



Download Request: All Documents: 1-288
Time Of Request: Thursday, November 23, 2017  12:06:06 EST
Send To:

MEGADEAL, ACADEMIC UNIVERSE
UNIVERSITY OF CHICAGO
LIBRARY
CHICAGO, IL


Terms: ((Vietnam OR Viet Nam) and Date(geq(04/01/1990) and leq(06/30/1990)))


Source: The New York Times
Project ID:



                               1 of 288 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                  April 1, 1990, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

Vietnamese Communists Purge an In-House Critic

BYLINE: By STEVEN ERLANGER, Special to The New York Times

SECTION: Section 1; Part 1, Page 4, Column 1; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 526 words

DATELINE: BANGKOK, Thailand, March 31


Vietnam's Communist Party says it has purged a senior member of the Politburo
who spoke of the need for faster political change in the wake of liberalization
in the Soviet Union and Eastern Europe.

The official, Tran Xuan Bach, 65 years old, was ousted from the 13-member
Politburo and the larger Central Committee. A statment issued at the end of a
long Central Committee meeting said Mr. Bach was removed ''for having seriously
violated the party's organizational principles and discipline, leading to many
bad consequences.''

The statement did not specify those consequences. But Mr. Bach had broken with
the usual collective nature of the Vietnamese leadership by speaking openly
about the dangers of separating political reform from economic liberalization,
as in China.

Not Just Europe

In a December speech broadcast a month later on the Hanoi radio, he said that
while Vietnam's economy had improved with restructuring, the people demanded
''more democracy and more social justice.'' ''One cannot think that turbulence
will occur only in Europe while in Asia things remain stable,'' he said. ''All
socialist countries are now in a process of evolution to move forward, have
outstanding differences to be solved, and need to break off the long-existing
stress and strain of old things.''

In an interview published in the Far Eastern Economic Review in February, Mr.
Bach made this comparison: ''You can't walk with one long leg and one short one,
and you can't walk with only one leg.''

While he did not call for a multiparty system, his outspoken comments were
quietly criticized as an effort to position himself to succeed the ailing party
General Secretary, Nguyen Van Linh. Mr. Linh has said he will step down at the
next party congress, which is to be held by the second quarter of 1991.

The statement after the Central Committee's extraordinarily long session, which
ended on Tuesday after 10 days of meetings, included few other surprises. The
party expressed confidence in the ability of Communism to weather its current
crisis and accused ''imperialists'' of trying to exploit the difficulties.

Improvements Mentioned

While applauding initial economic successes like the cutting of inflation, the
ending of subsidies to state enterprises and the encouragement of limited
private enterprise in the city and the countryside, the party conceded that more
needed to be done ''to broaden socialist democracy.''

But it put its emphasis on continuity and stability, saying, ''We must
consistently and firmly maintain stability in the political, economic and social
domains - especially political stability.''

Mr. Bach had previously been dropped from the Central Committee in 1976,
apparently because some leaders felt he had embarrassed the party by marrying a
woman 30 years younger. But he remained close to a senior Politburo member, Le
Duc Tho, and was returned to the Central Committee in 1982. He was appointed to
the Politburo in 1986, when Mr. Tho retired, and was among its youngest members,
with responsibility for relations with other Communist Parties. Thus, he
traveled more widely than most of the leadership.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1990 The New York Times Company


                               2 of 288 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                  April 1, 1990, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

Panama and U.S. Strive To Settle on Death Toll

BYLINE: By LARRY ROHTER, Special to The New York Times

SECTION: Section 1; Part 1, Page 12, Column 1; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 1223 words

DATELINE: PANAMA


Nearly three months after American troops invaded Panama, the Panamanian and
American Governments, as well as human rights groups in both countries, are
still struggling to compile a definitive tally of how many Panamanians were
killed and wounded in the overthrow of Gen. Manuel Antonio Noriega. The
uncertainty has allowed critics of the intervention and of Panama's new civilian
Government to offer much higher body counts and to charge, in the words of
former Attorney General Ramsey Clark, a ''conspiracy of silence'' to hide the
real death toll.

Officials of the Noriega Government maintain that 8,000 Panamanian civilians
were killed in the invasion, which began on Dec. 20, while Mr. Clark's
Independent Commission of Inquiry on the United States Invasion of Panama
estimates that more than 3,000 Panamanians died.

Mr. Clark, who said ''the figure I hear most frequently is 4,000 dead,''
described it as ''reasonable under the circumstances'' of the invasion, and
attributed it to ''sincere people trying to find out what really happened,''
including hospital workers, union leaders, church groups and human rights
organizations.

Such figures are widely rejected here. The Rev. Fernando Guardia, vicar of the
Roman Catholic Archdiocese of Panama, said ''estimates of thousands of civilian
dead are irresponsible and baseless'' and advanced only to further partisan
politics.

Skepticism Over U.S. Figures

But at the same time, there is widespread skepticism about the figures put
forward by the United States and the new Panamanian Government. The United
States Southern Command says 314 Panamanian soldiers and 202 civilians were
killed in the invasion, and President Guillermo Endara said ''less than 600
Panamanians'' died in the fighting that brought him to power.

Physicians for Human Rights, a Boston-based organization that sent an
investigative team here, said it had received ''reliable reports of more than
100 civilian deaths'' that were ''apparently not included'' in the Southern
Command tally. But the group also concluded that there was ''no evidence to
support estimates by some in Panama and the United States that several thousand
civilians died.''

Americas Watch, a Washington-based human rights group, has reached similar
conclusions. ''Our figure is a little higher than what the Southern Command has
allowed, but not by much,'' said Juan Mendez, the group's director. ''We're
estimating that somewhere around 300 people died.''

The Roman Catholic Church here calculates that 673 Panamanians were killed. The
Panamanian Human Rights Committee and the Center for Investigation of Human
Rights and Legal Aid estimate that 500 to 700 Panamanians died.

''The exact number will never be known, but it certainly is less than 1,000
dead,'' said Otilia de Koster of the human rights center. ''There was no
cover-up, only enormous chaos, with Noriega's people still in charge of the
hospitals for the first few days.''

The Chief Coroner's Assessment

Panama's chief coroner at the time of the invasion, Dr. Roger Montero, was
dismissed last month for ''improper actions'' taken during a coup attempt
against General Noriega last October, and went into hiding after criminal
charges were filed against him. But his successor, Dr. Humberto Mas Calzadilla,
said he was prepared to accept slightly higher unofficial estimates.

''I'm not arguing that our numbers are definitive,'' said Dr. Mas, director of
the Medical Legal Institute of Panama. ''We think there could be more
casualties, given the magnitude of the situation, but I don't think the figure
would be more than 100 or 150. I know there are people who say thousands were
killed, but no one has come forward with specific information, such as names and
gravesites, that would allow us to carry out an investigation.''

Col. Michael A. McConnell, who as command surgeon for the United States Southern
Command led American efforts to establish a definitive body count, said some of
the variations between the army's figures and those of other groups could be
explained by double counting and other errors. When asked about a discrepancy of
38 dead between his count in the city of Colon and that of Physicians for Human
Rights, he said bodies that were already in the morgue there when the invasion
began were buried along with the casualties from the fighting.

Human rights groups have also pointed out that although the American military
maintains that 314 Panamanian soldiers died, official reports list only 53
bodies of military men as recovered. Colonel McConnell said the higher number
may be incorrect, since it was based on unconfirmed reports by American troops
on how many Panamanian soldiers they had killed ''It was bang, bang I got one,
bang, bang I got another one,'' he said, describing the accounts of American
soldiers. ''How were body counts in Vietnam?''

Civilian Toll Is Central Issue

Colonel McConnell said the United States Southern Command's count included 86
people reported missing by relatives and presumed dead even though no bodies
have been found. ''We've erred on the side of the benefit of the doubt,'' he
said.

Dr. Mas estimated the number of Panamanians wounded in the fighting at slightly
over 2,000, in contrast to the conclusion of the Physicians for Human Rights
delegation that ''the actual number of wounded is likely to be higher than the
approximately 3,000 who presented to Panama City hospitals.'' Both figures,
however, would seem to point toward a death toll substantially smaller than that
estimated by Mr. Clark and former officials of the Noriega Government.

''Where there are dead, there are also wounded, in a much higher proportion,''
said Dr. Osvaldo Velazquez, a physician who is president of the Panamanian Human
Rights Committee. ''If there are more than 3,000 dead, there should also be more
than 20,000 wounded. But where are these wounded? They are not there because
they never existed.''

'A Ludicrous Lie'

Critics of the official American tally say that ''massacres'' took place, and
were covered up, in San Miguelito and El Chorrillo, a crowded working-class
neighborhood that lies between General Noriega's former headquarters and Ancon
Hill, where American forces were based. But witnesses in both neighborhoods said
the civilian death toll was relatively low.

The Rev. Javier Arteta, a Spanish priest at Our Lady of Fatima Church in El
Chorrillo, said 21 civilians died in the fighting there. A church census, which
thus far has contacted 1,700 of the 2,500 families from the neighborhood, has as
yet turned up no reports of any additional dead or missing.

Father Arteta dismissed charges by Panamanians that American forces had used
flame throwers to cremate dozens of bodies in El Chorrillo as ''a ludicrous lie,
a horrible myth.''

''No such action could have occurred without our having seen it or at least
being told about it by someone who had,'' he said.

But virtually all independent human rights groups in both the United States and
Panama have criticized the two Governments for ''insensitivity'' in their
dealings with relatives of the dead and those conducting independent inquiries.
''No one seems to be investigating who died and under what circumstances, and we
think this is one of many things that should be looked into,'' Mr. Mendez said.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo: Panamanians taking a walk through El Chorrillo, a crowded
working-class neighborhood, after the area was devastated in the overthrow of
Gen. Manuel Antonio Noriega. Three months later, there is still no definitive
count of Panamanian casualties of the American invasion. (Associated Press)

                   Copyright 1990 The New York Times Company


                               3 of 288 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                  April 1, 1990, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

For the Relief Workers, a Psychic Toll

BYLINE: By MARVINE HOWE

SECTION: Section 1; Part 1, Page 28, Column 1; Metropolitan Desk

LENGTH: 927 words


The worst thing about the Bronx soial club fire was that there were so few
survivors and so many families devastated, Laura Aiello, a Red Cross disaster
relief worker, reflected Friday night. ''It left a terrible emptiness,'' she
said.

Ms. Aiello spent much of Friday trying to console a family that had lost seven
members in the fire. She took them to the wake and helped with travel
arrangements so that they could accompany the dead home to Honduras to be
buried. And now she was trying to find a way to bring two children from
Guatemala to New York to attend the funeral of their mother, who perished in the
blaze early last Sunday.

Ms. Aiello and other Red Cross workers were doing what they could in the time
left before their disaster relief center closed. The center, a makeshift
operation in a school across the street from the burned-out Happy Land Social
Club, was dismantled last night, but Red Cross officials said the agency would
still help individual families.

Working Out of Gymnasium

In the days after the fire the relief workers appeared calm, but their efforts
took a toll on them. ''I never want to step into a social club again,'' Ms.
Aiello said. ''It reinforces my feeling that when I go into a restaurant, I'll
walk out if I feel it's unsafe.''

Ms. Aiello was part of the local Red Cross disaster relief team that coordinated
the help of state, city and private agencies. They included the New York City
Human Resources Administration and the city's Department of Mental Health, the
Bronx County Public Administrator's office, the New York State Crime Victims
Board, Catholic Charities, the New York State Funeral Directors Association and
the Honduran Government. Nearly all of the 87 victims were from Honduras.

The Red Cross set up its relief center in the gymnasium of Public School 67,
across Southern Boulevard from the burned-out club in the East Tremont section.
A team of 35 Red Cross staff members and volunteers, wearing red jackets and
vests, seemed to be everywhere giving comfort and special funds for everything
from food and clothing to funerals and rent.

'She Had No Means'

Ms. Aiello told of a single mother who died leaving five children under the age
of 10. She said the Human Resources Administration was going to help the
grandmother try to get custody of the children and was looking for an apartment
for the family.

In another case, a pregnant woman with three children under 8 years old had lost
her husband, the family's only wage earner, said Laura Cora, a Red Cross
caseworker. ''She had come to get burial benefits,'' Ms. Cora said, ''but when
we learned she had no means, we gave her a voucher for groceries and referred
her to H.R.A., which will follow her case.''

What made the Happy Land fire different from most disasters ''and more tragic''
was that it was apparently caused by vengeance, said Doris Sommerfield, the Red
Cross coordinator for disaster family services in New York.

The man accused of setting the fire, Julio Gonzalez, was indicted on Friday on
178 counts, including murder, attempted murder and arson. The police said Mr.
Gonzalez had set the fire to kill his estranged companion, Lydia Feliciano, a
coat checker at the club. She was one of five people to escape the fire. #3
Families Not Heard From All 87 victims have been identified, but the families of
three victims have not come forward and are apparently out of the country, Ms.
Sommerfield said.

The relatives were generally in shock immediately after the fire, Ms.
Sommerfield said; some were hysterical with grief. ''But now they seemed to
accept the tragedy and even thank us for little things,'' she said, ''like
getting relatives on a plane to go home for the funeral. It just tears me
apart.''

Red Cross staff members said a comforting presence to the relatives as well as
to the relief workers was Ken Curtin, director of the Red Cross team. He would
try to boost the morale of his own workers and those from other agencies by
telling them repeatedly, ''You're the greatest.''

Mr. Curtin, who grew up in Queens, has organized disaster relief for the Red
Cross from Vietnam to the Sudan. He said he had never seen such cooperation
among agencies as he did after the Happy Land blaze.

A DC-8 Carrying 50 Bodies

''What happened here was all based on need, and everyone needed some kind of
help,'' Mr. Curtin said. He said the Red Cross has given out cash supplements
totaling $35,000, part of it to pay for 97 airline tickets for families who
wanted their loved ones buried in their native land. The Red Cross also
chartered a DC-8 to take 50 bodies back to Honduras yesterday.

The relief effort marked a step forward in the identification of disaster
victims, Mr. Curtin said. Dr. Charles S. Hirsch, the Chief Medical Examiner of
New York, introduced a system in which relatives could identify victims from
Polaroid photographs, obviating the need for ''a grisly visit to the morgue,''
Mr. Curtin said.

''We cut the identification procedure by two-thirds,'' Mr. Curtin said. But he
noted that photo-identification did not eliminate all delays; nearly 400 people
had to wait in line for up to four hours to identify photographs, he said.

Salvador E. Rodezno Fuentes, Minister Counselor of Honduras, who had come to New
York to help with the repatriation of bodies, expressed admiration for the Red
Cross team's handling of the disaster. He said he was particularly impressed by
the ''integrated nature of the relief operation - taking care of every aspect
from emotional to food needs.''

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo: In the aftermath of the Bronx social club fire, the Red Cross is
providing disaster relief for families of victims. In the gymnasium of Public
School 67, Laura Aiello, right, and Laura L. Cora, Red Cross workers, counseled
Marlene Moss Martin and her cousins Maurice Avila, left, and Daniel Lambey. (The
New York Times/Alan Zale)

                   Copyright 1990 The New York Times Company


                               4 of 288 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                  April 1, 1990, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

DANCING;
Eiko and Koma: Life in the Slow Lane

BYLINE: By JACK ANDERSON

SECTION: Section 2; Page 6, Column 1; Arts and Leisure Desk

LENGTH: 1162 words


Slow, very slow - that's the first quality almost everyone notices about the
collaboratively choreographed works of Eiko and Koma. Audiences have found their
unruffled pacing both strange and eloquent ever since the Japanese-born dancers
made their New York debut 14 years ago.

Eiko and Koma are now highly regarded creative figures in the American dance
scene. They have given annual New York seasons, some of them under such auspices
as the Brooklyn Academy of Music's Next Wave Festival and the Japan Society.
Over the years, other productions have been commissioned by the Walker Art
Center in Minneapolis and the American Dance Festival in Durham, N. C. Slowness
is not the only distinctive feature of their creations. As Eiko and Koma proceed
to scramble, hunch, drag themselves along and even topple over, other things
become apparent. Their productions are visually powerful, and they concern
aspects of nature. Some have been inspired by such basics as trees, stones and
grain. Others evoke such processes as growth and decay, creation and
destruction. At times it may seem to take ages to raise an arm or a head;
positions are held and frozen and then give way to other sculptural positions
that are also frozen.

The program Eiko and Koma will present Tuesday through next Sunday night at the
Joyce Theater features three New York premieres: ''Memory,'' ''Rust'' and
''Passage.'' Movements will undoubtedly again be slow. And the stage will look
mysterious. The scenery for ''Memory'' and ''Rust'' consists of a chain-link
fence. ''Passage'' is dominated by a blood-red backdrop, and the action will
occur in a pool of water. As in some, but not all, of their previous
presentations, the dancers will be nude for the entire evening. Their choice of
accompaniment is also typical of them. To help focus attention on their
movements, Eiko and Koma are sparing in their use of sound. ''Memory'' will be
danced to a barely audible recorded score by a West German composer known as
Deuter. ''Rust'' will be performed in silence. And the only accompaniment to the
movements in ''Passage'' will be the drip of water into the on-stage pool.

The dancers' slowness can suggest eons of time. During a recent interview in
their midtown Manhattan apartment, Koma recalled that he and Eiko once did a
work about mountains in love. ''Mountains can't move fast,'' he observed. And
Eiko pointed out that it may take a very long time indeed for stars and planets
to draw near one another as they travel through space. Both dancers insisted
that slowness can be beautiful for its own sake. According to Koma, ''When we
move slowly, we are enjoying each moment as it occurs, and we hope the audience
will enjoy it, too.''

The dancers will stand in front of the fence in ''Rust.'' And that work's title
sums up its theme: Lighting effects give the impression that their bodies are
indeed rusting. In ''Memory,'' Eiko will be in front of the fence, but Koma will
be behind it, sometimes appearing to be a person actually present, at other
times only a remembered image. ''A body looks very tender, very vulnerable, when
seen against chain-link,'' Eiko remarked.

If ''Passage'' glares with redness, so does much of life, the dancers believe.
''Our blood is red,'' said Eiko. ''The earth's blood is red, as well - the magma
of volcanos is red. So is the ocher soil of South America.''

The use of water in ''Passage,'' as in some of their earlier works, is not just
a theatrical stunt. ''Real water is more beautiful than any lighting effect can
ever be,'' Eiko said. ''Water is something everyone knows. So, when audiences
see me covered with water, they will know how I feel.''

Performing in the nude has been part of their theatrical style ever since their
''Night Tide'' in 1984. Eiko explained why: ''Every time we are naked, it's
because we couldn't find an appropriate costume for that scene. It's
uncomfortable to be nude on stage. So, we keep trying out costumes. But when
none seems right, we dance nude. After all, nudity is also a form of theatrical
costuming.'' Concerning the nudity in ''Passage,'' she said, ''It's hard to move
in water with clothes on, and it feels colder because the wetness just gets into
a costume and stays there.''

Both of these theatrical nonconformists come from middle-class families. While
studying law and political science in Tokyo during the late 1960's, they joined
student groups protesting against America's involvement in Vietnam. At the same
time, they developed an interest in contemporary dance. Neither has studied any
traditional Japanese form. Instead, their early training was in the often
grotesque contemporary Japanese style known as Butoh. In 1972 they met at a
dance studio and soon decided to devote their lives to the art.

Both were eager to learn more about Western modern dance. But because of their
opposition to the war in Vietnam, they were reluctant to visit the United
States. Instead, they became curious about the Expressionist dance form that
Mary Wigman, one of the most influential choreographers of this century, had
developed in Germany during the 1920's.

Off to Europe they went - and by a route so roundabout that, Eiko said, ''to
this day my mother hasn't forgiven me for it.'' With an eye on their budget,
they took a boat from Japan to Siberia, then the Trans-Siberian Railway to
Moscow and, from there, a plane to Vienna. At first, they naively hoped they
could earn a living just by dancing extemporaneously in cathedral squares.
Quickly cured of that illusion, they bought an old automobile and drove across
the continent, trying to obtain engagements in cultural centers. When luck was
against them and funds were low, they would pull off the roadside and sleep in
their car.

As they traveled, they searched for a dance teacher. Although Wigman had died in
1973, an acquaintance suggested that Eiko and Koma, who use only their first
names, might find it stimulating to study with Manja Chmiel, a Wigman pupil who
taught in Hanover, Germany. She proved an inspiration who strongly supported
their collaborations.  Gradually, the couple's reputation grew. One of their
performances in Amsterdam was seen by Lucas Hoving, the Dutch dancer and teacher
who was for many years a principal of the Jose Limon Dance Company in New York.
Mr. Hoving urged them to come to America. And, because the United States had by
then withdrawn from Vietnam, they followed his advice, making their New York
debut in 1976. The city is now their home.

Their unhurried choreography initially astonished audiences. But many dancegoers
soon found it eloquent. Eiko says with a laugh that, today, a few of their most
ardent fans accuse them not of slowness but of moving too quickly. For anyone
unacquainted with their style, Koma has this advice: ''Going to our dances may
be like going to a new restaurant. The food may seem strange. But don't be
hesitant. Just try it - taste the food. Taste the movement.''

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo: Eiko and Koma rehearsing for their six-day run at the Joyce that
begins Tuesday. (The New York Times/Jim Wilson)

                   Copyright 1990 The New York Times Company


                               5 of 288 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                  April 1, 1990, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

ONE MAN'S HERO

BYLINE: By JOSH RUBINS; Josh Rubins writes a column about mystery books for
Entertainment Weekly.

SECTION: Section 7; Page 25, Column 1; Book Review Desk

LENGTH: 1050 words



GORDON LIDDY IS MY MUSE BY TOMMY ''TIP'' PAINE
By John Calvin Batchelor.
303 pp. New York:
Linden Press/Simon & Schuster. $18.95.

No, folks. Tommy ''Tip'' Paine, the narrator of John Calvin Batchelor's
collection of eight fictional minimemoirs, isn't kidding. The G. Gordon Liddy of
Watergate break-in fame really is his muse, because Tip - the ''demifamous''
author of cold war spy thrillers a la Buckley/Ludlum/Clancy - is a pipe-smoking,
wisecracking 80's yuppie in search of viable heroes, bigger-than-life models for
American manhood. And Gordon Liddy, who took orders and kept his mouth shut no
matter what, at least seems to stand for something. ''Gordon didn't take a fall
for make-believe, he took it for the presidency, our elected President, and
therefore for us all.''

However, Gordon Liddy himself only appears in the final episode of ''Gordon
Liddy Is My Muse by Tommy 'Tip' Paine.'' In most of the other stories, Tip meets
up with men who are at best heroes manque, embodiments of tarnished ideals or
outdated myths. In 1960, for instance, on a Quaker-organized peace mission to
Moscow, the pre-adolescent Tip finds a soul mate in a Russian lad called Trifya,
who reveres John Wayne and the Hollywood western's version of cowboy ethics. But
Trifya grows up to be a treacherous K.G.B. agent (one of ''the Three Million
Stooges''), probably corrupt, and is later ''disappeared'' during Mikhail
Gorbachev's rise to power.

Disillusionment lurks everywhere, in fact. In Miami to speak at a banquet for
munitions tycoons, Tip is initially drawn to the inarticulate dignity of some
local Vietnam veterans, then repulsed: his new friends turn out to be
cocaine-snorting, trigger-happy, ''middle-aged palookas,'' drag-racing around
Biscayne Bay in cigarette boats. Another species of macho man - the pugnacious,
womanizing literary lion - pops up, more than a little cartoonishly, at a
fiction workshop in Ohio, where Tip peels back romantic myth to reveal the
cowardly lecher behind the ''famous famous writer writer literary literary
person person.'' And Tip's best friend, a frontiersman and Yankee eccentric in
the Natty Bumppo tradition, doesn't quite measure up to his nickname of
Pathfinder - not after a botched eight-year marriage to a beautiful Texas
millionaire, a cop-out from the responsibilities of fatherhood and an inglorious
retreat from civilization.

Is Gordon Liddy, then, the only plausible candidate for American Mythic Hero
these days? Tip thinks so, and yearns to see his muse in action. He also needs
to exorcise his 17-year obsession with the whole Watergate caper - by deducing,
once and for all, the still-much-debated identity of ''Deep Throat.'' So, in the
long title story, which closes the book, Tip signs on for a week in the Arizona
desert at the Firearms Security Academy, Liddy's school for mercenaries and
other weapons lovers. At first Liddy lives up to expectations, quoting
Machiavelli and grinning under ''that signature mustache, walrus proud.''
Eventually, however, to no one's surprise but Tip's, the muse shows his soft
spots: the unrepentant hard-liner is actually ''cluttered with doubt.'' Worse
yet, Tip's closely argued (and generally shrewd) solution to the ''Deep Throat''
mystery finally casts Liddy not as a hero but, reluctantly, as a pathetic
metaphorical ''rape victim.''

Unfortunately, few of Tip's disillusionments in these seriocomic stories arrive
with much dramatic or satiric impact, largely because Tommy ''Tip'' Paine - as
concocted by the imaginative Mr. Batchelor (''American Falls,'' ''The Birth of
the People's Republic of Antarctica'') - remains such an uneasy composite: an
obviously artificial persona, all voice and no body. Alternately cynical and
naive, common-sensical (like his 18th-century namesake) and addled, Tip is
consistent only in the compulsive irony and flip mannerisms of his dense, often
zesty narration. He's fuzzy in his political profile, too, frequently
registering as merely an unsubtle caricature of National Review-style
conservatism but at other times asking - or so it seems - to be taken much more
seriously. Typically, when Tip visits a United States Army base in Bavaria and
comes to the conclusion that ''Germany is Europe's blackness,'' festering with
''cunning, immortal'' evil, it's unclear (in a frustrating rather than a
tantalizing way) whether we're supposed to marvel or scoff at the insight.

Furthermore, by presenting Tip as a self-conscious post-modernist storyteller,
prone to parody and cultural cross-references, Mr. Batchelor (who played similar
games in his fiction debut, the 1981 novel ''The Further Adventures of Halley's
Comet'') makes it even harder for us to keep this slippery narrator in steady
focus. A best-selling ''sci-fi/spy guy,'' Tip archly mocks his own thriller
techniques as he narrates these tales, all of which involve elements borrowed
from suspense genres. His labored allusions range from James Fenimore Cooper and
Herman Melville to the screenplay for Stanley Kubrick's ''Dr. Strangelove.''

Perhaps Mr. Batchelor's more ambitious preoccupations - the sad state of
America's mythic heroes, the future of Europe, the ''Deep Throat'' puzzle -
would have been better served by a series of essays and an unclouded authorial
voice. As it is, refracted through the iffy persona and trendy patter of Tommy
''Tip'' Paine, some provocative themes have been reduced to a sporadically
entertaining blur.

IS IT REALLY YOU?

My muse made my day. . . . His watchband was rattlesnake, his watch was one of
those rugged mechanisms . . . with more dials than the Spirit of St. Louis.

I could see that Gordon's personal clock had aged. There were only white wisps
for hair; he shaved his baldness. . . . Nevertheless he was a vigorous
fifty-nine-year-old, no paunch, good chest, dark eyebrows over a bright gaze
that squinted from too much desert, a crisp voice that was never vulgar. And
there was the signature mustache, walrus proud.

Gordon circled the room, working us like a diplomat, abrupt handshake and
heartfelt welcome. He didn't like to be touched, so I backed off a step before I
told him he looked better than Colonel North.

He grinned under the mustache. ''Who?''

From ''Gordon Liddy Is My Muse by Tommy 'Tip' Paine.''

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Drawing

TYPE: Review

                   Copyright 1990 The New York Times Company


                               6 of 288 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                  April 1, 1990, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

PAPERBACK BEST SELLERS: April 1, 1990

SECTION: Section 7; Page 32, Column 2; Book Review Desk

LENGTH: 844 words


     Weeks
This    On
Week  List Fiction

 1    103   THE HUNT FOR RED OCTOBER, by Tom Clancy. (Berleley,
           $4.50.) A submarine driver brings Soviet nuclear secrets
           to the United States.

 2     6    STAR, by Danielle Steel. (Dell, $5.95) The crossed paths
           of a man and a woman destined for stardom.

 3     2    RIVALS, by Janet Dailey. (Fawcett, $5.95.) Families
           compete in love and romance.

 4     1    RULES OF PREY, by John Sandford. (Berkley, $4.95) The
           pursuit of a mad, very clever serial murderer of women.

 5     4    MORNING GLORY, by LaVyrie Spencer. (Jove, $4.95.) Love
           answers a young widow's want ad.

 6     9    WEB OF DREAMS, by V.C. Andrews. (Pocket, $5.50.) The
           origin of a curse that has haunted a family of orphans in
           five previous novels.

 7     5    THE EDGE, by Dick Francis. (Fawcett, $5.95.) Murder and
           mayhem on a luxury train trip.

 8     5    PLAYMATES, by Robert B. Parker. (Berkley, $4.95.) The
           private eye Spenser on the trail of scandals in the world
           of college basketball.

 9     9    BILLY BATHGATE, by E.L. Doctorow. (Harper Paperbacks,
           $5.95.) The life of the 1930's gangster Dutch Schultz, as
           seen by a youth from the Bronx.

10     9    THE FORTUNE, by Michael Korda. (Warner, $5.95.) A young
           woman's ill-fated romance with the head of America's
           richest family.

11     5    STORMING INTREPID, by Payne Harrison. (Ivy, $5.95.)
           Warfare waged in outer space.

12     4    METAMORPHOSIS, by Jean Lorrah. (Pocket, $4.95.) A new
           "Star Trek" novel.

13     25   THE CARDINAL OF THE KREMLIN, by Tom Clancy. (Berkley,
           $5.95.) The C.I.A.'s Jack Ryan races tothe rescueof an
           American secret agent.

14     24   THE HANDMAID'S TALE, by Margaret Atwood. (Fawcett,
           $5.95.) In America of the future, men and women perform
           the duties they're assigned.

15     12   A THIEF OF TIME, by Tony Hillerman. (Harper Paperback,
           $4.95.) Missing artifacts and a murder in New Mexico)

16*    3    RED ARMY, by Ralph Peters. (Pocket, $5.50.) World War
           III seen through Russian eyes.

17*    4    WHISPERED KISSES, by Janette Taylor. (Zebra, $4.95) The
           stormy romance of a Texas heiress and a mysterious
           British safari guide.

     Weeks
This    On
Week  List NonFiction

 1     19   ALL I REALLY NEED TO KNOW I LEARNED IN KINDERGARTEN, by
           Robert Fulghum. (Ivy, $5.95.) Inspirational essays.

 2     16   NEW KIDS OF THE BLOCK, by Grace Cataiano. (Bantam,
           $3.50.) The lives and predilections of the five members
           of the popular singing group.

 3    336   THE ROAD LESS TRAVELED, by M. Scott Peck. (Touchstone/
           S&S, $10.95.) Psychological and spiritual inspiration by
           a psychiatrist.

 4     1    DADDY'S GIRL, by Clifford Irving. (Zebra, $4.95.) The
           1982 murder of a Houston lawyer and his wife, involving
           two other generations of their family.

 5     27   BLIND FAITH, by Joe McGinniss. (Signal/NAL, $5.95.) The
           family tragedy that came to light after the 1984 murder
           of a Toms River, N.J. woman.

 6     96   LOVE, MEDICINE & MIRACLES, by Bernie S. Siegel.
           (Perennial/Harper & Row, $8.95.) The importance of
           patient's mind and emotions.

 7*    10   BORN ON THE FOURTH OF JULY, by Ron Kovic. (Pocket,
           $4.50.) The autobiography of a former marine wounded in
           Vietnam.

 8     75   THE POWER OF MYTH, by Joseph Campbell with Bill Moyers.
           (Doubleday, $19.95.) The ways in which mythology
           illuminates the stages of life.

 9     7    MURDER IN LITTLE EGYPT, by Darcy O'Brien. (Onyx, $4.95.)
           The Dr. Jekyll and Mr. Hyde life of a physician in an
           Illinois community.

10*    9    IN BROAD DAYLIGHT, by Harry N. MacLean. (Dell, $4.95.)
           The 1981 killing of a man on Main Street in Skidmore, Mo.,
            witnessed by 45 people; a case that was never brought to
           court.

     Weeks
This    On
Week  List Advice, How-To and Miscellaneous

 1     2    WEIRDOS FROM ANOTHER PLANET! by Bill Watterson. (Andrews
           & McMeel, $7.95.) Cartoons.

 2     8    50 SIMPLE THINGS YOU CAN DO TH SAVE THE EARTH, by the
           Earthworks Group. (Earthworks Press/Publishers Group West,
            $4.95.) Ways to combat environmental problems.

 3     2    HAPPY TRAILS. by Berke Breathed, (Little, Brown, $8.95.)
           Cartoons.

 4     83   CODEPENDENT NO MORE, by Melody Beattie, (Hazelden/Harper
           & Row, $8.95.) Solving your own problems while caring for
           others.

 5     1    THE T--FACTOR DIET, by Martin Katahn. (Bantam, $4.95.) A
           new regimen for weight loss.

 6*    1    THE T--FACTOR FAT GRAM COUNTER, by Jamie Pope-Cordle and
           Martin Katahan. (Norton, $2.50.) Ways to reduce fat in
           one's diet.


These listings are based on computer-processed sales figures from 3,000
bookstores and from representative wholesalers with more than 38,000 other
retail outlets, including variety stores and supermarkets. The figures are
statistically adjusted to represent sales in all such outlets across the United
States.

*An asterisk before a book's title indicates that its sales, weighted to reflect
the book-selling industry nationally, are barely distinguishable from those of
the book above.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: LIST

                   Copyright 1990 The New York Times Company


                               7 of 288 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                  April 3, 1990, Tuesday, Late Edition - Final

NEWS SUMMARY

SECTION: Section A; Page 2, Column 5; Metropolitan Desk

LENGTH: 1330 words



INTERNATIONAL    A2-14

The leadership of Lithuania softened its tone, insisting that it never expected
to see immediate enactment of the independence that it declared from the Soviet
Union on March 11.    Page A1



The new Parliament of Estonia told President Mikhail S. Gorbachev that the
Soviet Constitution could not be the basis for realizing the republic's
proclaimed desire to be independent of the Soviet Union.    A14



In Bulgaria's Balkan politics, splits even within the splits    A14



Social Democratic Party officials in East Germany announced the resignation of
the party's founder and chairman after allegations that he had once informed for
the former Ministry of State Security.    A1



German unification fits neatly into European business leaders' vision of Europe
as a bigger, more united, more dynamic continent. But German unification may
hurt some countries and companies, European executives warn.    A1



Seltz journal: In Alsace, French-German nerves are showing    A4



Iraq's President threatened Israel. Boasting that he has advanced chemical
weapons, Saddam Hussein said he would annihilate half of Israel if it moved
against Iraq.    A1



Iraq can deliver, U.S. chemical experts say    A8


Soviet Emigres to Israel topped 7,000 in March    A5



Nelson Mandela agreed to a meeting with President F. W. de Klerk on Thursday to
discuss the growing violence in South Africa.    A10



Child malnutrition in Malawi is comparable only to the dire situation in
Ethiopia, according to a report by the United Nation's Children's Fund and the
Malawian Government.    A10



Japan wants to reduce trade tensions with the United States. It outlined
proposals to curb some of the more pervasive policy and cultural obstacles to
American imports.    D1



The world's stock markets have shown remarkable complacency in the face of the
collapse in Tokyo. After Monday's 1,978.38 point drop in the Nikkei 225, the
rest of the world fell but did not panic.    D1



Four Central American leaders are meeting with President Daniel Ortega Saavedra
of Nicaragua, who is using the talks as a final push for the quick disbanding of
the contra army, his aides say.    A3



Kin still press case of two slain in Guatemala    A3


U.S. gaining ground at U.N., State Department study says    A6



NATIONAL    A15-21



The American Heart Association announced that it was canceling its program to
award a seal of approval, for a fee, to foods that meet certain low-fat,
low-salt guidelines.    A1



A committee of U.S. Catholic bishops, revising an important statement on the
Roman Catholic Church and women's concerns, has retreated from the tone and
content of major sections in a draft issued two years ago.    A1



A complex desegregation battle is raging in Oklahoma City. The Supreme Court has
agreed to consider whether the schools must start busing again in the earliest
grades.    A1



An oil spill in the Allegheny River is threatening the drinking water of one
million people in Pittsburgh and 30 miles upstream. Eight small towns have
closed their water treatment plants.    A16



Oil company agrees to buy homes of those who sued it    A16



Can an award of punitive damages by a jury be so excessive or disproportionate
as to violate the Constitution's guarantee of due process of law? The Supreme
Court has agreed to decide that question.    A18



A stay of execution issued in San Francisco on Friday was upheld by the U.S.
Supreme Court. Robert Alton Harris had been scheduled to die in the gas chamber
at San Quentin Prison on Tuesday for the murder of two boys.    A21



The jury in the Iran-contra trial of John M. Poindexter began weighing criminal
charges against the former national security adviser after a Federal district
judge instructed jurors to disregard President Reagan's policies in the affair.
    A20



Noriega defense depicts invasion as 'war crime'    A15


Atwater enters hospital in Bronx    A20


Ex-police chief runs for Washington mayor    A20


Chicago journal: A gigantic face lift, and matching headache    A16



REGIONAL    B1-6

Jury selection began in the Bensonhurst murder trial amid signs of the same
racial tension that gripped New York City after Yusuf K. Hawkins was killed in
the predominantly white neighborhood last summer.    B1



The Central Park rape trial was indefinitely postponed after the prosecution
said it had found evidence that had been apparently overlooked by the police
crime laboratory.    B3



Deliberations start in Golub case    B2


Concern over 'moral values' led to murders, lawyer says    B5


The strategies contrast sharply in Marcos's trial    B3



A warrant for the arrest of the owner of the Bronx building that housed the
Happy Land Social Club was issued last year after he failed to answer complaints
about safety conditions, city records show. But the owner was never arrested.
    B1



A Honduran son's visit, his first, is his funeral    B4


News analysis: Club fire shows Dinkins's thin skin    B4



A transit shutdown in Buffalo ended after two days as the city and its suburbs
agreed on how to eliminate a $9 million deficit.    B1



Yale University will pay $2.6 million to deficit-burdened New Haven and promised
a loan of $7.5 million if the city succeeds in raising $22.5 million from other
donors.    B1



Albany standoff starts, but 4 emergency spending bills pass    B2


Dinkins's extra taxes add up to $200 million    B3



Why are Passover prices higher than other prices? According to a survey of 98
stores by the New York City Department of Consumer Affairs, the prices of kosher
chicken, fish and meat are increasing.    B3



BUSINESS DIGEST    D1



SCIENCE TIMES

Traditional farming taps Amazon forests without destruction    C1


Computerizing the search for supernovas    C1


Researchers in cold fusion review the puzzling results    C1


Doctor's World: Should an alcoholic get a liver transplant?    C3


A South American relative of the giant redwoods in peril    C4


Science Watch    C8



ARTS/ENTERTAINMENT

Staging an elemental ''Grapes''    C15


A bard of the Vietnam War    C15


Music: ''Of Thee I Sing''    C18


Kronos at Tully Hall    C18


Bream on guitar and lute    C18


Dance: Ballet of Los Angeles    C18


Juilliard Ensemble    C18


Word and Image: New days in Leningrad    C15


Tales of past and present    C17



FASHION    B7



SPORTS

The University of Nevada at Las Vegas routed Duke University, 103-73, to win the
National Collegiate Athletic Association basketball championship. The 30-point
margin was the widest ever in an N.C.A.A. title game.    B9



Baseball: Ojeda and Magadan demoted by Johnson    B9


Broadcasting: The Musburger decision    B9


Columns: Anderson on Sparky Anderson    B9


On Horse Racing    B13


Football: Plan B deadline passes    B12


Hockey: Quandary over Ranger goalies    B10


Maloney sees other side    B10



OBITUARIES    D23



Dr. Robert H. Felix, psychiatrist

EDITORIALS/LETTERS/OP-ED

Editorials    A22



Iraq's murderous threats
Unfair smoke, S & L fire
Hasty hysteria on aliens
Silence and the sick in Albany

Letters    A22



Anthony Lewis: Mandela in the storm    A23


Flora Lewis: A chance for Lithuania    A23


James S. Brady: Congress didn't want to see    A23


Janne E. Nolan: How to stymie Iraq - for a while    A23


LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Summary

                   Copyright 1990 The New York Times Company


                               8 of 288 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                  April 3, 1990, Tuesday, Late Edition - Final

FOREIGN AFFAIRS;
A Chance for Lithuania

BYLINE: By Flora Lewis

SECTION: Section A; Page 23, Column 5; Editorial Desk

LENGTH: 752 words

DATELINE: VIENNA


Tension has been mounting in Lithuania. So far, Mikhail Gorbachev has been
ambiguous, playing brinkmanship. He is in a difficult bind, and he probably
hasn't decided which way to go - to try to ease the pain and save face by
wriggling out of the imperial problem gradually, or crack down, prove his power
and damn the consequences.

His predecessors didn't behave that way. Not for them a sneaky escalation, like
America's in Vietnam. In Hungary in 1956, in Czechoslovakia in 1968, in
Afghanistan in 1979, they ordered intervention, kept it secret but gathered
their forces, and then moved suddenly with massive power.

Mr. Gorbachev doesn't appear to want that route. The parades of armor and
day-by-day seizure of offices in Vilnius are psychological warfare that may be
worse than two alternatives - crushing Lithuanian defiance by force or winning
the fruits of peaceful accommodation.

A retired Soviet major general, attending an East-West meeting here, said Red
Army commanders wouldn't want to move against civilians. They felt the backlash
of their recent operations in Tbilisi and Azerbaijan, and cite the party's
injunction against using the army for internal missions. Still, they would act
if ordered, he said, but ''at the right time, not too soon, not too late, that
is, when we could get public support.''

After all, the experience of Mr. Gorbachev's predecessors also proved that force
only works for a while. He is probing for a better way out.

So it is right for the U.S. to respond in kind to his ambiguity. Washington has
sent a firm message that a use of force sufficient to put down Lithuania's
independence movement, which could only be temporary in any event, would unravel
the great diplomatic enterprise that Mr. Gorbachev has begun. It is saying watch
out, but not provoking.

Though Mr. Bush may have lost some credibility by his indulgence of China's
repression, America's allies and even neutrals are signaling that Lithuania has
become a serious test for everybody on the prospects of East-West relations.

The stakes are much too great to be a game for Gorby-friends and Gorby-foes in
the West. It is really about the future of Europe and the Soviet Union.
Lithuania has become more than a symbol, an issue of whether to assert an
abstract principle with passion (and nothing more costly for those who demand
immediate Washington recognition).

Critics of the Bush Administration's careful diplomacy seem to put their own
claim to rectitude ahead of Lithuania's achievement of independence. It provokes
a question of whether the real aim is to undermine the whole effort to end the
cold war.

They have their counterparts in the Soviet Union, people who say ''Gorbachev has
wasted Socialism, wasted our allies and now is wasting the empire,'' in the
unintentionally vivid English of one Soviet expert.

But it isn't a matter of trying to save him from his enemies. Lithuania is not
only a real country with real people, it is a real dilemma for the future of
millions of people, inside and outside the Soviet Union. We can't get Mr.
Gorbachev out of the corner that he has helped himself into, but we can show how
seriously everybody's hopes ride on his finding maneuver room toward a
settlement.

Instead of ultimatums and display of armored convoys, Mr. Gorbachev needs to
convince the Lithuanians that they can choose independence but that it takes
preparation and attention to the enormous problems that course will bring both
sides. He may be starting to make headway. Lithuania's leader, Vytautas
Landsbergis, who has been putting on a brave show, now says his nation did not
expect Moscow to hand power over immediately, which may indicate a willingness
to move a step at a time, with less haste and more regard for Soviet
preoccupations.

Like it or not, Mr. Gorbachev has launched the decolonization of the last great
empire, even though he only started out to reform the Communist system. The
question isn't whether it is coming, but how and when. And replacing the empire
with some form of federation or commonwealth, rather than blowing it up, is a
mighty enterprise that needs to be undertaken with deliberation.

Washington's main task at this delicate stage is to make sure there are no
miscalculations. If Mr. Gorbachev can make use of the argument of grave
international reaction in persuading his own critics that force would be
disastrous, he is more than welcome. The West has nothing to gain in tipping the
scales by cutting off the peaceful option.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: OP-ED

                   Copyright 1990 The New York Times Company


                               9 of 288 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                  April 3, 1990, Tuesday, Late Edition - Final

A Storyteller For the War That Won't End

BYLINE: By D. J. R. BRUCKNER

SECTION: Section C; Page 15, Column 5; Cultural Desk

LENGTH: 1449 words


For the first time since his Army tour of duty in Vietnam ended 20 years ago,
Tim O'Brien will be going back in June. The official reason for the trip is a
conference of American and Vietnamese writers in Hanoi. A more personal one for
Mr. O'Brien is to return to the area around the village of My Lai.

''When the unit I went in with got there in February of 1969,'' he said the
other day, ''we all wondered why the place was so hostile. We did not know there
had been a massacre there a year earlier. The news about that only came out
later, while we were there, and then we knew. There is a monument in My Lai now
and I want to see it.''

Vietnam has never left Mr. O'Brien. The country, the war and the men who fought
it have filled most of his published fiction, and his latest volume, ''The
Things They Carried,'' is a series of interconnected stories about the war and
its victims - and about the whole business of concocting stories.

There will probably be more war stories. In a telephone interview from
Minneapolis, where he was promoting ''The Things They Carried,'' Mr. O'Brien
said: ''After each of my books about the war has appeared, I thought it might be
the last, but I've stopped saying that to myself. There are just too many
stories left to tell -in fact, more all the time. I suppose that for the sake of
my career, I ought to turn in another direction. And the novel I am working on
now is about life in the north country of Minnesota. But I know more war stories
will come out. They have to.''

Serpentine Paths

For Mr. O'Brien the stories are larger than the war, and considerably more
important. Those in ''The Things They Carried'' are at least as much about
storytelling as about men at war. Some retell in a different way stories already
told. Narrators dispute the accuracy of what they themselves are saying.
Occasionally a narrator will come to the end of a harrowing tale and then insist
that the protagonist did not do the terrible or heroic things he has just
recited, but that he himself did them.

Characters snatch stories from one another's mouths and tell them in a different
way, with different incidents. A character may take part of a story away from a
narrator and refashion it. A first-person commentator who intervenes to critique
or correct a story just told, and who can easily be mistaken for Mr. O'Brien,
may turn out to be a character in a later story. The stories themselves
eventually seem to be engaged in a dialogue about invention. ''As you play with
stories you find that whatever is said is not sufficient to the task,'' Mr.
O'Brien said.

In 1978, when Mr. O'Brien's third novel, ''Going After Cacciato,'' appeared,
some critics said his tale of an American soldier who simply walked away from
the Vietnam War had strong elements of the Latin American school of fiction
called magic realism. In his new work the magic is in the storyteller's
prestidigitation as the stories pass from character to character and voice to
voice, and the realism seems Homeric. Mr. O'Brien seems a little startled when
he is asked about that, but he admits that the Trojan War epics of the ancient
Greek poet keep drawing him back. There is not a line in ''The Things They
Carried'' that imitates Homer, but at times he is such a presence that he might
be included as an unnamed character - in the underlying assumptions about fate,
in the enmity of the earth itself toward men in battle, in the sheer glory of
fighting, in the boasting of young men.

The Shock of Being Drafted

Storytelling preceded war for Mr. O'Brien, or at least some kind of writing did.
He grew up in the southern Minnesota town of Worthington -''the Turkey Capital
of the World'' -and was there, a month out of Macalaster College in St. Paul,
when his draft notice arrived. He had always liked fiction, and books, but he
had majored in political science and certainly had no intention to be a writer.

His reaction to the draft notice still surprises him. ''I went to my room in the
basement and started pounding the typewriter,'' he recalled. ''I did it all
summer. It was the most terrible summer of my life, worse than being in the war.
My conscience kept telling me not to go, but my whole upbringing told me I had
to. That horrible summer made me a writer. I don't know what I wrote. I've still
got it, reams of it, but I'm not willing to look at it. It was just stuff -
bitter, bitter stuff, and it's probably full of self-pity. But that was the
beginning.''

He tried to abort the impulse. After he returned from Vietnam in 1970 he went
back to political science, doing graduate work in government at Harvard
University - ''I think I thought I might become the next Henry Kissinger,'' he
said - before a brief stint as a reporter for The Washington Post.

But the stories would not be stopped. So far they have filled five books; his
impression is that they are multiplying all the time in his head. He talks about
them like an evangelist or a prophet. ''My life is storytelling,'' he said. ''I
believe in stories, in their incredible power to keep people alive, to keep the
living alive, and the dead. And if I have started now to play with the stories,
inside the stories themselves, well, that's what people do all the time.

''Storytelling is the essential human activity. The harder the situation, the
more essential it is. In Vietnam men were constantly telling one another stories
about the war. Our unit lost a lot of guys around My Lai, but the stories they
told stay around after them. I would be mad not to tell the stories I know.''

Impatient With Reality

The stories, then, live on their own, and their relationship to reality is not
direct. Mr. O'Brien uses his infectious laugh to punctuate his confession that
the insistent reality of characters he has been imagining for 20 years often
makes him impatient with people he has not imagined: ''I live in my head all day
long and the world is a little dreamy.''

The intense reality of his characters explains a puzzle in ''The Things They
Carried.'' The book begins with a disclaimer: except for a few details all the
characters and incidents are imaginary. But then there is a dedication to a
company of soldiers, especially to six who are named. Then these six turn up in
the stories. ''Well, yes, I dedicated the book to my characters,'' Mr. O'Brien
said. ''After all, I lived with them for five years while I was writing. In
Vietnam people were being rotated constantly, so men you served with you would
know six or eight months. These characters are the people I know best.''

Where do they come from? Invariably they begin with ''a scrap of dialogue, a way
of saying something, in one form or another always with language. There's a
whisper inside the ear that begins each of them.'' They spring from spoken
words, even those who are quite inarticulate. In ''The Things They Carried,''
the central character of one story, ''The Man I Killed,'' is, as Mr. O'Brien
puts it, ''offstage,'' and writing a story about a character who is not there
was ''a wonderful technical challenge.''

Fact and Fiction Interwoven

But the character's voice, the ''way of saying something'' that inspired his
creation, is not silenced. He turns up elsewhere as a narrator. His name is Tim;
other people call him O'Brien. And therein lies another tale. A reader is well
advised to heed the book's opening caution that ''this is a work of fiction'' in
which all the characters are made up, as are all the disputes the narrators have
about the truth of the stories. This Tim, like Mr. O'Brien, comes originally
from Minnesota and is 43 years old. Everything else, even most of the convincing
personal details about his life and family, is made up.

It is disappointing to find that Tim's 9-year-old daughter is an invention, not
just because she is appealing but because her father's feelings about her role
as an interrogator of his conscience are so powerful. She was the most difficult
of all the characters to create, Mr. O'Brien said: ''I had to keep going back
and cutting a lot for the verisimilitude. But, you see, in a way she is real,
the child I do not have. Storytelling can even do that for you.''

But stories are not all he dreams about. Several years ago he told a reporter he
wanted to have a best seller, ''not just read in English classes.'' Now, he
said: ''I want both. After all, I don't write just for myself. It's really
annoying to be on a plane coming out here and see the guy in the next seat
reading someone else. So, sure, best seller. I'd love to knock Stephen King off
the top of the list. I know I won't but, after all, I spend my life inventing a
different reality.''

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: photo: Tim O'Brien (The New York Times/Steve Woit)

                   Copyright 1990 The New York Times Company


                              10 of 288 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                  April 3, 1990, Tuesday, Late Edition - Final

Books of The Times;
Going Home Again, and Finding You Can't

BYLINE: By Michiko Kakutani

SECTION: Section C; Page 17, Column 1; Cultural Desk

LENGTH: 955 words



In a Father's Place
By Christopher Tilghman
214 pages. Farrar, Straus, Giroux. $18.95.

In the title story of this radiant new collection, an aging patriarch learns
that his son, Nick, is writing a book, and he asks his son's girlfriend what the
book is about. ''Well, I guess what it's really about is you,'' she replies.
''Not really you, but a father, and this place'' - this place, meaning Nick's
boyhood home, the family manse, the community his family has lived in now for
generations.

The same might well be said of all the stories in this debut volume by
Christopher Tilghman. Each one measures the emotional distance a man or woman
has traveled since leaving home; each one traces the vestigial hold that
childhood memories and a familial past continue to exert on an individual life.

In many of the tales, a man or woman returns - after the space of many years -
to a family home. In ''Loose Reins,'' a man by the name of Hal goes back to
Montana, to visit his widowed mother who has just announced her marriage to a
ranch hand named Roy. As Hal revisits his favorite boyhood haunts, he realizes
that all he sees is overlaid with another map that exists only in his
imagination, a map of memories and emotions he thought he'd lost when he moved
back east.

He sees the kitchen table where his taciturn father used to preside silently
over dinner, staring out the window looking for rain. He sees his mother at work
in the garden, and remembers how she moved to this desolate land from the East
so many years ago. And he sees the ranch hands' bunkhouse and remembers how Roy
used to sleep there, how he nearly froze to death there one winter during a
violent blizzard. The image of Roy in the bunkhouse is juxtaposed, now, with the
image of Roy giving his mother ''a light, dancing kiss on the top of the head''
as they sit on the veranda sipping coffee in the warm mid-morning sun.

A similar juxtaposition of time present and time past occurs in ''On the
Rivershore.'' The reader watches a 12-year-old boy named Cecil witness a brutal
murder in the marshlands behind his house - his father shoots and kills a local
troublemaker who has been making passes at Cecil's sister. The reader then
watches as Cecil, some 30 years later, returns home for his father's funeral,
revisiting the scene of the crime he witnessed so many years ago. In the
intervening years, almost everything about Cecil's hometown has changed: the
farmlands have been leased out to a grain conglomerate, local fishermen have
fallen on hard times and old schoolmates have gone off to Vietnam and come back
transformed. Cecil himself has married, fathered three chidren and moved to a
Baltimore suburb, far from the haunted environs of his youth.

This compression of a character's life into a couple of brief pages
distinguishes all the stories in this volume. Though many revolve around a
single dramatic anecdote - a man's attempt to find his wife, who's run away from
home; a father's attempt to talk with his son during a strained family reunion;
a sailor's attempt to make a choice between his marriage and his love of the
open sea - they unfold to reveal an entire life, a complete emotional history.
In this sense, the central anecdote simply serves as a touchstone by which Mr.
Tilghman's hero may re-evaluate his relationship with the past, with his family
and their world.

Indeed, Mr. Tilghman demonstrates a remarkable gift in these stories for
delineating the complexities and complications of familial love: the ways in
which one embraces or rebels against family tradition; the ways in which one is
tied to other family members by loss, crisis and a shared sense of place, as
well as by straightforward affection. Many of his people come to see their lives
as defined not only in terms of their immediate families, but also in terms of
generations within the arc of history.

In ''Loose Reins,'' Hal's mother, who gave up a debutante's life for the
hardships of Montana, says she understands ''what the pioneer wives felt as they
waited in the wagons, dreaming of the green hills of Ohio, while husbands made
homes out of sod and buffalo skin.'' And Grant, the hero of ''Hole in the Day,''
who is driving west across Montana in pursuit of his wife, thinks of his
great-grandfather, who traced a similar route westward to the Pacific, and all
the others who once left their homes in search of an elusive frontier.

In fact the land itself emerges as a kind of character in many of these stories.
The wilds of Montana, the clay banks of Maryland's Eastern Shore, the
sun-dappled landscapes of Chesapeake Bay - such places are giving way, in Mr.
Tilghman's stories, to homogenized suburbs with ''miracle miles and plastic
strips.'' But they remain implanted in his heroes's imaginations, as powerful,
if receding, memories that help define who they are.

It is Mr. Tilghman's sure sense of his characters' histories that lends these
stories their form and their emotional chiaroscuro. When he abandons this
impressionistic method in favor of more self-conscious, structural conceits, the
results tend to be weaker. ''Mary in the Mountains,'' which relies upon excerpts
from a woman's letters to her estranged husband, gives the reader an oddly
disembodied account of a middle-aged woman's fractured life. And ''A Gracious
Rain'' stands as an awkward ghost story about a young father who dies from a
sudden heart attack, and then returns to watch over his family.

Such tales, however, are exceptions. ''In a Father's Place'' is a moving and
pictorially vivid collection -a collection that signals the appearance of a
gifted new writer, blessed with an instinctual feel for the emotional
transactions that make up family life.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: photo: Christopher Tilghman (Marion Ettlinger)

TYPE: Review

                   Copyright 1990 The New York Times Company


                              11 of 288 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 April 4, 1990, Wednesday, Late Edition - Final

U.S. Easing Disk Curbs

BYLINE: AP

SECTION: Section D; Page 12, Column 5; Financial Desk

LENGTH: 192 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, April 3


The Commerce Department moved on Monday to free exports of hard-disk drives for
personal computers.

Last year United States sales of the drives to other countries came to $500
million, the department said, despite licensing requirements that kept them out
of the Soviet Union and its allies. Dropping the curbs is expected to lead to a
large increase in sales.

On Wednesday the licensing restrictions will be removed for sales of disks with
a capacity of 45 megabytes to almost all countries outside the Soviet Union and
its allies. One megabyte holds a million characters.

The department has decided that the drives can be bought freely from other
countries so there is no reason to prevent American companies from competing for
the business.

To permit sales to the Soviet Union and its East European allies, the Commerce
Department will submit a proposal to the Coordinating Committee on Multilateral
Export Controls, known as Cocom.

If Cocom agrees, as expected, United States disk drives will be available
throughout the world, except in Libya, Cuba, Vietnam, North Korea and Cambodia
and to the police and armed forces of South Africa.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1990 The New York Times Company


                              12 of 288 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 April 5, 1990, Thursday, Late Edition - Final

Nguyen Lam; Vietnamese Official, 68

BYLINE: AP

SECTION: Section B; Page 13, Column 2; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 114 words

DATELINE: BANGKOK, Thailand, April 4


Nguyen Lam, a former Deputy Prime Minister of Vietnam, died on Sunday, the
official Hanoi radio reported. He was 68 years old.

Mr. Lam, also a former top official of the ruling Communist Party, died in an
army hospital, the radio said on Monday. It said he had a serious brain
infection caused by a cerebral blood circulation disorder.

The official Vietnam News Agency said Mr. Lam was born on Dec. 31, 1921, in the
northern province of Ha Nam Ninh. It said he was a member and secretary of the
party's Central Committee and was Deputy Prime Minister in 1976 - a year after
the Communists defeated the United States-backed Government of South Vietnam and
reunified the country.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Obituary

                   Copyright 1990 The New York Times Company


                              13 of 288 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 April 5, 1990, Thursday, Late Edition - Final

Review/Television;
'Outsiders,' a Drama of Socioeconomic Divisions

BYLINE: By JOHN J. O'CONNOR

SECTION: Section C; Page 15, Column 1; Cultural Desk

LENGTH: 953 words


If ''The Outsiders'' movie worked for Matt Dillon, Patrick Swayze, Rob Lowe,
Emilio Estevez, Tom Cruise and Ralph Macchio, can ''The Outsiders'' television
series make stars of Jay R. Ferguson, Rodney Harvey, Boyd Kestner, Robert
Rusler, David Arquette and Harold Pruett? Francis Ford Coppola certainly hopes
so. He directed the film and, with Fred Roos, is co-executive producer of the
series. Currently taking an enormous financial gamble in making a new addition
to ''The Godfather'' saga, Mr. Coppola and his Zoetrope Studios are in the
market for all the hits they can get.

Not surprisingly, ''The Outsiders'' can be seen on the Fox Broadcasting Network
- in New York on Channel 5 on Sundays at 7 P.M. Like ''21 Jump Street'' and
other Fox offerings, the new series is aimed directly at young audiences. Based
on the S. E. Hinton novel, ''The Outsiders'' goes back to 1966 to watch tough
street kids, known as Greasers, do battle with privileged jock types, known as
Socs (pronounced SOH-shiz). More than anything else, this is a class war, and
after a decade of the rich getting richer and the poor getting poorer, Fox's
explorations of the traditional divisions adds up to shrewd audience targeting.
The poor guys are the heroes, of course. There are more of them out there
watching television.

From a distance, the raggedy Greasers can be a bit offputting, but once you get
to know them, they're just plain dudes. Most prominent of the lot are the three
Curtis brothers, whose parent were killed in a car accident. Darrel (Mr.
Kestner), a carpenter, is now the young head of the family, trying hard to hold
things together so that the welfare worker doesn't send the others to foster
homes. Sodapop (Mr. Harvey), the brother in the middle, is an easygoing fellow
who spends most of his time looking for girls. And 15-year-old Ponyboy (Mr.
Ferguson) is sensitive and sweet. His favorite book is ''To Kill a
Mockingbird.'' Ponyboy serves as series narrator, spelling out the neat little
moral of each episode. He is a kind of Doogie Howser without a personal
computer.

Fleshing out the core group of Greasers are goofy Two-Bit (Mr. Arquette),
earnest Steve (Mr. Pruett) and big, mean Tim (Mr. Rusler), one of the older guys
longing for the good old days of violence and mayhem. The women in their lives
include underprivileged Scout (Heather McComb), a tomboy taken under Ponyboy's
wing (her favorite book is ''The Yearling''), and squeaky blonde Cherry (Kim
Walker), who is torn between Greaser energy and Soc money. Top Soc
representatives, their lips curled in contempt for the world's deprived, are
Greg (Sean Kanan) and Randy (Scott Coffey). Invariably, they lose the gang
battles but win the socioeconomic wars.

A seemingly bad attitude is merely a shell to protect a sensitive nature. Last
Sunday, Sodapop was distressed to hear that his casual girlfriend was pregnant
and wanted him to pay for an abortion. Wanting to do the right thing, Sodapop
pawned his dead mother's ring, which infuriated brother Darrel. Marriage was a
possibility, of course, but Sodapop was reluctant to ''throw my life away over
one night.'' Hey, he actually said, ''I'm just a kid.'' Even when he found out
he was not the father, Sodapop did right by the girl, seeing her off on a bus
after her mother, a beautician, condemned her as a slut. Philosopher Ponyboy
placed everything in helpful perspective: ''Some folks in this world know
exactly where they're going. Others just drift.''

This Sunday, troublemaking Tim returns to town after a short prison hitch.
Ponyboy has this to say about people like Tim: ''They can't help it. That's just
the way they are.'' Tim proves attractive to a ''fast'' rich girl. ''My daddy
loves to show me off,'' she whines. ''He treats me like a Barbie doll.'' Tim's
mother, however, wants nothing more to do with her misfit son, even refusing to
accept his birthday gift. Beneath the swagger, the poor guy is a whimpering
mess. In no time at all, he is listening to two former prison mates who have a
plan for a local payroll heist. But like last week's pregnancy, this
complication is neatly finessed, ending with one of those macho-bonding
fistfights between Tim and Darrel.

In the buzzing background of ''The Outsiders,'' there are occasional reports of
some kind of military action in a place called Vietnam, but the series is far
more interested in domestic resentments. As rebellious Tim tells carpenter
Darrel: ''Them Socs let you build their roofs, but they ain't ever going to let
you under one.'' The war? A veteran of the Korean conflict shrugs: ''They send
us Greasers to the front. The Socs get the cushy desk jobs. That's the way it
is.'' There is a subversive undercurrent to this series. Fox is clearly betting
that the times are ready for it. And creating a new batch of teen idols wouldn't
hurt business, either.

RICH VS. POOR IN THE 60'S - THE OUTSIDERS, developed for television by S.E.
Hinton, Joe Byrne and Jeb Rosebrook, based upon characters from the novel ''The
Outsiders,'' by S. E. Hinton; Mr. Byrne and Mr. Rosebrook, co-executive
producers, for Zoetrope Studios in association with Papazian-Hirsch
Entertainment; Francis Ford Coppola and Fred Roos, executive producers. Sunday
on Fox at 7 P.M.

Ponyboy Curtis...Jay R. Ferguson
Sodapop Curtis...Rodney Harvey
Darrel Curtis...Boyd Kestner
Tim Shepard...Robert Rusler
Two-Bit Matthews...David Arquette
Steve Randle...Harold Pruett
Belinda (Scout) Jenkins...Heather McComb
Cherry Valance...Kim Walker
Randy Adderson...Scott Coffey
Marcia...Jennifer McComb
Greg...Sean Kanan
Buck Merrill...Billy Bob Thornton
Barbara Richards...L. Scott Caldwell
Maria Rogers...Jenny Agutter

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: photo: Boyd Kestner, left, Rodney Harvey, center, and Jay R. Ferguson
in the Fox Broadcasting Network's ''Outsiders.'' (Aaron Rapoport)

TYPE: Review

                   Copyright 1990 The New York Times Company


                              14 of 288 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                  April 6, 1990, Friday, Late Edition - Final

NEWS SUMMARY

SECTION: Section A; Page 2, Column 5; Metropolitan Desk

LENGTH: 1361 words



International    A3-10



A five-day summit meeting between President Bush and Mikhail S. Gorbachev will
be held in Washington beginning on May 30, the White House and the Kremlin said.

    Page A1



Soviet troops went on another foray in the Lithuanian capital while the Kremlin
repeated that it would not hold formal talks with separatist leaders until the
republic voided its declaration of independence.    A1



Support for German unification has grown, but Americans seem uneasy about
whether the change in Europe is permanent, according to the New York Times/CBS
News Poll.    A8

East Germany's new Parliament held its inaugural session, but with the major
parties still negotiating a coalition, no government was installed.    A8



Bonn works on money plan amid protests in East

    A9



Yugoslavia's first multiparty vote in 45 years will be held Sunday in the
republic of Slovenia. No matter who wins, the tiny republic on the edge of the
Alps is considered certain to signal its desire for independence.    A8



Japanese barriers on trade will be reduced under an agreement reached by
Washington and Tokyo. The Japanese steps range from cutting restrictions on
large retail stores to altering real estate tax policies.    A1



Aid to Cambodia and Vietnam by Eastern European countries may be reduced after
the collapse of Euro-pean Communism and the withering of Comecon, the
Eastern-bloc trading association.    A10



There is a sense of crisis in Nepal. The pro-democracy opposition is preparing
for a general strike, and there is speculation that King Birendra, the
all-powerful sovereign, might suspend Parliament.    A3



F. W. de Klerk and Nelson Mandela agreed to reschedule formal talks between the
Government and the African National Congress on a political settlement on South
Africa's future.

    A1



The Israeli people want reform. Their voices are difficult to hear above the din
of promises, threats and warnings that characterize the nation's politics, but
their message is clear: they want electoral reform.    A6



Gelbard, career envoy, reported favored for Managua post

    A3



Nsanje journal: Will Malawi shut its door to refugees?

    A4



National    A12-22



The long climb in housing prices that has made home ownership all but a
sure-fire investment may level off or decline during this decade, many experts
think. That would alter consumer spending habits.    A1



Pentagon spending reductions twice as great as those offered by President Bush
have been proposed by two senior Republican Senators, William S. Cohen of Maine
and John McCain of Arizona.    A1



The nation's Roman Catholic bishops have engaged a public relations firm and a
polling concern in Washington to conduct a nationwide campaign to persuade both
Catholics and non-Catholics to oppose abortion.    A1



Study finds little distress in women after abortion

    A16



An Alderman in Milwaukee has stunned and divided the city with his efforts to
revive the Black Panthers and build a black militia that he says will take
violent action if his demands for racial parity are not met.    A12



A hoax call to the Coast Guard may have cost the lives of two fishermen on a
ship sinking off the coast of Massachusetts.    A12

Boston University's John R. Silber is not a conventional candidate for the
Democratic nomination for Governor of Massachusetts.    A14



Washington Talk: If politics is broke, can talk fix it?

    A12



F.B.I. Director William S. Sessions was accused by members of Congress of
tolerating what one lawmaker described as the ''living hell'' experienced by the
bureau's black and Hispanic employees.    A15



Newspaper editors hear self-criticism

    A15



The issue of controlling acid rain was tackled by the House Energy and Commerce
Committee, which voted to recommend sweeping legislation to strengthen the Clean
Air Act.    A18



Mercury may be banned from paint. Government regulators are alarmed at growing
evidence of potential health dangers from the toxic metal, which is used in
latex paint.    D1



Monkey virus infects four, but none gets sick

    A16



A winged rocket is launched into orbit from a B-52 aircraft

    A16



Regional    B1-4



An additional revenue shortfall of $105 million is faced by New York City for
the fiscal year ending June 30, Mayor Dinkins said. He said he would seek $309
million more in higher taxes to balance the budget for next year.    A1



An income tax cut would be delayed under a tentative plan agreed on by Gov.
Mario M. Cuomo and legislative leaders in Albany. The cut would be phased in
over three years.    B1



The Port Authority dropped plans for a $1 increase in its bridge and tunnel
tolls and a 25-cent fare increase on PATH trains later this year, the executive
director of the bistate agency said.    B2



Dean of New School picked to head planning agency

    B3



The Hispanic community is rallying to pressure the Dinkins administration to
avoid sweeping away social clubs that the community says serve vital cultural,
economic and educational needs.    B1



An appraisal: The Trump Taj Mahal has been advertised as the eighth wonder of
the world, but it will be that only to people who consider seeing 3,000 slot
machines in a single room to be a greater experience than the pyramids.    B1



Four turtles from under the streets of New York City

    B1



Marcos role in investments is recounted by ex-banker

    B3



Suspect in slaying had order to stay away

    B3



A doctor cites loss of memory in murder case

    B2



Business Digest    D1



Weekend



Easter music    C1



Bushes see Michael Jackson    C27



Theater: On Stage    C2



''Paradise for the Worried''    C3



Len Cariou in ''Mountain''    C29



Film: At the Movies    C8



''I Love You to Death''    C8



''Cry-Baby''    C10



''The Cook, the Thief, His Wife and Her Lover''    C12



''In the Spirit''    C16



Music: World tour via folk song    C1



States drop record labeling bills    C36



Dance: Pilar Rioja    C3



Architecture: An elusive modernist    C27



Art: Brazilian at the Modern    C31



Auctions    C31



''Works on Paper'' at the Armory    C31



Restaurants    C22



Word and Image: TV Weekend    C34



Edith Wharton stories    C36



Sports



Baseball: Righetti to close show

    A28



Spira is arraigned

    A28





Basketball: Oklahoma reinstates women's program

    A27



Boxing: Ruddock in picture    A27

Column: Anderson on Masters    A25



Golf: Two Masters rookies lead    A25



Hockey: Rangers beat Islanders    A25



Devils fall in overtime    A25



Whalers edge Bruins    A29



Tennis: Capriati defeats Sanchez Vicario

    A28



Law    B6



At the Bar

Leaps of science create quandaries on evidence

Obituaries



Edward E. Carlson, former chief executive of UAL Inc.

    A20



S. Gershon Levi, an ex-president of a Rabbis' group

    A20



Rafael Lorente de No, a researcher

    A21



Editorials/Letters/Op-Ed



Editorials    A34



Pretoria: not black and white

Court rules for the homeless

Protecting inept managers

David C. Unger: Nationalism

Letters    A34



William Safire: Our ''open doormat''    A35



Anthony Lewis: Hope, the beloved country    A35



Alice H. Amsden: An Asian plan for East Europe

    A35



James T. Laney: Why tolerate campus bigots?    A35


LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Summary

                   Copyright 1990 The New York Times Company


                              15 of 288 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                  April 6, 1990, Friday, Late Edition - Final

Upheaval in the East;
East Europe Considers Cutting Aid to Indochina

BYLINE: By STEVEN ERLANGER, Special to The New York Times

SECTION: Section A; Page 10, Column 5; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 800 words

DATELINE: PHNOM PENH, Cambodia


The collapse of European Communism and the withering of Comecon, the
Eastern-bloc trading association, have led Eastern European countries to
consider reducing their diplomatic representation and aid to Cambodia and
Vietnam.

Planned reductions in aid, tied to the negotiation of a new set of five-year
plans to begin next year, underline the need for Vietnam and Cambodia to improve
their relations with the West. It puts further pressure on both countries to
seek a settlement to the Cambodian war, on which improvement of relations with
the United States depends.

A Hungarian diplomat in Hanoi said, ''We want a relationship with Vietnam
similar to that of any other Western European country, based on clear mutual and
commercial interests.''

Prague Recalls Envoys

In late February, the Czechoslovak Ambassadors in Vietnam, Cambodia and Laos
were recalled to Prague for consultations by the new Government. Czechoslovak
diplomats say they will be replaced and their embassy staffs reduced, while
relations with Laos may be downgraded to charge status.

The Hungarian Ambassador in Phnom Penh has sent an evaluation of his embassy to
Budapest that discusses the options of closing it or reducing its staff.

A Hungarian diplomat said cost is the main issue, but doubted the embassy would
be closed. ''You can see the high tide coming from the West as part of any
settlement,'' he said. ''To close the embassy in the face of this high tide
would be stupid.''

Still, another Eastern European diplomat said, the focus of foreign policy among
the newly non-Communist governments must be Europe, the Soviet Union and the
West, with Indochina only a distant concern.

Anxiety in Phnom Penh

He said the changes are causing severe anxiety in the Cambodian Government,
which is trying to secure relations with more countries and fears losing ties
with any of the 10 that now have diplomatic missions here.

Many Eastern European embassies, a diplomat said, are operating with no clear
instructions from their tumultuous home capitals.

''There is a dangerous silence on the part of many East European embassies
here,'' he said, while Western countries like Australia, Japan, Sweden, Canada,
France and Britain are gearing up for better relations ''as soon as it is
seemly.''

Cambodia's main aid donors are the Soviet Union, East Germany and
Czechoslovakia.

Change in Trade Relations

''These relationships will inevitably change, and soon,'' a Polish diplomat
said. ''Comecon is moving toward a hard-currency relationship, and no one can
afford to subsidize trade in the same ways.''

Even the Soviet Union, which supplies Cambodia's oil and gasoline at subsidized
prices and provides military aid, is now negotiating a new five-year plan, to
run from 1991, that will look very different from the last one.

''Many figures may change,'' a Soviet diplomat said.

With the possibility of an Indochina peace settlement and changes in Moscow's
foreign policy, military aid to Hanoi is sure to decrease, a Soviet diplomat
there said. ''Our relationship, which was before mostly political and military,
is now becoming mostly economic and cultural.''

'We Start to Count the Money'

''That creates more problems,'' he said, including how to value old loans.
Instead of building huge plants and infrastructure projects all on credit,
''with no thought about cost, now we start to count the money.''

The new five-year plan, he said, would concentrate on joint ventures and
contracts between enterprises on the basis of hard currency and market prices.
''We seek to balance our relations and make them mutually beneficial,'' he said.

He said Western estimates of $2.5 billion a year in Soviet help to Vietnam were
''roughly right,'' not including direct aid. But he would not comment on
suggestions that this figure may be reduced as much as 40 percent.

Such considerations clearly worry the Vietnamese. Nguyen Ngoc Minh of the State
Bank said Hanoi's 1989 budget deficit was more than double 1988's, increasing
inflationary pressures.

A sizable cut in Soviet aid as Hanoi tries to remodel its industry, create jobs,
adopt market prices and eliminate subsidies would be bound to hurt.

In particular, he said, it would intensify Vietnam's credit squeeze, at least
until Washington stops blocking new loans from the International Monetary Fund,
the World Bank and the Asian Development Bank.

Planned Comecon projects, like improving the north-south railroad, ''are as good
as dead,'' a diplomat said.

Even the official news organizations of the countries that were once Communist
now have little reason to maintain Hanoi bureaus. As Western news agencies
negotiate to open offices in Hanoi, at least two Eastern European agencies are
planning to relocate to Bangkok or Jakarta.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1990 The New York Times Company


                              16 of 288 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                  April 6, 1990, Friday, Late Edition - Final

Call for Black Militia Stuns Milwaukee

BYLINE: By ISABEL WILKERSON, Special to The New York Times

SECTION: Section A; Page 12, Column 1; National Desk

LENGTH: 1150 words

DATELINE: MILWAUKEE, April 4


A Milwaukee Alderman has stunned and divided this quiet, no-nonsense city with
his efforts to revive the Black Panthers and build a black militia that he says
will take violent action if his demands for racial parity are not met within
five years.

The Alderman, Michael McGee, a former Black Panther who represents one of the
city's poorest, most crime-ridden districts, says the inner city has watched as
the rest of Milwaukee has prospered. He has vowed to promote violence unless the
city creates a $100 million jobs program and takes other steps to revive black
neighborhoods.

''We've done things the nonviolent way, and it hasn't gotten us anywhere,'' Mr.
McGee said in an interview. ''The only way to get respect is to be willing to
use violence. We either stand there with our backs to the wall or fight our way
out.''

Many white Milwaukeeans have responded in outrage, with one white Alderman
calling his demands a ''clear-cut case of extortion.'' Mayor John O. Norquist,
who is white and a one-time ally of Mr. McGee, has called for his resignation,
saying, ''In this business you have to decide: You're in the system or you're
out of it.''

Words Find a Chord

But the criticism seems only to have fueled Mr. McGee's bombast and his support
among many blacks. While more moderate black politicians have denounced talk of
violence, Mr. McGee's message of empowerment has struck a chord with his
constituents. (Legal officials said they did not think Mr. McGee was breaking
any law, since he is not advocating any immediate, specific act of violence at
this point.) In the shadows of the glass towers and automated breweries of
booming downtown Milwaukee, 600 frustrated and angry blacks packed into a grade
school auditorium in a depressed black neighborhood Wednesday night to sign up
for the militia.

They cheered and hooted and stood in ovation as Mr. McGee, dressed in black
fatigues with a yellow arm patch depicting a black panther, said: ''Dr. King
said he might not make it there with us. He won't. We're going to fight our way
to the promised land.''

Many in the audience said they were willing to do whatever was necessary to
improve their lives. But most said they did not think it would come to violence.

''I'm ready to die if I have to,'' said DeJuan Johnson, a 25-year-old
carpenter's aide. ''We can't sit back and let our neighborhoods die.'

A Depressing Shift

Indeed, the city has undergone a dramatic economic shift in the past decade that
researchers say has most hurt Milwaukee's blacks, 40 percent of whom live below
the poverty level.

While non-manufacturing and service jobs have created boom times for the
business core, Milwaukee has lost tens of thousands of factory jobs that lured
blacks to the city in the first place. Some researchers put the black
unemployment rate in the inner city at 25 percent, as against 5 percent for the
city over all.

A recent study conducted for the Milwaukee City Council showed that blacks in
Milwaukee were discriminated against in many everyday matters.

Last year, researchers from the University of Chicago listed Milwaukee -where
most blacks live on the North Side, and most whites live on the South - as one
of five American cities whose patterns of segregation were so pronounced and so
deeply entrenched that they were deemed ''hypersegregated.'' The other cities
were Chicago, Detroit, Cleveland and Newark.

But unlike some poor cities in the South, where impoverished blacks may live in
shanties without indoor plumbing, racial discrimination is more subtle in
Milwaukee, black residents say.

''It's a very clean city with a clean kind of racism,'' said Jerrel Jones,
president of Courier Communications, owner of two black newspapers and a black
radio station in Milwaukee. ''You don't see a ghetto as such. But if you knock
on a door on our side of town, 25 people might come out who haven't eaten in a
week.''

'He Scares People'

Many white city officials concede that more should be done to help blacks, who
make up about a fourth of the population. But they say threats of violence are
only clouding his message. ''Whether intended or not, the words of Alderman
McGee have created a lot of dissension and divisiveness in the city,'' said
Alderman John R. Kalwitz, who is white.

''He scares people,'' said Thomas P. Donegan, the president of the City Council,
who is white. ''There's a sense of outrage that anyone would dare threaten to
use guns.''

The 40-year-old Mr. McGee, who was an Army medic in the Vietnam War, has been a
renegade on the Council since he was first elected in 1984.

He is considered a passionate and committed spokesman for the disposessed, one
who will do almost anything to get his point across. Once, he hung a black baby
doll from a tree inside the City Hall rotunda to symbolize racism in Milwaukee.
Another time he wore a paper bag over his head in an official Council portrait
to protest lack of funds for blacks. Moving Too Fast?  In recent years, while
his district slipped further into poverty, development elsewhere has accelerated
with new shopping malls and skyscrapers, a new home for the Milwaukee Bucks
basketball team, efforts to get a hockey team and plans for a new baseball
stadium for the Milwaukee Brewers, which alone could cost $100 million.

''People tell me, 'Mike, you want to move too fast,' '' Mr. McGee said. ''But
they move fast when they want something downtown. Our community cannot take a
back seat to baseball and basketball.''

He said that, for now, his militia would spend its time patrolling black
neighborhoods and fighting crime and drugs, much like the Black Muslims have in
Washington, D.C. But he said he is ready to fight if black neighborhoods do not
get more attention by 1995.

''I'm not advocating what the Black Panthers were advocating,'' Mr. McGee said,
recalling that the Black Panthers advocated self-defense, not violent attacks,
and promoted community social programs. ''Our militia will be about violence.
I'm talking actual fighting, bloodshed and urban guerilla warfare.''

His brand of politics is coming to be known around here as ''the politics of
discomfort.''

''He certainly is pricking our conscious about the real world,'' Mr. Kalwitz
said. ''It's a legitimate question. Where are our priorities when you spend
millions for downtown amenities and dribbles for the neighborhood?''

Others are not so convinced. Alderwoman Annette Scherbert, who is white, likened
his demands to blackmail. ''A hundred million dollars, folks, or I start up my
army,'' she said just after he announced his plans.

Still, Walter Farrell, a professor of educational policy and community relations
at the University of Milwaukee who is black, said that many poor blacks hear Mr.
McGee's overall message differently. ''What he has done for blacks in this
town,'' said Professor Farrell, ''is restore their dignity.''

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo: Michael McGee, a Milwaukee Alderman who represents one of the
city's poorest and most crime-ridden districts, wants to build a black militia
that would take violent action, if necessary, to get racial parity. Mr. McGee
urged people to join the militia at a rally on Wednesday. (The New York
Times/John Cumming); Community members signing up for a black militia backed by
Michael McGee, a Milwaukee Alderman, at a school auditorium on Wednesday.

                   Copyright 1990 The New York Times Company


                              17 of 288 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                  April 6, 1990, Friday, Late Edition - Final
                              Correction Appended

Menu for Newspaper Editors: Criticism and 60's Headliners

BYLINE: By ALEX S. JONES, Special to The New York Times

SECTION: Section A; Page 15, Column 1; National Desk

LENGTH: 750 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, April 5


The nation's newspaper editors have received a thorough scolding at their annual
convention here this week, most of it self-administered.

Loren Ghiglione, president of the American Society of Newspaper Editors, chided
his colleagues Wednesday for ''looking at the world increasingly through the
eyes of the comfortable.''

''We often think of ourselves as Davids, fighting the establishment, but the
public sees us more as status-quo, establishment Goliaths,'' Mr. Ghiglione
asserted, in a plea for ''editors of action.''

If such oratory prompted memories of the 1960's, it was no accident. The society
is an 1,000-member organization of directing editors of daily newspapers, and
the principal theme of its convention, a theme orchestrated by Mr. Ghiglione, is
that the most important issues of the 1990's are the unfinished business of the
1960's. Insensitive? Who's Insensitive?  Mr. Ghiglione, editor and president of
The News in Southbridge, Mass., one of the few editors who own their papers, has
a reputation as an outspoken maverick. He included denunciations of horoscopes
and of the tobacco industry, an important advertiser.

Some editors saw this convention as a vast consciousness-raising effort, and
felt that they did not really need it. ''I think I'm already sensitive,'' said
Jerald A. Finch, managing editor of The Richmond News Leader.

During a series of speeches encouraging support for prison journalism and hiring
more disabled journalists, a man stood on the stage translating in sign language
for the hearing-impaired.

A Disclosure of a Self

Perhaps the most memorable occurrence, though, was an emotional statement by
Leroy F. Aarons, senior vice president for news at The Oakland (Calif.) Tribune,
at the end of his report on a survey of the attitudes of homosexual men and
women who are journalists.

After telling his colleagues that only 13 percent of those responding to the
survey were willing to be quoted, he said the undertaking in itself had ''given
them hope and optimism.''

''I, as an editor and a gay man, am proud of A.S.N.E.,'' Mr. Aarons concluded in
a choked voice. While he had long been frank with close friends and fellow
workers about his sexual orientation, he had not declared himself in front of
the society. Neither had anyone else.He said later that many people had
expressed support for him and he had received no negative comments. Those
Headline Names!  But the convention was definitely divided on the effort to tie
the 60's to the 90's by inviting prominent figures of the 60's to talk about
''unfinished business.''

Walter Cronkite, the retired CBS anchor, moderated a panel that included Gen.
William C. Westmoreland of the Army. retired, who commanded American forces in
Vietnam; Gloria Steinem, a founder of Ms. magazine and advocate of feminism;
John D. Ehrlichman, who served a prison term for his role in the Watergate
affair, and is now a writer; Robert Moses, former leader of the Student
Nonviolent Coordinating Committee and now an educator, and the Rev. Theodore
Hesburgh, president emeritus of the University of Notre Dame.

''It was like going to a museum,'' said Paul Janensh, editor of The Journal-News
in West Nyack, N.Y., who complained that the panelists had mostly rehashed old
issues. Jessica Mitford, a muckraker who was part of a group invited to question
the panelists, asked General Westmoreland if he had suffered from ''massive
self-delusion'' in Vietnam. The general, chin jutting, said the question was
nonsense.

Some editors considered the thematic approach a success simply because of the
subject. ''We're at last addressing a lot of issues and constituencies that we
should,'' said Janet Chusmir, executive editor of The Miami Herald.

Unfinished Business: Minorities

There was skepticism, however, about just how effective Mr. Ghiglione's effort
would prove in the long run.

''Unfortunately, while the leadership has its heart in the right place, the
membership is not as responsive,'' said Tom Morgan, president of the National
Association of Black Journalists.He was referring especially to a survey
reporting that over half the nation's dailies have no black, Hispanic, Oriental
or Native American journalists. Mr. Ghiglione had asked the society's board to
publish the names of those papers with no minority journalists. The board
decided to name only papers willing to be identified.

The society's incoming president is Burl Osborne, editor and president of The
Dallas Morning News.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

CORRECTION-DATE: April 7, 1990, Saturday, Late Edition - Final

CORRECTION:

An article yesterday about the annual meeting of the American Society of
Newspaper Editors misidentified the editor of the Journal-News in West Nyack,
N.Y. He is Paul Janensch.

                   Copyright 1990 The New York Times Company


                              18 of 288 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                  April 6, 1990, Friday, Late Edition - Final

LAW;
At the Bar

BYLINE: By David Margolick

SECTION: Section B; Page 6, Column 1; National Desk

LENGTH: 819 words


In the opening scene of ''Mountain,'' William O. Douglas is on his deathbed,
marshaling his dwindling energies to defend his career. ''The law must be about
life!'' he rails. ''About the people and their lives! How can you sit in
judgment on them if you haven't lived? If you haven't taken those journeys?''

It is a neat epitaph for Douglas, who served for 36 tumultuous years on the
United States Supreme Court, longer than anyone else. And it is the leitmotif of
Douglas Scott's unusual new play about the man, starring Len Cariou, which
opened last night at the Lucille Lortel Theater in New York. [Review, page C29.]
Most Supreme Court Justices are not the stuff of great drama. The cloistered
life of reading motions, sitting in conferences, hearing oral arguments presents
few dramatic possibilities. Whatever other descriptive labels one might place on
William H. Rehnquist, William J. Brennan Jr. or their peers, ''charismatic'' is
not one that leaps to mind.

But there is undoubtedly an epic quality to Douglas's life, which began in
Yakima, Wash., and took him to Columbia and Yale law schools and New Deal
Washington before he reached the High Court in 1939. He sat there until 1975.
Five years later he was buried in Arlington National Cemetery where, to the
strains of ''This Land is Your Land,'' he was placed 20 feet from Oliver Wendell
Holmes Jr. Along the way Douglas wrote 1,300 opinions, caused continual
controversy, married four times and climbed innumerable mountains. It was to
those mountains - usually the Cascades, but also the Himalayas -that he
retreated all his life for reflection and refreshment. The play's few props
include not only the predictable robe and law books, but also a hiking staff and
a Stetson.

As he said in his autobiography, those same mountains kept him from becoming a
conventional corporate lawyer. When the Swaine of Cravath, Swaine & Moore
offered the young Douglas $5,000 a year to practice there, he turned it down,
convinced that such a job would sap him of his spirit. Even those who scaled the
heights of Wall Street ''did not seem to have much left at 65,'' he wrote. ''If
I walked their paths I'd never be able to climb another mountain.''

Mr. Scott, 56, approached Douglas from an unusual direction. Mr. Scott's
background is not in law, but in history and English. He spent many years with
the Rand Corporation, including a tour with Daniel Ellsberg in Vietnam, and now
works for William F. Baker, president of Channel 13. The ''Douglas'' Mr. Scott
is named for is Fairbanks, not William O. Mr. Scott began ''Mountain'' in 1985
after reading ''Go East, Young Man,'' the first volume of Douglas's
autobiography. Then he read all of Douglas's opinions as well as his 30 books.
He spoke with at least one of Douglas's wives and a few former law clerks. And
he retraced some of Douglas's steps, beginning by walking the streets of Yakima.

Last October, Mr. Cariou took a similar trip - ''to see the country Douglas was
so much in love with,'' he said. To get a better feel for his demeanor, voice
and mannerisms, he watched a television interview Douglas gave to Eric Sevareid.
From what had been only the most rudimentary knowledge of Douglas, Mr. Cariou
came to admire what he saw as his vision, drive and singleness of purpose.

In a sense, it is appropriate that Douglas's lionizers are lay people. Among
legal scholars, his reputation a decade after his death is mixed. However much
they applaud his civil libertarian instincts, they fault him for shooting from
the hip in his opinions and slighting legal theory, texts and precedents. G.
Edward White, a professor of law and history at the University of Virginia Law
School, has called Douglas ''the foremost anti-judge of his time.'' His point is
that rugged individualism is better suited to mountaineering than judging, at
least on a collegial institution like the Supreme Court.

Mr. Scott's play touches upon some of these issues, though sometimes only by
omission. For all the opinions Douglas wrote, ''Mountain'' contains few
references to them. John C. Vennema, the actor who portrays the various men in
Douglas's career, is called upon to play Louis D. Brandeis (the Justice he
replaced); Franklin D. Roosevelt (the man who appointed him); Gerald R. Ford
(who tried to have him impeached and, eventually, appointed his replacement) and
Richard M. Nixon (who once told Douglas he inspired his political career). ''I
do believe that hearing that compliment was the most upsetting moment of my
life,'' Douglas says in the play.

But there is next to nothing from Hugo Black or Felix Frankfurter or John
Marshall Harlan, the men who served so long with him.

''America was the better for having Douglas on the Court, and I wish he were
still there,'' Mr. Scott said. ''But he could be a very, very difficult man. I
admire him, and in a way I love him. But I don't think I like him.''

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Drawing

                   Copyright 1990 The New York Times Company


                              19 of 288 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 April 7, 1990, Saturday, Late Edition - Final

A Roundup for the Great Society

BYLINE: By BARBARA GAMAREKIAN, Special to The New York Times

SECTION: Section 1; Page 9, Column 1; National Desk

LENGTH: 884 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, April 6


They gathered tonight for what Lady Bird Johnson called ''a Texas-size roundup
of the Great Society.''

But the celebration, marking the 25th anniversary of the year Lyndon Baines
Johnson was inaugurated, was shadowed by the recent publication of a highly
critical biography of Johnson by Robert A. Caro.

Nearly 1,000 people, from former Cabinet officers to White House butlers, began
a weekend reunion of parties and panel discussions that began with an afternoon
reception at the White House for members of the Johnson family and influential
figures in the Johnson Administration.

In a tribute to the 36th President, who died at his ranch in Texas in 1973,
President Bush called Johnson ''a towering and passionate figure.''

'Lyndon Johnson Heard,' Bush Says

''He was endlessly in motion,'' Mr. Bush said at the East Room ceremony, in
which he was joined by Mrs. Bush. ''He tried with all his heart to be the best
President that this country ever had for the people who are pressed against the
wall, whose cries are not heard. But he heard. Lyndon Johnson heard.''

At one point the President turned to Mrs. Johnson and said, ''The best thing he
ever did was marrying Lady Bird Johnson.''

Thanking Mr. Bush for his tribute to her husband and his Presidency, Mrs.
Johnson said, ''I will remember it always.''

Those who participated in the celebration today were mindful that the occasion
followed by a few weeks the publication of Mr. Caro's book, ''Means of Ascent,''
the second installment of a projected four-volume biography of Johnson. The
best-selling book, published by Alfred A. Knopf, presents a detailed account of
how, in Mr. Caro's view, Johnson used political power to make a fortune in
broadcasting and stole the 1948 Democratic primary for a seat in the United
States Senate from his opponent, Coke Stevenson, a former Governor of Texas.

Some Personal Portraits Are Offered

Many who had worked for Johnson were eager to offer their own portraits of him
at a dinner tonight in the Mayflower Hotel here.

''In truth, almost every fault you can think of, Lyndon Johnson had some of
those,'' said Jack Valenti, who was a special assistant in the Johnson White
House and is now president of the Motion Picture Association. ''But he also
started a social, political and economic revolution in this country that can
never be forgotton or ignored.''

Charles Guggenheim, a film producer who has spent 18 months researching and
filming several movies about Johnson, said: ''He was so multifaceted. He could
be kind, he could be abrupt, he could be mean, he could be loving, he could be
compassionate, he could be devious. He was just bigger than life - that is what
makes him so fascinating.''

Mr. Guggenheim added: ''He left the Presidency under a cloud, and I think it's
fair to say he was an unpopular man because of Vietnam. But I think there is an
obligation after 25 years to look back on the extraordinary contributions he
made in his domestic programs that have been obscured by the tragedy of Vietnam.
''

Clark M. Clifford, who served as Johnson's Secretary of Defense in 1968, seemed
to stiffen when asked about the Caro book. ''I worked closely with Lyndon for
many years, and I knew him better than Mr. Caro knows him,'' Mr. Clifford said.
''Caro had an opportunity to write a really outstanding book and it's too bad,
even tragic, that his bias and prejudice against Lyndon Johnson was so
pronounced.''

Portrayal of 1948 Opponent Is Assailed

Many of those who gathered here noted that some reviewers had faulted Mr. Caro
for his portrayal of Stevenson as a paradigm of integrity.

''No one says Lyndon Johnson was a flawless man,'' said Liz Carpenter, former
press secretary for Mrs. Johnson. ''But Caro tried to make a saint out of Coke
Stevenson. He was just a goat-herding Governor - he had no vision for Texas.''

Mr. Valenti, who was master of ceremonies at the dinner, said: ''The Caro book's
principle sin, for which there is no expiation, is the fact that he distorts
reality. He set up a very mediocre Governor of Texas as a latter-day Jesus
Christ so that he could portray Johnson as the slimiest creature that walked the
earth.''

In recent interviews Mr. Caro has defended his book as accurate and indicated
that later volumes, dealing with Johnson's Senate leadership in the 1950's and
his White House years from 1963 to 1968, would be more sympathetic.

There was no comment on Mr. Caro's work from Mrs. Johnson, who was joined at the
celebration by her daughters, Lynda and Luci, and six grandchildren. What was on
her mind, she said, was that she would remember and recognize the array of
former ambassadors, speech writers, military and political advisers and White
House telephone operators, gardeners and carpenters who attended the dinner.

''I hope my friends will realize my eyesight and legs are not as good as they
once were; I've asked them to make the namecards in big print,'' she said today.
''I feel such an overwhelming warmth at the outpouring of friends who have come
from all the phases of work that we tried, and did, in those five crowded years.
Lyndon would have had more fun than anyone at this gathering.'' Advance
Publicationsd(Alfred A. Knopf) A reunion of former Johnson aides is shadowed by
a critical biography.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo: At celebration in Washington of the 25th anniversary of Lyndon
B. Johnson's inauguration, Lady Bird Johnson talked with two former Defense
Secretaries, Robert McNamara, left, and Clark Clifford. (The New York
Times/George Tames)

                   Copyright 1990 The New York Times Company


                              20 of 288 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                  April 8, 1990, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

Lisa Poulin Weds Clayton J. Kloehr

SECTION: Section 1; Part 2, Page 52, Column 4; Society Desk

LENGTH: 178 words


The Church of the Annunciation in Washington was the setting yesterday for the
marriage of Lisa M. Poulin, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs. Normand Poulin of
Potomac, Md., to Clayton J. Kloehr, a son of Mr. and Mrs. J. H. Kloehr of Tulsa,
Okla. The Rev. Michael Quill performed the Roman Catholic ceremony.

Ms. Poulin-Kloehr, 34 years old, graduated from Bucknell University and received
an M.B.A. from the University of Pittsburgh. She is a senior manager in
bankruptcy and reorganization for the New York accounting firm of KPMG Peat
Marwick.

Her father is a retired Foreign Service Officer who served in embassies in
Saigon, Paris, Madrid and The Hague. Her mother, Joan M. Poulin, is a research
official with the Westat social service research corporation in Rockville, Md.

Mr. Kloehr, 33, graduated from the University of Tulsa. He is the treasury
operations manager at the Placid Oil Company in Dallas. His mother, Nellie M.
Kloehr, retired as a medical administrator and his father retired as a
manufacturing manager at Rockwell International, both in Tulsa.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1990 The New York Times Company


                              21 of 288 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                  April 8, 1990, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

'Just Kidding' - But at Whose Expense?

BYLINE: By RICHARD BERNSTEIN

SECTION: Section 2; Page 1, Column 1; Arts and Leisure Desk

LENGTH: 3123 words


Orson Baldwin seems at first a charming straight-talker in a world of wimps.
Then his unpleasantness comes through - in the form of cryptically derogatory
remarks about Jews and blacks, powerful suggestions of misogyny. And yet,
Baldwin's forthrightness has a seductive appeal, especially contrasted with the
mealy-mouthed politeness of the other characters in ''Some Americans Abroad,''
Richard Nelson's spoof of American Anglophilia now playing at the Mitzi E.
Newhouse Theater. Therein lies a complex issue in today's arts and culture, the
issue of insult: when it's acceptable and when it isn't.

Theater and stand-up comedy - even, in its own far more cautious way, television
- have always been arenas for mockery, while the arts themselves provide ways of
expressing notions, including dangerous and disturbing ones, that are generally
in the social air but have no other safe outlet. The issue of who can say what
about whom, moreover, is a sure sign of our larger values. Why, for example, did
the CBS commentator Andy Rooney learn how dangerous it is to make or even be
accused of making remarks offensive to blacks and homosexuals, while, in all
probability it is perfectly safe to insult a whole list of individuals and
groups, even in these days of raw nerves and sensibilities: Japanese
entrepreneurs, yuppies, Richard Nixon, Protestant fundamentalists and Donald
Trump, to name a few. The value here protects the perceived underdog, the
oppressed group, while it leaves the prosperous and the powerful susceptible to
parody, satire and insult.

But is it that simple? Questions pile upon questions in this difficult domain of
who can say what about whom, and under what circumstances. Why, for example, did
Mr. Rooney's comments about homosexuals lead to such trouble while there are no
calls to discipline Eddie Murphy for his prancing parodies of homosexuals, such
as the one in the video ''Eddie Murphy Raw,'' where the comedian (slipping into
his most fey, drag-queen impersonation) says that he can't go to San Francisco
because ''they've got a 24-hour homo watch''? Is it that Mr. Rooney was on
network television, that tamest of all the media, while Mr. Murphy was
performing for a live audience, and is seen ''Raw'' these days only on rented or
purchased videotapes? That is merely part of the explanation; there are other
inconsistencies as well.

''Amos 'n' Andy,'' for example, the radio and then television comedy show
portraying black Americans as good-humored but sly and all-too-human bunglers is
still voluntarily kept off the air, presumably because many would find it
racist. Yet when the film maker Spike Lee in ''Do the Right Thing'' portrayed
most of his black characters perhaps more devastatingly than ''Amos 'n' Andy''
ever did, nobody moved to ban his movie.

Mr. Rooney is one of television's most highly paid personalities precisely
because he lampoons so many people and groups, from Presidents of the United
States to corporate bigwigs. Does anybody think that if he had mocked the
Methodist church or Margaret Thatcher, there would have been any protest? And
what of the fact that his suspension was followed by an abrupt lowering of ''60
Minutes' '' ratings? Some were offended by what he said, but others, judging
from the mail that arrived at CBS protesting his dismissal, were offended at his
punishment. Perhaps most puzzling, why is it that even as the society becomes
ever more publicly respectful of all groups, some entertainment figures - from
rap lyricists, who are saying some of the most abrasive things these days, to
stand-up comics - make their fortunes by ridiculing the very groups toward whom
most of the rest are elaborately polite?

''It's very easy to incite an audience toward more prejudice when you're trying
to discourage prejudice,'' said Eric Bogosian, the performance artist whose
one-man series of satirical sketches, ''Sex, Drugs, Rock-and-Roll,'' is
currently playing to full houses at the Orpheum Theater. Mr. Bogosian, noting
the susceptibility of humor to multiple interpretations, cited ''All in the
Family,'' the television originator of the idea of attacking bigotry by
displaying it on screen. ''To many people, Archie Bunker came across as the
smart guy,'' he said. ''His liberal, left-leaning son-in-law came across as a
moron.

''Or take 'Saturday Night Live,' '' Mr. Bogosian said. ''In its portrayal of
blacks, what was meant to be enlightening was seen by some people as just making
fun of black people.''

Is the society hypocritical? Is it just not paying attention? What are the
conventions that we as a society observe, perhaps unconsciously, and what do
they tell us about ourselves?

One thing the conventions indicate is that two opposing tendencies seem to be
taking place. On one hand, the post-1960's era involves a powerful inclination
to show respect to every group, and more, to be tolerant of virtually every life
style, opinion and view of the world. Joshua Meyrowitz, a professor of
communications at the University of New Hampshire and the author of ''No Sense
of Place,'' a study of the influence of the electronic media on social behavior,
argues that the age of mass communications has made the once prevalent private
humor extremely risky.

In the old days, people made jokes about other people who couldn't hear them,
Mr. Meyrowitz said. Now, because, in effect, everybody can hear, ''people get
extremely sensitive, and it ends up that you can't say much about anybody.''

This attachment to inoffensiveness can be seen in many ways. Last year, the
University of Michigan faculty - in an effort ultimately rejected by the courts
as an infringement on free speech - voted to punish any speech on campus that
''stigmatizes or victimizes'' people on the basis of a long list of attributes.
These included race, ethnicity, religion, sexual orientation, national origin,
marital status, handicap and what was described as ''Vietnam-era veteran
status.''

More recently the Turner Broadcasting System banned the word ''foreign'' not
only from its broadcasts but also from the business letters of its employees, on
the ground that ''foreign'' carries a pejorative connotation; ''international''
is to be used instead.

These days, in response to pressure from the feminist movement, many strive to
use what is called gender-free language; two decades ago very few people read
insult into words like ''mankind.''

Current propriety asks that we not speak about bums or junkies, cripples or the
insane. It asks that we talk of the homeless, of substance abusers, of the
hearing-impaired and the disturbed. It is as though everybody hears everything,
and everybody is far more careful about giving offense.

Strained Politeness Breeds Reaction

The second tendency stems from a reaction to the first. It is the desire to
express, or at least to hear expressed, the very impolite and impious opinions
banned by the official culture of politeness. Some of the public that does not
dare say ''faggot'' evidently loves hearing that word coming out of the mouths
of satirists and humorists, who can utter it without apparent penalty.

''Pluralism creates an atmosphere of generalized tolerance,'' said Peter Berger,
a sociologist at Boston University who has written extensively about cultural
values. ''This creates reactions.'' Professor Berger evoked a metaphor, the
''Protestant smile,'' which was coined by another scholar, John Murray Cuddihy,
to express the culture's attachment to a certain bland, generalized politeness
and good will. ''It's imposed by the pluralistic culture, and God knows, I'm all
for tolerance,'' Professor Berger said. ''But after a heavy dose of this
Protestant smiling, some people want to stick their tongues out.''

Mr. Nelson, Orson Baldwin's creator, allows that ''the audience takes some
pleasure in the directness of the character,'' particularly in contrast to the
other characters' avoidance of the truth, and their lack of courage in
responding to his racism and unpleasantness. ''There's a refreshing quality,''
Mr. Nelson said of Baldwin, but he attributes some of the character's appeal to
a widespread yearning for simple answers in a complicated world. ''Those who are
trying to deal with the complexities of life come across as wimpish,'' he said.

Society has always needed a few figures to break taboos and trample euphemism.
The avant-garde in France in the first half of the 20th century used
outrageousness, flaunted sexual license, and turned convention on its head to
awaken what it disdainfully regarded as the bourgeoisie from its supposed torpid
complacency. Lenny Bruce, who in the 1950's tried his best to shock and disturb
and ended up persecuted and indicted, represents a more recent incarnation of
this type, and the price that was paid.

Today these figures - ironically, because of the culture of tolerance - are less
beleaguered than their predecessors. They are the likes of the fictitious
Baldwin, or the real-life Mr. Bogosian, whose impersonations of beggars, movie
moguls, and rock stars hover in that gray zone between mime and satire. Also in
this group are the comedians Eddie Murphy and Richard Pryor, whose routines are
full of profanity and mockery.

More verbally violent and explicitly insulting is the comedian Andrew Dice Clay,
whose stock in trade is lashing out at just about everybody, smashing every
remnant of sanctimony and hypocrisy. Mr. Clay, who performs to large crowds and
whose ''Andrew Dice Clay Concert Movie'' is scheduled for release this summer,
plays a foul-mouthed, sexually obsessed, low-class bigot and misogynist. In his
HBO special, available on videocassette, women are sex objects, homosexuals are
''faggots,'' Asians are ''slanty-eyed'' and Arab taxi drivers are
''urine-colored'' people who smell bad and should go back where they came from
because they can't speak English. ''I can't hang out with a guy whose name is
Achmed,'' he says.

Comic as Politico: Context Is Critical

Mr. Clay is to Mr. Rooney as Attila the Hun is to George Bush. Yet it was the
comparatively innocuous Mr. Rooney who was censured by CBS. The situation,
however, is less paradoxical than it seems. There is a code at work, and there
is more to it than the fact that Mr. Rooney appears on prime-time television
while Mr. Clay is available only to those who go to live shows or use
videotapes. It has to do also with context. Some things can be said with
impunity at one moment by certain people but not at a different moment by
others. It depends on who is doing the talking and under what circumstances.

The best illustration of this is the incident last year involving Jackie Mason
and the New York mayoral race, when Mr. Mason, a supporter of the Republican
candidate, Rudolph Giuliani, was chastised for making the kind of comment that
brought him success in his Broadway show.

During the campaign he said that some Jews have such a guilty conscience they
would vote for any black, even an incompetent one. Was that more offensive than
his onstage quip: ''Did you ever hear of a black guy who got nervous because he
saw three Jews on the street ahead of him?'' Maybe not. Nonetheless, the taboo
broken by Mr. Mason in his political remarks was so powerful that few ever asked
the simple question: Was there any truth to Mr. Mason's campaign comment? The
theater, the stage, the cartoon - what might be called the context of
entertainment - generally (though not always) protects opinions that would not
be protected if they were uttered in real life. If Andrew Dice Clay were to give
Congressional testimony along the lines of his comedy routine, an uproar would
undoubtedly ensue. But the stage protects by its very ambiguity. When Mr. Clay
rants belligerently and humorously, it is not clear whether he is speaking his
own opinion, or whether a fictitous character is talking. Mr. Mason's ''World
According to Me'' contains that same uncertainty. Onstage, a comedian can always
invoke the phrase ''just kidding.'' In the political arena, as Mr. Mason
learned, he can't. Even with deniability, performers can be interpreted in
different ways. A figure like Mr. Bogosian aims, he says, to awaken the middle
classes from their prejudices by stating the taboo words, evoking the
embarrassing scene. He wants, he says, not to insult, but to show how easy it is
to summon forth dark thoughts.

When Mr. Bogosian portrays a half-demented beggar, shrieking furiously that some
well-heeled passerby is going home to eat asparagus tips, there are at least two
possible interpretations. One apparently intended by Mr. Bogosian is to humanize
the beggar, to draw attention to his plight. The other, paradoxically, would
confirm the view that beggars are demented and therefore it is useless to try to
help them.

''I'm constantly adjusting what I'm doing in front of an audience,'' Mr.
Bogosian said, adding that humor intended ''to shock a middle-class audience
into realizing its own prejudices'' can backfire into confirming those
prejudices.

''Years ago, I did a character named Ricky Paul, who would say every
mean-spirited thing you could say. He was against all groups. I did routines
about handicapped people, blacks, homosexuals, and they were all very offensive.
But it quickly got out of hand.

''I've moved away from portraying as many down-and-out and disenfranchised
people as I used to,'' Mr. Bogosian continued. ''I'm aiming my guns more and
more at people similar to me. The rock stars, the performers, and others are the
ones who come off bad in my show. That's what satire is all about. It's about
looking at yourself, not hammering somebody else.''

The Liberated Guffaw Of the Frustrated

Whatever they do, comedians, unlike news commentators or politicians, get away
uncensured because they provide a safety valve for brooding notions. It is as
though ''real life'' - the world of political discourse, scholarly debate, news
reporting and commentary - is a kind of daytime arena, bathed in the rules of
politeness and euphemism. It is, to use a Freudian metaphor, the ego and the
superego. Entertainment belongs to the Freudian nighttime hours, to the id. It
is the domain of the repressed, when the things few will say publicly these days
come out in a form that makes them acceptable.

Mr. Clay, for example, may comfort those members of his audience who, quite
simply, are prejudiced against blacks, homosexuals, women and others he
lampoons. Beyond that, it is not hard to imagine that part of his appeal
reflects a belief on the part of many that we have edged from politeness into a
sanctimonious repressiveness. This is a country of many constituencies. Part of
the public clearly adores figures who break the mold. The outrageous comedians
say, in the disguised, protected form offered by the entertainment context, what
many members of the audience are thinking. The noise emanating from Mr. Clay's
audience may be the collected, suddenly liberated guffaw of the frustrated.

''I can't stand that kind of humor myself because it seems so mechanical,'' said
Paul Fussell, a social critic at the University of Pennsylvania. ''You have one
principle, which is to pull everything inside out. But if someone like Andrew
Dice Clay is packing them into arenas, it shows that people are getting sick of
what I call the compulsorily sincere society. There's a political meaning to it
also, a reaction against liberalism. People like to express their annoyance at a
number of the causes that liberals have taken up, like feminism, civil rights,
the requirement to be tolerant.''

Where the LineIs Finally Drawn

Still, some things are not protected in the current cultural climate, even in a
theatrical or artistic guise or in small downtown clubs. Imagine a genuinely
antihomosexual play, one that, say, portrayed the AIDS epidemic as deserved
punishment for ''immoral'' behavior. How about a comedy routine that made fun of
Holocaust victims? Perhaps a Civil War-era movie that portrayed slaves living
happy-go-lucky lives on paternalistic plantations? Even Andrew Dice Clay doesn't
go that far.

In fact, even the most belligerent comic routines seem to observe some taboos.
Eddie Murphy and Andrew Dice Clay may not insult absolutely everybody. They
tend, for example, not to make fun of Jews. Yet they attack enough different
sorts so that there is no specific ethnic, racial or sexual targeting in their
work. The target is all, or at least most of, humanity, the greed, stupidity and
frailty of the entire species.

While it is risky to offend certain groups, some people can be insulted without,
it seems, taking offense. Corporate bigwigs, Richard Nixon, smokers, Japanese
automobile manufacturers, preppies and, more recently, yuppies are all in the
safe-to-make-fun-of category. Mr. Nelson's ''Some Americans Abroad'' shows that
American academics are certainly on that list. Professor Berger also mentions
Roman Catholics, religious fundamentalists and members of the ''WASP
establishment.'' The operating principle, says Mr. Meyrowitz is sensitivity to
those perceived to be oppressed, the members of out-groups, persecuted
minorities.

''You can't make fun of anybody who has a sense of being excluded,'' he said,
''but you can make jokes about people who seem to be very fortunate, like Leona
Helmsley. It is also safer now for blacks to make fun of whites or for women to
make fun of men than the other way around.''

Is that hypocritical? Perhaps. But, as Mr. Nelson argues, it could be a
hypocrisy reflecting good taste. ''In a society with a power structure,'' he
said, ''people can use criticisms to keep other people in their place.''

Moreover, in a pluralist society, membership in a group confers a certain
freedom to criticize it, though there, too, sensibilities are fragile. Thirty
years ago, Jewish groups accused Philip Roth of anti-Semitism after the
publication of his novel ''Goodbye, Columbus.'' Yet there seems little question
that Jackie Mason can say things about Jews that no non-Jewish comedian could
say; the same holds for Eddie Murphy or Richard Pryor about blacks.

This in-group freedom explains why a black film maker like Spike Lee can create
characters rather like those in the troublesome ''Amos 'n' Andy,'' which was a
white creation in an era when it was the only program about blacks on radio or
television. Mr. Lee's streetside characters in ''Do the Right Thing'' figure in
a far richer, more varied context. Moreover, the work is viewed, correctly, as
black self-expression, rather than a white-imposed stereotype.

''It's one thing for people to have self-deprecating humor,'' said Mr.
Meyrowitz, ''and it's another to have others poking fun at you.''

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Drawing (pg. 1); photos: Andrew Dice Clay (Retna/Jon Perrin); Henderson
Forsythe playing a seductive bigot in Richard Nelson's spoof of Amercian
Anglophilia ''Some Americans Abroad'' (The New York Times/Keith Meyers); Eddie
Murphy (Bruce Talamon); Eric Bogosian (Doma Ann McAdams) (pg. 34)

                   Copyright 1990 The New York Times Company


                              22 of 288 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                  April 8, 1990, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

THEATER;
A Theatrical Family Faces the End of a Line

BYLINE: By JAN STUART; Jan Stuart is the chief theater critic of 7 Days.

SECTION: Section 2; Page 7, Column 1; Arts and Leisure Desk

LENGTH: 1940 words


In 1974, a few months before ''A Chorus Line'' opened at the Public Theater, a
member of the original cast named Wayne Cilento announced in rehearsal that his
wife was expecting a child. The cast, which had been together for several months
and had begun to think like a family, exploded: ''We're going to have a baby!''
Brian Cilento is now 14 years old, just a few months younger than the landmark
show his 26 surrogate parents were conceiving.

Like every family, the ''Chorus Line'' clan has had its share of conflicts. Time
has resolved some but others are beginning to spill over publicly, spurred by
the simultaneous closing of the show scheduled for April 28 - the date was first
set for March but delayed because of a surge in ticket sales - and this month's
publication of the original cast's memoir, ''On the Line: The Creation of 'A
Chorus Line' '' (Morrow).

Recognition and money are often flashpoints in families and this one is no
exception. When the Tony- and Pulitzer Prize-winning show closes at the Shubert
Theater it will have grossed in excess of $277 million in the United States
alone, according to Variety. That figure is of great interest to those members
of the original cast who gathered around a tape recorder in a Manhattan loft in
early 1974. Their memories became the source for ''A Chorus Line,'' the story of
17 dancers auditioning for roles in an unnamed Broadway musical. The fact that
they signed away the rights to their stories 15 years ago for $1 is of even
greater interest. Who should get money from the show and who should receive
credit for its creation are questions that have been asked before, but perhaps
never more bluntly than now. In recent interviews with original cast members,
the mood was that of a family confronting a major rite of passage, mixing
sadness, resignation and defiance.

One of the most poignant questions for the dancers has never changed: ''Why
aren't you famous?'' The archetypal musical that pays tribute to the unsung, the
members of the chorus line, ironically has not sent stars spinning into public
orbit.

''Whose idea of success?'' sputtered Baayork Lee, who has since forged a career
restaging ''A Chorus Line'' all over the world. Ms. Lee's resentment was echoed
by Thommie Walsh, with whom she has co-written the original company's story,
''On the Line,'' with Robert Viagas. ''The emphasis is always negative,'' Mr.
Walsh said. ''Priscilla Lopez won a Tony playing Harpo Marx and Wayne Cilento
has been nominated twice for his choreography and it's never mentioned. Other
people are very happy selling antiques and looking at beautiful sunsets in
Arizona.''

''Whenever anything is successful in this business you feel the pressure to live
out the American dream,'' said Donna McKechnie. ''No matter what you do it's not
enough.'' Ms. McKechnie's career attracted the greatest amount of media scrutiny
for the way in which it fulfilled the life of her character. Like Cassie, she
was romantically linked with ''Chorus Line's'' director and co-choreographer
Michael Bennett (the model for Zach, the director in the show), to whom she was
married for a brief time.

She remembers Bennett saying, ''at the very beginning, that 'A Chorus Line' must
stand alone. He said, 'You can't compete with it; you musn't try to use this as
a barometer.' ''

The more than 6,000 performances since the show opened in previews at the Public
Theater on April 16, 1975, trace an arc of history, from the decline of the
Vietnam War to the retreat of Soviet Communism, as well as four American
Presidencies. The entire original cast has also survived an era in which the
theatrical community has experienced a drastic number of casualties, including
Bennett, who died of AIDS, and the show's co-writer James Kirkwood and lyricist
Edward Kleban, both of whom died of cancer.

While a majority of the 27 performers are still in some area of show business, a
substantial number have taken other career paths: among their ranks are an
interior designer, a psychiatric nurse and a marketing administrator in the
cosmetics industry. At this point none of them appear to care about stardom.
Instead, they seem to exude the sanguineness of adults in midlife who have
shaken off the pressure of expectations and matured comfortably within their
chosen fields. They also maintain an unusual familial connection. As Kelly
Bishop, who won a Tony for playing the sharp-tongued Sheila, said, ''They feel
like my brothers and sisters now, to a person. If anyone puts down any of them
in front of me, I'm right there to defend them. They are my family.''

Those ties were reinforced over the years by intermittent landmarks: a
spectacular reunion performance in 1983 to mark the musical's record as
Broadway's longest-running show, Michael Bennett's death in 1987 and a Los
Angeles benefit for AIDS in 1988.

In addition, during dry spells in their careers, many of the cast would return
to the musical. The experience would be both reassuring and unsettling, as
homecomings can be.

Mr. Walsh was disturbed to find the show played as a period piece. (The Playbill
note that used to say ''An Audition, Time: Now'' has been changed to ''Time:
1975''). ''Some of these people doing the show now don't know who Michael
Bennett is,'' he said. Just a year after leaving, Priscilla Lopez returned to
find a completely new cast. ''I stood in my place at the end and looked down the
line and said, 'Who are these people?' That was when I finally left. I realized
that my 'Chorus Line' was here'' she said, resting her hand on her heart.

Most of the original cast would submit to an often hostile show business
obstacle course. Some would land movie roles, many would get television work,
and almost all would encounter some resistance to their theater credits and lack
of experience in film. A few challenges emerged directly from the show itself,
which, while glorifying the ensemble, raises the issue of the need to be
recognized individually. It is a measure of the vagaries of show business that
Barry Bostwick, arguably the most visible ''Chorus Line'' alumnus in terms of
his later television work (the mini-series ''George Washington''), left the
production while it was still in rehearsals.

For those who would seek self-fulfillment in a life away from the theater, there
were other rewards. Michael Serrecchia lives on several acres in a small town
just north of Dallas. The Brooklyn-born dancer, who manages two art galleries by
day and runs the Denton Light Opera Company by night, calls his spread, which
includes two horses, ''Casa de Chorus Line.''

Sammy Williams, who won a Tony for his ''Chorus Line'' performance, in which his
character, Paul, has a serious fall during auditions, is proud of the prizes he
has received for floral design as the proprietor of a Los Angeles flower
business he started early this year. Mr. Serrecchia and Mr. Williams are among
the original cast members who have found their own answers to the crucial
question posed by the character Zach: ''What are you going to do when you can't
dance anymore?''

Before ''A Chorus Line'' they frequently did not dance for another reason. The
musical was ''born out of frustration,'' according to Ms. McKechnie. A decline
in Broadway productions, to a low of 54 during the 1973-74 season from 84 a few
seasons before, was discouraging dancers. Michon Peacock and Tony Stevens, two
dancers who wanted to create a resident company of performers who could sing,
dance and act, brought their idea to Bennett, who had been contemplating a show
based on the lives of Broadway gypsies. He assembled a group of about 20 dancers
at a Nickolaus exercise center in lower Manhattan on a January Saturday in 1974
at midnight - a time when performers would have finished work. Nine of them
would appear in the original production.  Prompted by Bennett's demanding
questions, the dancers revealed candid memories of childhood and adolescence.
The tape-recorded 12-hour jam, and subsequent sessions, provided the raw
material for what would become ''A Chorus Line.'' In seven months of workshops
subsidized by the New York Shakespeare Festival, Bennett would edit the tapes
into a song-and-dance narrative with the help of the librettists Kirkwood and
Nicholas Dante, the composer Marvin Hamlisch, the lyricist Kleban, the
co-choreographer Bob Avian and the cast.

This intimate collaboration resulted in a powerful, occasionally disorienting,
kinship among cast members. Family resentments and sibling rivalries would erupt
when dancers were required to audition for roles that in some cases had been
adapted from their own lives, at the same time that others watched as their
''lives'' were awarded to other dancers.

The desire to please ''father,'' as Don Percassi still describes Bennett, was
endemic. ''He was a real Svengali,'' said Pamela Blair, whose character, the
saucy Val, celebrates the rewards of cosmetic surgery in her song ''Dance: 10;
Looks: 3.''. ''He was always playing whatever role he felt you needed to get you
to do what he wanted you to do.''

When the time arrived to make the 1985 film version, many in the original
company would go through their second ''Chorus Line'' audition. None of them
would be cast.

They would not find consolation in their earnings from the show. According to
John Breglio, Bennett's attorney and executor, a complicated transaction was
arranged by Bennett, who himself would receive as a producer 25 percent of the
musical's profits (the other 75 percent went to the Shakespeare Festival).
Bennett agreed to turn over part of the income to which he was entitled as one
of the contributors to the show's book (separate from his producer's share) to
be divided among 37 people. This money - one half of one percent of the show's
gross and a proportional share of subsidiary income - would be shared by the 24
participants in the workshops, who still receive payments, and 13 in the
original cast who were not in the workshops and who would receive income only
while they remained in the show. But was this a fair slice?

As the show apparently nears its close, many in the original cast are beginning
to ask that question. Pamela Blair, who estimates that she has received a
royalty income of $60,000 over 15 years, said, ''I showed the agreement to a
lawyer once and he said, 'This gives the phrase ''dumb dancer'' new meaning.'
Because it isn't stipulated one percent of what.''

The show's associate producer, Bernard Gersten, who noted that he and Joseph
Papp did not personally share in the profits, described the complexities of ''A
Chorus Line's'' ownership. ''If you subdivide the 6 percent that normally goes
to a musical's authors, with 2 percent each going to the composer, the lyricists
and the book writers, which in this case was, in great measure, based on
autobiographical material but distilled through a writer's consciousness, what
portion of that should go to the underlying material?''

Lately, the discontent has been tempered by a deeper sense of loss as the
scheduled closing approaches. For some, it is like a death in the family. For
others, their baby has grown up and is moving away.

''I'll be sad when I don't see myself flying by on the bus ad anymore,'' said
Priscilla Lopez ruefully. ''But I have worked 11 years before 'Chorus Line'
opened and 15 years since.''

Kay Cole, after wistfully singing a bar of ''At the Ballet,'' her ''Chorus
Line'' song, said, ''When you are young and impressionable, you think that
anything is possible. You start to realize as you get out there that each person
has their own time and their own dance.''

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photos: The California contingent of original ''Chorus Line''
performers, above, includes, seated, Nancy Lane and Ron Kuhlman; middle row from
left, Pamela Blair, Michel Stuart, Ronald Dennis, Sammy Williams; rear, Clive
Wilson, Kay Cole and Patricia Garland (Neal Preston/Outline Press Syndicate); In
New York, the original alumni, right, at the Public's Newman Theater where the
show began, include, from left in foreground, Kelly Bishop, Thommie Walsh and
Don Percassi; from left at rear, Donna McKechnie (on a visit from California),
Wayne Cilento, Baayork Lee and Priscilla Lopez-brothers and sisters (Martha
Swope)

                   Copyright 1990 The New York Times Company


                              23 of 288 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                  April 8, 1990, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

HOME ENTERTAINMENT/NEW RELEASES: AND KEEP IN MIND

SECTION: Section 2; Page 32, Column 1; Arts and Leisure Desk

LENGTH: 695 words


Here are some notable releases of the last few months.

THE ABYSS - ''A gigantic sea monster of a film about marriage, death, nuclear
war and alien life forms can be described in these words: E. T. Underwater.''
(Caryn James) 1989. CBS/Fox. $89.98. LD, $49.98. 2:20. CC. PG-13.

THE BIG PICTURE - Christopher Guest's Hollywood sendup about the adventures of a
film student is ''consistently genial'' and ''intermittently funny.'' (Vincent
Canby) 1989. RCA/Columbia. $89.95. LD, $34.95. 1:40. CC. PG-13. BREAKING IN - A
halcyon comedy starring Burt Reynolds about a partnership between thieves is
''an accumulation of wonderfully buoyant, sometimes irrational details that
would be throwaways in more conventional comedies.'' (Canby) 1989. HBO. $89.99.
1:31. R. CASUALTIES OF WAR - Sean Penn is ''extremely fine'' as a ''comradely
foul-mouthed naif'' in Brian De Palma's ''earnest, troubling'' film about rape
and murder in Vietnam. (Canby) 1989. RCA/Columbia. $89.95. LD, $34.95. 1:53. CC.
R. CHOCOLAT - Claire Denis's film, set in colonial Cameroon in the 1950's, about
a little French girl's friendship with her parents' houseboy is some kind of a
miniature classic.'' (Canby) 1989. Orion. $79.98. 1:45. PG-13.

CITY OF WOMEN - Federico Fellini's fantasy, with Marcello Mastroianni in top
form ''is spellbinding, a dazzling visual display.'' (Canby) 1979. New Yorker.
$79.95. 2:18. No rating.

DEAD POETS SOCIETY - Robin Williams is the most vivid and complex character in
Peter Weir's film, ''which moves with such predictability that one must walk
very slowly not to walk ahead of it.'' (Canby) 1989. Touchstone. $89.95. LD:
$39.99. 2:08. CC. PG.

DO THE RIGHT THING - The film ''is ''living, breathing, riveting proof of the
arrival of an abundantly gifted new talent.'' (Canby) 1989. MCA. $98.95. LD.
$34.98. 2:00. CC. R. FIELD OF DREAMS - This fantasy about baseball in a
cornfield ''does the almost impossible trick of turning sentimentality into true
emotion.'' (James) 1989. MCA. No suggested price. 1:46. CC. PG.

HONEY, I SHRUNK THE KIDS - Dad (Rick Moranis) makes the offspring knee-high to a
carpenter ant in an ''old-fashioned romp that conveys a sense of wonder.''
(James) 1989. Disney. $22.99. LD, $34.95. 1:41. CC. PG.

LETHAL WEAPON 2 - Richard Donner's sequel with Mel Gibson and Danny Glover
''follows the most basic law of sequels. If you liked 'Lethal Weapon,' you'll
like 'Lethal Weapon 2' '' (James) 1989. Warner. $24.98. LD. $24.98. 1:54. CC. R.
MURMUR OF THE HEART - Louis Malle's film about a young boy's incestuous
relationship with his mother makes ''a comedy of uncommonly high order.''
(Canby) 1971. Orion. $79.98. LD, $49.95. 1:58. R. THE PAJAMA GAME - Doris Day,
John Rait, ''Hey There,'' Hernando's hideaway and boy meets union girl in an
Iowa shirt factory. ''The whole thing is splendid,'' said the Times reviewer.
''Fresh, funny, lively and tuneful.'' 1957. Warner. $59.95. 1:41. CC. No rating.

QUEEN OF HEARTS - Jon Amiel's film about a woman, her son and her spurned former
fiance leads to a ''conclusion that is very much about family matters.'' (James)
1989. M.C.E.G./Virgin. $89.95. LD, $39.95. 1:52. CC. PG.

WHEN HARRY MET SALLY . . . - Rob Reiner has made ''the sitcom version of a Woody
Allen film,'' starring Billy Crystal and Meg Ryan. (James) 1989. Nelson/Orion.
$89.98. LD, $24.95. 1:36. CC. R. WOMEN IN LOVE - Ken Russell's adaptation of the
D. H. Lawrence novel stars Glenda Jackson, Alan Bates and Oliver Reed. This is
''a movie of action that is almost as romantic as something by a Bronte
sister.'' (Canby) 1969. MGM/UA. $29.95 2:09. R. YOUNG EINSTEIN - Yahoo Serious
wrote, directed and stars in a ''smart-stupid film'' filled with ''visual jokes
so stupendously dumb they are actually funny.'' (James) 1988. Warner. $89.95.
LD, $24.98. 1:25. CC. PG.



For Children

THE ADVENTURES OF MILO AND OTIS - This picaresque odyssey of a cat and dog is
''occasionally fearful but never terrifying.'' (Holden) 1989. RCA/Columbia.
$89.95. LD, $34.95. 1:16. CC. G.

BAMBI - ''Walt Disney's wizards,'' as a contemporary critic called them, work
their magic. 1942. Disney. $26.99. LD, $39.99. 1:09. CC. G.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Review

                   Copyright 1990 The New York Times Company


                              24 of 288 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                  April 8, 1990, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

SPYING FOR HANOI

SECTION: Section 6; Page 8, Column 4; Magazine Desk

LENGTH: 127 words


I was a Time magazine correspondent in Vietnam for 18 months in 1969 and 1970.
Thus I read with interest Morely Safer's article ''Spying for Hanoi'' (March
11), about my former colleague Pham Xuan An. I am shocked to learn that Mr. An
all along had been a spy for North Vietnam. Worse, I am embarrassed that I
trusted Mr. An as enormously as I - and my fellow journalists - did for
information about what was happening, militarily and politically, in Vietnam.
Clearly, Mr. An misled me; when he did, I then mislead Time's readers. I thus
owe Time's readers an apology for misinforming them about the Vietnam War. So do
Time's editors and so do the editors of The New Yorker, for whom Mr. An also
ostensibly worked.

BURTON YALE PINES
  Washington

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Letters

                   Copyright 1990 The New York Times Company


                              25 of 288 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                  April 8, 1990, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

SPYING FOR HANOI

SECTION: Section 6; Page 8, Column 4; Magazine Desk

LENGTH: 77 words


Morley Safer is very intelligent in saying: ''I do not think of him [Pham Xuan
An] as a Communist, though he is still a loyal party member. . . . No, An is a
genuine patriot, I decide, one of the few I have known.''

As we have seen of late, Communism, like other ideologies, comes and goes,
serves and fades. The quality of An, and all men, is measured by their
patriotism: their loyalty to nation and family.

HELEN M. MULLER
  Stamford, Conn.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Letters

                   Copyright 1990 The New York Times Company


                              26 of 288 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                  April 8, 1990, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

NOTED WITH PLEASURE

SECTION: Section 7; Page 39, Column 1; Book Review Desk

LENGTH: 884 words



A Mother by Any Other Name?

To suggest that the German language prevented him from loving his mother as he
should have is a truly Kafkaesque complaint. This is from ''Reading Kafka:
Prague, Politics, and the Fin de Siecle,'' edited by Mark Anderson (Schocken).

Yesterday it occurred to me that I did not always love my mother as she deserved
and as I could, only because the German language prevented it. The Jewish mother
is no ''Mutter,'' to call her ''Mutter'' makes her a little comic. . . . We give
a Jewish woman the name of a German mother, but forget the contradiction that
sinks into the emotions so much the more heavily, ''Mutter'' is peculiarly
German for the Jew, it unconsciously contains, together with the Christian
splendor Christian coldness also, the Jewish woman who is called ''Mutter''
therefore becomes not only comic but strange. . . . I believe that it is only
the memories of the ghetto that still preserve the Jewish family, for the word
''Vater'' too is far from meaning the Jewish father.

Never Long and Never Wrong

According to W. H. Auden, Sydney Smith, who died in 1845, was the most famous
wit of his generation. This is his definition of ''a nice person,'' quoted in
Auden's ''Forewords and Afterwords,'' selected by Edward Mendelson (Vintage).

A nice person is neither too tall nor too short, looks clean and cheerful, has
no prominent features, makes no difficulties, is never displaced, sits bodkin,
is never foolishly affronted, and is void of affectations. . . . A nice person
is clear of trumpery little passions, acknowledges superiority, delights in
talent, shelters humility, pardons adversity, forgives deficiency, respects all
men's rights, never stops the bottle, is never long and never wrong, always
knows the day of the month, the name of everybody at table, and never gives pain
to any human being. . . . A nice person . . . laughs in the right place, and has
a watchful and attentive eye.

Art in the Bullpen

The relation of modern art to business is analogous to the relation of
Renaissance art to the church. When the sculptor Marcia Clapp and the art dealer
Grace Borgenicht arranged to show Louise Nevelson's work in an insurance agency,
The New Yorker wrote a bemused report, which is quoted in ''Louise Nevelson: A
Passionate Life'' by Laurie Lisle (Summit).

[Miss Clapp] led the way into a good-sized bull pen full of girls and
typewriters; they were surrounded by filing cabinets and about two dozen of Miss
Nevelson's works. ''I picked her because her work is strong enough to fight
office equipment,'' said Miss Clapp, pointing out a simplified duck that stood
on a pedestal beside a three-tiered green cabinet. ''In offices especially, I
think it's important to concentrate on the abstract and the semi-abstract,
because those styles are very much in tune with the scientific, business way of
thinking.'' She glanced [at Chairman Michael H.] Levy, who had followed us out
of the office. ''Could he look at a pastoral scene in his present tensed-up
frame of mind?'' she demanded. . . . Mr. Levy said Miss Nevelson's work caught
his mood exactly. ''She telescoped form,'' said Miss Clapp. ''That's what
businessmen are doing today.''

Going With the Flow

In undeveloped countries people learn to seize occasions with a kind of
brilliant acceleration that the more affluent nations seem to have lost. This is
Carlo Gebler, a London writer, in a Cuban hotel with his wife and daughter. It
is from ''Driving Through Cuba: Rare Encounters in the Land of Sugar Cane and
Revolution'' (Simon & Schuster).

We were in the room and waiting for the water to come on at six. The first sign
was the tinkling sound of the water closet starting to fill. Next, the tap start
to rasp and splutter. Finally, half a dozen thin needles dribbled from the
shower head. All over the hotel I could hear shouts of joy mingled with
admonishments to get going. In fifteen minutes it was all over. The city was dry
again.

On the gallery, the newly showered menfolk gathered to smoke. Their vests were
crisply ironed; their hair combed and shiny. There was a smell of soap and
scent. Through the open doors of their dark bedrooms - again there was no power
- I could see their wives hanging up the just-washed clothes.

They Carried Gravity

If wars are good for nothing else, they seem to be good for literature. This is
from ''The Things They Carried,'' a collection of stories about Vietnam by Tim
O'Brien (Houghton Mifflin/Seymour Lawrence).

They shared the weight of memory. They took up what others could no longer bear.
Often, they carried each other, the wounded or weak. They carried infections.
They carried chess sets, basketballs, Vietnamese-English dictionaries, insignia
of rank, Bronze Stars and Purple Hearts, plastic cards imprinted with the Code
of Conduct. They carried diseases, among them malaria and dysentery. They
carried lice and ringworm and leeches and paddy algae and various rots and
molds. They carried the land itself - Vietnam, the place, the soil - a powdery
orange-red dust that covered their boots and fatigues and faces. They carried
the sky. The whole atmosphere, they carried it, the humidity, the monsoons, the
stink of fungus and decay, all of it, they carried gravity.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Drawings

                   Copyright 1990 The New York Times Company


                              27 of 288 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                  April 8, 1990, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

A SPECIAL REPORT: Numbers Please!;
A House Divided

BYLINE: By Anthony DePalma

SECTION: Section 4A; Page 31, Column 1; Education Life

LENGTH: 1439 words


HIGHER BIRTHRATES and a stream of new immigrants are driving up the number and
proportion of black, Hispanic and Asian people in the United States so fast that
soon after the year 2000 they will make up a third of the nation's students.

With their symphony of languages and cultures, these minority members, who at
present total about 23 percent of all Americans, will occupy one of every three
desks in America's classrooms. Their numbers will present challenges unlike
anything most states have seen since the great migrations of the turn of the
century. Schools will be hard pressed to prepare these Americans, many of them
poor, for a more sophisticated work force. ''What's at stake,'' said Dr. John F.
Noonan, president of Bloomfield College in Bloomfield, N.J., where half the
1,600 students are members of minorities, ''is the future of the country.''

The record so far is not encouraging. The 1988 study, ''One-third of a Nation,''
concluded that: ''America is moving backward - not forward - in its efforts to
achieve the full participation of minority citizens in the life and prosperity
of the nation.'' It concluded that since the mid-1970's minorities have become
comparatively poorer and increasingly segregated in distressed, urban
neighborhoods where schools sometimes harbor failure. Their financial picture
grows dimmer as tuition rises leave financial aid further and further behind.

Decline in the Colleges

A smaller percentage of minority members are going to college. In 1976 the
percentage of black high school graduates who enrolled in college was 50.4. By
1988 it had dropped to 46.6 percent. During the same period, the college
participation rate for white students rose from 53.5 percent to 58.6 percent.
Hispanic students' participation also declined, but not so severely as that of
blacks. In 1976 48.9 percent of Hispanic high school graduates were in college.
By 1988 the figure had slipped to 47.1 percent.

In addition, blacks, especially black men, earned fewer bachelor's and master's
degrees over the last decade. Fewer became teachers, which could hurt black
students looking for someone to emulate.

The picture is markedly different for Asians, but even there educators see
trouble. From 1976 to 1986, Asian enrollment at two- and four-year colleges
increased 126 percent, and could double again over the next decade. But many of
the newest and fastest-growing groups of Asian immigrants, those from Vietnam,
Cambodia and Laos, may not be able to repeat the success of earlier immigrants.
For one thing they are poorer; their rate of poverty, 35 percent, is as high as
that for Puerto Ricans and Mexican-Americans. They also arrive with less
preparation for learning and lower expectations.

As the number of minority students surges, demographic forecasts indicate that
past problems could quickly multiply. From 1968 to 1986 Hispanic students'
enrollment in public schools nationwide doubled, from 2 million to 4.1 million,
while enrollment for whites dropped 16 percent. During the same period, black
enrollment rose 5 percent, from 6.3 million to 6.6 million. Students from Asia,
currently America's fastest-growing minority group, jumped 55 percent in the
1980's alone, from 749,000 to 1.2 million.

Already in 25 of the largest American cities and metropolitan areas, more than
half the public school students come from minority groups. But also in towns and
villages that 10 years ago were nearly all white, substantial and growing
numbers of minority students have arrived, bearing special talents and needs.

Schools Being Forced to Change

They have already forced schools on all levels to change. New Rochelle, N.Y.,
has a new-arrivals program in two elementary schools to handle Mexican and
Salvadoran immigrants. In East Orange, N.J., where schools are 98 percent black,
troubled students identified as potential dropouts receive special support each
week for 27 weeks, starting as early as the fourth grade. Gettysburg College, in
Pennsylvania, has opened a genealogical research center specializing in slave
records and uses it to attract black students.

Perhaps the most profound shift is that schools are beginning to understand that
they no longer can simply label minority students Hispanic, Asian or black,
making generalizations about their needs and talents. Rather they must take into
account students' economic, social and education backgrounds, differentiating
Cubans from Mexicans, Vietnamese from Chinese. ''It's a tremendous challenge,''
said Dr. Ronald H. Rolph, the superintendent of schools in Holland, Mich., a
city of 24,000 residents on the shore of Lake Michigan.

Twenty years ago Holland was an almost completely white, Dutch Calvinist
community. Today, Dr. Rolph said, 28 percent of the district's students are from
minorities. Most are Mexican-Americans who traveled the migrant-worker stream
from Texas and decided to settle. The others are Cambodian, Laotian and
Vietnamese boat people sponsored by local religious groups.

Holland now has two bilingual programs, in Spanish and Vietnamese. College night
is held in both English and Spanish. When the only high school guidance
counselor left three years ago, the Holland district searched a full year for a
bilingual-bicultural counselor to replace her.

Transforming School and Community

By their presence alone, these minority students transform a school, a district
and a community. Bobby Fong, dean for the arts and humanities at Hope College in
Holland, says his 5-year-old son, Jonathan, comes home from kindergarten talking
about his Mexican friends and saying ''Adios, amigos.''

Dr. Fong's appointment at Hope College in itself represents a shift in
attitudes. He is the first Asian-American and the first person from outside the
Reformed Church to head a department at the 2,700-student Calvinist school.

Alfredo M. Gonzales, appointed assistant dean for multicultural life two years
ago, said the college was hiring more minority faculty members and revising its
curriculum. It probably will require all students to take courses in ethnic
culture or non-Western literature before graduation.

For Hope, the demographic trends are still in the future. But at Incarnate Word
College in San Antonio half the student body already is either black or
Hispanic. One of the fastest-growing private colleges in the Southwest,
Incarnate Word has doubled its enrollment, to 2,500, since 1985, with Hispanic
students taking substantially more of the new seats than whites. The Roman
Catholic college spends about $1 million a year in advertising, printing half in
English and half in Spanish. It also increased its financial aid, to $2.3
million a year.

Corina Cortez of George West, Tex., is one of the students attracted to and
helped by the college's new outlook. The 21-year-old senior accounting major
comes from a family of five; her parents did not graduate from high school, and
Spanish is spoken at home.

Miss Cortez said Incarnate Word had contacted her and invited her to the campus.
Because there was so little money at home, she said she thought she might attend
for one year and then go to work. ''Never in a million years did I think I'd get
a degree in four years,'' she said. With financial aid from several sources she
is now in her fourth year of college.

As they graduate, students like Miss Cortez leave behind an academic landscape
whose changes extend beyond recruitment and financial aid. Educators are
realizing that many cultures now represented in the classroom have been largely
excluded from the history, arts and philosophies that students have been taught.
''Increasingly,'' said David Abalos, a professor of religious studies at Seton
Hall University in South Orange, N.J., ''what scholars are asking is not just
what history has said, but what history has not said.''

Mr. Abalos, who is Mexican-American, spent a year helping the New Jersey
Department of Education develop a curriculum with a global approach to
literature and world culture. Other states, including New York and Minnesota,
are undertaking similar revisions.

''What's happening is deeper and wider than demographics,'' Mr. Abalos said. He
noted that when American public schools were established in the 19th century, a
main goal was to make immigrants good Americans, which usually meant hiding
their languages, customs and religions. As classrooms fill with more people of
color, Mr. Abalos believes that is no longer the case.

''We are now living in a world clearly international, clearly multicultural,''
he said. ''We now know that we don't have to be just American.''

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Graph: percentage of white, black and Hispanic 18- to 24-years olds who
graduated high school and attended college, 1978 vs. 1988 (Source: National
Center for Education Statistics)

                   Copyright 1990 The New York Times Company


                              28 of 288 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                  April 8, 1990, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

PAPERBACK BEST SELLERS: April 8, 1990

SECTION: Section 7; Page 34, Column 2; Book Review Desk

LENGTH: 782 words


     Weeks
This    On
Week  List Fiction

 1    104  THE HUNT FOR RED OCTOBER, by Tom Clancy. (Berleley,
           $4.50.) A submarine driver brings Soviet nuclear secrets
           to the United States.

 2     7    STAR, by Danielle Steel. (Dell, $5.95) The crossed paths
           of a man and a woman destined for stardom.

 3     3    RIVALS, by Janet Dailey. (Fawcett, $5.95.) Families
           compete in love and romance.

 4     2    RULES OF PREY, by John Sandford. (Berkley, $4.95) The
           pursuit of a mad, very clever serial murderer of women.

 5     5    MORNING GLORY, by LaVyrie Spencer. (Jove, $4.95.) Love
           answers a young widow's want ad.

 6     1    ALMOST HEAVEN, by Judith McNaught. (Pocket, $4.95.) A
           historical romance set in London's salons and Scotland's
           Highlands.

 7*    1    THE NEGOTIATOR, by Frederick Forsyth. (Bantam, $5.95.)
           An American expatriate tries to thwart terroists.

 8     10   WEB OF DREAMS, by V.C. Andrews. (Pocket, $5.50.) The
           origin of a curse that has haunted a family of orphans in
           five previous novels.

 9     6    PLAYMATES, by Robert B. Parker. (Berkley, $4.95.) The
           private eye Spenser on the trail of scandals in the world
           of college basketball.

10     6    THE EDGE, by Dick Francis. (Fawcett, $5.95.) Murder and
           mayhem on a luxury train trip.

11*    25  THE HANDMAID'S TALE, by Margaret Atwood. (Fawcett,
           $5.95.) In America of the future, men and women perform
           the duties they're assigned.

12     1    THE PANDORA PRINCIPLE, by Carolyn Clowes. (Pocket,
           $4.50.) An awesome new weapon threatens the "Star Trek"
           Federation.

13     1    STRANGER IN SAVANNAH, by Eugenia Price. (Jove, $5.95.)
           The vicissitudes of three families during the Civil War.

14     10   BILLY BATHGATE, by E.L. Doctorow. (Harper Paperbacks,
           $5.95.) The life of the 1930's gangster Dutch Schultz, as
           seen by a youth from the Bronx.

15     6    STORMING INTREPID, by Payne Harrison. (Ivy, $5.95.)
           Warfare waged in outer space.

     Weeks
This    On
Week  List NonFiction

 1     20   ALL I REALLY NEED TO KNOW I LEARNED IN KINDERGARTEN, by
           Robert Fulghum. (Ivy, $5.95.) Inspirational essays.

 2     1    THE LIVES AND LOVES OF NEW KIDS ON THE BLOCK, by Jill
           Matthews. (Pocket, $3.95.) An account of the popular
           young singing group from Boston.

 3     17   NEW KIDS OF THE BLOCK, by Grace Cataiano. (Bantam,
           $3.50.) The lives and predilections of the five members
           of the popular singing group.

 4     2    DADDY'S GIRL, by Clifford Irving. (Zebra, $4.95.) The
           1982 murder of a Houston lawyer and his wife, involving
           two other generations of their family.

 5     1    SUMMER OF '49, by David Halberstam. (Avon, $4.95.) The
           year the Boston Red Sox and the New York Yankees battled
           to the last game for the American League pennant.

 6*   337   THE ROAD LESS TRAVELED, by M. Scott Peck. (Touchstone/
           S&S, $10.95.) Psychological and spiritual inspiration by
           a psychiatrist.

 7*    28   BLIND FAITH, by Joe McGinniss. (Signal/NAL, $5.95.) The
           family tragedy that came to light after the 1984 murder
           of a Toms River, N.J. woman.

 8     11   BORN ON THE FOURTH OF JULY, by Ron Kovic. (Pocket,
           $4.50.) The autobiography of a former marine wounded in
           Vietnam.

 9     97   LOVE, MEDICINE & MIRACLES, by Bernie S. Siegel.
           (Perennial/Harper & Row, $8.95.) The importance of
           patient's mind and emotions.

10     76   THE POWER OF MYTH, by Joseph Campbell with Bill Moyers.
           (Doubleday, $19.95.) The ways in which mythology
           illuminates the stages of life.

     Weeks
This    On
Week  List Advice, How-To and Miscellaneous

 1     3    WEIRDOS FROM ANOTHER PLANET! by Bill Watterson.
           (Andrews & McMeel, $7.95.) Cartoons.

 2     9    50 SIMPLE THINGS YOU CAN DO TH SAVE THE EARTH, by the
           Earthworks Group. (Earthworks Press/Publishers Group West,
           $4.95.) Ways to combat environmental problems.

 3     3    HAPPY TRAILS. by Berke Breathed, (Little, Brown, $8.95.)
           Cartoons.

 4     84   CODEPENDENT NO MORE, by Melody Beattie, (Hazelden/Harper
           & Row, $8.95.) Solving your own problems while caring for
           others.

 5     2    THE T--FACTOR DIET, by Martin Katahn. (Bantam, $4.95.) A
           new regimen for weight loss.


These listings are based on computer-processed sales figures from 3,000
bookstores and from representative wholesalers with more than 38,000 other
retail outlets, including variety stores and supermarkets. The figures are
statistically adjusted to represent sales in all such outlets across the United
States.

*An asterisk before a book's title indicates that its sales, weighted to reflect
the book-selling industry nationally, are barely distinguishable from those of
the book above.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: LIST

                   Copyright 1990 The New York Times Company


                              29 of 288 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                  April 8, 1990, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

NEW YORK STORIES: HELL'S KITCHEN KILLERS ...

BYLINE: By DAVID HAOWARD BAIN; David Haward Bain, the author of ''Aftershocks''
and ''Sitting in Darkness,'' writes often about politics and crime. He teaches
writing at Middlebury College.

SECTION: Section 7; Page 12, Column 1; Book Review Desk

LENGTH: 934 words



THE WESTIES
Inside the Hell's Kitchen Irish Mob.
By T. J. English.
384 pp. New York:
G. P. Putnam's Sons. $21.95.

This is about as grim a gangster story as one can find in or out of print, in
many places requiring a strong stomach. ''The Westies'' chronicles the last
incarnation of the Hell's Kitchen gang, a force on Manhattan's West Side long
predating the popular 1930's shoot-'em-up racketeer films starring James Cagney.

As T. J. English writes, the neighborhood was well suited for its criminal
reputation. Long an Irish-American enclave, Hell's Kitchen sat between the rough
margin of Times Square, with its drugs and prostitution, and the pier-studded
Hudson River, lucrative for squeezing money from shippers and the unions. For
all those years most law-abiding citizens kept their silence, looked the other
way, refused to cooperate with authorities in a clannishness characteristic of
poor immigrant communities. Meanwhile, successive Irish gangs thrived on a power
base built on extortion, loan sharking, gambling, kickbacks and patronage.
Periodically a threat, a beating or a murder reinforced a gang's position.

This tenuous equilibrium was disturbed in the 1970's, beginning with the
ascendancy of James (Jimmy) Coonan and Francis (Mickey) Featherstone, whose
stories are this book's primary focus. These two vicious young men formed a
partnership in 1976 that was to rule Hell's Kitchen until the mid-80's, forging
ties with the Mafia and leaving a trail of bodies in that violent neighborhood.

Mr. Coonan was a backslider from the middle class who from his youth dreamed of
racketeering, aiming to replace the gangster chief Michael Spillane. Mr.
Featherstone, who became James Coonan's bodyguard and enforcer, had traded his
lackluster, impoverished youth for the United States Army and service in
Vietnam. Although Mr. Featherstone saw no combat, his war duty behind the lines
did nothing for his mental stability, nor for his violent propensities,
according to the author. Once back in the United States he lived in a drug- and
alcohol-induced fog and was in and out of psychiatric wards and prisons, with,
as he later admitted, several homicides to his credit. When Mr. Coonan's
enforcer was murdered, Mr. Featherstone agreed to replace him. Primarily he was
motivated by gratitude for James Coonan's attention, secondarily by the easy
money, the author tells us. It was inevitable that such a bond would unravel.

Until it did, Jimmy Coonan and Mickey Featherstone ruled with frightening
effectiveness. Consequently, their story contains a murder on an average of
every few days, most portrayed in gruesome detail. Moreover, as the author
shows, Mr. Coonan had arrived at a formula for escaping not only the law but
revenge from his rivals: ''No corpus delicti,'' he would often say, ''no
investigation.'' He learned how to dismember murder victims from a cohort
prison-trained as a butcher, and he disposed of the results in the swift
currents of the East River. Even Mr. Featherstone, who sadistically enjoyed
terrorizing people and who, according to the author, killed many if not most of
the gang's victims, was uncomfortable with the dismemberment and with Mr.
Coonan's grisly delight in it.

All this, however, had little to do with the pair's falling out, and nothing to
do with Mr. Featherstone turning Federal witness against Mr. Coonan in a widely
publicized criminal trial in 1987-88, resulting in the breakup of the gang and a
number of long prison stretches. By then, gentrification was doing more to
transform ''Hell's Kitchen'' into ''Clinton'' than all the previous efforts of
law enforcement.

The criminal partnership had begun to split in 1978, when Mr. Coonan forged an
alliance with Paul Castellano, then head of the Gambino crime family. Over the
next several years, his West Side Irish cohorts became increasingly angry and
fearful as Mr. Coonan's ambitions took him closer to the Italian mob from
Brooklyn. Rage at this ethnic betrayal, leavened with Mr. Featherstone's pure
drive for self-preservation, propelled him into the witness chair and the
Federal Witness Protection Program, in which he still resides.

Mr. English, who covered the Westies' racketeering trial for The Irish Voice
newspaper, has done a prodigious job of research on this book, attending the
lengthy trial and interviewing many criminals, attorneys, law enforcement agents
and West Side neighbors. But as a work of journalism, ''The Westies'' contains a
flaw that runs from start to finish: Mr. English drew so close to his criminal
sources and their attorneys that he left himself no critical distance. For
instance, with major characters possessing no redeeming qualities, the
journalist must at least acknowledge inconsistencies (Mr. Featherstone's years
of sadism contrasted with his later distaste for Mr. Coonan's excess is but one
example).

Tellingly, Mr. English's authorial voice is so deeply omniscient that, as
journalist-narrator, he talks out of one side of his mouth just like his
gangsters, spitting expletives and colloquialisms. This sort of narration
undercuts his credibility almost as much as those times when the author gives us
the last thoughts of a dying murder victim, or when, at certain dramatic
moments, he withholds key information. If the reader is privy to every grotesque
thought of these criminals, then the author cannot hold back information as he
does, even if for a few pages. His credibility can only erode. Despite this
drawback, however, ''The Westies'' is driven by the momentum of its gritty,
grisly subject matter.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo: Francis (Mickey) Featherstone, left, a high-ranking member of
the Westies, after his arrest for murder, New York, 1979. (The Daily News)

TYPE: Review

                   Copyright 1990 The New York Times Company


                              30 of 288 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                  April 9, 1990, Monday, Late Edition - Final
                              Correction Appended

Scholars Acclaim de Gaulle as a Man of Vision

BYLINE: By PAUL LEWIS

SECTION: Section A; Page 9, Column 1; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 682 words


Although he was a thorn in the side of successive American Presidents, General
Charles de Gaulle was portrayed this past weekend as a visionary statesman who
restored France's faith in itself and peered beyond the cold war to foresee the
collapse of the Soviet domain.

This positive portrait of a leader whom many American politicians considered
ungrateful and arrogant and a visceral opponent of all things American and
British emerged at a three-day conference organized here by Columbia, New York
and Harvard Universities as part of the preparations for the centenary of de
Gaulle's birth on Nov. 22.

The conference brought together not only American historians and academic
experts on de Gaulle but many of his surviving aides, including Pierre Messmer,
former Defense Minister and Prime Minister; Olivier Guichard, former Industry
Minister and the general's principal aide from 1947 to 1960, and Jean-Marcel
Jeanneney, who served both as his Minister of Industry and Minister of Social
Affairs.

The prevailing view at the conference was summed up by Prof. Stanley Hoffmann of
Harvard's Center for European Studies, who called de Gaulle a figure of '' epic
proportions'' who believed that ''saying what is right even if it does not
happen for 20 years is more important than taking part in someone else's grand
design.''

De Gaulle was given high marks for telling America it would never win the
Vietnam War and for resisting its efforts to confront the Soviet Union with a
monolithic Atlantic alliance, realizing that the forces of European nationalism
would prove stronger than Communism.

Above all, he was praised for having foreseen the end of the cold war with his
vision of a ''Europe from the Atlantic to the Urals,'' which seems to be coming
into being today.

''De Gaulle understood the problem of building a more egalitarian international
order, which is the challenge of the 1990's,'' said Prof. Frank C. Costigliola
of the University of Rhode Island. Even former Secretary of State Henry A.
Kissinger described de Gaulle as ''a truly great man.''

Probably no single one of de Gaulle's actions angered Washington more than his
decision in 1966 to withdraw France's armed forces from the command of the North
Atlantic Treaty Organization and expel the alliance's headquarters from France.

And it was here that the conference broke new ground, with Mr. Messmer
suggesting that de Gaulle had probably been planning to make this break ever
since his return to power in 1958 and offering two previously unknown pieces of
evidence to support this view.

The first was Mr. Messmer's assertion that he believed de Gaulle was not serious
about the proposal he made soon after his return for the reform of NATO through
the creation of a three-power ''directorate'' consisting of the United States,
France and Britain with a veto over the use of American nuclear weapons. He told
the conference that de Gaulle never even mentioned the idea to him and that the
French President probably put it forward only on the assumption it would be
rejected as a way of preparing the ground for withdrawal from NATO later on.

As further evidence that General de Gaulle never intended to stay in NATO's
integrated command structure, Mr. Messmer disclosed that de Gaulle brushed off a
secret American suggestion in 1962 that a French general instead of an American
one might command the alliance's forces in Europe. Mr. Messmer speculated that
the suggestion might have been intended to make it harder for de Gaulle to
withdraw from NATO.

Only a few scholars openly criticized de Gaulle at the conference, which Prof.
Irwin Wall of the University of California at Riverside described as ''a
canonization service.'' Professor Wall said de Gaulle's domestic achievements
were necessarily flawed because he was swept from power after the student riots
and strikes of May 1968.

Dr. Robert R. Bowie, a State Department counselor from 1966 to 1968, called de
Gaulle's foreign policy ''basically theater'' and said it was only possible
because NATO had successfully contained the Soviet Union.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

CORRECTION-DATE: April 10, 1990, Tuesday, Late Edition - Final

CORRECTION:

An article yesterday about a conference on Charles de Gaulle referred
incorrectly in some copies to the date of his return to power, to the conference
organizers and to the meeting site. De Gaulle returned in 1958, not 1957.
Besides Columbia and New York Universities, the organizers included Harvard; the
sessions were at Columbia and N.Y.U., not the United Nations.

                   Copyright 1990 The New York Times Company


                              31 of 288 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                  April 9, 1990, Monday, Late Edition - Final

Tough Call for Bush: A Presidential Pardon for Poindexter?

BYLINE: By DAVID JOHNSTON, Special to The New York Times

SECTION: Section A; Page 13, Column 1; National Desk

LENGTH: 1065 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, April 8


John M. Poindexter's conviction on five felony charges seems likely to thrust
President Bush once again into the discomforting limelight of the Iran-contra
affair, this time over the possibility of a Presidential pardon.

Mr. Poindexter's lawyers have not indicated whether they will seek such a
pardon, and the White House has said Mr. Bush will not comment on the verdict.
But the possibility of a pardon has been raised before in the cases of other
Iran-contra defendants.

Representative Lee H. Hamilton, an Indiana Democrat who is former chairman of
the House Intelligence Committee, said in an interview today that he expected
some lawmakers to ask the White House to pardon Mr. Poindexter.

''The reaction to the verdict will be substantial,'' said Mr. Hamilton, a critic
of the Reagan Administration's actions in the affair who testified as a
prosecution witness in the Poindexter trial. He said support for a pardon was
likely to depend on how Mr. Poindexter was sentenced.

Barred Direct Assistance

A Federal District Court jury found Mr. Poindexter guilty of one count of
conspiring to mislead Congress, two counts of obstructing Congressional
inquiries and two counts of making false statements to lawmakers about the
weapons sales to Iran and efforts to assist the Nicaraguan rebels when Congress
had barred direct aid.

Judge Harold H. Greene has set June 11 for sentencing. The maximum penalty for
the five charges is 25 years in prison and fines of $1.25 million. Mr.
Poindexter's lawyers said he would appeal the convictions.

No other defendant in the affair has been sentenced to any prison time. But Mr.
Poindexter is the most senior Reagan Administration official to be convicted of
felony charges, and he was found guilty of more counts than any other person
charged.

A pardon would likely be more politically risky in Mr. Poindexter's case because
of the decisive nature of the verdict against the former national security
adviser, who was found guilty of all the charges against him.

Verdict Seems to Dispel Doubts

A pardon might be further complicated because the verdict seemed to dispel
doubts over the value of the Iran-contra investigation, providing Lawrence E.
Walsh, the independent prosecutor, with a conviction that appeared to validate
the three-year inquiry.

Until the Poindexter case, Mr. Walsh had failed to win a felony conviction
against a senior Reagan Administration official in a jury trial, although the
former national security adviser was the seventh person to plead guilty or be
convicted of wrongdoing in the affair.

In March 1988, Robert C. McFarlane, who preceeded Mr. Poindexter as national
security adviser, pleaded guilty to misdemeanor charges of withholding
information from Congress. And last May, Oliver L. North, who was Mr.
Poindexter's subordinate, was convicted of three charges, but he was acquitted
of nine other counts.

After Mr. North's conviction, his supporters raised the idea of a pardon for the
former Marine Corps lieutenant colonel. Mr. Bush avoided a potentially divisive
decision when Mr. North was not sentenced to a jail term. Mr. North is appealing
his conviction.

Important Witnesses

The verdict against Mr. Poindexter seems likely to breathe life into Mr. Walsh's
often troubled investigation, which centers on whether other officials in the
Reagan Administration tried to conceal the weapons sales to Iran and efforts to
aid the Nicarguan rebels, Government officials said.

Mr. Poindexter and Mr. North are both likely to be important witnesses who may
be summoned to testify before the Federal grand jury in the case, said the
officials.

Among the officials who are likely to face additional scrutiny is Donald P.
Gregg, who was national security adviser to Mr. Bush when Mr. Bush was Vice
President, officials said.

Mr. Gregg, who is now Ambassador to South Korea, insisted at his confirmation
hearings that he was unaware of Mr. North's contra-aid activities until late
summer of 1986 and did not report to Mr. Bush on Mr. North's actions until after
the affair was disclosed in November 1986.

Classified Information Barred

Two cases remain unresolved. One involves Joseph F. Fernandez, a former Central
Intelligence Agency station chief in Costa Rica, who was charged with making
false statements to Iran-contra investigators.

A Federal district judge in Virginia dismissed the four-count indictment against
him after Attorney General Dick Thornburgh barred the disclosure of classified
information. Mr. Walsh has appealed the judge's ruling.

The other case involves Thomas Clines, who was indicted in February for
under-reporting his earnings in 1985 and 1986 to the I.R.S. Mr. Clines, a former
C.I.A. official, was employed by the private network that helped supply arms to
the contras.

As Mr. Poindexter's trial demonstrated, future prosecutions may be unable to
answer the still unresolved questions about the extent of involvement by former
President Ronald Reagan and President Bush.

Blocked Defense Efforts

Mr. Bush remained a peripheral figure in the Poindexter trial. Defense lawyers
hinted in pretrial hearings that Mr. Poindexter sometimes briefed him about the
affair, but Judge Greene blocked defense efforts to compel the President to
testify.

Mr. Poindexter's lawyers succeeded in compelling Mr. Reagan to be a witness, but
the former President's videotaped testimony was marked by his apparent inability
to recall whether he participated in key events in the affair.

In an interview, Wayne M. Mitchell, the foreman of the Poindexter jury, said
that the testimony of Mr. Reagan carried no special weight.

Only Mr. Poindexter himself appeared capable of providing a fresh firsthand
account, but his decision not to testify in his own defense virtually foreclosed
the possibility that new insights would emerge from his trial.

Mr. Bush has tried and largely succeeded in maintaining a low-visibility role in
the affair. A Presidential review board and Congressional investigating
committees concluded that he was at most a marginal figure.

Since November 1986 when the affair was disclosed, Mr. Bush has walked a
tightrope about the affair, at times acknowledging mistakes, while remaining
loyal to Mr. Reagan and supportive of some of the participants, like Mr. North,
whom Mr. Bush has called a military hero for his service in Vietnam.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: News Analysis

                   Copyright 1990 The New York Times Company


                              32 of 288 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                  April 9, 1990, Monday, Late Edition - Final

Classified Documents Not Left in Vietnam

SECTION: Section A; Page 18, Column 4; Editorial Desk

LENGTH: 299 words


To the Editor:

Your obituary of Graham Martin, last United States Ambassador to South Vietnam
(March 15), states, ''hundreds of classified documents were left behind'' in the
evacuation of Vietnam at the end of April 1975. This is false. So is the
reference to late evacuation of ''thousands of American troops.'' To say that
thousands of Vietnamese who worked for us were also left behind is at best a
quarter-truth.

As deputy chief of mission at the Saigon Embassy at the time, I ordered the
systematic return of embassy documents and files to the United States beginning
in early March 1975. This was done in the next weeks, along with removal of
security-sensitive equipment, the nuclear fuel elements in a small research
reactor in Dalat and other items. The classified documents that remained on
April 29, 1975, were either burned or taken out by those of us last to leave.
None were left behind. Even the typewriter ribbons were destroyed.

There were no American troops in Vietnam in 1975. Almost all had left in 1972
and the last by the end of January 1973, when the Paris agreements came into
effect.

We evacuated or facilitated evacuation of roughly 54,000 people beginning April
4, though we had no legal authority to have most of them enter the United States
until four days before the end; 7,500 more went out on the helicopter lift in
the last 20 hours, and 14,000 more were evacuated by boat and barge. This total
over four weeks included 5,750 Americans. The rest were almost all Vietnamese.

All this had to be done so as to avoid massive panic, which would have made any
evacuation impossible. Yes, some we would have wanted to take out did not make
it. Others, including some employees, did not want to leave.

WOLF LEHMANN
  Rockville, Md., March 26, 1990

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Letter

                   Copyright 1990 The New York Times Company


                              33 of 288 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                  April 9, 1990, Monday, Late Edition - Final

Review/Dance;
Aftershocks of Vietnam

BYLINE: By JACK ANDERSON

SECTION: Section C; Page 13, Column 1; Cultural Desk

LENGTH: 338 words


A great gap can exist between artistic aspiration and achievement. When Michiyo
and Dancers presented ''The Elevator'' on Thursday night at the Dia Art
Foundation on Mercer Street, that gap became a chasm.

Michiyo Tanaka, the company's director, examined the life of a veteran of the
Vietnam War in her new dramatic dance to a taped collage by Billy R that
combined music with fragments of news reports and speeches. Ms. Tanaka, a
Japanese-born choreographer who has worked in New York City for nine years, has
developed a style derived from both jazz dance and modern dance. But it proved
inadequate on this occasion.

At the start of ''The Elevator,'' Howard Perry was believable and poignant as a
homeless man shuffling through the streets. Through flashbacks, he returned to
his wartime service in Vietnam, and Kyoko Iizuka, Kathryn Milostan-Egus, Sheryl
Pollard, David Maurice Sharp and Yuko Yuasa were variously cast as ''flower
children,'' soldiers in combat and prostitutes in a brothel. At the end of the
work, Mr. Perry was once again shivering in the streets.

Even though some Vietnam veterans have indeed found it difficult to adjust to
civilian society, Ms. Tanaka never made her protagonist's fate choreographically
convincing. Not all veterans end up on Skid Row. Not all men on Skid Row are
veterans. Ms. Tanaka failed to show why her protagonist's life had to take the
downward course it did.

In Mr. Perry's ''King of the Hill,'' another premiere, Ms. Iizuka, Ms.
Milostan-Egus, Ms. Pollard and Ms. Tanaka played increasingly competitive
children's games to music by Tim Berne. They did so energetically. Yet the
work's dramatic development was obvious, and in his attempts to make the
performers childlike, Mr. Perry occasionally made them look foolish instead.

The program also included two pieces by Ms. Tanaka inspired by water. Dancers
crept and slithered in ''The Pond.'' And Ms. Tanaka and Mr. Perry performed an
acrobatic duet from ''Exotic Aquatics'' that resembled a glitzy nightclub
routine.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Review

                   Copyright 1990 The New York Times Company


                              34 of 288 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                  April 9, 1990, Monday, Late Edition - Final

Reviews/Television;
On the Art of Being a Spokesman

BYLINE: By WALTER GOODMAN

SECTION: Section C; Page 18, Column 4; Cultural Desk

LENGTH: 887 words


A pride of former Presidential press secretaries purr and growl their way
through ''The Presidency, the Press and the People.'' Prompted by the bantering
questions and comments of John Chancellor, 10 men who served occupants of the
White House from John F. Kennedy to Ronald Reagan indulge in anecdotes and
analysis at 8 tonight on Channel 13, in a two-hour get-together that moves like
a fast-paced press conference. Their faces, though showing the impositions of
the years, will remind viewers of many Administrations past and provide reason
to be on guard against those present and still to come.

The press secretary's staff is several times larger today than it was when
Kennedy's man, Pierre Salinger, made do with 10 assistants. Bill Moyers, who
worked for Lyndon B. Johnson, laments that manipulation of the press has
increased proportionately. He puts much of the blame on his own adopted field,
television, which he calls today's ''primary precinct of politics.'' The result
of all the media managing, he says, is that ''we see more and more of our
Presidents and know less and less about what they do.''

The participants, ranked on either side of Mr. Chancellor as if for a photo op,
do not consider themselves to have been manipulators, however. No, as they tell
it, they were in the thankless position of trying to serve two masters: the
President and the working press. (Mr. Chancellor cracks that he knows ''the one
you serve when you can't serve both masters.'') Perhaps the reason for the
defensiveness is that most of those participating in this informally informative
chat suffered, to put it as mildly as Mr. Chancellor does, from imputations of
truth-shading during their tenure. Although several of these former front men
concede that they were not always up front with reporters, all evidently feel
more sinned against than sinning. George Christian, who worked for Johnson,
pleads extenuating circumstances: ''The White House press secretaries are
unusually susceptible to being told wrong information by other people and
inadvertently relaying it as fact.'' Remember that the next time you're
listening to Marlin Fitzwater.

Mr. Salinger says he knew nothing about the Bay of Pigs operation until a few
hours before it occurred, and Larry Speakes, who spoke for Mr. Reagan, blames
Admiral John M. Poindexter, then national security adviser, for assuring him
that reports of an imminent invasion of Grenada were ''preposterous,'' an
adjective that Mr. Speakes promptly passed along to reporters. ''Some of us also
thought it was preposterous,'' observes Mr. Chancellor, who gets the most laughs
out of the live audience.

Ronald L. Ziegler concedes that he could not do much to improve the image of
Richard M. Nixon, ''which was not one of great warmth''; the impact of the
Vietnam War, he now recognizes, was far beyond the power of press relations to
assuage. Further comfort for voters worried about the wizardry of press
secretaries in shaping public perceptions comes from Ron H. Nessen. His
experience with trying to change Gerald R. Ford's somewhat klutzy image, he
says, ''ought to defeat once and for all the idea that we are great manipulators
of the press.''

George E. Reedy, still talking like a press secretary, explains that the Johnson
White House got into trouble not because it lied, but because it took ''a series
of facts and arranged them in the most optimistic fashion.'' Reassured?
Competing for one-liners, Mr. Moyers says, ''It really got so bad we couldn't
believe our own leaks.'' Mr. Speakes says President Reagan ''never had an
opportunity to leak because the Cabinet and the senior staff were so expert at
it.'' Mr. Nessen tops the laugh meter when he calls his former boss, Mr. Ford,
''a great leaker.''

Among the other subjects kicked around collegially is the practice of making up
on the President's behalf utterances that were never in fact uttered. In a
retaliatory strike, Jody Powell, who was Jimmy Carter's spokesman, blames the
reporters themselves, who, he contends, ''have built a major portion of their
careers fabricating quotes and sticking them in the newspapers and attributing
them to people that don't exist.''

Mr. Powell makes another point that deserves more elaboration than it receives
on the program. American journalism, he charges, punishes what it insists that
it wants most: ''openness, candor and access.'' He says the best advice to a
President is: ''Don't tell them a damn thing. The more you give them, the worse
shape you're in.''

Viewers will be left with the impression that press secretaries feel themselves
much beset, on one side by officials willing to conceal or distort information
for political advantage and, on the other, by the insatiable demands of
reporters. That seems like a pretty natural, if somewhat unsettling, state of
things. Let the public beware.

Front Men

THE PRESIDENCY, THE PRESS AND THE PEOPLE, directed by Philip Doucet; produced by
Peter Kay and Sarah Luft for KPBS San Diego and the University of California at
San Diego; Paul Marshall, executive producer; John Chancellor, moderator. At 8
P.M. on Channel 13.
WITH: James S. Brady, George Christian, Bill Moyers, Ron H. Nessen, Jody Powell,
George E. Reedy, Pierre Salinger, Larry Speakes, Jerald F. terHorst and Ronald
L. Ziegler.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo: Jody Powell, left, and Larry Speakes, press secretaries to
Presidents Jimmy Carter and Ronald Reagan, on ''The Presidency, the Press and
the People,'' tonight at 8 on Channel 13.

TYPE: Review

                   Copyright 1990 The New York Times Company


                              35 of 288 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                  April 9, 1990, Monday, Late Edition - Final

Ronald E. Evans, 56, Astronaut Who Piloted Apollo 17 Mission

BYLINE: By STEPHANIE STROM

SECTION: Section D; Page 10, Column 5; National Desk

LENGTH: 351 words


Ronald E. Evans, the Apollo 17 astronaut who exclaimed ''Hot diggety dog!'' upon
taking his first steps in space in December 1972, died of a heart attack in his
sleep on Saturday at his home in Scottsdale, Ariz. He was 56 years old.

Shortly before that mission, the outspoken Commander Evans, who piloted the
command ship America in the last space mission in the Apollo series, had
publicly accused the Nixon Administration of supporting the space program ''by
talk but not by action'' and called politicians who did not support space
exploration ''kooks.''

He began as an astronaut in 1966 and was a member of the backup crews for Apollo
14 and the joint Soviet-American space flight in 1975. He had never flown in
space before the Apollo 17 mission in 1972. The three-man mission collected
samples from the Moon's surface and set up a network of scientific instruments
there.

A Most Proficient Pilot

He spent 47 minutes outside the command ship America, suspended between the Moon
and Earth, collecting used film from cameras and an ultraviolet spectrometer.
The experience caused his heart rate nearly to double, to 140 beats a minute.

He was considered one of the most proficient pilots in the astronaut corps. He
had honed his skills in more than 100 combat missions in the Vietnam War. He
went to war aboard the aircraft carrier Ticonderoga, the ship that recovered the
Apollo 17 crew from the Pacific after its splashdown on Dec. 19, 1972.

He joined the Reserve Officer Training Program at the University of Kansas,
where he received a bachelor's degree in electrical engineering in 1956. He
received a master's degree in aeronautical engineering from the Navy's
Postgraduate School in 1964 and became an astronaut in 1966.

After 21 years as a Navy officer, Mr. Evans left the astronaut program in 1977
to join the Western American Energy Corporation in Scottsdale.

Survivors include his wife, Janet, of Scottsdale; his mother, Marie, of Osage
City, Kan.; a brother, Jay, of Olathe, Kan.; a son, Jon, of Austin, Tex.; a
daughter, Jaime Harner, of Scottsdale, and six grandchildren.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo: Ronald E. Evans (NASA, 1971)

TYPE: Obituary

                   Copyright 1990 The New York Times Company


                              36 of 288 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                April 11, 1990, Wednesday, Late Edition - Final

Eight Sentenced In 1980 Protest At Nuclear Unit

BYLINE: By MICHAEL deCOURCY HINDS, Special to The New York Times

SECTION: Section A; Page 14, Column 1; National Desk

LENGTH: 853 words

DATELINE: NORRISTOWN, Pa., April 10


In a case that seems to bridge the years between the antiwar turmoil of the
1960's and the current easing of the cold war, eight peace advocates were
sentenced today for a 1980 protest in which they poured their blood on
blueprints at a nuclear weapons plant.

The sentencing was the latest, although perhaps not the last, chapter in the
case of the group that calls itself the Plowshares Eight, after the reference in
the Bible to the beating of swords into plowshares.

In their protest, one of the best-known antiwar incidents in this country since
the Vietnam War, the group also damaged components of nuclear warheads at the
General Electric complex in King of Prussia, near here.

All eight, including the Rev. Daniel J. Berrigan and his brother Philip,
received sentences equal to the time they had already served in jail before the
1981 trial, at which they were convicted of criminal conspiracy and burglary.
The time they had served ranged from five days to 17 1/2 months. Some
defendants, citing matters of conscience, had declined to post bail pending
appeals of the 1981 verdict. The original sentences, 1 1/2 to 5 years for some
defendants and 3 to 10 years for others, were eventually thrown out on the
ground the trial judge had been biased.

Watch on Washington

The defendants were told today that they would have to serve 23 months in county
jail if they are convicted of any more antiwar activity in the next 23 months, a
condition that the defendants said they might not be able to fulfill.

After the sentencing, Daniel Berrigan, who is 68 years old, said: ''I'm going to
watch President Bush very closely. It all depends on him whether I go back in
the pokey or not.''

Judge James E. Buckingham of Montgomery County Court of Common Pleas expressed
sympathy for the defendants, although he said he could not condone their
actions. ''The defendants were attempting to make a statement of their deep-felt
convictions,'' he said, ''I agree with many of those convictions. We are all
concerned about nuclear war.''

Besides Daniel Berrigan, a Jesuit priest from New York City, those sentenced
were: Philip Berrigan, a former priest and peace advocate from Baltimore., Molly
Rush, 54. director of the Thomas Merton Center in Pittsburgh, an advocacy
organization on social issues. John Schuchardt, 50, a peace advocate and lawyer
from Madison, Conn. Dean Hammer, 36, a pastoral counselor, from New Haven. The
Rev. Carl Kabat, 54, a Roman Catholic priest. Elmer Maas, 54, a peace advocate
and former history professor. Sister Anne Montgomery, 69, a Roman Catholic nun.

Mr. Kabat, Mr. Maas and Sister Montgomery were all brought from other prisons,
where they were serving time for similar acts of defiance.

Philip Berrigan said in an interview on Monday that despite worldwide lessening
of tension, a nuclear war could happen. ''The Soviet Union and the United States
are deploying more and more sophisticated first-strike weapons, which are less
and less under human control,'' he said.

In court today, Mr. Maas said, ''Beating nuclear weapons into plowshares will
not guarantee our survival, but I believe it is our only hope.''

Rejected Plea Bargains

Ten years ago, the Plowshares Eight rejected a plea bargain that would have
dropped all charges except some misdemeanors and released them based on the jail
time they had served while waiting for the 1981 trial.

The group has argued all along that their actions were justified by the threat
of war. They also argued that Nuremberg principles of law gave the citizens of
any country the right to interfere with the commission of war crimes or crimes
against humanity.

But the judge at the 1981 trial ruled that the group's motives were irrelevant
and he did not let them present their justifications. His decision was reversed
by the state Superior Court, but the State Supreme court ultimately upheld his
decions, and the United States Supreme Court last October refused to hear a
further appeal.

An Antiwar Concert Held

Monday night, supporters of Plowshares Eight held a religious service, a
candlelight march to another G.E. nuclear missile plant, in West Philadelphia,
and an antiwar concert featuring Pete Seeger in a local church.

Today, peace advocates rededicated themselves to their struggle in a ceremony in
front of G.E. Aerospace Headquarters in Valley Forge, Pa. Just before the
sentencing began, they held a prayer vigil on the courthouse steps.

The incident in King of Prussia, on the morning of Sept. 9, 1980, was the
culmination of two years of demonstrations by the Brandywine Peace Community, a
local group, against the manufacture of nuclear weapons.

Mr. Schuchardt gave this account in an interview Monday: The group, armed with
hammers and about four pints of their blood, distracted a guard to enter the
G.E. complex in King of Prussia, a Philadelphia suburb. They found two metal
nose cones that protect and guide nuclear warheads to their targets and beat the
cones with hammers, causing damage later estimated at $28,000, and poured blood
on some nose cones, desks, work orders and blueprints.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: photo: Eight peace advocates were sentenced yesterday for a 1980
protest in which they poured their blood over blueprints at a nuclear weapons
plant near Norris town, Pa. Five of the advocates held a banner that read, ''The
crime is here'' as they demonstrated yesterday at another General Electric
plant. From left were Dean Hammer, the Rev. Daniel J. Berrigan, Molly Rush, John
Schuchardt and Philip Berrigan. (Associated Press)

                   Copyright 1990 The New York Times Company


                              37 of 288 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                April 11, 1990, Wednesday, Late Edition - Final

Book Notes

BYLINE: By Edwin McDowell

SECTION: Section C; Page 17, Column 4; Cultural Desk

LENGTH: 790 words


Publishing waters have been roiled in recent days by a dispute between James
Webb, a former Secretary of the Navy, and Prentice Hall, which published his
first two novels.

Specifically, Mr. Webb says he is unhappy about the fact that that Prentice Hall
awarded the relicensed paperback rights to one of those novels to Pocket Books,
and not to Avon Books, which offered the most money for those rights.

''Quite conveniently,'' Mr. Webb said in a telephone interview, ''Pocket Books
is owned by the same people who own Prentice Hall.'' Pocket Books and Prentice
Hall are part of Simon & Schuster, which is owned by Paramount Communications.

Steven Murphy, the president of Prentice Hall Press, denied that the procedure
was irregular. ''When the rights to the paperback reverted, we had the right to
do many things, including publish the book ourselves,'' he said. ''We chose to
relicense it by putting it out to the highest bidder. All players knew the
rules, and it went to the highest bidder.''

Sale Based on a Single Bid

The paperback edition of ''Fields of Fire,'' Mr. Webb's critically acclaimed
1978 novel about a platoon of Marines in Vietnam, was originally published by
Bantam Books, whose 10-year license expired last year. His royalties from the
paperback still average about $1,000 a month, said Mr. Webb, a much-decorated
former Marine Corps officer who was wounded in Vietnam.

Several weeks ago Prentice Hall announced that it would relicense the paperback
to whoever made the highest offer, based on a single bid. Avon Books bid
$50,000, Mr. Webb said, but when it did not hear back from Prentice Hall it
raised its offer in two stages to $70,000. Mr. Murphy ruled, however, that only
Avon's original bid could be considered. Thus Prentice Hall accepted the bid
from Pocket Books, which Mr. Webb said was $60,000.

Mr. Murphy said that Prentice Hall had a policy of not revealing the names or
bids of other participants. He said: ''Everybody knew that the rules stipulated
only one bid, and once the bids were in we chose the highest bidder. It wouldn't
have been fair to the other parties otherwise.''

Mr. Webb said he favored Avon not just because its last offer was larger than
the bid from Pocket Books, but because Avon has acquired the paperback rights to
his new novel, ''Something to Die For,'' which William Morrow & Company will
publish in January. ''It would be better for my writing career to have the
paperbacks published by the same imprint,'' said Mr. Webb, who resigned as
Secretary of the Navy in 1988 to resume his writing career full time.

'A Kind of Auction'

In almost all cases, publishers of the hard-cover edition of a book own the
paperback rights, which they can publish themselves or license to a reprinter on
the basis of one-time bids or a multi-bid auction.

Mr. Murphy said that while the one-time bid is not a bona fide auction, ''it's a
kind of auction.'' He added that Prentice Hall, like most publishers, takes into
account many factors in deciding how best to sell reprint rights to a book.
''Many times it's felt that it's fairer to let interested parties know they can
buy the book by putting in their best bid,'' Mr. Murphy said. ''It happens that
way with books and with companies.''

Carolyn Reidy, the president of Avon Books, said, ''We would rather have had an
auction for the book, but Prentice Hall was very straight with us.'' What was
unusual, she said, was having three publishers interested in a backlist book.

Protecting the Author

However, Mr. Webb said, there is a larger question about the role and
responsibility of conglomerate publishers. (Prentice Hall was privately owned
when it published ''Fields of Fire'' and ''A Sense of Honor,'' his 1981 novel
set in the United States Naval Academy, from which Mr. Webb graduated in 1968.)
''What's the protection of the author in all this?'' Mr. Webb asked. ''I haven't
heard from Prentice Hall in 10 years, and all of a sudden they're controlling my
future. And when they don't allow an auction and Pocket Books comes in with the
last and highest bid, they have the burden of proving it's not an inside deal.
The only way to avoid that is to throw it open to an auction.''

Mr. Murphy replied that the author was s protected by the publisher's mutual
stake in the success of the book. Speaking of ''Fields of Fire,'' he said,
''this is a book we have published successfully as part of our backlist for 10
years, and when rights reverted we secured for the author an additional advance
from a major paperback publisher and a commitment that it will continue
publishing the book successfully.

''I feel that we have created a situation that will be very beneficial to the
book and its author.''

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1990 The New York Times Company


                              38 of 288 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                April 11, 1990, Wednesday, Late Edition - Final

R. Dixon Herman, 78, Judge at Berrigan Trial

BYLINE: AP

SECTION: Section D; Page 26, Column 6; National Desk

LENGTH: 172 words

DATELINE: HARRISBURG, Pa., April 10


R. Dixon Herman, the Federal judge who oversaw the conspiracy trial of the
Harrisburg Seven, died of a heart attack on Friday at Harrisburg Hospital. He
was 78 years old.

Judge Herman was appointed to the Federal District Court in 1969 by President
Richard M. Nixon. He became a senior judge in 1981.

In 1972 he presided at the trial of seven Vietnam War opponents: the Rev.
Phillip Berrigan, two other priests, a former priest, two nuns and a Pakistani
scholar. The principal charges were conspiring to blow up underground steam
tunnels in Washington and kidnap Henry A. Kissinger in an effort to end the war.
The jury could not agree on the major charges, convicting Father Berrigan and a
co-defendant, Sister Elizabeth McAlister, only of smuggling letters into the
Federal prson in Lewisiburg, Pa.

Judge Herman, a graduate of Bucknell University and the Cornell Law School, was
a state judge before he was named a Federal judge.

Survivors include his wife, the former Elizabeth Dunn DeWitt, a son and three
daughters.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Obituary

                   Copyright 1990 The New York Times Company


                              39 of 288 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 April 12, 1990, Thursday, Late Edition - Final

NEWS SUMMARY

SECTION: Section A; Page 2, Column 5; Metropolitan Desk

LENGTH: 1327 words



International    A3-15



A compromise on German unification offered by the Soviet Union was rejected by
the Bush Administration as a guise for making Germany neutral. Moscow had
suggested that a united Germany belong to both NATO and the Warsaw Pact.    Page
A1



British question Soviet suggestion for a united Germany

    A10



In a shuttered museum, Stalin's ghost is stirring

    A10



Lech Walesa took back his statement that he would run for President of Poland.
The leader of the Solidarity trade union said his remarks had merely been a
''metaphor'' aimed at speeding the pace of reforms.    A11



Romania advises King Michael not to go home for Easter

    A10



A suspect in the car-bomb killing of Orlando Letelier, a Chilean exile leader,
in Washington in 1976, was arrested in Florida by the F.B.I.    A1



G.I. accused of murder in Panama invasion    A9



A raid on a Peruvian jungle base on Saturday by guerrillas supporting coca
growers was the first major confrontation to involve American civilian
helicopter pilots.    A1



The Labor Party's new government was not presented to the Israeli Parliament for
approval after two religious members of the Labor coalition said they were
resigning.    A3



France came under sharp criticism for its decision to normalize relations with
Libya, as French officials said they had negotiated the release of three
hostages in direct talks with the Government of Col. Muammar el-Qaddafi.    A14



Omens of intolerance among Cairo's Muslims    A15



Man in the news: Prime Minister Constantine Mitsotakis of Greece was sworn in in
Athens, representing the victory of the center-right forces after a decade of
Socialist rule.    A3



Reporter's Notebook: In Nepal, the winds of change that have swept the country
recently have encouraged many people to speak out about police brutality. But
they are still cautious.

    A5



Violence in Kashmir is intensified    A8



A cholera epidemic has hit Zambia. The epidemic, the second in two months, is
centered in the city of Kitwe and townships like Luangwa on Zambia's copper
belt.    A6



Beijing journal: America is painted in a poor light

    A4



National    A16-24, B10



The 1990 census is seriously lagging, Federal officials said. Hundreds of
thousands of census forms were never delivered to the proper address and
millions of people did not return completed forms.    A1



Counting the people: How it's going    A20



Where paper planes fly, census plan crashes    A21



Fraud in savings institutions seized by regulators is ''pervasive,'' and
pursuing the hundreds of cases will be a costly effort stretching out over
several years, the director of the F.B.I. told a Congressional panel.    A1



The bitter Democratic primary in Texas is over, and now the state has turned its
attention to a gubernatorial race between a tough-talking woman from Austin and
a rough-hewn oil millionaire from Midland.    A1



Washington Talk: Execution case poses test for court

    A18



The F.B.I. wants broad new powers to seize documents and other evidence in
criminal investigations without the use of grand jury subpoenas, bureau and
Congressional officials say.    A19

The Iran-contra prosecutor, Lawrence E. Walsh, said he has no intention of
stopping his three-year inquiry, hinting at investigating the actions of other
Reagan Administration officials.    A16



Predictions of a doubling of traffic in the next three decades have prompted
Federal officials to actively promote a major program of computerization and
automation that would fundamentally alter the designs of vehicles and highways.
    A16



The two largest right-to-die groups in the nation are moving toward a merger.
The change, which is expected as early as next week, is intended to create a
unified lobbying and educational voice.    B10



Scientists have extracted DNA, the genetic code of life, from a plant that
thrived millions of years before the dawn of man.    A17



U.S. to send data on treating spinal injuries    A21



Drug is promising in Sickle-Cell test    B10



No date set for flight of shuttle    A18



Durham journal: The day the voters struck out the Bulls

    A16



Regional    B1-8



The police station in Teaneck, N.J., was attacked by black teen-agers angry over
the fatal shooting Tuesday evening of a 15-year-old youth by a police officer.
Several police cars were destroyed.    B1



Conflicting accounts of fatal Teaneck shooting    B2



The chief of the transit police quit unexpectedly after facing a dramatic
increase in subway crime in New York City. The head of a state police agency in
Massachusetts was named to replace him.    B1



N.J. Transit proposed raising fares on the commuter railroad by 10.9 percent and
on buses by 9.9 percent. If the increases are approved, it would be the third
year that transit fares in New Jersey have gone up.    B3



Port Authority to pick new chairman    B2



A serial killer is stalking cab drivers in the Bronx, the police said. Three
livery cab drivers have been robbed and killed in the last five weeks, ter-
rorizing drivers and prompting many to stop working at night.    B1



The Flushing section of Queens is thriving. The once-declining commercial
section has been rejuvenated in recent years, chiefly by the area's many Asian
newcomers. But some residents there are unhappy.    B1



Reporter's notebook: The trial of the Rev. Al Sharpton, which began three weeks
ago, has been noteworthy largely for its dullness, despite its promise of
courtroom theatrics.    B4



Jury gets family-slayer case    B4



Business Digest    D1



The Home Section



Homes where fame lives on    C1



Artfully built nests await feathering    C1



Tracking the life of the new father    C1



Close to Home    C2



Repairing damage to table tops    C5



Parent & Child    C8



A Gardener's World    C10



A Georgian house comes of age again    C11



Arts/Entertainment



East German conductor Kurt Masur has been appointed to succeed Zubin Mehta as
music director of the New York Philharmonic, starting with the 1992-93 season.
The appointment surprised many in the music world.    A1



Bob Woodward and his books    C13



Music: ''Casino Paradise''    C16



Dance: Philadanco in a debut    C13



''Cinderella''    C18



Art: A Ryder retrospective    C13



Word and Image: A Vietnam memoir    C17



Sports



Baseball: Mets blank Pirates    D19



Yankees snowed out    D20



Column: Berkow on opening day    D19



Hockey: Rangers lead series, 3-1    D19



Devils' series tied 2-2    D19



Lacrosse: Twin brothers boost Syracuse    D21



Health    B11



Personal Health

Surgery would help more epileptics, panel says

Obituaries



1,500 attend the funeral of Ryan White    B12



Harold Ballard, owner of the Toronto Maple Leafs    B12



Richard M. Kain, authority on James Joyce    B13



Editorials/Letters/Op-Ed



Editorials    A22



Why risk Start now?

Protecting New York's future

Nicholas Wade: Japan

Letters    A22



A. M. Rosenthal: A kind of treachery    A23



Tom Wicker: A proposal and an idea    A23



Randy Shilts: Is ''outing'' gays ethical?    A23



Mortimer Levitt: Shirt dealer's choler rises    A23


LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Summary

                   Copyright 1990 The New York Times Company


                              40 of 288 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 April 12, 1990, Thursday, Late Edition - Final

G.I. Accused of Murder in Panama Invasion

BYLINE: By MICHAEL R. GORDON, Special to The New York Times

SECTION: Section A; Page 9, Column 1; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 664 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, April 11


The Army said today that it had charged a paratrooper with premeditated murder
and aggravated assault during the invasion of Panama. It was the first time
since the Vietnam War that a soldier was charged with murder in a combat
situation.

The soldier who was charged, First Sgt. Roberto Enrique Bryan, 42 years old, is
a Panamanian-born member of the 82d Airborne Division with more than 19 years of
Army service.

The Pentagon had portrayed the December invasion as a model of discipline, in
which soldiers took great care to protect civilians and to capture Panamanian
soldiers alive.

Sergeant Bryan was charged with murder on Tuesday in the killing of an
unidentified Panamanian man near the Madden Dam in Panama ''by shooting him with
an M-16 rifle on or about Dec. 23.''

The three charges of aggravated assault also involve incidents at the Madden
Dam. Sergeant Bryan is accused of hitting a Panamanian man in the hand with the
butt of an M-16 rifle and striking a man in the head with the butt of the rifle
on Dec. 20. He is also accused of hitting a Panamanian man in the back with a
rubber hose on Dec. 21.

A lawyer for Sergeant Bryan denied the accusations. ''Mr. Bryan is innocent of
the charges,'' said Mark Louis Waple, Sergeant Bryan's civilian lawyer. ''He did
nothing more than honestly and honorably serve his country during Operation Just
Cause in the recent invasion of Panama.''

Mr. Waple said Sergeant Bryan had no record of disciplinary action and had been
selected to attend the Army's Sergeant Major Academy in 1991. Sergeant Bryan has
been assigned to the 82d Airborne for 10 years and was awarded the Army's
Meritorious Service Medal in 1984, Mr. Waple said. Army officials said last
month that the service's Criminal Investigative Command was investigating
another case involving a different soldier who is accused of killing a
Panamanian soldier who was taken prisoner. That soldier belongs to a unit that
was stationed in Panama, and Army officials declined today to discuss the status
of that investigation.

According to the Uniform Code of Military Justice, the maximum penalty for
premeditated murder is death. Other penalities include life in prison,
dishonorable discharge, forfeit of pay and allowances and reduction in rank.

According to military procedures, the accusations against Sergeant Bryan are to
be be brought before a military officer.

The investigating officer plays a role similar to that of a grand jury in a
civilian court. But there are some differences. The proceeding before a military
officer are ususally public, and Sergeant Bryan would have the opportunity to
present evidence and to cross-examine Government witnesses.

The investigating officer would then make recommendations to Maj. Gen. James H.
Johnson Jr., commander of the 82d Airborne, as to whether there should be a
court-martial and, if so, on what charges the defendant would be tried.

Army officials said last month that the murder charge against Sergeant Bryan
stems from an incident at a roadblock. A car carrying Panamanians drove up and a
grenade was later thrown at the Americans, wounding some of them. The Americans
fired at the Panamanians, and Sergeant Bryan is accused of killing one of the
Panamanians who survived.

A relative of the sergeant disputed the Army's account, saying that Sergeant
Bryan did not commit murder.

The investigation of Sergeant Bryan's actions was one of a series into
accusations of criminal acts against American soliders in Panama. Army officials
assert that the cases demonstrated the service's ability to investigate itself.

About 24,000 soldiers and Marines were involved in the Panama invasion, which
began on Dec. 20. An Army official said inquiries were made into more than 60
cases of possible wrongdoing. The inquiries led to about 20 formal
investigations. Most of those cases have been dismissed.

The investigation of the accusations were carried out by the Army's Criminal
Investigation Command.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1990 The New York Times Company


                              41 of 288 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 April 12, 1990, Thursday, Late Edition - Final

Upheaval in the East;
Dial 'A' for Albania

SECTION: Section A; Page 10, Column 2; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 182 words


Albania, whose hard-line Communist Government is known for jealously preserving
the country's isolation, will soon allow citizens to accept telephone calls from
the United States.

The American Telephone and Telegraph Company said yesterday it would begin
offering operator-assisted calls to Albania next month.

Richard A. Wallerstein, a spokesman for A. T. & T., said that on March 24
Albania began without explanation to allow its citizens to dial direct to more
than 50 countries. The Government agreed soon afterward to allow incoming calls
from the United States, he said.

Only three other countries still do not accept calls placed from the United
States: North Korea, Cambodia and Vietnam.

It is unclear how many Americans want to call Albanians or whether they will be
able to reach them. Calls handled by A. T. & T. will travel through a cable from
Italy that carries just 80 telephone lines. Even A. T. & T. has no idea how many
telephones there are in Albania, a country where the private ownership of
automobiles is forbidden and most people travel on foot or by oxcart.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1990 The New York Times Company


                              42 of 288 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 April 12, 1990, Thursday, Late Edition - Final

ON MY MIND;
A Kind of Treachery

BYLINE: By A. M. Rosenthal

SECTION: Section A; Page 23, Column 5; Editorial Desk

LENGTH: 734 words


Muammar el-Qaddafi orders the release of three hostages kidnapped more than two
years ago by one of the bands of terrorist killers that he controls.

As advance payment for releasing the hostages, France allows three French-made
jet fighter planes to fly off to join Libya's air force.

When the hostages are freed, Paris lifts embargoes against Libya, and promises
more payoffs in the future.

Then Foreign Minister Roland Dumas of France has something more to say. He calls
the Libyan's act ''noble and humanitarian.''

For these words alone, Mr. Dumas earns for himself and his Government a
paragraph in history that neither will outlive.

In any free court, the tyrant of Tripoli would be convicted of participation in
the kidnapping and imprisonment of the three hostages - and of sponsoring other
acts of terrorism and murder beyond number.

Everywhere, antiterrorist specialists know that Colonel Qaddafi could have
ordered the hostages released almost any day since the kidnapping.

The two adults were picked up in their pleasure boat by terrorists working for
Abu Nidal, the killer leader who then and since lived under the protection of
Libya. A child was born to them, in captivity.

The hostages were held in Libya for at least part of their time in hell. More
important, Colonel Qaddafi is the main source of revenue and arms for the Abu
Nidal gang, one of the most vicious in the world, if there are gradations among
them.

Relatives have paid ransom before. Nazi and Communist nations were paid in money
or in imprisoned agents to release some of their victims.

A child in captivity - that is a hard thought to bear. I suppose it is France's
business if it wants to pay ransom to terrorists. France paid it before, to
Iran.

It is France's business, but only up to a point. By sending arms to Libya, and
holding out the promise of more, it adds to the power that makes Libyan
terrorism possible.

France leaves the list of victims of crime. Instead, it joins the list of
abettors of crime.

Perhaps Mr. Dumas and President Francois Mitterrand will think of that the next
time they read of Libyan or Libyan-sponsored terrorism. The rest of the world
will.

But for those who still struggle against terrorism, for any surviving victims,
and all the beloved of those who did not survive, nothing will cut as cruelly as
the words of deep political hypocrisy - the glorification of a terrorist king.
Noble and humanitarian - Colonel Qaddafi.

Those words are an attempt to give him respectability and absolution. Neither
are France's to give. Mr. Dumas prostitutes words and emotion. What is more
important than the meaning of words? Distorting them is a tyrant's daily weapon.
For a free government to do so is intellectual treachery.

But Mr. Dumas is not alone. We have been having an epidemic of hypocrisy in the
West this past year.

The U.S. says that top-level visits to the butchers of Beijing, against
President Bush's promise to do no such thing, are acts of kindness to their
victims, the Chinese people.

Then Washington put forward the novel thought that reneging on the 50-year-old
American promise of support for Lithuanian independence was really for the good
of the Lithuanians. Somehow Lithuanians do not see it that way, stiff-necked
people.

Britain handcuffs screaming boat people to be shipped back to Vietnam. Other
Western nations look away. Everybody then goes to a human rights meeting
somewhere.

Western Europe discovers itself smothered in an unexpected stampede toward swift
German unification and anxiously says there is nothing to worry about at all -
nothing, you hear?

Yes, certainly Mikhail Gorbachev has his share of hypocrisy awards to display.
He gives the Soviet press and nationalities tastes of glasnost except when the
freedom chips are down. Then, fingersnap, gone is glasnost. But China,
Lithuania, boat refugees, whistling past German unification, kissing kidnappers'
boots - all within a year - tell us that we are mired in the hypocrisy business
ourselves, never mind Mr. Gorbachev.

Maybe we can find the reason in the level of Western leadership these days;
hypocrisy and mediocrity often are born twins. Maybe the answer is in the
uncaring faces in our individual mirrors.

Either way, Mr. Dumas and his noble, humanitarian friend make it important to
look at what is happening in the capitals of the Western world, and pay
attention.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Op-Ed

                   Copyright 1990 The New York Times Company


                              43 of 288 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 April 12, 1990, Thursday, Late Edition - Final

Books of The Times;
The Everlasting Grip of Bonds Forged by War

BYLINE: By LARRY HEINEMANN; Larry Heinemann is the author of ''Paco's Story,'' a
novel about Vietnam that won the National Book Award in 1987.

SECTION: Section C; Page 17, Column 1; Cultural Desk

LENGTH: 994 words



These Good Men
By Michael Norman
Illustrated. 310 pages. Crown Publishers. $19.95.

In the 15 years since the end of the war in Vietnam, the writing inspired by
that war has been extensive. Before 1975, you could count the good books and
plays and volumes of poetry on the fingers of one hand. Since 1975, the number
of novels, plays, volumes of poetry, collections of letters, history and more
reflective journalism, biography and political and personal memoirs makes an
astonishing bibliography.

The writing has come in three distinct waves: the flat-out war stories; the more
reflective kind of writing concerning the aftermath, and now examinations of the
deeper meanings of that event.

The long war in Southeast Asia was a benchmark of American history if there ever
was one. The epic of the war, the combat itself, the political and cultural
assumptions which dragged Americans through that sorry episode and the social
commitment to resist the conduct of the war and finally end it, deserve to be
examined and understood right down to the last splinter of the last stump.
Something very important to Americans as a culture and a people was squandered
in Southeast Asia. Something about Americans' good opinion of themselves as a
helpful, regardful, large-hearted nation. An undeniable sense of betrayal
informs many an ex-G.I.'s attitudes.

Now there is Michael Norman's excellent memoir, ''These Good Men.'' It begins
with a particular date: April 19, 1968, at Bridge 28 on Route 9 over the Quang
Tri River. His Marine company lost half its men, killed and wounded, to recover
the body of a single marine. Mr. Norman lost several friends.

He joined the Marine Corps while in college, his grades shoddy and he freshly
jilted, out of curiosity and an impulse to prove himself in some way - not
unlike tens of thousands of others. In 1969, he got out of the Marines and went
back to school at Rutgers, suddenly an exemplary student. He wholeheartedly
joined the antiwar movement there, but left, saying that it seemed ''a loose
gathering of lone wolves'' with whom he shared very little. Putting the war
behind him, he worked for a time as a reporter for The New York Times.

In the early 1980's, he had a nervous breakdown. In 1984, because of an
''inexplicable choler'' as he calls it, an unsettled and irritable restlessness,
he suddenly had the impulse to look up the men he served with. Some of them not
seen since that day in April at Bridge 28, ''a knacker's yard, a perfect place
for slaughter''; some not seen since he left Vietnam. He discovers the men one
by one.  Belknap, horribly wounded. A recovering alcoholic living in Dallas.
Williamson, blinded in one eye in a later fire fight, and losing the sight of
his good eye, living the nomadic life - alfresco, as Mr. Norman describes him -
among the Federal parks in Oklahoma and Arkansas, and living on his pension and
what he can scrounge. Hefright, the corpsman, wounded helping Belknap. Worked as
a prison infirmary medic in Pennsylvania until he, too, had a nervous breakdown.

DeWeese, the senior corpsman. When he got home and settled in Seattle, he
declared he was gay. DeWeese told the author that the gay men he met in the
Seattle baths ''held me while I sobbed and cried and talked about all those kids
that died. I could remember names; I could name events. . . . And they supported
me, helped me. That may seem like kind of a strange group of people to turn to,
but I wonder how many veterans of our war had anybody like that?'' Now he works
at the inpatient ward for victims of post-traumatic stress disorder at American
Lake Veterans Administration Hospital in Tacoma, Wash.

Gone from Mr. Norman's memoir is the bitterness over the selfish and arrogant
politics that sent Americans to Vietnam, the ''gook'' hatred, the whole
grueling, backbreaking work of the war - and the exasperating logic of the
military mind.

Left is the memory of the company of men, and what James Jones called a
''pointless pride.'' The United States Marines have had another phrase to
describe it: Semper Fidelis, ''Always Faithful.'' But the faith kept is not with
an idea, or an institution, but with the handful of men with whom you shared
something; the men who saved your life and you saved theirs, men whom you owe
and men who owe you.

In seeking out each man's company (and finally a reunion in his backyard in New
Jersey) Mr. Norman discovers again what was the best of the war, the satisfying
discovery of the positive, most human impulses shared among men. And it is by
meeting and talking with the men that he hoped to find reflected something for
his own heart's ease. Mr. Norman is like a good many who served overseas,
seeking (now 20 years and more later) a livable peace; trying to jibe the
considerable mean spiritedness of the war with the love of fellows that in this
culture is extremely difficult to articulate and declare.

What lingers throughout Mr. Norman's memoir is a remembered respect, the savor
of genuine affection that is something more than recall of shared danger and
absolute trust. These men lived in a very tight circle, though the fire fight at
Bridge 28 changed all that. ''Those who survived clung to one another,
wide-eyed, with a darker kind of wonder,'' Mr. Norman says. There are blood kin
brothers who do not regard one another with the love that brother soldiers
display. Mr. Norman and his fellow marines had lived through something that is
harder and tighter and more solid, and they are not ashamed to seek it out,
define it and celebrate it.

In the last scene of the book, his second child is born and he invites one of
the men to be the boy's godfather, and when the man steps forward to take the
child in his arms and proclaim himself the godfather, Mr. Norman writes that
this is what Vietnam means to him, his child in the arms of his good and trusted
friend whom he first met years ago during the war. Advance Publicationsd(Crown)

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo: Michael Norman

TYPE: Review

                   Copyright 1990 The New York Times Company


                              44 of 288 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 April 12, 1990, Thursday, Late Edition - Final

An Old Liberal, a New Sermon

BYLINE: By LOUIS UCHITELLE

SECTION: Section D; Page 1, Column 3; Financial Desk

LENGTH: 1630 words


Robert B. Reich is on the stump again. His audience is a cross section of the
Washington establishment: nearly 80 lobbyists, politicians, businessmen,
economists, union leaders and journalists. They hurried through their luncheon
of salmon and asparagus, leaving ample time to hear Mr. Reich speak and to
cross-examine him.

Mr. Reich, a Harvard professor, is one of the nation's best-known liberals. In
the early 1980's, he popularized the concept of industrial policy, which
proposed Government subsidies and incentives to strengthen American industry and
overcome the Rust Belt blight. Now, he is getting a new public hearing for a
fresh industrial policy, one he contends would make the United States more
competitive in the emerging global economy. And this time the appeal goes beyond
the liberal movement, embracing free-marketeers, although he still has plenty of
critics in that camp.

Simple and Vivid Message

Mr. Reich, who is 4 feet 11 inches tall, arrived for the lunch at the Institute
for International Economics, a Washington research group, carrying a worn wooden
footstool that he placed behind the lectern in the crowded dining room. His
message was simple and vivid, delivered with the certainty of a sermon: Business
competition has changed radically, but neither public policy nor public
perception has made the adjustment.

American-owned corporations are no longer the sole source of the nation's
competitiveness and living standard, he said. A Philips (Dutch) or a Honda
(Japanese) shifts wealth to the United States when they put factories here, just
as General Motors factories in Europe shower wealth on that continent at the
expense of the United States. Therefore, Government policy should concentrate on
getting the world's best companies to put their premier operations here,
ignoring nationality. ''We no longer know what the pronoun 'we' means or who is
'us,' '' Mr. Reich said, repeating a favorite phrase.

Among other measures, he wants laws changed so that foreign corporations are
allowed to participate in government-financed joint research. Rebuild the
transportation system, he says, so any company would want to locate here. And,
above all, Mr. Reich believes the Federal Government should foster education and
on-the-job training to upgrade the skills of millions of American workers.

Actually, the role Mr. Reich assigns to the Government today is not much
different than in 1983, when he emerged as the guru of an earlier industrial
policy that also emphasized job training and subsidies. But two important
changes have widened Mr. Reich's appeal.

In 1983, he wanted the Government to favor sunrise industries - the emerging
makers of specialty steels, electronics, precision-built cars -while allowing
low-tech manufacturing to shrink. That alienated many economists who considered
market forces to be better than the Government at picking winners and losers.

A New Approach

Mr. Reich, a conciliator by nature, no longer disputes this view, arguing
instead that the Government must upgrade the nation as a whole so that market
forces will, in fact, attract the world's best investments. ''His new approach
is a better one,'' said Robert M. Solow, a professor at the Massachusetts
Institute of Technology and a winner of the Nobel Memorial Prize in Economic
Science. ''And he is correct that there are a number of things the free markets
tend to neglect, like research and job training.''

In the early 1980's, Mr. Reich and the new liberal movement that he helped shape
were also more nationalistic, the goal then being to promote only American-owned
companies. Now, nationality is unimportant, and that indifference appeals to
many free-marketeers; they endorse unrestricted corporate investment anywhere in
the world.

In fact, Mr. Reich's luncheon host, the Institute for International Economics,
is an organization of free- marketeers and the institute's director, C. Fred
Bergsten, welcomes Mr. Reich as an unexpected ally. ''I want to make the world
safe for foreign investment and he wants to harness foreign investment to
American interests,'' Mr. Bergsten said.

The speech was Mr. Reich's second appearance of the day. The 45-year-old
professor, who teaches political economy at Harvard's Kennedy School of
Government, had just come from the State Department, where he gave a similar
address to senior staff members, most of them also free marketeers.

Mr. Bergsten had placed a copy of a Reich article entitled ''Who Is Us?'' at
every place setting. The article, which pulls together the professor's evolving
thesis, drew wide public attention when it was published in the Harvard Business
Review in January. It is a prelude to a nearly finished book that Mr. Reich
hopes will be as influential as his 1983 work, ''The Next American Frontier.''
Walter F. Mondale stayed up all one night to read that book and quoted from it
as the Democratic candidate for President in 1984.

Some are Skeptical

But many of the luncheon guests were skeptical. Howard Samuels, an official of
the A.F.L.-C.I.O., disputed Mr. Reich's characterization of the Japanese as good
employers, saying that they resist unionization at their American plants. Assar
Lindbeck, an economist at the University of Stockholm, said the borrowing
required to finance Mr. Reich's Government policies would leave the private
sector short of funds. And Michael Maibach, a lobbyist for the Intel
Corporation, a California semiconductor company that concentrates most of its
operations at home, challenged Mr. Reich's most basic conclusion: that
multinational companies are shedding their national ties and operating globally.

Mr. Maibach and others argue that only a handful of huge corporations are truly
global. The rest, particularly those in Japan, still try to keep most of their
wealth and best technology at home, they contend, shortchanging other countries
where they operate. ''The truly global corporation is not yet here,'' said Paul
Krugman, an M.I.T. economist who is a co-author of a recent book on the subject.

The implication is that Mr. Reich's research might be faulty, a charge that has
emerged in the past, not only for Mr. Reich but also for other economists who
attempt to describe broad new trends, basing their conclusions on a mixture of
statistics, personal experience, anecdotes and interviews.

Even Mr. Reich's fans acknowledge that his declarations are sometimes too black
and white. ''There are times when Bob, in his effort to clarify a point, paints
it in more unequivocal colors than I would,'' said Raymond Vernon, a colleague
at the Kennedy School who reads the first drafts of Mr. Reich's manuscripts.
''But he is a brilliant popularizer, and he is popularizing ideas that are very
important.''

Office in Cambridge

Mr. Reich operates from a narrow, cluttered first-floor office in the Kennedy
School building in Cambridge, Mass. Two colorful paintings on the walls - both
by Mr. Reich - illustrate themes from his 1970's experiences at the Federal
Trade Commission, which he joined after completing Yale Law School and working
for the Solicitor General's office.

The F.T.C. cases that Mr. Reich handled, as head of policy planning, first made
him familiar with the difficulties then dragging down major American industries
like auto making, consumer electronics and steel. His first magazine articles in
the late 1970's were an attempt to describe the downfall. He has written many
books and articles since then.

When President Carter lost to Ronald Reagan in 1980, Mr. Reich went on to the
professorship at Harvard, which he has held for a decade. But the
''eye-opening'' F.T.C. experience and the information collected there led
eventually to the proposals set forth in ''The Next American Frontier.''

Mr. Reich's research today is intertwined with teaching. He carries a full load:
four courses a semester, 120 students, more than 1,000 papers to read. He
devotes afternoons to teaching, mornings to writing and nights to more work,
with dinner and early evening reserved for his two pre-teen-age sons.

Consultant to Corporations

He spends three or four days a month as a corporate consultant; 80 such sessions
with executives in the last three years were a major source of information for
his forthcoming book.

''We discuss how global resources are allocated, corporate strategies, what the
executives expect from government,'' Mr. Reich said. ''I test each of my ideas
on 15 or 20 companies in these sessions, and if they are confirmed, then I'll go
to the statistics, and if there are anomalies, I work these out.''

Other forces have shaped Mr. Reich's thinking. One is his quest for consensus,
in part an outgrowth of his relationship with his father, Edwin. The elder Mr.
Reich, a conservative Republican, owned a women's clothing store in rural South
Salem, N.Y., where Mr. Reich grew up. ''Probably my greatest political success
in terms of persuading anybody of the rightness of my views has been in
convincing my father to move from the extreme right to the center right,'' Mr.
Reich said.

Product of Kennedy Era

Mr. Reich came of age in the Kennedy era and never lost what he described as a
feeling of being a Camelot Democrat. After sputnik, President Kennedy's push to
overtake the Soviet Union in space ''filled me with patriotism,'' Mr. Reich
said.

He was a high school senior when President Kennedy was assassinated. A few
months later he graduated as valedictorian in a class of 80 and went on to
Dartmouth, where he was caught up in various causes, among them the anti-Vietnam
War movement. After Dartmouth came a Rhodes Scholarship, where he first delved
into what would become his lifelong interest: the relationship of law, politics
and economics.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: photo: While his views on industrial policy are attracting a growing
new audience, Robert B. Reich, standing at center, maintains a full teaching
load at Harvard's Kennedy School of Government, where he recently instructed a
class entitled ''Law, Politics and Industrial Structure.'' (The New York
Times/Jim Bourg)

                   Copyright 1990 The New York Times Company


                              45 of 288 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                  April 13, 1990, Friday, Late Edition - Final

Winners of the 1990 Pulitzer Prizes in Journalism and the Arts

SECTION: Section A; Page 17, Column 1; Metropolitan Desk

LENGTH: 3199 words



Public Service
The Philadelphia Inquirer

The Philadelphia Inquirer was cited for distinguished public service for a
series of articles by Gilbert M. Gaul that disclosed major shortcomings in
Federal regulation of the nation's blood banks. The five articles told how,
beginning in the early 1980's, the Food and Drug Administration reduced its
inspections of the country's 2,000 blood banks and commercial plasma centers at
the very time that acquired immune-deficiency syndrome was beginning to threaten
the blood supply. The articles led to the opening of a major Congressional
investigation into the blood industry late last year. Mr. Gaul, 38 years old,
won a Pulitzer Prize in 1979 for local reporting.

The Washington (N.C.)
Daily News

The Washington (N.C.) Daily News, a family-owned newspaper with an editorial
staff of nine people, was cited for ''meritorious public service'' for more than
25 articles revealing the contamination with carcinogens of the municipal water
supply, which local officials had knowingly concealed for eight years. The
disclosures by the 81-year-old paper, which serves a town of 9,000 people in
eastern North Carolina, led state officials to require that all municipalities
test their drinking water and make the results public. Previously, only
communities of 10,000 or more were required to test. The articles, written by
Betty Gray, 35 years old, and Mike Voss, 32, are also believed to have
contributed heavily to the electoral defeats last year of the mayor and three of
the five city councilmen.

General News Reporting
The San Jose (Calif.)
Mercury News

The newspaper's staff won for its detailed coverage of the Oct. 17, 1989,
earthquake in the San Francisco Bay area and its aftermath. Robert Ingle, the
executive editor, said 300 reporters, photographers and editors were involved in
the quake coverage. Within five hours of the quake, the paper published stories,
photographs and graphics that occupied the first 12 pages without any
advertising. The most intense coverage occurred during the five days that
followed the quake, Mr. Ingle said. During that time, he said, the paper
published 70 pages devoted entirely to the quake.

Investigative Reporting
Lou Kilzer
and Chris Ison
The Minneapolis-St. Paul
Star Tribune

Lou Kilzer, 39 years old, and Chris Ison, 32, won for a two-part series that
exposed a network of local citizens who had familial and business links with
members of the St. Paul Fire Department and who profited financially from fires,
some of suspicious origin. Their articles led to the suspension of the Fire
Chief and to Federal investigations into the relationships. Mr. Kilzer is a Yale
graduate who joined The Star Tribune in 1987 after working as a reporter and
editor for The Denver Post. At The Post, he was the lead reporter on a series on
missing children that won the 1986 Pulitzer Public Service award for the paper.
Mr. Ison, a graduate of the University of Minnesota, worked for The Duluth
(Mich.) News-Tribune before joining The Star Tribune in 1986 as a St. Paul
city-government reporter.

Explanatory Journalism
Steve Coll
and David A. Vise
The Washington Post

Steve Coll, 31 years old, and David A. Vise, 29, were honored for their
four-part series that scrutinized the Securities and Exchange Commission and the
way it has been affected by the policies of John S. R. Shad, chairman of the
commission from 1981 to 1987. The purpose of the series was to throw light on
the workings of an important and complex agency that is little understood by the
public. Mr. Coll, a Phi Beta Kappa graduate of Occidental College in Los
Angeles, joined The Post as a reporter in 1985 and served as New York financial
correspondent from 1987 to 1989. Last summer, he joined the paper's foreign
staff and is now the correspondent in New Delhi. Mr. Vise, a magna cum laude
graduate of the Wharton School of the University of Pennsylvania, joined The
Post in 1984. A national business reporter, on Monday Mr. Vise will become the
newspaper's local business editor.

Specialized Reporting
Tamar Stieber
The Albuquerque Journal

Tamar Stieber's articles noted the connections between a rare blood disorder and
a nonprescription drug, L-tryptophan, a dietary supplement used by some to treat
insomnia, premenstrual syndrome and depression. The drug has since been recalled
by the Federal Government, and physicians have credited the articles for helping
identify many cases of the illness that would have gone undetected and for
saving time, money and suffering. Her first article was based on a tip from a
Journal news stringer about four friends who were suffering unusual cases of the
flu, two of whom were taking L-tryptophan. Ms. Stieber, 34 years old, did not
take her first full-time reporting job until 1987, when she joined the
twice-weekly Sonoma, Calif., Index-Tribune. She has been at The Journal since
May 1989.

National Reporting
Ross Anderson
Bill Dietrich
Mary Ann Gwinn
and Eric Nalder
The Seattle Times

The four reporters were part of a team of nearly 35 Times reporters, artists and
photographers covering the Exxon Valdez oil spill and its aftermath - a story
that the newspaper regarded as especially important because of Seattle's ties to
Alaska, said David Boardman, an assistant city editor. The Times avoided
''clinical'' reporting and ''very much told it as a human story,'' he said. Mr.
Anderson, 42 years old, is The Times's chief political reporter, but is on leave
writing a book about Alaska fishermen and the oil spill. Mr. Dietrich, 38, has
has covered the environment since returning from a Nieman Fellowship at Harvard
University in 1988. Ms. Gwinn, 38, a feature writer for the newspaper's Sunday
magazine, has worked at The Times for seven years. Mr. Nalder, 43, has been the
newspaper's chief investigative reporter since 1983.

International Reporting
Nicholas D. Kristof
and Sheryl WuDunn
The New York Times

Nicholas D. Kristof and Sheryl WuDunn of The New York Times won the
international reporting award for their ''knowledgable'' coverage of the
democracy movement in China and its subsequent suppression last spring. Mr.
Kristof, the Beijing bureau chief since October 1988, and Miss WuDunn, a bureau
reporter since March 1989, were cited for a series of articles chronicling the
tragedy, many written under perilous circumstances after Chinese troops attacked
young demonstrators near Tiananmen Square. On May 20, for example, while Mr.
Kristof was describing how a throng of a million Chinese had taken to the
streets to defy martial law, Miss WuDunn told of how Government troops, awed by
the spectacle, were refusing to put down the protests. Mr. Kristof and Miss
WuDunn, both 30 years old, are the first husband and wife team to win
simultaneous Pulitzer Prizes in journalism. In 1968, Will and Ariel Durant won
the Pulitzer Prize for general nonfiction.

Feature Writing
Dave Curtin
Colorado Springs (Colo.)
Gazette Telegraph

Mr. Curtin, a police and general assignment reporter, won for his feature story
about the rehabilitation of a family after a propane gas explosion severely
disfigured three members. ''I'm in a state of shock and disbelief,'' said Mr.
Curtin, who is 34 years old. ''I guess that's what everybody always says, but
it's the truth.'' In writing the story, Mr. Curtin followed the father and two
of his children, 4 and 6 years old, through their hospitalization. He watched as
the children struggled to cope with the reaction of their schoolmates when they
returned to school. He ate with the family and slept one night in their home in
an effort to understand their pain. ''The fact is, disfiguring burns scare
people,'' Mr. Curtin said.

Commentary
Jim Murray
The Los Angeles Times

Jim Murray, who won a Pulitzer for his sports columns, has been documenting the
egos and emotions of the athletes and characters who people the sports world for
more than three decades. He was covering Hollywood for Time magazine, lunching
with the likes of Marilyn Monroe and Jack Benny, when Henry Luce decided to
launch the sports magazine that eventually became Sports Illustrated. Mr.
Murray, now 70 years old, was on the staff at the beginning. ''There weren't
very many people at Time who knew anything about sports,'' he recalled. ''I was
one of maybe six or eight.'' Mr. Murray has received 14 National Sportswriter of
the Year awards, 12 of them consecutively, for the sports columns that have run
in The Los Angeles Times since 1961.

Criticism
Allan Temko
The San Francisco Chronicle

Allan Temko won for architecture criticism that blends social commentary with
analysis of buildings and the environment. Among Mr. Temko's pieces were an
argument for preserving a historic rail station threatened by demolition and a
set of proposals for the Presidio, a large plot of land abutting the San
Francisco Bay where the Army is closing a post. Mr. Temko, 66 years old, was
born in New York City and attended Columbia University and the Sorbonne; he has
worked for The Chronicle since 1961. He advised President John F. Kennedy and
Gov. Edmund G. (Pat) Brown of California on environmental politics.

Editorial Writing
Thomas J. Hylton
The Pottstown (Pa.) Mercury

The editorials that won the Pulitzer Prize for distinguished editorial writing
for Mr. Hylton represent a longstanding interest in land preservation. The
series of seven editorials advocating a $50 million bond issue to preserve farm
land and open space in Chester County led to approval by 81 percent of the
voters for the measure in a referendum last year. ''It is great to win the
award, but it is more important to save the rich farm land around here from
mindless development,'' Mr. Hylton said yesterday. Mr. Hylton, 41 years old,
graduated from Kutztown (Pa.) State College in 1970 and joined The Mercury the
following year.

Editorial Cartooning
Tom Toles
The Buffalo News

Tom Toles, 38 years old, who won the Pulitzer Prize for editorial cartooning,
prefers to focus his artistic vision on environmental issues and on matters of
economic justice, and the topics that won him the award included the savings and
loan bailout, the rebellion in Tiananmen Square and the potential reunification
of Germany. The particular sketch cited in the award, ''First Amendment,'' dealt
with what Mr. Toles considered hypothetical restrictions that would be imposed
on the exercise of free speech by a Constitutional amendment prohibiting flag
burning. Since 1982, when he joined The News, his work has been syndicated by
the Universal Press Syndicate.

Spot News Photography
The Oakland Tribune

A team of seven photographers won for their coverage of the devastation of the
Bay Area earthquake of Oct. 17, 1989, particularly the collapse of the Cypress
Freeway, in which 44 people died. Although The Tribune's building is just 10
blocks from the freeway, the staff got the paper out on time, said Leroy Aarons,
senior vice president for news. One of the prize-winning pictures was a shot of
medics lowering a victim over the railing of the freeway. That photograph was
the work of Michael Macor, 33 years old, a native of Chester, Pa., who moved to
the Bay Area when he was 2. Other pictures showed a victim with the rubble of
the freeway in the background and a woman holding her arms aloft in a ''V''
during a memorial service. Ron Riesterer, 50, who was born in Sublimity, Ore.,
and joined The Tribune in 1958, directed the photo operations.

Feature Photography
David C. Turnley
The Detroit Free Press

David Turnley won for his portfolio documenting the year of revolutions from the
massacre in the area around Tiananmen Square in China to the downfall of the
Romanian leader Nicolae Ceaucescu and the demise of the Berlin Wall. Currently
based in Paris, Mr. Turnley, 34, has been with The Free Press since 1980. He is
a graduate of the University of Michigan and has studied at the Sorbonne.
Yesterday, Mr. Turnley dedicated his prize ''to all the people I've witnessed
who've put their lives on the line so their brothers and sisters can have a
better life.''

Fiction
Oscar Hijuelos
''The Mambo Kings
Play Songs of Love''

''The Mambo Kings Play Songs of Love,'' published by Farrar, Straus & Giroux, is
Mr. Hijuelos's second novel, the story of two young Cuban musicians who make
their way up from Havana to the grand stage of New York during the era of the
mambo in 1949. The high point in the career of the fictional Castillo brothers
comes when they meet Desi Arnaz and appear on the ''I Love Lucy'' show. The
novel paints a portrait of the brothers, their families, their fellow musicians
and lovers, and it also brings to life the sights and sounds of an era in music
and unsung moment in American life. The 38-year-old novelist is a New Yorker of
Cuban parentage who received his B.A. and M.A. degrees from City College of New
York.

Drama
August Wilson
''The Piano Lesson''

Mr. Wilson's award for ''The Piano Lesson'' is his second Pulitzer Prize for
drama; he won his first in 1987 for ''Fences.'' ''It adds fuel to the fire,''
Mr. Wilson said yesterday. ''It makes me want to do more work.'' Until less than
a decade ago, he was a little-known poet; then the manuscript of a play he had
written was discovered by the director Lloyd Richards at the Eugene O'Neill
Theater Center in Connecticut. That play was ''Ma Rainey's Black Bottom,'' which
opened on Broadway in the 1984-85 season and won much critical praise. ''Ma
Rainey'' was followed on Broadway by ''Fences'' - which won the Tony Award for
best play as well as the Pulitzer - and ''Joe Turner's Come and Gone.'' They and
''The Piano Lesson'' - the story of a dispute between a brother and sister over
a piano that has involved their family since the days of slavery - are part of a
series of plays that Mr. Wilson is writing, one for each decade, on the life of
black Americans in the 20th century. The newest, ''Two Trains Running,'' is now
at the Yale Repertory Theater. Mr. Wilson, who will be 45 years old on April 27,
lives in St. Paul, Minn.

History
Stanley Karnow
''In Our Image:
America's Empire in the Philippines''

Mr. Karnow won for his study of the relations over more than three centuries
between the Filipinos and, first, the Spaniards, then the Americans, and
finally, among themselves in governing the islands. ''In Our Image: America's
Empire in the Philippines'' published by Random House, includes portraits of
colonial grandees, American Civil War soldiers and corrupt politicians. In a
long career as a foreign correspondent, Mr. Karnow, 65 years old, has reported
from Europe, Africa, the Middle East and Asia. Mr. Karnow's books include
''Southeast Asia,'' ''Mao and China: From Revolution to Revolution'' and ''
Vietnam: A History.'' Mr. Karnow was born in New York City and lives in Potomac,
Md.

Biography
Sebastian de Grazia
''Machiavelli in Hell''

''I like the man,'' said Sebastian de Grazia yesterday, speaking of Machiavelli.
''I like the texts he's written. And I like the way he comported himself.'' Mr.
de Grazia's biography seeks to portray a more complex man than is commonly
imagined and draws extensively on Machiavelli's own words. Not just his
political works are quoted, but also letters, plays, and sonnets. ''No one
thought of Machiavelli as being the life of the party; yet he was,'' Mr. de
Grazia said. ''He could be very funny.'' In the book published by the Princeton
University Press. The author helps set the personal tone of the book with his
decision to address his subject by his first name: Niccolo. Mr. de Grazia, 72,
received his Ph.D from the University of Chicago, served with the O.S.S. during
World War II and has taught political philosophy at Rutgers since 1962. Given
his admiration for his subject, why then the title of ''Machiavelli in Hell''?
It is a question that Mr. de Grazia has been asked before. ''I did not consign
him to hell,'' he says, laughing. ''If anything, I helped let him out of it.''

Poetry
Charles Simic
''The World Doesn't End''

When Charles Simic's high school friends in Oak Park, Ill., began writing
poetry, he thought they were sissies. ''I wanted to show them I could do it
better in five minutes,'' he said yesterday. ''But I couldn't. And I got
hooked.'' Mr. Simic, 52 years old, has been writing poetry ever since, including
the eight years he spent working his way through night school at New York
University. ''The World Doesn't End,'' published by Harcourt Brace Jovanovich,
is a collection of prose poems, which Mr. Simic described as an underappreciated
form. The images in his work are both accessible and fantastic. A dead man
climbs from a scaffold and orders two beers - one for him and one for his head.
A woman uses a severed thumb as a red stub of lipstick. ''We were so poor I had
to take the place of the bait in the mouse trap,'' one of his poems begins. Mr.
Simic, who calls himself a fan of garlic and pigs' feet, was born in Yugoslavia
and moved to the United States when he was 15.

General Nonfiction
Dale Maharidge
and Michael Williamson
''And Their Children
After Them''

''People on welfare and homeless people weren't anything shocking or new, since
I grew up in a lot of foster homes,'' Michael Williamson, a 33-year-old
photographer with The Sacramento Bee, said yesterday. He and Dale Maharidge, a
32-year-old Bee reporter, ''wanted to go to the roots of poverty and we'd both
read 'Let us Now Praise Famous Men''' - James Agee and Walker Evans' influential
1941 book about Alabama sharecroppers. To produce their book, ''And Their
Children After Them'' (Pantheon), ''we decided to go back and find the
descendants of the people in Agee and Evans's book, and we found 128, nearly all
of them,'' he said. ''Most were still poor, and 95 percent were still in
Alabama.'' Since joining the Bee in 1980, Mr. Maharidge has reported on social
issues in the United States, Latin America and the Philippines. Mr. Williamson's
photographic assignments have ranged from Super Bowl games to the wars of
Central America.

Music
Mel Powell
'Duplicates'

''There might be some difficulty thinking of this work as a toe-tapper,'' the
composer Mel Powell said in a lecture before the premiere of his '' a Concerto
for Two Pianos and Orchestra. Mr. Powell, a 67-year-old composer and pianist,
has been head of the composition department at the California Institute of the
Arts, in Valencia, since 1969. Born in New York, he began his career as a jazz
pianist and arranger for Benny Goodman and Glenn Miller. But after studying
composition with Paul Hindemith at Yale University, he turned toward a more
abstruse compositional style, which - depending on the work - takes in 12-tone
writing, semi-improvisatory forms and electronic music. ''Duplicates'' is a
labyrinthine, pointillistic three-movement score in which the solo pianists and
the orchestra expand upon each other's thematic material. It was given its
premiere by the Los Angeles Philharmonic on Jan. 26, 1990.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: photos: A portrait of a Romanian man venting years of grief at the
hands of the Ceausescu regime was among the photographs that earned David C.
Turnley of The Detroit Free Press the 1990 Pulitzer Prize for feature
photography. (David C. Turnley); Roy H. Williams's picture of a woman being
rescued from the lower deck of the Cyprus Street viaduct after the San Francisco
earthquake helped the photography staff at The Oakland Tribune win the 1990
Pulitzer Prize for spot news photography. (Roy H. Williams)

                   Copyright 1990 The New York Times Company


                              46 of 288 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                  April 15, 1990, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

ECONOMY EXPECTED TO ABSORB EFFECTS OF MILITARY CUTS

BYLINE: By LOUIS UCHITELLE

SECTION: Section 1; Part 1, Page 20, Column 1; National Desk

LENGTH: 1836 words


The United States economy can absorb large cuts in military spending without
serious damage, economists say, although for a while, at least, tens of
thousands of Americans will lose their jobs.

That will happen mostly because military spending will shrink faster than the
civilian sector can expand to take up the slack. By most estimates, the process
could temporarily idle up to 100,000 people a year in the 1990's, most of them
discharged from the military service against their wishes or laid off at weapons
plants, which would then go unused.

The proposed military cuts, some calling for reductions that would reach more
than $100 billion a year by the late 1990's, would mark the fourth big cutback
in military spending since World War II. But it would differ from the others in
two significant ways. Never before on the eve of a major reduction has the
military represented so small a portion of the national economy: less than 6
percent of the total wealth created in the nation last year. As a result, the
cutback will scarcely show up in the statistics that measure economic strength.


Cutbacks Could Spur Recession

Nevertheless, this is the nation's first attempt to shrink military spending at
a time of sluggish economic growth -when idle weapons factories and their
workers are not really needed for civilian production. The cutbacks might be
hard to spot in the national statistics, but in a weak economy they could
contribute to a recession in the early 1990's.

''Probably, the weakness in the economy today has something to do with the
shrinkage in defense spending that has already taken place,'' said Robert
Giordano, chief economist at Goldman, Sachs & Company, the investment bankers.
''But to really take a sledgehammer to the economy, you would need cutbacks far
bigger than anyone has yet proposed.''

Even if the cutbacks turn out to be footnotes in the record books, they still
inflict damage in places like Lima, Ohio, and Warren, Mich., where the General
Dynamics Corporation operates the only two factories still producing tanks in
the United States.

Tank Production to End in 1993

The Army intends to end tank production in 1993, for the first time since World
War II. If such plans go through, then General Dynamics insists that it will
have to close its tank division, which employs 7,300 people and draws on a
network of private suppliers that employ thousands more.

''What can you do with a tank factory?'' Michael W. Wynne, a vice president of
General Dynamics, asked rhetorically. ''You can make tractors and heavy
earth-moving equipment, but Caterpillar already has that market sewed up. If
there is no defense work to support these factories, then we'll have no
alternative but to give them up.''

Similar problems are hurting cities and towns in the Northeast, the mid-Atlantic
and West Coast, the three regions where military spending is concentrated. And a
cutback in military spending brings subtle changes that affect millions of
lives.

Minority Workers Could Suffer

Among these changes, perhaps the most important is the impact on minority
workers. The armed forces and the Defense Department's civilian payroll have
been a source of jobs and training for blacks and others who have been
underrepresented in the civilian sector. In addition, weapons makers and
military research laboratories often pay more than civilian employers, so the
military cutback might lower the national wage level. In Massachusetts, a center
of arms research and production, military-sector wages averaged $33,000 a year
in 1987, or 23 percent more than the average income in the private sector,
according to a state government study.

More positively, a cutback in military spending would bring highly skilled
people to the civilian sector. Thirty percent of the nation's engineers and
scientists work on military projects, and some would be freed to develop
civilian products, said Lloyd Dumas, an economist at the University of Texas.

''Take videocassette recorders,'' he said. ''We invented the basic technology,
and with that head start, if we had applied enough engineering and technology
talent to developing the recorders themselves, we would be ahead in the field.''
No American company makes them today.

Whatever the benefits or drawbacks, the biggest immediate issues, in the view of
many economists and politicians, are retooling and retraining. Factories that
make tanks or fighter planes or missiles will need to be overhauled to make
civilian products. Workers at every level will need to function in a civilian
business sector that marches to different values, among them working under
pressure and cutting costs.

''The military environment is far more relaxed,'' said Leonard Siegel, director
of the Pacific Study Center, a California research group.

To deal with the conversion problem, Congress is considering a bill that would
force military contractors to draw up retooling plans and to retrain workers.
Among the states, Washington recently became the first to pass a bill that
appropriates money to help communities shift to civilian production.

Effect of the 'Peace Dividend'

Above all, the American economy in the 1990's will be shaped by the Federal
Government's strategy for spending the ''peace dividend.'' The huge debate
building over this issue offers two options.

One would use the savings from the military sector to reduce the budget deficit,
in the belief that a lower deficit means less Government borrowing and thus
lower interest rates on loans for everyone. Given these lower rates, the
civilian sector would presumably borrow more to invest in new factories, stores
and research operations that would replace the shrinking military sector.

An alternative is to spend much more on public works. Even strong proponents of
budget cutting acknowledge that the nation's deteriorating highways and bridges,
water and sewer systems, airports and mass transit make companies reluctant to
build new factories, no matter how low interest rates might be. Without a good
highway or railroad, for example, a new shoe factory in Wisconsin might not be a
good investment because of difficulties in getting the shoes to market.

'Once-in-a-Lifetime Opportunity'

''The peace dividend is a once-in-a-lifetime opportunity to restore the nation's
infrastructure to its level in the 1960's, without new taxes or new borrowing,''
said Robert Heilbroner, the economic historian.

The peace dividend, in fact, is already starting to appear. Despite all the
attention on high-tech weaponry in the 1980's, the military budget has been
quietly shrinking since 1985.

That development is evident when annual military appropriations are restated in
1990 dollars to discount the effects of inflation. Appropriations peaked at more
than $330 billion in 1985 and then shrank by roughly 2 percent a year, reaching
$300 billion in the fiscal year 1989, the Commerce Department reports. #2%
Annual Shrinkage to Continue The Bush Administration would continue this 2
percent shrinkage through 1995, an annual cutback that amounts to an
almost-invisible one-tenth of 1 percent of the gross national product, a
measurement of the value of goods and services produced in the nation. Others
would like to double or triple this cutback, to as much as $15 billion a year
for 10 years.

Such sums are lost in an economy that generates $4.1 trillion in goods and
services each year. The $15 billion becomes significant only if the economy
remains sluggish and the G.N.P. grows at an annual rate of less than $100
billion - the situation since last fall. In so weak an economy, $15 billion
could make the difference between a recession and continued expansion.

The huge cutback in military spending after World War II produced a recession,
but the pent-up demand for goods and then the Korean War quickly made the
economy boom. Brief recessions also developed as military spending contracted
after the Korean War and as the Vietnam War came to an end.

Scenario for Layoffs

But quite apart from the recession issue, the proposed cutbacks do not seem
likely to result in millions of layoffs. Some 3.2 million Americans work at
private-sector jobs financed by military spending, said Robert Kutscher, an
associate commissioner of the Labor Department. But fewer than 500,000 of these
workers are making ammunition, missiles, warships and other weaponry in
factories that cannot be easily converted to civilian use.

In the very unlikely event that the Defense Department halted almost all weapons
programs, fewer than 50,000 of these weapons workers would be laid off each
year, Mr. Kutscher said. Of the remaining private-sector workers, about 2.2
million are employed by subcontractors who also sell to the civilian sector.
Most of these people are likely to keep their jobs, Mr. Kutscher added.

''A truck driver doesn't know whether his cargo is military or civilian,'' he
said. ''And the same holds for machine shops that make parts, and hotels whose
guests are connected with the military.''

Joblessness would also strike among the 2.1 million people in the armed services
and the million civilian employees of the Defense Department. This year, 40,000
in both groups are to be mustered out or laid off, said Robert Rauner, director
of the Defense Department's Office of Economic Adjustment. A stepped-up cutback
over the next five years might shrink the armed forces by an additional 200,000
and the department's civilian workers by 100,000, he added.

The layoffs would come at a time when the demand for workers is likely to
outstrip the number of people entering the work force. Whereas more than two
million Americans came of job age annually in the 1980's, a slower-growing
population will add only 1.5 million young people a year in the 1990's, the
Labor Department projects.

Still, cuts in military spending work on the economy in strange ways. During
earlier postwar cutbacks, for example, weapons exports rose as manufacturers
scrambled for customers. They are scrambling again - one company, General
Dynamics, is trying to sell tanks to Egypt - but with the easing of East-West
tensions the overseas market is shrinking.

Mixed Outlook for Redevelopment

Back home, the Defense Department proposed in January to close 10 large military
bases and numerous smaller ones around the country. Some would be sold for
industrial parks, shopping centers and prime real estate, and the network of
businesses serving the military would most likely end up serving new civilian
customers.

But the transition might not work for other installations, among them the
three-base cluster in the Oakland-Alameda area near San Francisco. Mr. Siegel of
the Pacific Study Center noted that although the bases are on valuable
waterfront property, suitable for hotels, conference centers and shopping malls,
hazardous waste was stored at the bases, polluting the underground water.
''Cleaning this up might delay redevelopment for years,'' he said.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Graph: U.S. military spending as a percentage of the gross natinal
product, 1940-1990 (Sources: Commerce Department, Federal Reserve Bank of
Boston); chart: states where the most Pentagon money is spent and those states
where it has the most impact, for 1989 (Source: Washington Analysis Corporation,
based on Defense Department data.)

                   Copyright 1990 The New York Times Company


                              47 of 288 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                  April 15, 1990, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

Europeans Warn Sihanouk on U.N. Seat

BYLINE: By PAUL LEWIS, Special to The New York Times

SECTION: Section 1; Part 1, Page 3, Column 4; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 674 words

DATELINE: UNITED NATIONS, April 14


The 12 European Community countries have warned Prince Norodom Sihanouk that
they will oppose the usual practice of giving Cambodia's United Nations seat to
his coalition government-in-exile, because it includes the Khmer Rouge, which
brutally ruled Cambodia from 1975 to 1978, European and Asian diplomats say.

The question of who represents Cambodia at the United Nations has long been a
diplomatic complication in efforts to work out a power-sharing arrangement to
bring peace.

The present Government in Phnom Penh is supported by Vietnam, which put it in
place after it invaded and occupied the country 11 years ago, ousting the Khmer
Rouge. The Vietnamese withdrew the bulk of their forces last September. Because
the United Nations opposed the invasion and occupation, it continued to
recognize a delegation that includes Khmer Rouge representatives. The European
Community, like the United States, has been in the uncomfortable position of
opposing the Khmer Rouge as a killer of its own people but not opposing its
presence at the United Nations.

Warning to Asian Nations

The European warning that the seating of the Sihanouk coalition would be opposed
at the General Assembly session in September was given by the community's
foreign ministers to their counterparts in the six Asian countries that make up
the Association of South East Asian Nations at a meeting in February, diplomats
said.

The Asian countries - Indonesia, Malaysia, the Philippines, Thailand, Brunei and
Singapore - have historically played a leading role in discussion of the
Cambodian issue at the United Nations. Some of them are also helping the armed
forces of Prince Sihanouk's coalition in their fight against the Government of
Prime Minister Hun Sen.

Apparently trying to prevent a European challenge to the coalition's United
Nations seat, the non-Communist supporters of Prince Sihanouk and his Prime
Minister, Son Sann, have suggested that the Chinese-backed Khmer Rouge withdraw
all its diplomats from the exile government's overseas missions, including the
one at the United Nations, a Cambodian official said.

The Khmer Rouge has not yet responded to the suggestion.

Powers Behind Khmer Rouge

Officially, the Khmer Rouge is led by Khieu Samphan, who holds the title of Vice
President for Foreign Affairs in Prince Sihanouk's exile government.

In practice, Cambodian officials say, the Khmer Rouge is still being run by Pol
Pot and other discredited leaders who presided over a radical remaking of
Cambodian society in which more than a million people died.

Like the United States, the European Community countries do not formally
recognize Prince Sihanouk's coalition as the legal Cambodian government. But
they have not challenged its claim to the country's United Nations seat since
its formation in 1982. However, they argue that while it was reasonable to let
the coalition occupy the seat while it was fighting a Vietnamese army, the
Cambodian conflict has now become a civil war in which the United Nations should
not take sides.

European diplomats say the community's stand was influenced by rising public
resistance to extending more legitimacy to the movement after the failure of a
peace conference on Cambodia in Paris last year.

Latest Attempt at Peace Plan

The Europeans recognize that challenging the present three-party coalition's
claim to Cambodia's seat will be difficult in both political and procedural
terms because the coalition enjoys widespread third world backing, led by the
six ASEAN countries.

A fight over Cambodia's seat at the United Nations could still be avoided in
September, diplomats say, if the country's four factions can accept a peace plan
being worked out by the Security Council's five Permanent Members, the United
States, Britain, France, the Soviet Union and China.

This plan, still incomplete, calls for vacating Cambodia's United Nations seat
while the United Nations takes over the administration of Cambodia and organizes
free elections for a legitimate government.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1990 The New York Times Company


                              48 of 288 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                  April 15, 1990, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

Undefeated by Storm, Spoleto Open to in May

BYLINE: By ALLAN KOZINN

SECTION: Section 1; Part 2, Page 42, Column 1; Cultural Desk

LENGTH: 668 words


Leonard Bernstein is to open the 14th Spoleto Festival U.S.A. in Charleston,
S.C., with a performance of the Beethoven Seventh Symphony offered in
celebration of Charleston's rebuilding after Hurricane Hugo, which devastated
parts of the city last September. The opening concert, on May 25, also includes
a performance of Mr. Bernstein's ''Arias and Barcarolles'' and Samuel Barber's
First Symphony, to be conducted by Mark Stringer.

Also among the principal attractions of the festival, which runs until June 10,
is a production of Wagner's ''Parsifal'' and the world premiere of ''The
Hydrogen Jukebox,'' a collaboration by Philip Glass, Allen Ginsberg and Jerome
Sirlin.

Several of the concert halls used by the festival were damaged by Hurricane
Hugo, but the festival's administration has said the damage will be repaired in
time to present a full program of 114 events this spring. The composer Gian
Carlo Menotti, the festival's founder and artistic director, said that despite
the hurricane he wanted the festival to be ''as challenging to the heart and
mind as in the past.''

The ''Parsifal'' production, which is to be directed by Mr. Menotti, was first
staged at the Festival of Two Worlds in Spoleto, Italy, in 1987. The cast
includes William Pell in the title role, Ruthild Engert-Ely as Kundry and Victor
von Halen as Gurnemanz. Pierluigi Samaritani designed the production, which is
to be conducted by Spiros Argiris, Spoleto's music director. The two
performances are June 2 and June 4 at the Gaillard Municipal Auditorium.

A Mozart Re-revival

The other operatic offering, Mr. Menotti's production of Mozart's ''Nozze di
Figaro,'' is a revival from last year's festival program. It opens at the Dock
Street Theater on May 26. The cast includes Young Ok Shin as Susanna, Erich
Parce as Figaro and Renee Fleming as the countess.

''The Hydrogen Jukebox,'' which has music by Mr. Glass, a text by Mr. Ginsberg
and visual design by Mr. Sirlin (who collaborated with Mr. Glass on ''1000
Airplanes on the Roof'' in 1988) is a multi-media work about America in the late
20th century, with Vietnam, the sexual revolution and ecology among its themes.
It was commissioned jointly by Spoleto and the American Music Theater Festival
in Philadelphia, which is presenting the work in a concert version this month.

Spoleto's fully staged version is to be directed by Ann Carlson and will be the
festival's first offering at the Sottile Theater, a renovated movie house. It
runs from May 26 to June 2.

Also among the festival's music-theater offerings are ''Pioneer,'' a work by the
Paul Dresher Ensemble, which opens on May 26, and the Boston Camerata's staging
of ''Tristan and Iseult,'' which uses music and texts from 12th- and
13th-century sources.

Beethoven to Berio

The Spoleto program also includes a performance of the Beethoven Ninth Symphony,
conducted by Mr. Argiris; choral concerts conducted by Joseph Flummerfelt; daily
chamber-music concerts, and a ''20th Century Perspectives'' series, which is to
include works by Luciano Berio, Toru Takemitsu and John Cage.

The Chick Corea Akustic Band, Chet Atkins and Stanley Jordan, Mose Allison and
the Gary Burton Quintet are scheduled to give concerts at the festival, and
among the dance attractions are performances by the Martha Graham Dance Company,
the Joffrey Ballet, Urban Bush Women and Jonathan Stone.

The Gate Theater from Dublin will perform Oscar Wilde's ''Salome'' at the
festival from May 27 to June 10; and the director John Jesurun is presenting a
multi-media mystery, ''Everything That Rises Must Converge,'' on June 1 and 2.

''Against the Odds,'' an exhibition of work by black artists, will be presented
at the Gibbes Museum of Art as part of the festival, as will an exhibition of
contemporary American landscape paintings influenced by the Italian tradition.

For schedules and information: Spoleto Festival U.S.A., Box 157, Charleston,
S.C. 29402, or call (803) 722-2764. For tickets, (800) 868-7228.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo: Gian Carlo Menotti, who is staging Wagner's ''Parsifal'' for the
Spoleto Festival U.S.A. (NYT)

                   Copyright 1990 The New York Times Company


                              49 of 288 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                  April 15, 1990, Sunday, Late Edition - Final
                              Correction Appended

HEADLINERS;
Make That 50,000,001

SECTION: Section 4; Page 7, Column 1; Week in Review Desk

LENGTH: 173 words


A report on the Headliners page last Sunday about historians' views of Charles
de Gaulle misstated the year of de Gaulle's resignation as President of France.
It was 1969, not 1968.

For several American Presidents, Charles de Gaulle was one Frenchman who was
definitely wrong. After all, Le Grand Charles pulled French forces out of NATO,
criticized American involvement in Vietnam and once had the nerve to propose
that France and Britain have veto power over America's use of nuclear weapons.
But now some historians are saying the French President was more a visionary
than an ungrateful prima donna.

At a conference in New

York City last week in preparation for the November centenary of de Gaulle's
birth, historians and other academicians from Harvard, Columbia and New York
Universities praised de Gaulle for having foreseen world changes that would
substantiate his views. De Gaulle, who died two years after he was forced from
power in 1968, recognized the need for ''a more egalitarian international order,
which is the challenge of the 1990's,'' said Prof. Frank C. Costigliola of the
University of Rhode Island. And former Secretary of State Henry A. Kissinger
called him ''a truly great man.''

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

CORRECTION:
LEAD: A report on the Headliners page last Sunday about historians' views of
Charles de Gaulle misstated the year of de Gaulle's resignation as President of
France. It was 1969, not 1968.

GRAPHIC: Photo: Charles de Gaulle (Associated Press)

                   Copyright 1990 The New York Times Company


                              50 of 288 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                  April 15, 1990, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

WHEN WILL THE BOOK BE DONE?

BYLINE: BY SUSAN SHEEHAN: Susan Sheehan is the author of ''Is There No Place on
Earth For Me?'' which won the Pulitzer Prize for nonfiction in 1983.

SECTION: Section 6; Page 38, Column 1; Magazine Desk

LENGTH: 3802 words


I'M ALWAYS MAKING SUGGESTIONS to my husband that I later regret. On Friday
afternoon, June 16, 1972, I telephoned Neil at the Washington bureau of The New
York Times to ask him about the funeral he had attended at Arlington National
Cemetery that morning. A week earlier, a good friend and influential source from
his years as a correspondent in Vietnam, John Paul Vann, had been killed in a
helicopter crash there. I listened for half an hour while Neil described the
funeral in captivating detail and spoke emotionally about Vann, the
civilian-soldier whose death had caught him by surprise, because Vann had spent
10 years in Vietnam beating the odds that claimed the lives of other, more
cautious men. ''It sounds as if there's a book in Vann,'' I said, before we hung
up.

Vietnam was the story Neil could never quite get away from. United Press
International had sent him there first in 1962 for two years, and then The Times
had sent him back in 1965 for a third year. After being assigned to Washington
in the fall of 1966, he had covered the Defense Department, which meant covering
the Washington end of the war, and in 1971 had obtained the Pentagon Papers, the
secret history of the conflict. In February 1972, Neil had published his first
book, ''The Arnheiter Affair,'' about a bizarre naval drama that had occurred
aboard the U.S.S. Vance, a destroyer escort on coastal patrol off South Vietnam.
He had considered writing a memoir of the war for the past year, and had drafted
a proposal. He had even given it a title, ''An End to Innocence.''

That night over dinner we talked about the funeral. Neil had been thinking about
John Vann all day. Vann was a metaphorical figure through whom he could tell the
story of the war in Vietnam. Within two months Neil had secured a two-year leave
of absence from the paper and a contract from Random House for a 100,000-word
biography of John Vann. He had flown off to Denver on June 29 to interview
Vann's former wife, Mary Jane, and other members of the Vann family. By August,
Neil was in Vietnam for three months to interview Vann's Vietnamese and American
friends and associates who had fought his last battles with him. The manuscript
was to be delivered in the summer of 1974.

I had ample time to regret my suggestion. ''A Bright Shining Lie: John Paul Vann
and America in Vietnam,'' all 360,000 words of it, was published in October
1988. By then, more than 16 years had elapsed since our fateful conversation.

LIFE SEEMED PROMISING IN THE summer of 1972. We were both 35. We lived with our
daughters Maria, 5, and Catherine, 3, and a baby sitter in a house we'd bought
in 1966 with a $35,000, 6 percent mortgage and considered ourselves well off. We
had used Neil's $10,000 advance for ''The Arnheiter Affair'' as a down payment
on a farm in West Virginia, and in 1973 started to build a log cabin in an apple
orchard on our mountainous acres. It had taken Neil only three years to write
''The Arnheiter Affair,'' while holding a job; neither the anticipated time or
word length of the Vann book seemed forbidding.

Nineteen-seventy-four was the worst year of our lives. Marcus Aurelius
Arnheiter, the ex-captain of the U.S.S. Vance, had sued Neil, Random House and
others for libel shortly after the book's publication. A suit had been expected,
because Arnheiter had a record of suing and losing, but Neil, Random House and
the publisher's lawyers could not have imagined the costs in money and misery of
several libel suits that Arnheiter proceeded to file on this occasion. In late
1973, one of the lawyers directed Neil to write a memo cataloguing his entire
research files. Neil spent most of 1974 writing a 343-page memorandum and
organizing a 14-foot-high stack of book-research materials for the lawyers.

We had always been (Continued on Page 68) night owls. Neil's workday at The
Times was from 11 A.M. to 8 P.M.; we usually went to bed at 2 A.M. After the
memo writing began, Neil's bedtime advanced to 3 or 4 A.M. and gradually to 6
A.M. During the summer of 1974, Neil would stop at 6, have a hot bath and do
exercises for a back problem, take 10 milligrams of Valium the doctor who was
treating him for his back had prescribed, and try to go to sleep. The all-night
memo writing would help win the Arnheiter lawsuits, but it was squandering the
time and money that was supposed to be spent on the book. Wild with rage and
frustration, Neil would take another five milligrams of Valium. Usually he fell
asleep but sometimes he was so angry that after tossing and turning for hours he
would get out of bed, mow the lawn or work in the garden to sweat out his rage
in the sun, and go back to writing the memo. By the next morning, he would be
able to sleep.

Neil finished the memo in November 1974. The cabin was virtually completed and
he decided to go to West Virginia for a few days to relax before returning to
the Vann book. He left for the farm in our car on Nov. 24. On the 25th, it
snowed. As he was driving to a friend's office in nearby western Maryland to
borrow a four-wheel-drive vehicle, a young man who liked to drive down the wrong
side of the road drove his unregistered station wagon head-on into the car,
breaking 10 of Neil's bones. In 1975, Neil was too weak to do much work. The
book's original due date passed and he hadn't yet written a line.

Early 1976 would have been a logical point for Neil to abandon the Vann book.
The Times couldn't continue to extend his leave of absence, but would have put
him back on the payroll. Neil resigned from the paper. What kept him working on
the book emotionally was the will to finish what he had begun. By temperament,
he isn't a sprinter; he is (and in boarding school was) a long-distance runner.
There is also a quasi-religious streak in Neil. He wanted to leave something
meaningful behind - more than a reporter's memoir, more than a newspaperman's
clip file. His goal was to write the book on the war in Vietnam.

Several foundation grants and fellowships made it possible for him to continue
through the 1970's; the $45,000 of his $67,500 Random House advance to which he
was entitled before completing the manuscript had been spent by 1975. He
finished his opening section on the funeral in December 1976, got bogged down in
a false start on several hundred pages of manuscript that followed, but caught
himself and started again and had a narrative structure that was working by
1979, the year the Supreme Court brought an end to the tortuous lawsuits: the
court let stand decisions against Arnheiter by the Federal appeals courts of New
York and California. One last fellowship in 1979-1980 enabled Neil to complete
three-fifths of the manuscript in the summer of 1981.

That would have been the end of the road, if William Shawn, then editor of The
New Yorker, and Robert Loomis, Neil's editor at Random House, to whom Neil sent
the manuscript, hadn't believed in what they read. Shawn said that he would
publish 120,000 to 125,000 words of the book when it was done, and would advance
us some money when we needed it. Random House renegotiated Neil's contract,
raising the advance to $200,000, to include the long-gone $45,000.

Neil thought he would be done in a couple of years (the advance's last two
payments were due upon completion of a satisfactory manuscript, in 1983), but he
was wrong again - and again. He didn't type the final line until Aug. 6, 1986.
Those last five years were progressively more exhausting. He hadn't had a real
vacation since 1971. The concluding section of the book proved the longest and
toughest to write. The physical consequences of the car accident exacted a
progressively more painful toll - in addition to a pinched nerve that bothered
his shoulder, Neil developed osteoarthritis in a knee that had been broken. The
tension never let up. Not a week went by without someone asking if it wasn't
much too late to be writing a book about Vietnam.

As it happened, the turning point in my writing life came the year after Neil
started the Vann book. I had graduated from college in 1958, spent two months at
an advertising agency, and then worked as an editorial researcher, or
''checker,'' for Esquire for a year and a half. In September 1960, I left
Esquire to become a freelance writer, sold my first piece to The New Yorker two
months later, became a staff writer for the magazine in 1961, and have been one
ever since.

I met Neil in New York in September 1964, and flew off to Djakarta, where he had
become a correspondent for The Times. We were married in March 1965. In August,
we were apprised that our honeymoon was to be a year in Saigon, where I wrote my
first book. ''Ten Vietnamese'' was published in March 1967, when Maria was 2
months old. I never stopped writing - I have no talent for leisure - and could
always earn two or three times as much as a live-in baby sitter. Before Maria
(and later Catherine) went to school, they commuted to New York with me from
Washington. In the girls' early years I didn't have the concentration for long
New Yorker pieces and instead wrote ''Talk of the Town'' stories and articles
for other magazines.

By 1973, the girls were both in school. I wanted to get back to writing long New
Yorker pieces and to writing another book. I mailed a letter to Alfred Knopf,
the publisher, asking to write his biography. I was sure he would say no. I had
met him once on an Esquire fact-checking mission and found him to be one of the
surliest men I'd ever encountered, but he was a singular publisher.

Knopf said yes, and I signed a contract to write his biography in 1974. That
summer, Catherine went to Spain with our baby sitter; Maria, then 7, and I moved
into Alfred and Helen Knopf's house in Purchase, N.Y. While Maria went to a
nearby day camp, I interviewed Alfred. That fall I spent two weeks in Austin,
Tex. (Alfred had by then given most of his papers to the Humanities Research
Center there), and in California, interviewing Alfred's friends, relatives and
authors.

I stopped work in November 1974, after Neil's accident. In 1975, I resumed
researching the Knopf biography. I spent the summers of 1975 and 1976 in Austin,
reading Knopf's papers while Maria and Catherine went to day camp there, but my
heart was no longer in the Knopf biography. I had been more content in the
barrios of Puerto Rico and the slums of the Lower East Side and Brooklyn writing
an article for The New Yorker about a welfare family than I was in the literary
precincts of New York and New England doing Knopf interviews. I lacked
enthusiasm for the unhappiness that had characterized so much of Alfred's life -
his marriage to his first wife, their relationship with their son, with many of
their employees, and with some of their authors. I was devoted to Helen Knopf,
Alfred's second wife, and didn't want to write a book that would trouble her if
I went to the heart of darkness.

In 1976, as our finances were getting dicey, I began to write a New Yorker
series on a prisoner in a New York State maximum-security prison. In 1977, Neil
earned $1,000; I had spent the Knopf advance. Writing long pieces on subjects
like prison for The New Yorker paid well and I loved researching them.

Even so, there were lean months and years between 1976 and 1986. As one writer
was later to describe our financial circumstances during that decade, ''The
Sheehans were never food-stamp poor. They just never knew where their next
dollar was coming from.'' I recently took out Neil's Day-Timers from 1972 to
1986, and reread a few pages at random, more than enough to bring back the
horrors of the book-writing years.

The Day-Timers reveal that Neil was always tired. ''Today would have been more
productive if I had had more energy,'' he wrote on one page. ''I kept falling
asleep all evening,'' he observed several pages later. He was plagued by
inadequate working quarters. The worst was a basement in the neighborhood,
rented from a woman who sat on the floor above and tossed her yipping toy poodle
a ball for hours on end. The Day-Timers show how discouraging illness was. Neil
brought back a tapeworm from Vietnam, required a sinus operation, developed a
nervous stomach that caused him to lose 15 pounds. I was prone to migraines and
ulcers, and Neil had to take me to hospitals for kidney stones and several
operations, including a parotid tumor that left my face frozen for two months.
''Susan and the girls deserve all my time, and more,'' he wrote, a day after
visiting me in the hospital.

Writing was never easy. ''It is always so damned hard to get one of these
sections moving. One starts and is satisfied with a start and then one sees that
one has to work in more and so one goes back and does it over again.'' He urged
himself to continue: ''Hustle, Sheehan.'' ''Stay with it.'' In 1961, when Neil
was a Specialist 4 in the Army, a sergeant told him he was an alcoholic, and
took him to a meeting of Alcoholics Anonymous. Neil has never taken a drink
since. Before he asked me to marry him he insisted on telling me he was an
alcoholic and that he believed in the A.A. credo of praying each night for
another 24 hours of sobriety. I sensed that the daily exhortations were a
logical addition to the daily prayers for sobriety and helped him get the book
written the only way it could have been done, a day at a time.

I also riffled through my own diaries. So many of the terse entries show how
close to the edge I was. I railed against power failures that kept Neil from
working. A basement flooding problem absorbed more time, and $12,000 we didn't
have. Three teen-agers with an air-gun went on a Saturday night lark and shot
out hundreds of car windows, including the windows of our car and truck: more
time and money futilely lost. I was thankful for leap years - Feb. 29 was an
extra writing day.

I occasionally asked Neil when he thought the book would be done. His answer
(''I'm writing as fast as I can'') angered me, which angered him. ''I've
resolved not to ask about the book's progress for six months,'' I noted in a
diary. ''Asking only makes matters worse, it gets nothing done faster.''

AND SUDDENLY THE nightmare was over. In August 1986, there wasn't just a strong
first sentence (''It was a funeral to which they all came''), there were two
eloquent last lines. ''John Vann was not meant to flee to a ship at sea, and he
did not miss his exit. He died believing he had won his war.'' True, there were
470,000 words in between, but it took Neil only a year to cut the manuscript to
the 360,000 words considered the optimum length for this book. I promptly sold
my Knopf research to another author for $31,000, the advance I'd received from
the publisher, which I thereupon repaid. His agent auctioned the book for a
substantial six-figure sum. I was jubilant to be free of it.

In the fall of 1987, Neil had time for major knee surgery, and Robert Loomis of
Random House commuted from New York to Washington, working on the final text.
Photographs were selected and laid out and maps chosen; source notes,
acknowledgments, lists of interviews and documents, and a bibliography were
word-processed.

The pace of life seemed to go from slow motion to fast forward, no doubt because
so many good things started to happen after so many years of desert solitaire.
The Book-of-the-Month Club made the book a full main selection. Random House set
a first printing of 100,000. Robert Gottlieb, the new editor of The New Yorker,
shared Shawn's enthusiasm (''the book of the decade,'' he called it), and
excerpted it in four parts.

In the summer of 1988, Neil became the object of more attention from the press
than he could ever have imagined during those long nights' journeys into day,
when he sometimes finished one page, sometimes not. I was prepared. We had
camped out in our 57-year-old house since we had bought it. The kitchen and the
upstairs were beyond quick and affordable salvation but I gave to Goodwill
Industries $900 worth of aged and tacky velvet sofas and chairs that we had
bought from a paving contractor who was moving. We redecorated the living room.
Interviewers were for the most part confined to my one-room stage set.

During the fall of 1988, the stage set was mine and the cat's. Catherine was a
sophomore at Wellesley, Maria was working in New York, Neil was often on the
road, peddling his book in Baltimore and Boston, Cleveland and Chicago, San
Diego and San Francisco. In Washington, Random House gave a publication party at
Germaine's, the city's best-known Vietnamese restaurant. In New York there were
more parties, and a dinner at the Four Seasons, which was followed by a walk in
the rain uptown toward my mother's apartment, where Catherine and Neil and I
were staying. We bought the next day's New York Times at a newsstand at Third
Avenue and 57th Street, a few blocks from the Four Seasons, and stood under the
corner lamppost, raindrops and light beams misting down on the page, while
Catherine read the review aloud to the last paragraph: ''Sheehan's skillful
weaving of anecdote and history, of personal memoir and psychological profile
give the book the sense of having been written by a novelist, journalist and
scholar all rolled into one.''

I'd enjoyed pretty good reviews on my six books, but modest sales. After 16
years I wanted Neil to have it all. I knew little about best-seller lists except
that they appeared in certain newspapers on Sundays. I was thrilled to pick up
The Washington Post Book World on Oct. 2 and find ''A Bright Shining Lie''
listed as No. 4. It was No. 5 on the 9th, No. 7 on the 16th, and No. 2 on the
23d. By then I had read the fine print below the list - ''Book World best-seller
hotline: (202) 334-4175.'' Late every Friday afternoon an up-to-date recording
of a woman's voice was played. She recited the 10 hard-cover fiction best
sellers, the 10 hard-cover nonfiction best sellers, then the paperback best
sellers for the Sunday nine days hence. On Friday, Oct. 21, I knew that Neil's
book would be No. 1 in Washington on Sunday, the 30th.

Book-prize season opened in early October, when Robert Loomis called to tell us
that Neil's book was one of the five nominees for the National Book Award for
nonfiction. The night before the awards ceremony, the 10 nominees were invited
to read from their books before a small audience.

The ceremony itself was a black-tie dinner at the Pierre in New York. Neil's
tuxedo, bought in 1964, had hung undisturbed in the closet for years, but when I
looked at it that morning I noticed it was frayed. I suggested he buy a new one.
When we got to the store he tried on an elegant tuxedo with black grosgrain
lapels - and developed sticker shock. His first tuxedo had cost $150. A new one,
including vest and bow tie, would cost close to $1,000, the sum given to each
nominee. ''Buy it,'' I said. ''What if I don't win?''

''You'll feel less like buying it. If you lose, at least you'll have a new
tux.'' Alterations were done in two hours. The 29th of November appeared to be
publishing's answer to Academy Award night. Television camera crews and
photographers roamed the Pierre's grand ballroom. I sat next to Robert
Bernstein, then the chief executive officer of Random House. Soon the chairman
of the panel of fiction judges was reading the five citations the judges had
composed, and the fiction nominees (or their editors) were coming up to the
platform. The chairman proclaimed: ''The winner is . . .'' It was Pete Dexter, a
Random House author and also a Bob Loomis author. The chairman of the nonfiction
panel then read and presented his judges' citations in alphabetical order.

''What do you think, win or lose, is it worth it?'' Bob Bernstein whispered to
me during the applause for the fourth nominee, holding my icy hand in his.
''Yes,'' I prayed. Neil walked slowly to the dais and the chairman read:

''Neil Sheehan spent 16 years writing 'A Bright Shining Lie.' It is a work of
remarkable lucidity, but also of remarkable passion, which bridges several
nonfiction genres: history; social history; biography; memoir; investigative
reporting. The narrative's richness of detail is as impressive as the economy of
its detail; the murky figure of a hero coming inexorably into focus as an
individual throws an entire era into relief. This is a work of multiple and
perhaps one could say epic ironies, among which one must count the title. It's
the truth that shines here.''

When I heard what was to be my favorite description of the book, and the one
with the most radiant last line, I knew Neil had won, and he did. He hugged and
kissed me, and returned to the stage to accept his award. The audience had risen
to its feet. I will never forget the roar of that crowd.

The prizes - lucite blocks, metal busts and parchment scrolls - kept coming.
Neil won the Columbia Journalism Award (the first journalist ever to receive it
twice), a Robert F. Kennedy Book Award, his second Sidney Hillman Award, a
special achievement award from the Vietnam Veterans of America and several
others. On March 30, 1989, our 24th wedding anniversary, he received the
Pulitzer Prize for nonfiction.

The prize that touched Neil most was the John F. Kennedy Award from his hometown
of Holyoke, Mass., where his late father had been a dairy farmer and where his
mother, Mary O'Shea Sheehan, and many of his relatives from County Kerry, still
live. It is given every year to ''an outstanding American of Irish descent.''
The award was the occasion for a gala 1989 St. Patrick's Day weekend. There was
a High Mass at which the presiding bishop presented Neil with a wooden and brass
plaque. ''This is a very heavy award,'' the Most Rev. Joseph F. Maguire
whispered in caution, as he handed it over. A banquet at Holyoke Community
College (built in the middle of what had been the Sheehan family's cow pasture)
followed. Neil's trophy on that occasion was an Irish blackthorn stick.

[Text omitted] was mine, just mine to keep,'' she wrote.

One pays a price for whatever one does. That is life. If at times the price
seemed high, well, few people ever have the chance to spend 16 years doing what
they want to do. One night not long ago Neil was in a reflective mood. ''Those
middle years may have been the best damn years of my life,'' he said. ''There
were so many things I didn't do. I could have had a bird dog and gone quail
hunting in Georgia. We could have taken vacations in Europe. Some days I wake up
and I think, I'm not young anymore, I've got a bum knee, I'll never be able to
jump out of a helicopter again like I used to do in the Mekong Delta. But then I
think what the hell, age catches up with you whatever you do, and I've been
lucky. I saw more of our daughters than most fathers do, and I wrote the book I
wanted to write.''

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photos: Left: Susan Sheehan, who wrote this article, with her husband,
Neil, in their Washington home. (Keith Jenkins) (pg. 38); Below: Neil Sheehan in
1971, working on the Pentagon Papers for The Times (Renato Perez/The New York
Times) (pg. 38)

                   Copyright 1990 The New York Times Company


                              51 of 288 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                  April 15, 1990, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

DATELINE: HO CHI MINH CITY

BYLINE: By NICHOLAS LEMANN; Nicholas Lemann is a national correspondent for The
Atlantic.

SECTION: Section 7; Page 3, Column 1; Book Review Desk

LENGTH: 1846 words



FLASHBACKS
On Returning to Vietnam.
By Morley Safer.
Illustrated. 206 pp. New York:
Random House. $18.95.

It feels extremely odd to think of Vietnam as another gradually disengaging
colony in the Soviet empire, but, to judge from Morley Safer's account of a
visit there last year, that is what we ought to begin to do. In 1986, the
Communist Party Congress decentralized the Vietnamese economy; Mr. Safer finds
at least a few places that have gone ''berserk with capitalism'' under the
auspices of doi moi, the local version of perestroika. The first business to
open after the Party Congress's ruling, he reports, was a printer of business
cards.

There is noticeably less of the utterly drab, Iron Curtain feeling to Vietnam in
''Flashbacks'' than there was in earlier postwar visitors' reports, like William
Broyles Jr.'s ''Brothers in Arms,'' published four years ago. People in what
used to be South Vietnam seem not to be gripped by fear of the consequences of
criticizing the Hanoi regime, even though most of the time Mr. Safer was
traveling with a camera crew and a couple of Vietnamese Government officials in
tow. It seems possible finally to entertain the hope that as events in the
Soviet Union play out, this eternally subjugated country might in our lifetime
become free at last.

As a young correspondent for CBS News, Mr. Safer produced some of the best
broadcast coverage of the Vietnam War. He did what was probably the single most
important television story from the field - his report in August 1965 of the
torching of a group of defenseless hamlets called Cam Ne by the marines, which
appeared on the evening news accompanied by footage of soldiers holding their
Zippo lighters to the thatched roofs of huts. Afterward, according to Mr. Safer,
President Lyndon Johnson excoriated Frank Stanton, the president of CBS, on the
telephone and in person, and the Administration put out the word that Mr. Safer
was a K.G.B. agent.

In his present mellowed incarnation as a correspondent for ''60 Minutes,'' Mr.
Safer got permission to make a tour of Vietnam of a little over a week's
duration. That's a slender reed on which to rest a book, but Mr. Safer has
brought it off, thanks in no small part to the richness of his previous
association with the country. A journalist's war isn't as vividly horrific as a
soldier's, but it is more panoramic, encompassing all the major venues and
leaders. Every interview of Mr. Safer's, every visit, calls forth an interesting
memory of the war years. Even his futile attempt to see the old CBS offices in
the Caravelle Hotel in Ho Chi Minh City leads to a charming passage that
combines a description of the hotel in the bad old days, with shatter-prevention
tape on all the windows, with the news that the offices are now, in the words of
the hotel's ''floor boy,'' the ''Hungarish embassy,'' whose occupants are
lengthily absent at midday.

Thanks either to the quality of his network of contacts or to the clout of CBS,
the small group of interviewees Mr. Safer has assembled is an unusually
interesting one. There are Vo Nguyen Giap, the victorious general in the battles
of Dien Bien Phu and Khe Sanh, now a ''natty old man''; Bui Tin, the conqueror
of Saigon; Duong Quynh Hoa, a founder of the National Liberation Front (and now
a former Communist); Nguyen Be, the mastermind of the alleged defection of
Robert Garwood, the only American prisoner of war ever convicted of
collaboration; and Pham Xuan An, the Time magazine correspondent who now turns
out to have been a spy for Hanoi all the while. None of these people partakes
very deeply of any of the standard American attitudes about the war, such as
anger, bitterness and ineradicable hurt. They won, after all, and what they call
''the American war'' was for them simply one phase in a never-ending national
struggle. Psychologically, the war seems to have devastated us much more than it
did the Vietnamese.

The picture of America that Mr. Safer gets in Vietnam is of an immensely rich
but irresolute nation. The only aspect of our fighting forces that inspired fear
in his interviewees was the B-52 bombers - certainly not the troops. American
soldiers had one-year tours in Vietnam, but Vietnamese soldiers stayed in the
field indefinitely. At the Long Binh Army post near what was then Saigon, 22,000
Vietnamese were employed as support staff for 26,000 Americans who were
themselves supposed to be support troops. The Vietnamese must have many more
victims of Agent Orange than we do, but their victims suffer silently because,
as Mr. Safer points out, having a way to redress past wrongs is an American
luxury. The visible legacy of the American presence that is most vivid in Mr.
Safer's account is not physical destruction, but junk - jeeps, pizza ovens,
desks, cans of packing material - of a sort that a society like ours produces
copiously and then discards, and a society like Vietnam's hoards forever. Though
materially we staked much more on the war than the Vietnamese did, we had much
less at stake, and that, Mr. Safer says, is why we lost.

Every travel writer needs a persona; Mr. Safer's is that of a classic foreign
correspondent, actually more of the World War II than the Vietnam variety, grown
ruefully middle-aged and pleasantly encumbered by his own success. (This is the
rare travel book in which the traveler has an entourage - producers, cameramen,
and so on - that he has to shake off in order to engage in the lonely pursuit of
insight.) A trench coat is not mentioned, but the rest of the classic picture is
there: the jump-cuts from battlefields to fine restaurants and hotels, the long
evenings of male bonding over a diminishing bottle of whisky, the good novel
tucked under the arm, the mixture of cynicism about organizations with
sentimentality about friends, the air of prefeminist romance (which in this case
finds expression in a crush Mr. Safer develops on his straitlaced interpreter,
''the delicious Miss Mai''). It comes as no surprise that the late additions to
the reviewer's galleys appear to have been written on a battered manual
typewriter.

Like any self-respecting veteran newsman, Mr. Safer knows how to squeeze every
last drop out of his less than voluminous material, and to imbue it with drama
whenever possible. He works his interview with Pham Xuan An, the spy, up into a
small thriller; one of his guides merely ''looks at the name and goes ice
cold.'' As a man who has been around the track a time or two, Mr. Safer feels
entitled to use his first book as the occasion to settle a few scores. He tosses
bouquets to old friends like Charles Collingwood of CBS and David Greenway of
The Boston Globe, and artfully insults Zbigniew Brzezinski, Barry Goldwater and
Bill Moyers (''the sometimes overly pious public defender of liberal virtue''),
who stood at President Johnson's side during the browbeating of CBS over the Cam
Ne story.

There are only a few places where Mr. Safer, as a character in his own book,
begins to grate. He is a little quick with an ethnic stereotype, such as, ''With
enough beer Aussies can turn a churchyard into a Melbourne pub, and usually
do.'' Since everybody knows he is a television star, when he strikes a
self-righteous little-guy pose, it doesn't work. At one point, two Vietnamese
who worked in the CBS bureau when Saigon fell hear he is in town, find him and
make a pathetically abject entreaty for $3,000 in back pay that they are owed.
Mr. Safer uses this as a take-off point for an excoriation of the ''bean
counters'' who run the networks and regard news as ''a commodity.'' Why couldn't
he have paid the men himself and put in for reimbursement when he got back to
New York, instead of handing their bill over to the bean counters, who did honor
their obligation, but took several months to do so?

An important part of the foreign correspondent's equipment - the intellectual
equivalent of the trench coat - is a mistrust of sweeping answers to the world's
problems. Mr. Safer creates a feeling that the Vietnam War was just another
episode in the endless procession of human folly. About the American
involvement, he says, maybe a bit disingenuously, ''It all seems so ludicrous
now, the idea that we were spending all that high explosive and those lives of
pilots on what? On trying to make these Vietnamese into better people?'' He
professes similar bafflement about why the Vietnamese fought so long: ''The hard
part for me to understand is the idea of duty to a country that is waging a war
of stubbornness . . . a war being fought, once you get past the slogans, to
prove you can whip technology with sandals, and incidentally a million or so
lives.''

There was a great deal genuinely at stake in the war, though, on both sides. Mr.
Safer's newsroom fatalism had led him, deft observer and savorer of ironies
though he is, away from the final irony of the Vietnam War. In the long run, a
faraway and unrelated event, the collapse of Soviet Communism, might bring both
the United States and Vietnam the disparate goals they spilled so much blood in
vain to achieve: respectively, a victory in the cold war, and independence.

MEMORIES CONFRONTED

Sipping strong tea at a restaurant near his home in Manhattan, Morley Safer
described ''Flashbacks'' as a liberation from the journalistic demands of ''60
Minutes'': ''In day-to-day reporting there are so few chances to write simply to
please yourself. You must consciously withdraw your own passions and obsessions
from the copy you are producing. It was a relief to be able, at last, to digress
a bit.''

Although he wrote ''Flashbacks'' to confront his memories of Vietnam, Mr. Safer
said he also wanted to focus on the present situation there: ''Since the fall no
one has been interested in Vietnam itself. It has become a kind of hot literary
psychodramatic subject, but it is always treated more or less as a domestic
story. During the war, it was the same. There was great interest in the couple
of hundred thousand boys who were sent off to a country they knew nothing about,
to fight a people of whom they were entirely ignorant - but these boys could
have been anywhere. Clearly the administrations involved weren't even curious
about the Vietnamese. And they still aren't. This distresses me because it can
give birth to a kind of revisionism that says if only we had stayed longer, sent
more men and arms, we would have 'prevailed,' whatever that means. I suppose we
could have killed several million people and called it victory, but what many
don't understand is that the Vietnamese were prepared to fight another 30 years
if they had to.''

Mr. Safer said he is eager to write another book, but perhaps not so personal a
one as ''Flashbacks.'' ''It's a risky business, psychologically,'' he said.
''The flip side of liberating oneself from journalistic necessities is that
you're doing so in a way that's going to be sitting there for all time. And
there are no third parties to hide behind. The sources - and the sadness - are
all your own.''

MARK MCGURL

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photos: Morley Safer and a frigthened South Vietnamese villager during
a Marine search-and-destroy operation in the hamlet of Cam Ne, 1965. Most of the
village was burned (From ''Flashbacks''/Ha Thuc Can/CBS News); Morley Safer
(Sarah Safer)

TYPE: Review

                   Copyright 1990 The New York Times Company


                              52 of 288 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                  April 15, 1990, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

THE MISTAKES IN THIS ESSAY ARE MY OWN

BYLINE: By JOHN MAXWELL HAMILTON; John Maxwell Hamilton is the author of several
books, including ''Edgar Snow: A Biography'' and ''Entangling Alliances: How the
Third World Shapes Our Lives.''

SECTION: Section 7; Page 1, Column 1; Book Review Desk

LENGTH: 2655 words


To crack open a new book and read its dedication and acknowledgments is
typically an occasion for me to relive an experience years ago, when I was a
midshipman. One night I was assigned to stand watch on the fantail of our ship
with a young enlisted man. While we looked over the inky Pacific, illuminated by
a long strip of moonlight, he poured out a story of his sad youth, especially of
his unloving parents. Though barely able to make out the sailor's face, I felt a
bond born of sincere self-revelation. Then, several days later, we happened to
meet in a passageway. I noticed the sailor had a large tattoo on his arm, a
heart with the inscription ''Mother.''

Authors, whether of fiction or nonfiction, pride themselves on uncompromising
honesty and courage, on originality and style. But when the time comes to put
the finishing touches on their books, they, like the young sailor, are inclined
to suspend judgment; they become perfunctory and reach for smarmy cliches or the
trite to decorate their work. The result is that the front of the book is rarely
worth reading.

For proof, consider the fruits of a survey of 50 books taken off my shelf at
random:

First, half of those dedications in which the relationship to the author was
clear were to spouses. This is not only unimaginative, it's not particularly
reassuring about the clearheadedness of the author. After all, one out of every
two marriages ends in divorce these days. Second, not one of the acknowledgments
in these 50 books had anything negative to say about anything or anyone. Of
course, the idea of acknowledgments is to thank people, not lambaste them. Yet,
as every writer knows, praise means nothing if it is not balanced against
criticism. How, indeed, does one measure authors who see around them only
unfailingly helpful librarians, cheerful typists, utterly candid sources and
selfless scholars who, contrary to the reality of academe, always make
constructive comments - and on time?

The only example that comes to mind of genuine frankness was an acknowledgment
in which the author complained about the New York Public Library - and having
stumbled on it so long ago, I now can't recall the name of the book.

Not that authors get much guidance; how-to books on publishing say plenty about
choosing typefaces and fashioning bibliographies. But acknowledgments and
dedications are treated as if they were naughty activities best left out of
polite conversation. ''If the author wishes to have a dedication page,'' says
one guide on writing books, ''he should phrase the dedication as simply as
possible.'' ''The Chicago Manual of Style'' talks about dedications as ''matters
for the author to determine,'' though it discourages the unusual or interesting.
''Extravagant'' dedications are ''things of the past''; humorous ones are
''inappropriate in a serious book.''

''It's one of those things that you are supposed to know how to handle, like
your wedding night,'' the essayist Joseph Epstein told me. He had written
briefly on acknowledgments in ''The Middle of My Tether,'' including in his
choice comments the most nearly adequate acknowledgment he ever received. It
read: ''I am indebted to Joseph Epstein for (among other things) directing me
toward Alexander Herzen.''

Richard H. Rovere, a journalist, parodied acknowledgments 25 years ago in The
American Scholar (where, coincidentally, Mr. Epstein's essays appear). The tone
of acknowledgments, Rovere understood, is better satirized than described. He
began his parody this way: ''Like the six that preceded it, this seventh volume
in my life of Raison d'Etre owes its existence to many people besides its
author. As d'Etre himself once said, slightly paraphrasing his great
contemporary, Washington Irving, E pluribus unum is a motto that could be as
aptly applied to the work of scholars as to the young Republic to which both
d'Etre and the incomparable creator of the Leatherstocking tales made such
signal contributions.''

Acknowledgments are a curious achievement of pretension, hyperbole and banality.
Still, no one about to send a book to the publisher should feel intimidated by
this final task. A rigid formula eliminates virtually all choice, both in
overall structure and in phrasing. Would-be authors can simply follow the
step-by-step process outlined below, using the quotations (culled from real
books) much as kids cobble together Mr. Potato Head.

* At the very beginning, call into question your facility with words. One of the
best techniques is to suggest your debts are beyond your capacity to describe:
''It would be impossible to acknowledge adequately all the assistance I have
received from scholars, libraries and editors.'' Or: ''I have accumulated more
debts than I can possibly repay here.''

Any glossary for acknowledgments puts two words right at the top, ''indebted''
and ''invaluable,'' as in ''I'm indebted to -- -- for invaluable help
photocopying the manuscript and coping with the many paper jams we encountered
along the way.'' The phrase ''constant encouragement and advice'' is essential;
''deeply grateful'' is a must. Use ''cheerful'' to describe those who did the
most menial chores for you.

If you must venture out on your own, be certain to say something
incomprehensible. Here we should acknowledge the actor William Shatner's
acknowledgment in his 1989 science fiction novel, ''Tekwar'': ''Ron Goulart, a
wonderful writer, showed me the way out and showed me the way in to completing
the novel.''

* Throughout, make the reader suspicious of your character and intellect.
Ideally, suggest that you are pushed around like a flabby sack of meal and will
never amount to much on your own. ''I might not have undertaken [or finished]
the project without the encouragement of -- --.'' Or: ''If I have been a
stubborn and obtuse student at times, the fault has not been theirs.''

* Somewhere toward the end, say that ''the mistakes in this book are my own.''
Never mind that you have just said how critical was the help of various people
who shaped the book. (Michael Lewis deviated from the norm in ''Liar's Poker,''
a book on the crazy world of Wall Street. His parents, he said, ''are, of
course, directly responsible for any errors, sins, or omissions herein.'')

* Close with something about the family, being careful to make it slightly
patronizing or preposterous. One of the best techniques is to suggest that
writing is an ordeal inflicted on the innocent by the crazed. The spouse and
children ''endured far more in the way of uneven temper, eccentric hours and
generally impossible behavior than they had any right to expect.'' One of my
favorites: ''Our children . . . I hope are unscarred by this endeavor.'' The
reader will want some explanation of why your spouse hung around such a demented
household. Accordingly, she or he should be made to seem quite passive,
satisfied carrying out mindless chores and yet brilliantly editing your copy.
Thank your spouse, therefore, ''for gentle admonitions and for patient and
sympathetic support.'' Or: ''I pay tribute to the patient forbearance of my wife
during the long period of gestation and birth of this book.''

Eugene D. Genovese provided an antidote to this in ''Roll, Jordan, Roll.'' His
wife, to whom the book was dedicated, ''did not type the manuscript, do my
research, darn my socks, or do those other wonderful things one reads about in
acknowledgments to someone 'without whom this book could not have been written.'
Nor did she work so hard on this book that she deserves to be listed as
co-author; if she had, she would be listed as co-author.''

I confess to scant originality in acknowledgments, though I once had wit enough
to note that my wife, an attorney, ''had other things to do.'' Nor have my
dedications been any more creative, having inscribed books simply to my parents,
wife and son.

I am almost certain to be less predictable in the future. My supply of relatives
suitable for dedicating purposes is running out. Still, even brief dedications
to loved ones offer possibilities beyond the choice between ''To Mother'' and
''To Mamma.''

One standard ploy is to say so much in a dedication that the author says
nothing. Here one puts all discriminating facilities in neutral and dedicates
the book to every conceivable living relative and friend, not to exclude the
word processor repair person and the mailman who finally delivered something
besides a rejection notice. This approach seems motivated by fear more than
anything else - fear that one will never write another book. Even so, group
dedications can have appeal, as in ''The Real Frank Zappa Book'' by Frank Zappa
with Peter Occhiogrosso: ''This book is dedicated to Gail, the kids, Stephen
Hawking and Ko-Ko. F.Z. August 23, 1988 06:39:37.''

It is much preferable to single out someone and then say your piece with a
little charm. Kurt Vonnegut dedicated ''Welcome to the Monkey House'' to his
agent: ''To Knox Burger, ten days older than I am. He has been a very good
father to me.'' (For those who think it surprising that an author might actually
like his agent, Mary Higgins Clark went one better in naming her child after her
agent, Patricia Myrer.) J. D. Salinger's dedication of ''Franny and Zooey'' is
in top form for its sweetness: ''As nearly as possible in the spirit of Matthew
Salinger, age one, urging a luncheon companion to accept a cool lima bean, I
urge my editor, mentor and (heaven help him) closest friend, William Shawn,
genius domus of The New Yorker, lover of the long shot, protector of the
unprolific, defender of the hopelessly flamboyant, most unreasonably modest of
born great artist-editors, to accept this pretty skimpy-looking book.''

Yet another gambit is to reach for intimacy, giving only the honored person's
first name or initials, or seeking to obscure his or her identity entirely. This
can be far more satisfying to the reader than might at first be imagined - for
instance, Dashiell Hammett's dedication ''To Lillian'' in ''The Thin Man,'' or
Jack Higgins's dedication in ''Memoirs of a Dance Hall Romeo'': ''In grateful
remembrance of all the girls of those far-off days, but especially the ones who
said yes.''

Usually, however, the reader cannot relate to cryptic dedications, and the
person being celebrated does not enjoy the full measure of presumably deserved
glory. After all, if anonymity is so satisfying, why don't authors ask that book
awards be given in private?

But the problem with dedications generally is that they are awkwardly grafted
onto books, appearing as out of place as someone waving to his mother while
being interviewed on ''The MacNeil/Lehrer Newshour.'' Dedications at their best
should have something to do with the book's subject matter. Better yet, they
should do productive work.

Plow through enough books and you'll turn up examples of apt dedications. T. S.
Eliot's dedication of ''The Waste Land'' could not have been more appropriate:
''For Ezra Pound il miglior fabbro [the better craftsman].'' Pound worked hard
on Eliot's poem, reducing it to half its original length. The Roman Catholic
theologian Hans Kung underscored the ecumenical message of his book ''The
Church'' by dedicating it to the Archbishop of Canterbury. The journalist
Vincent Sheean dedicated ''First and Last Love,'' his ''autobiography of a
listener,'' to the opera star Lotte Lehmann. And the political scientist Bernard
Fall gave his book ''The Two Vietnams'' ''to the valiant and long-suffering
Vietnamese - North and South.''

Graham Greene's lovely dedication to Rene and Phuong in ''The Quiet American''
did double duty. It remembered ''the happy evenings I have spent with you in
Saigon,'' the setting of the novel; at the same time it gave the author an
occasion to protect his friends by disclaiming their similarity to characters in
the book.

My friend Joel Swerdlow prosaically dedicated his first two books to his
grandparents and parents. Then he read John Steinbeck's page-long dedication to
''East of Eden.'' Like the book, it told a story, complete with dialogue. Joel
now tries to write dedications so that they fit his books, as he did in ''To
Heal a Nation: The Vietnam Veterans Memorial'' (written with Jan Scruggs). The
long dedication to his brother, dying of leukemia, closed with this: ''His
courage reaches out to all those who still endure the pains of war, to those
whose lives will bear the burden of future wars, and to everyone whose life may
be threatened by circumstances such as serious illness. 'Love each other now,'
this courage says. 'Enjoy each day, and remember that acts of kindness and
loyalty, no matter how small they may seem, can defeat life's most dirty
devices.' ''

None of this should suggest dedications cannot have a light touch while toiling
for the book. Antoine de Saint-Exupery's ''Little Prince'' is a story for
youngsters and adults, and his charming dedication to a friend in occupied
France bridges the gap. ''To Leon Werth. ''I ask the indulgence of the children
who may read this book for dedicating it to a grown-up. I have a serious reason:
he is the best friend I have in the world. I have another reason: this grown-up
understands everything, even books about children. I have a third reason: he
lives in France where he is hungry and cold. He needs cheering up. If all these
reasons are not enough, I will dedicate the book to the child from whom this
grown-up grew. All grown-ups were once children - although few of them remember
it. And so I correct my dedication:

''To Leon Werth when he was a little boy.''

Mark Twain used every part of his books to the fullest. (He even made fun of
appendixes.) The dedication to his autobiographical ''Roughing It'' related
directly to a character and experience in the book: ''To Calvin H. Higbie of
California, an honest man, a genial comrade, and a steadfast friend, this book
is inscribed by the author in memory of the curious time when we two were
millionaires for ten days.''

Twain had a penchant for losing money, but the experiences gave him grist for
his moneymaking writing. He wrote ''Following the Equator'' during an especially
rocky financial time, when he was being helped out by the Standard Oil kingpin
Henry Rogers. Twain repaid this kindness by dedicating the book to Rogers's son,
''with recognition of what he is, and apprehension of what he may become unless
he form himself a little more closely upon the model of the author.''

And why shouldn't dedications serve the most practical purposes? In his treatise
describing the sun, not the earth, as the center of the planets, Nicolaus
Copernicus wrote a long dedication to Pope Paul III. Copernicus explained why he
dared to challenge established theory and, at the same time, quite frankly
protected himself: ''I have [dedicated] these lucubrations of mine to Your
Holiness . . . because, even in this remote corner of the world where I live,
you are considered to be the most eminent man in dignity of rank and in love of
all learning and even of mathematics, so that by your authority and judgment you
can easily suppress the bites of slanderers, albeit the proverb hath it that
there is no remedy for the bite of a sycophant.''

But for practicality, no one can beat Lawrence Block. He dedicated ''The Topless
Tulip Caper'' (1975) to the Edgar Allan Poe Award selection committee of the
Mystery Writers of America, and to three book reviewers - Barbara Bannon of
Publishers Weekly, Newgate Callendar (who writes about thrillers in this
publication) and John Dickson Carr, whose notices appeared in Ellery Queen's
Mystery Magazine.

My own related idea is to stop acknowledging the help of friends and colleagues
altogether. Better to thank only your worst critics. That will disqualify them
from reviewing the book and increase the chances that supporters will have a say
in journals like the one you are reading right now.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1990 The New York Times Company


                              53 of 288 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                  April 15, 1990, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

PAPERBACK BEST SELLERS: April 15, 1990

SECTION: Section 7; Page 22, Column 2; Book Review Desk

LENGTH: 870 words


     Weeks
This    On
Week  List Fiction

 1     2    ALMOST HEAVEN, by Judith McNaught. (Pocket, $4.95.) A
           historical romance set in London's salons and Scotland's
           Highlands.

 2    105  THE HUNT FOR RED OCTOBER, by Tom Clancy. (Berleley,
           $4.50.) A submarine driver brings Soviet nuclear secrets
           to the United States.

 3     4    RIVALS, by Janet Dailey. (Fawcett, $5.95.) Families
           compete in love and romance.

 4     2    THE NEGOTIATOR, by Frederick Forsyth. (Bantam, $5.95.)
           An American expatriate tries to thwart terroists.

 5     3    RULES OF PREY, by John Sandford. (Berkley, $4.95) The
           pursuit of a mad, very clever serial murderer of women.

 6     8    STAR, by Danielle Steel. (Dell, $5.95) The crossed paths
           of a man and a woman destined for stardom.

 7     2    THE PANDORA PRINCIPLE, by Carolyn Clowes. (Pocket,
           $4.50.) An awesome new weapon threatens the "Star Trek"
           Federation.

 8     6    MORNING GLORY, by LaVyrie Spencer. (Jove, $4.95.) Love
           answers a young widow's want ad.

 8     10   WEB OF DREAMS, by V.C. Andrews. (Pocket, $5.50.) The
           origin of a curse that has haunted a family of orphans in
           five previous novels.

 9     2    STRANGER IN SAVANNAH, by Eugenia Price. (Jove, $5.95.)
           The vicissitudes of three families during the Civil War.

10     1    THE NAKED HEART, by Jacqueline Briskin. (Dell, $5.95.) A
           woman's desire for revenge.

11     26   THE HANDMAID'S TALE, by Margaret Atwood. (Fawcett,
           $5.95.) In America of the future, men and women perform
           the duties they're assigned.

12     26   THE CARDINAL OF THE KREMLIN, by Tom Clancy. (Berkley,
           $5.95.) The C.I.A.'s Jack Ryan races to the rescue of an
           American secret agent.

13     11   WEB OF DREAMS, by V. C. Andrews. (Pocket, $5.50.) The
           origin of a curse that has haunted a family of orphans in
           five previous novels.

14     1    KILLSHOT, by Elmore Leonard. (Warner, $5.95.) Two thugs
           out to assassinate a man and a woman.

15     2    TEENAGE MUTANT NINJA TURTLES, by B. B. Hiller. (Yearling
           /Dell, $2.95.) A group of turtles saves New York City
           from a band of brigands.

16*    1    LORD OF THE FLIES, by William Golding. (Wideview/Perigee,
           $4.95.) English schoolboys stranded on an uninhabited
           Pacific island.

17*    7    STORMING INTREPID, by Payne Harrison. (Ivy, $5.95.)
           Warfare waged in outer space.

18*    7    THE EDGE, by Dick Francis. (Fawcett, $5.95.) Murder and
           mayhem on a luxury train trip.

     Weeks
This    On
Week  List NonFiction

 1     21   ALL I REALLY NEED TO KNOW I LEARNED IN KINDERGARTEN, by
           Robert Fulghum. (Ivy, $5.95.) Inspirational essays.

 2     2    THE LIVES AND LOVES OF NEW KIDS ON THE BLOCK, by Jill
           Matthews. (Pocket, $3.95.) An account of the popular young
           singing group from Boston.

 3     18   NEW KIDS OF THE BLOCK, by Grace Cataiano. (Bantam,
           $3.50.) The lives and predilections of the five members
           of the popular singing group.

 4     3    DADDY'S GIRL, by Clifford Irving. (Zebra, $4.95.) The
           1982 murder of a Houston lawyer and his wife, involving
           two other generations of their family.

 5*   338   THE ROAD LESS TRAVELED, by M. Scott Peck. (Touchstone
           /S&S, $10.95.) Psychological and spiritual inspiration by
           a psychiatrist.

 6     2    SUMMER OF '49, by David Halberstam. (Avon, $4.95.) The
           year the Boston Red Sox and the New York Yankees battled
           to the last game for the American League pennant.

 7     12   BORN ON THE FOURTH OF JULY, by Ron Kovic. (Pocket,
           $4.50.) The autobiography of a former marine wounded in
           Vietnam.

 8*    98   LOVE, MEDICINE & MIRACLES, by Bernie S. Siegel.
           (Perennial/Harper & Row, $8.95.) The importance of
           patient's mind and emotions.

 9     77   THE POWER OF MYTH, by Joseph Campbell with Bill Moyers.
           (Doubleday, $19.95.) The ways in which mythology
           illuminates the stages of life.

10*    29   BLIND FAITH, by Joe McGinniss. (Signal/NAL, $5.95.) The
           family tragedy that came to light after the 1984 murder
           of a Toms River, N.J. woman.

     Weeks
This    On
Week  List Advice, How-To and Miscellaneous

 1     4    WEIRDOS FROM ANOTHER PLANET! by Bill Watterson. (Andrews
           & McMeel, $7.95.) Cartoons.

 2     10   50 SIMPLE THINGS YOU CAN DO TH SAVE THE EARTH, by the
           Earthworks Group. (Earthworks Press/Publishers Group West,
           $4.95.) Ways to combat environmental problems.

 3     4    HAPPY TRAILS. by Berke Breathed, (Little, Brown, $8.95.)
           Cartoons.

 4     85   CODEPENDENT NO MORE, by Melody Beattie, (Hazelden/Harper
           & Row, $8.95.) Solving your own problems while caring for
           others.

 5     2    THE T--FACTOR FAT GRAM COUNTER, by Jamie Pope-Cordle and
           Martin Katahn. (Norton, $2.50.) Ways to reduce fat in
           one's diet.


These listings are based on computer-processed sales figures from 3,000
bookstores and from representative wholesalers with more than 38,000 other
retail outlets, including variety stores and supermarkets. The figures are
statistically adjusted to represent sales in all such outlets across the United
States.

*An asterisk before a book's title indicates that its sales, weighted to reflect
the book-selling industry nationally, are barely distinguishable from those of
the book above.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: LIST

                   Copyright 1990 The New York Times Company


                              54 of 288 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                  April 15, 1990, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

Campuses See a New Spirit of Involvement

BYLINE: By Andi Rierden

SECTION: Section 12CN; Page 1, Column 5; Connecticut Weekly Desk

LENGTH: 1515 words


Joseph Hilliman says he is not too familiar with the writings of Eldridge
Cleaver, but he nonetheless ascribes to the slogan attributed to the former
Black Panther: ''You're either part of the solution or part of the problem.''

So Mr Hilliman, a 20-year-old junior at Southern Connecticut State University in
New Haven, helped start a racially mixed fraternity two years ago, in an effort
to ease the mounting racial tensions among students. Last spring, when a fight
broke out on a campus footbridge between black and white students, Mr. Hilliman
and other fraternity members organized a candlelight vigil to protest the
incident. The march attracted more than 500 students and faculty members.

''What motivates us is the perpetuation of ignorance,'' Mr. Hilliman said in a
recent interview. ''We've got to break down this ''us and them'' mentality and
realize we're all in this together.''

Christine Capuzzo expresses simiilar concerns. When she was a senior at the
University of Bridgeport in 1968, she lived off campus in a neighborhood where
drugs were sold openly on the streets and the children had few after-school
activities. She responded by organizing the Homebase Project, a program that
attempts to steer urban teen-agers away from crime by exposing them to
university life.

As part of the program, more than 40 eighth graders from the James Curiale
School in Bridgeport go twice a week to the campus, where Homebase volunteers
supervise athletic activities for them and offer personal and academic
counseling.

''These are kids who think that drugs and alcohol and guns are the norm,'' said
Austin Stout, a junior from the Bronx who toook over as head of the program when
Ms. Capuzzo graduated last year. ''We're here to show them another side to
life.''

Increasing concerns over social problems have spurred a growing number of
college students to take action. Whether they are serving meals in soup
kitchens, lobbying in the STate Capitol on behalf ot he homeless or cleaning up
beaches, students across the state have embraced a spirit of involvement not
seen on campuses since the late 1960's, college officials say.

''The mood among students has completely changed since the Reagan era,'' said
Dr. Rosalyn Amenta, adjunct professor of philosphy at Southern and the advisor
to Mr. Hilliman's fraternity, Chi Psi Chi. ''Once again, students care about
their communities. The era of the ''me generation'' is finally over.''

Action Reflects National Trend

The increase in student activism in Connecticut since the mid-1980's reflects a
national trend. In a recent survey of students at 400 colleges and universities,
conducted by the Higher Education Research Institute in Los Angeles, 37 percent
of the freshmen said they had been involved in protests or demonstrations in the
previous year, more than double the percentage in the late 1960's. Students said
their concerns included the environment, campus racial incidents and the growing
number of homeless people.

''There are still students living in their ivory towers,'' said Benjamin
Liebman, a junior at Yale University. ''But many of us see how desperate the
homeless situation in New Haven has become, and we just can't ignore it.''

Mr. Liebman is a leader of the Yale Hunger and Homeless Action Project, one of
several such campus organizations that try to aid New Haven's growing homeless
population. Some estimates have put the number of homeless people in the city as
high as 6,000.

The organization, which lobbies for affordable h ousing, sponsors a food pantry,
at the corner of Howe and George Streets, that feeds more than 200 homeless
people every other Thursday. Members also volunteer at shelters and the Downtown
Evening Soup Kitchen.

Last fall, Mr. Liebman helped organize an all-night demonstration at the New
Haven train station to protest the city's lack of shelters for the homeless. The
event drew more than 90 students. Mr. Liebman said the city, which has been
under a court order for more than a year to provide shelters, opened a new one
within weeks of the protest.

Other issues that attract Yale students include abortion, gay rights, AIDS
education and protection of animals. The hub for much of the activism is Dwight
Hall, the oldest and largest student organization center in the country. Founded
in 1882 folowwing student protests over compulsory worship at Yale, the center
supplies meeting rooms, computers and mailboxes for some 140 student
organizations.

The center's director, Jack Hasegawa, said student activism at Yale found
renewed momentum around 1984 with the anti-apatheid movement. Urging the
university to divest its investments iin copanies that did business in South
Africa, students protested outside administration buildings and erected a shanty
siilar to those found in South Africa's black townships. ''All during the
mid-1980's, people were pontificating about the selfish, cynical students who
cared only about material wants,'' Mr. Hasegawa said. ''We are seeing an
unprecedented number of students getting involved in all sorts of advocacy from
South Africa to the rights of the elderly.''

Michael Maran, a first-year student at Yale Divinity School and a New Haven
Alderman, called the South African protest the crucible of student activism.
Since that time, he said, students' concerns have shifted from international to
local politics.

''The general condition of life in New Haven inevitably affects the condition of
life on campus,'' Mr. Maran said. ''There's no escaping the fact that students
have to work with the city to solve its problems.''

Students at Southern Connecticut are also supporting efforts to help the city
deal with its growing poverty rate. Chi Psi Chi members cook and serve a meal
once a month to homeless men at the Columbus House in New Haven and regularly
hold clothing drives for shelters that serve the homeless and battered women.

But for Mr. Hilliman, and other fraternity members, the group's ultimate purpose
is to promote racial understanding, both inside and outside the classroom.

''Turn on your television news tonight, and you'll see some black man with his
coat over his head being dragged off by police for some drug charge,'' he said.
''The public is constantly being bombarded with these negative images of blacks.
We try to get people to look at the broader picture.''

Racial awareness was the theme of a recent ''reverse press conference'' at
Wesleyan University. Some 40 students questioned a panel from the campus media
and the local press about minority representation in newspapers and television
and the media's treatment of minority issues.

Help for Rape Victims

At Connecticut College in New London, some 600 students are involved in
community service work, triple the number of five years ago, said the college's
office of community service. In one program, student mentors are paired with
eighth graders fromm low-income families to give them personal and academic
guidance. Other college students volunteer at the Women's Center in New London,
where they answer phones and, after a 10-week training program, counsel rape
victims.

While 1960's radicalism focused primarily on anti-establishment themes, students
of the 90's say they are working closely with the judicial and legislataive
systems, using tactics like direct mail and political lobbying to achieve their
goals. ''They are definitely better organized,'' saiid Mr. Hasegawa of Yale.
''Students today want to do something on a smaller scale where they can have an
impact. Their approach to political problems is practical and sophisticated.''

Michael Tertes, campus coordinator for the Connecticut Public Interest Research
Group in West Hartford, an environmental organization with 17,000 student
members, said the organization leans heavily on door-to-door canvassing and
issues a newsletter about legislative action.

Trying to Beat the Odds

At the University of Bridgeport, journalism students are putting the final
touches on a new magazine, Earth Works, that will address local and national
environmental issues.

Though not as turbulent as the 1960's era, when student protests against the
Vietnam War let to clashes between police and demonstrators, today's students'
work for social change is no less passionate, college officials said.

Consider Godfrey Johns, a sophomore and Homebase volunteer at the University of
Bridgeport. The biomedical engineering major from Brooklyn, N.Y., grew up in a
neighborhood much like those of childrenin the Homebase program. Standing in the
middle of thes school's basketball court recently, watching a group of eighth
graders shoot baskets, Mr. Johns said he knows how difficult it will be for them
to beat tthe odds.

''Many of these kids have had the motivation knocked out of them at a real young
age,'' he said. ''And getting them to do something constructive can be a real
struggle. But the worst thing I could do is hang my head in shame and walk away
from the problem, because no matter how bad the situation gets, you've still got
to have hope.''

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photos; Members of Chi Psi Chi, a Southern Connecticut State University
fraternity, loaded clothes and food for the homeless, and Alice Henderson, a
University of Bridgeport graduate student, gave a swimming class, as part of
Homebase project. Anya Sverdlov, a Yale junior, worked in a New Haven soup
kitchen (NYT/Gale Zucker; Rollin A. Riggs; Steve Miller)

                   Copyright 1990 The New York Times Company


                              55 of 288 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                  April 15, 1990, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

IN SHORT;
FICTION

BYLINE: By CHARLES SALZBERG

SECTION: Section 7; Page 14, Column 1; Book Review Desk

LENGTH: 354 words



THE PHANTOM BLOOPER. By Gustav Hasford. (Bantam, $17.95.) In this sequel to
Gustav Hasford's first novel, ''The Short-Timers'' (which Stanley Kubrick turned
into the film, ''Full Metal Jacket''), James (Joker) Davis is still in Vietnam.
Only this time, instead of plying his trade as combat correspondent, he is
patrolling the boonies with the Vietcong. The title of Mr. Hasford's
well-crafted novel refers to a Caucasian, thought to be an American, who
appeared in actual press reports of the period and was believed by many soldiers
to be the leader of a Vietcong guerrilla force. To Joker and his fellow Marines,
this Phantom Blooper is a symbol, a near mythic force. ''He is,'' according to
Joker, ''the dark spirit of our collective bad consciences made real and
dangerous.'' In the first section of the book, set in the days when the Marines
are preparing to vacate Khe Sanh, Mr. Hasford effectively renders the chaos of
battle, the disintegration of authority, the futility of taking part in a war
that cannot and perhaps should not be won. During these final days, Joker is
captured by the enemy. For a year, this Alabama farm boy lives among the
Vietcong, a prisoner intent on escape from captors who plan to use him as a
propaganda tool against the Yankee imperialists. Before long, though, he begins
to identify with his former enemies in their struggle against the invader. ''If
the federal government of the United States died,'' he explains, ''I'd dance on
its grave. I've joined the side of people against the side of governments. I've
gone back to the land.'' In the final section of ''The Phantom Blooper,'' Joker,
after being rescued in battle, tries desperately to come to grips with his
Vietnam experiences. He is discharged from the Marines and re-enters civilian
life. Here Mr. Hasford occasionally falters, slipping into maudlin
philosophizing. But this is a minor lapse, one that is more than made up for by
his strength in vividly portraying the day-to-day life of the Vietcong
villagers, thereby giving us something we've rarely seen before: an empathetic
view of a heretofore faceless enemy.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Review

                   Copyright 1990 The New York Times Company


                              56 of 288 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                  April 16, 1990, Monday, Late Edition - Final

Books of The Times;
The Rise and Fall of a Thoroughly Vicious Gang

BYLINE: By Selwyn Raab

SECTION: Section C; Page 17, Column 1; Cultural Desk

LENGTH: 885 words



The Westies
Inside the Hell's Kitchen Irish Mob
By T. J. English
384 pages. G. P. Putnam's Sons. $21.95

Almost every blue-collar neighborhood of New York has spawned a legendary
criminal gang. Today these marauders mainly flourish by trafficking in
narcotics. In more tranquil times, the traditional rackets - bookmaking,
extortion, loansharking and robberies - nourished the local tough guys.

One neighborhood notorious for its share of traditional-style gangsters is
Hell's Kitchen, a tenderloin slice of Manhattan's West Side in the shadow of the
theater district. The most recent crop of cutthroats to emerge from the
neighborhood - gentrified and renamed Clinton - was a particularly vicious band
known as the Westies.

At their peak, the loosely organized Westies never numbered more than a dozen or
so thugs, but over a 20-year period ending in the mid-1980's, at least 30
murders were attributed to them. A grisly Westies trademark was the
dismemberment of victims and the disposal of their remains in the East River.
The butchery was a tactic devised by the Westies' leader, Jimmy Coonan, to
terrorize rival gangsters. Coonan also had the bright thought that the police
would have no reason to initiate an investigation if they didn't have a corpse.

Underlying any grisly crime story is the question of whether it is intended
primarily to titillate or if it contains a deeper dimension. T. J. English's
history of the gang's rise and fall in ''The Westies'' provides ample
bloodletting and depravities. But by trying to fit the Westies into a broader
canvas, he naively portrays them as a symbol of recent social upheavals among
working-class Irish-Americans. In the literary genre of misinterpreting
psychotic killers as amiable rogues, Mr. English inexplicably laments their
passing.

''As terrifying as the Westies had been,'' Mr. English writes, ''for those who'd
lived their entire lives in the neighborhood, the alternative was far more
unsettling - that the Hell's Kitchen Irish Mob, born of another age, was the
last vestige of a culture and community that would never be seen again.''

There is a redeeming aspect, however, in this, Mr. English's first, book.
Through the sick saga of ''The Westies,'' he unwittingly provides a raw example
of the chaos bedeviling the nation's clogged criminal-justice system.

As criminals, the Westies were consummate bunglers. They were arrested early and
often. They double-crossed and killed one another. Many of their murders and
assaults flowed from impetuous barroom brawls and their incompetent crimes more
often than not led to quick arrests.

Nevertheless, by intimidating witnesses, by hiring skillful lawyers and through
haphazard prosecutions, the Westies twisted the law and usually evaded
conviction. When the evidence was overwhelming, their lawyers evoked the magic
of plea bargaining to obtain light prison sentences.

Mr. Coonan and his chief henchman, Francis (Mickey) Featherstone, were masters
at wriggling out of legal complications. In a bar one night, a husky stranger
insulted Mr. Featherstone. A slightly built man with a temper more explosive
than his fists, Mr. Featherstone retaliated by shooting his tormentor dead.

At his trial, Mr. Featherstone pleaded insanity. His lawyer won the sympathy of
a jury and a judge by presenting Mr. Featherstone as a disturbed Army veteran
whose adolescent mind had snapped during savage combat in Vietnam. The verdict:
not guilty by reason of ''mental defect.''

Mr. Featherstone indeed served in Vietnam - as a stock clerk. He never saw
combat. His sole wound occurred during a drunken orgy when his buddies, as a
joke, circumcised him.

Courtroom machinations earned Mr. Coonan and Mr. Featherstone a neighborhood
reputation of invincibility. Moreover, by the late 1970's exaggerated yarns of
the Westies' exploits as the New Murder Inc. were fed to the press and
television by ambitious detectives, lawyers and prosecutors. In fact, a
detective invented the gang's name.

Befogged by alcohol and drugs, most Westies led a scrabbly existence as
criminals. Except for Mr. Coonan, who forged a link with the big boys in the
Mafia, including the reputed crime boss John Gotti, none of them prospered much
from their underworld endeavors.

Paradoxically, it was a miscarriage of justice that undermined the Westies. Mr.
Featherstone, who had escaped punishment for participating in at least six
murders, was wrongly convicted for a slaying committed by another Westie.
Instead of going to prison, Mr. Featherstone, believing that he had been framed
by his own pals, switched sides. Turning on his former confederates, he entered
the Federal Witness Protection Program, and as a prosecution witness helped to
dispatch them to long prison terms.

''The Westies'' is told largely through the perspective of Mr. Featherstone, and
Mr. English is treacly sympathetic about the reasons for Mr. Featherstone's
conversion and presumed rehabilitation. He is free after serving three years,
while Mr. Coonan was sentenced to 75 years.

Mr. English's account also relies too often on profanities as a substitute for
style and vivid writing. Despite its flaws, ''The Westies,'' by design or
chance, offers a disquieting look at a worthwhile subject: the frailities of
justice in a big city.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: photo: T. J. English (Martin Sheerin)

TYPE: Review

                   Copyright 1990 The New York Times Company


                              57 of 288 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 April 17, 1990, Tuesday, Late Edition - Final

MALAYSIA ACCUSED ON BOAT PEOPLE

BYLINE: By STEVEN ERLANGER, Special to The New York Times

SECTION: Section A; Page 6, Column 1; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 870 words

DATELINE: BANGKOK, Thailand, April 16


Despite continued protests from the United Nations High Commissioner for
Refugees, Malaysia is turning away Vietnamese boat people with increasing
frequency, diplomats and international relief workers say.

Since the end of May 1989, in violation of its agreement to provide first asylum
to the Vietnamese, the Malaysians have sent back out to sea at least 5,401
people arriving in at least 109 boats.

In March alone, according to the High Commissioner, at least 1,050 Vietnamese in
22 boats were denied asylum in Malaysia and forced to return to sea.

On Feb. 19, the Malaysians towed out to sea in a new boat 159 Vietnamese who had
been rescued on Feb. 8 by a commercial ship in Malaysian waters.

Plight 'Speaks for Itself'

The captain of the vessel, upon receiving a letter from the Vietnamese, wrote an
angry letter of his own to the refugee commissioner's office in Geneva, saying
the Vietnamese letter ''speaks for itself and I would not know any other way to
get attention to the fact that the Malaysian Government is knowingly putting
refugees back on the high seas from which they have just been rescued.''

The Malaysians have even tried to push off boats landing on Bidong Island, where
there is a refugee camp for Vietnamese boat people, in sight of officials of the
United Nations refugee office. But after intervention by those officials, the
Malaysians have been persuaded to accept the boats. The waters around Bidong
Island are ''defended'' against Vietnamese boats by naval and police patrol
boats and helicopters, diplomats and refugee officials say.

''In the beginning, the Malaysians were being very careful and selective, and
seemed to be simply trying to make a point,'' a senior refugee worker said.
''But now they are pushing off more and more people in a more haphazard way. The
noose seems to be tightening.''

As many as 50 to 60 percent of those Vietnamese boat people arriving in Malaysia
are now being sent back out to sea, diplomats say.

The Malaysian Prime Minister, Mahathir Mohamad, again denied last week that
Vietnamese boat people are being towed away or otherwise denied asylum. He has
said Malaysia is only ''preventing foreign vessels from entering our waters''
and protecting the rights of Malaysian fishermen.

Malaysian Is Indignant

But according to Eric E. Morris, representative of the High Commissioner in
Malaysia and Brunei, virtually all the Vietnamese boats first came ashore in
Malaysia. Often, the Vietnamese are regrouped and sent back out to sea by the
Malaysians in different, refurbished boats, diplomats said.

Mr. Mahathir also said Malaysia has done a great deal for refugees since 1975,
and diplomats say Malaysia treats those who are allowed to stay on Bidong Island
with decency. Mr. Mahathir renewed his complaint that resettlement countries
like the United States, Canada and Australia were ''picking and choosing'' the
Vietnamese they want, leaving Malaysia with what he has variously called ''the
residue'' and ''the scum.''

''Why should Malaysia be the repository of the unwanted of this world?'' he has
asked.

But according to the High Commissioner's office and to Western diplomats, the
Malaysian expulsions violate an agreement reached in June 1989 between
first-asylum countries like Malaysia and resettlement countries. The agreement
was reached at a conference in Geneva instigated by Malaysia.

The conference decided that all Vietnamese boat people arriving after a cutoff
date - June 16, 1988, in Hong Kong and March 14, 1989, for other Southeast Asian
nations - would no longer receive automatic status as refugees, but would be
screened to decide who among them were real refugees with a ''well-founded fear
of persecution'' and who were economic migrants.

Where U.S. Differs

The resettlement countries agreed to take all those who arrived before the
cutoff dates and those judged to be refugees. But a disagreement persists over
what to do with the economic migrants. Southeast Asian nations, the British, and
officials in some other countries think these migrants should be returned to
Vietnam, forcibly if necessary, as illegal immigrants. The United States and
Vietnam object to forcible repatriation.

In the meantime, the numbers of those screened out are growing, which is a prime
reason, diplomats say, that the Malaysians continue to push the new arrivals
away - despite an agreement in June that first-asylum countries would in the
meantime provide shelter for all who arrive.

The United Nations refugee officials interview Vietnamese who land further south
on Galang Island, near Singapore, which belongs to Indonesia. There is no way of
knowing how many Vietnamese are lost at sea after being denied asylum in
Malaysia, the High Commissioner's office says, but a Western diplomat said that
3 to 10 percent of boat people do not find safe havens and perish in shipwrecks,
from starvation or at the hands of pirates.

The Indonesians have sheltered all those pushed off from Malaysia, thus far
without complaint, diplomats say. The Thais have also kept the June agreement,
the diplomats say, but have been receiving about 1,000 boat people a month for
the last three months and are unhappy about it.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1990 The New York Times Company


                              58 of 288 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 April 17, 1990, Tuesday, Late Edition - Final

NEWS SUMMARY

SECTION: Section A; Page 2, Column 5; Metropolitan Desk

LENGTH: 1338 words



INTERNATIONAL    A2-19

Lithuania is prepared to compromise on some of the independence measures that
drove Moscow to threaten severe economic sanctions against the republic, the
Lithuanian Prime Minister said.    Page A1



Insurgency swept into Moscow. Long-suffering dissidents finally took control of
the Moscow City Council - and of the broken, demoralized city.    A1



Sculptor to honor Siberia's victims    A18



Czechoslovakia's sense of harmony after the ''velvet revolution'' that toppled
Communist rule last November has turned into discord in the Moravian capital of
Brno.    A18



The U.S. should not rejoin Unesco, the Bush Administration has decided. A State
Department report says that the U.N. organization wastes money, is poorly
managed and has not taken a firm stand in defense of freedom of the press.    A1



Blocked funds put U.S. role in Seville world fair in doubt    A8



Vancouver is fighting the AIDS virus by issuing clean needles to drug addicts
who want them. The program just marked its first anniversary and drew praise in
an article in The Canadian Journal of Public Health.    A16



Ortega warns of snag on contras    A12


Llosa announces he will remain in race in Peru    A2



Nepal's first multiparty government in 30 years will be formed. King Birendra
invited the national opposition, including Communist leaders, to form the new
government.    A3



Malaysia is turning away boat people from Vietnam with increasing frequency,
despite continued protests from the United Nations High Commissioner for
Refugees, diplomats and international relief workers say.    A6



News analysis: India's accusations that Pakistan is trying to provoke another
war over Kashmir are diverting attention from the inability of Prime Minister V.
P. Singh's Government to stem resurgent tides of secessionism.    A19



Sanctions against South Africa should continue, Nelson Mandela said. His call
took on special meaning in Britain, where Prime Minister Thatcher advocates a
relaxing of sanctions and has taken steps to do so.    A3



Ethiopian Government seen as fighting to survive    A5


Lusaka journal: All about what's going on in Zambia, slyly told    A4


  NATIONAL    A20-22, B8-10

The environment is at the forefront of American politics. Officials are finding
themselves forced to recast their public postures on hazardous waste, acid rain
and the ozone layer.    A1



Barrels of plutonium-laced material stored at the Rocky Flats nuclear weapons
plant actually contain wastes subject to regulation by Colorado and are being
stored illegally, a Federal judge has ruled.    B10



The battle against aircraft noise is being won by neighbors of airports around
the country whose complaints were once often shunted aside by government
officials and airlines.    A20



The shortage of affordable shelter for millions of needy people is putting
enormous pressure on the nation's already overburdened public housing system and
giving a new edge to an old policy debate.    A1



The final appeal of a retarded man who, as a teen-ager, murdered a state trooper
was turned down by the Supreme Court. By lifting its stay of execution, the
Court will allow Louisiana to execute the prisoner.    A1



Supreme Court lets stand a ban on school dance    A22


Convict suspected as drug figure flees Texas jail    B10



A strike by teachers in Oklahoma shut nearly a quarter of the school districts.
More than 18,000 teachers are protesting the Legislature's failure to pass an
education bill that would have included pay raises.    A20



Scores of transcendental meditators have moved their companies to Fairfield,
Iowa, or begun new ones there. And they have brought with them prosperity and
growth to an isolated patch of America's heartland.    A22



Cincinnati arts center denies obscenity charges    B8


Washington Talk: Rewriting a budget (and its rules?)    A20



REGIONAL    B1-6

Mayor Dinkins will not be able to vote as a member of the Board of Estimate on
the renewal of two cable television franchises in Manhattan, the Conflicts of
Interest Board ruled.    B1



Two men Mayor Dinkins depends on, Norman Steisel and Bill Lynch, have developed
a steady relationship, comfortably sharing power and the Mayor's confidence.
B3



The School of Library Service at Columbia University, the oldest and one of the
most prestigious library schools in the nation, may close at the end of the
academic year.    B1



7 Days has ceased publishing. Started two years ago with great fanfare, the
magazine became popular with New York trendsetters, but it could not generate
advertising support.    D1



The leader of a group of white youths ''boasted that he would 'blow the heads
off the nigger bastards' '' hours before Yusuf K. Hawkins was shot to death, a
prosecutor asserted in his opening statement in the Bensonhurst murder trial.
    B1



The teen-ager killed by a policeman in Teaneck, N.J., last Tuesday was buried
after a funeral service marked by muted anger amid themes of reconciliation and
reform.    B2



An alarming number of teen-agers and even children as young as 6 are riding
outside elevators as they sweep up and down the shafts of high-rise housing
projects.    B1



Cuomo says budget is close, but legislators are less sure    B2


Daily News stops checkoffs    B2


Broadway producer pleads guilty to defrauding investors    B3


Animal-rights advocate agrees to year in jail in bomb plot    B3


Judge urged to allow more tests without answers disclosed    B4



BUSINESS DIGEST    D1



SCIENCE TIMES

In a restricted diet, tantalizing clues to longevity    C1


The anguish of a heart valve's failure haunts the developer    C1


Ancient paintings in the Amazon, but how ancient?    C1


Medical detectives track down an elusive odor disorder    C3


Can a nice green lawn be hazardous to your health?    C4


Search for brown dwarfs in space heats up    C6


Personal Computers    C7


Peripherals    C8


Science Watch    C9


Science Q&A    C11



ARTS/ENTERTAINMENT

Chinese loyalty and dissent in art    C13


Alice Munro writes of home    C13


Theater: ''The Piano Lesson''    C13


Music: Classical Band and Grande Bande    C14


Exploring the trombone    C15


Chamber Music Society    C16


Dance: By and for students    C20


Word and Image
2 novellas by Natalia Ginzburg    C17


Migrant workers' plight, on TV    C18



FASHION

B13



Tokyo, where fashion is an art
Patterns
By Design

SPORTS

Baseball: Mets clobber Cubs    D21


Coach gets Yanks back to basics    D25


Brewers rout Red Sox, 18-0    D25


Basketball: Knicks win    D21


N.B.A. Notebook    D25


Columns: Anderson on Don King    D21


On Horse Racing    D23


Hockey: Rangers plan strategy    D24


Devils' hopes unravel    D24


Lacrosse: Notebook    D23


Marathon: Bordin and Mota win in Boston    D21


SportsPeople    D23



OBITUARIES    B12



Marco A. Robles, former President of Panama
Raymond Parker, abstract artist

EDITORIALS/LETTERS/OP-ED

Editorials    A24



America, arrogant trade cop
China policy, twice tainted
Her face kept secrets
Lost lesson of mental health

Letters    A24



Anthony Lewis: Verdict on Reagan    A25


Flora Lewis: The last war in Europe    A25


Victor Danilenko: Vilnius - its own worst enemy    A25


Humphrey Taylor: U.S. health care - built for waste    A25


LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Summary

                   Copyright 1990 The New York Times Company


                              59 of 288 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                  April 20, 1990, Friday, Late Edition - Final

LAW;
How a '74 Fracas Led to a High Court Libel Case

BYLINE: By DAVID MARGOLICK, Special to The New York Times

SECTION: Section B; Page 8, Column 3; National Desk

LENGTH: 1720 words

DATELINE: MAPLE HEIGHTS, Ohio, April 14


Sixteen years have passed since the wrestling match between the Mustangs of
Maple Heights High School and the Mentor High Cardinals degenerated into a
vicious brawl. But for Michael Milkovich, the melee lives on, though the people
grappling now are lawyers, and their arena is the United States Supreme Court.

Even Mr. Milkovich, a man who was to Ohio wrestling what Woody Hayes was to Ohio
football, would concede that the stakes now are higher than they were in 1974,
when only the Greater Cleveland Conference crown was on the line.

When the High Court, which twice before declined to hear Mr. Milkovich's case,
finally hears arguments on it next week, at issue will be a man's reputation, a
free press and the thin line the law draws between facts and opinions. More
specifically, the Justices must address a question that news organizations
consider critical: whether columns, editorials and other articles that include
the writer's opinion must be held to the same standard of accuracy as regular
news coverage.

After the fracas, which involved fans as well as wrestlers, a local sports
columnist wrote that Mr. Milkovich, Maple Heights's longtime wrestling coach,
lied under oath about his role in fomenting the episode. Contrary to the coach's
account, the columnist asserted, Mr. Milkovich had baited officials, egged on
the excited crowd and finally stood by when the fight erupted.

The accusation stung Mr. Milkovich, a man so revered in this bedroom community
near Cleveland that a school here is named for him. He sued the columnist, J.
Theodore Diadiun, and his newspaper, The News-Herald of Willoughby, Ohio, for
libel.

Dozens of Judges Involved

In Mr. Milkovich's 27 years of coaching here, his teams won 10 state
championships. But victory in court has proved far more elusive. Since it was
filed in 1975, Mr. Milkovich's suit has wandered through the judiciary. By his
count, 70 to 80 judges have considered it.

Along its arduous way, the case has raised a host of issues, both legal and
political. There is the vexing matter of when someone becomes a public figure,
and whether a man who once promoted himself as ''Ohio's No. 1 High School
Coach'' qualifies as one. Under the law, public figures must generally put up
with much harsher criticism than ordinary citizens. Another issue is whether, as
Mr. Milkovich has charged - and a Justice of the Ohio Supreme Court has echoed
-judges currying favor with the press are gutting the law of libel.

But most important is the subtle distinction between an assertion of fact, which
can be refuted and can therefore be defamatory, and an opinion, for which
targets have no legal remedy.

Rallying Behind Team

In March 1974, a month after the brawl, which sent four Mentor wrestlers to the
hospital, the Ohio High School Athletic Association censured Mr. Milkovich and
barred his team from the next state championship as punishment. But through a
series of house-to-house bottle drives and spaghetti dinners, local residents
raised $4,000 to appeal the suspension. In January 1975, after hearing testimony
from Mr. Milkovich and others, a judge in Columbus lifted the ban.

The next day Mr. Diadiun (pronounced DIE-a-dun) assailed the ruling in his
column. Under the headline ''Maple Beat the Law With the 'Big Lie' ,'' he
charged that Mr. Milkovich had perjured himself before the judge. The lesson, he
wrote, was ''if you get into a jam, lie your way out.'' The sportswriter had
witnessed the melee and Mr. Milkovich's appearance before the athletic
association, but not the hearing before the judge. He based his account on an
interview with the athletic association commissioner, who was in the courtroom.

Mr. Diadiun's lawyers, from Wickens, Herzer & Panza of Lorain, Ohio, assert that
his column represents ''emotionally charged commentary'' rather than a statement
of fact and cannot be libelous.

News Organizations Concerned

Standing behind Mr. Diadiun and The News-Record is an array of news
organizations, including the three major broadcast television networks, Dow
Jones & Company, The Washington Post, and The New York Times, which filed a
joint friend-of-the-court brief in the case.

Against the news media giants stand the 68-year-old Mr. Milkovich, who retired
in 1977, and his lawyer, Brent L. English of Cleveland. The average reader, Mr.
English argues, would consider Mr. Diadiun's writings to be ''an accusation of a
pernicious crime rather than a mere expression of his opinion.''

In 15 years of litigation, the Lorain Journal Company, which owns The
News-Herald, has spent nearly $500,000 in legal fees on the case, according to
Richard A. Naegele of Wickens, Herzer. The firm has collected so much in fees
that its lawyers call one portion of their office building the ''Milkovich
wing.'' Mr. Milkovich has spent $40,000 of his own money on the case, while Mr.
English has donated at least $250,000 worth of his time. For all this, never has
the original question - whether Mr. Milkovich indeed lied - been answered.

Pride in the Paper

As for Mr. Diadiun, who at 43 is now metropolitan editor of The Cleveland Plain
Dealer, it sometimes seems that more copies of his column have been appended to
court briefs than were originally printed in The News-Herald.

Maple Heights, a place unremarkable for either its trees or its altitude, is one
of those suburban communities that sprouted after World War II. Its historical
society dates back only to 1982. The town consists largely of houses so simple
and so much alike they almost belong on a Monopoly board, into which residents -
primarily of Polish, Italian and Czechoslovak extraction - poured their savings,
their energies and their pride.

Sport as Religion

Single-mindedly and almost single-handedly, Mr. Milkovich, the brother, uncle
and father of several former state wrestling champions as well as one himself,
put Maple Heights on the map, turning wrestling into a kind of religion.

Matches were like frenzied revival meetings, in which the coach, dressed in a
red shirt so that his wrestlers could spot him during matches, presided over as
many as 4,000 parishioners. There were pilgrimages, like the busloads of
students and their families who headed to Columbus each March for the state
championship. There were also acolytes: a Wrestlers' Dads club, cheerleaders and
boosters and pep clubs and ''mat maids,'' who assembled huge quilt-like cakes
that the entire student body shared after victories.

And there were disciples, notably the 1,500 boys who wrestled for Mr. Milkovich.
They were, by and large, the sons of blue-collar families, with names like
DiDomenico and Borczsz, Gucciardo and Sadowsky. Many would never gone to college
but for the athletic scholarships the coach got them. Five of Mr. Milkovich's
wrestlers were killed in Vietnam.

School Named for Him

In 1983, over the opposition of two local officials who remembered the brawl,
the middle school was named for him. When, in the year 2076, the citizens of
Maple Heights retrieve the time capsule placed in the cornerstone of the county
library a century earlier, they will find one of Mr. Milkovich's wrestling
medals in it. The only blot on the Milkovich legend was the melee with visiting
Mentor, a town 23 miles to the northeast.

To this day, Mr. Milkovich maintains that he did nothing wrong and that the
whole episode was overblown. ''The kids who went to the hospital received two
aspirin and that was it,'' he said. He told the same thing to both the athletic
commission and the judge who lifted its suspension. Was an Oath Violated?  In
the column written after that decision, Mr. Diadiun complained that the judge
had fallen for Mr. Milkovich's ''polished and reconstructed'' story. ''Anyone
who attended the meet knows in his heart that Milkovich lied at the hearing
after having given his solemn oath to tell the truth,'' he wrote.

Once the article appeared, Mr. Milkovich said, ''The whole student body wanted
to know how a coach could lie under oath and get away with it, and how many
other things you got in your life by lying and cheating.'' He offered two
explanations for Mr. Diadiun's column, the first facetious. ''I think he was
high when he wrote it,'' he said, ''And he wanted to sell newspapers.''

''That's just not true,'' Mr. Diadiun said. ''I had always admired Milkovich. I
was reacting to what I thought was a miscarriage of justice.''

Up and Down the Courts

For several years, the case bounced between the trial and appellate courts of
Ohio and the United States Supreme Court, which twice declined to hear it. In
December 1984 a divided Ohio Supreme Court ruled that the ''plain import'' of
the column ''is that Milkovich committed the crime of perjury.'' But in 1987,
that court reversed itself and held that the article was, after all, opinion. It
noted that the article was printed under the words ''T.D. Says,'' and that it
appeared on the sports page, ''a traditional haven for cajoling, invective and
hyperbole.''

In dissent, Justice Clifford F. Brown called the ruling a ''verbal orgy of
nonsensical jargon'' and accused the majority, two of whom had recently been
elected to the court with the editorial support of the state's newspapers, of
kowtowing to the news media.

Mr. Milkovich, once a robust, barrel-chested man, has grown pale and frail. His
wife, whom he met at a wrestling match, is now in a nursing home, and Mr.
Milkovich himself had triple bypass surgery a few weeks ago. He is too weak to
go to Washington to hear the arguments in his case.

Mr. Milkovich goes to matches only rarely these days, fearful that he might get
too excited and suffer the same fate as the father of one Maple Heights
wrestler, who during one match not long ago had a heart attack and died. In a
recent visit to the school gymnasium, whose air was thick with a compound of
sweat and antiseptic and wet rubber, Mr. Milkovich counseled the young wrestlers
only halfheartedly before giving up and sitting down. ''I've had enough of it,''
he said. ''I'm burned out.'' But he remains optimistic about the outcome -
''They wouldn't have picked my case over 400 others if it was a hot-dog case,''
he said - and offered Mr. English some advice on how to handle the Justices.
''Don't let 'em shout you down,'' he said.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photos: Michael Milkovich, left, former wrestling coach of Maple
Heights High School in Ohio, whose 1975 libel suit against a local sports
columnist is to be considered next week by the United States Supreme Court. J.
Theodore Daidiun, right, who is now metropolitan editor of The Cleveland Plain
Dealer, is being sued for a column he wrote 15 years ago in The News-Herald of
Willoughby, Ohio, also named in the suit. (The New York Times/Luci Williams)

                   Copyright 1990 The New York Times Company


                              60 of 288 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 April 21, 1990, Saturday, Late Edition - Final

OBSERVER;
Don't Worry, Feel Good

BYLINE: By Russell Baker

SECTION: Section 1; Page 23, Column 1; Editorial Desk

LENGTH: 743 words


A bunch of famous rock musicians get together and make a record for a really
good cause.

A public-relations guy cooks up a great photo opportunity: people standing in
streets and highways all across the country, hands joined to make a human
transcontinental chain.

A politician spends millions by the dozen to saturate TV screens with pictures
of people being happy while a fellow with a voice-of-God type voice intones:
''It's morning in America.''

And so on, with feel-good, good-cause public-relations gimcrackery, rhymes with
quackery.

Everybody feels good, shells out, votes happy.

Great for stuffing always ravenous media maw. Much ink, much video time (90
seconds in prime time; full three minutes on A.M. breakfast shows!).

TV panel-show regulars appear with famous rock stars to discuss great issues:
Will rock 'n' roll save the world? Can human chains stop starvation? End war?
Save the whales?

Never mind, not to worry. Why worry when it's morning in America? Don't worry,
be happy. Feel good about linking hands in human chain for good causes.

Get that good-guy feeling by buying a record with all your rock favorites
stamping out war, starvation, rhinoceros poachers with really great music.

Re-elect those wonderful morning-in-America guys and feel good for days
afterward. (''No more feel-bad; read my lips.'') You're in Public Relations
World, folks, which is why you hear yourselves being called ''folks.'' The most
important citizens of P.R. World (we're not stuffy about proper names here,
folks) are folks.

You can always tell folks from nonfolks. Folks like to feel good, like to smile
for the camera when there's a big photo opportunity for a really good cause.

Folks are the ones who believe it will always be morning in America and never
listen to cynics saying, ''Sure, and that morning that is eternal is Monday
morning.'' (At this point the Artist was interrupted by the Editor, and dialogue
ensued.) Editor: If you intend to come out against Earth Day, go ahead and do
it, but please, please, stop the hot air about public relations and get on with
it.

Artist: You'd like me to come out against Earth Day, wouldn't you? You think all
humanity would be so horrified that they would rise up against me crying, ''What
kind of monster would be down on Earth Day? What kind of paper hires such a
beast?'' Then you'd have an excuse to fire me - Editor (interrupting): If you
want to write piffle nobody's going to read, it's no skin off my nose. I'm just
advising you: If you're against Earth Day, say so. If you're not, just say
whatever you're trying to say and wind it up.

Saying which, the Editor walked away, shaking his head. How little he
understands the literary art. Here am I, struggling to paint a portrait of a
once great nation that has fallen prey to the public-relations plague, and all
he wants is for me to take an editorial stand on Earth Day.

For or against Earth Day? What difference does it make? A few hours after Earth
Day is over there will be something new, a New Thing, demanding everyone's
attention.

The always ravenous media maw will insist upon it and public-relations people,
who know how quickly we tire of yesterday's fantastic event, will create it for
us: a brand new New Thing, rich in photo ops and feel-good potential.

If good sense were involved here, of course I would be against Earth Day, for
the simple reason that practically everybody else is for it. When you find
something being supported by practically everybody, watch your step.

Anything that isn't opposed by about 40 percent of humanity is either an evil
business or so unimportant that it simply doesn't matter. In the first category
I list the Tonkin Gulf resolution, approved by every member of the Senate but
two, which President Johnson later used to justify full-scale war in Vietnam.

The second category (simply doesn't matter) is probably where Earth Day belongs.
It's a media event, which is to say a public-relations stunt for the folks of
P.R. World.

Another good reason for opposing it is that it's a feel-good stunt. A day spent
praising the earth and lamenting man's pollutionist history makes you feel like
a superior, sensitive soul.

You enjoy the smug warmth of feeling like one of the good guys, and it doesn't
cost you a cent, which, as George (''Read My Lips'') Bush realizes, you're
probably too cheap to pay. It's the kind of thing we do beautifully here in P.R.
World: inconsequentiality.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Op-ed

                   Copyright 1990 The New York Times Company


                              61 of 288 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                  April 22, 1990, Sunday, Late Edition - Final
                              Correction Appended

U.S. WILL ARM PERU TO FIGHT LEFTISTS IN NEW DRUG PUSH

BYLINE: By JAMES BROOKE, Special to The New York Times

SECTION: Section 1; Part 1, Page 1, Column 6; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 1662 words

DATELINE: LIMA, Peru, April 20


The United States and Peruvian Governments have agreed to send American military
trainers to Peru as part of a new American campaign to help this country fight
leftist guerrillas who are said to protect coca growers and traffickers.

To combat the guerrillas, members of a group called Shining Path, the United
States plans to build a military-training base in the heart of the coca-growing
area, to train and equip six battalions, to provide river patrol boats and to
refurbish 20 ground-attack jets, a top American official said here.

The trainers, who are to be members of the United States Army Special Forces,
are to be restricted to their base and are not to take part in any operations,
officials said.

'A Dramatic Change'

The State Department today authorized the United States Ambassador here, Thomas
Quainton, to sign an agreement with Peru's Defense Minister, Julio Velazquez
Giaccarini, allowing the $35 million military aid package to be disbursed.

Previous United States assistance to Peru had been restricted to operations
directly linked to stopping the cultivation, processing and smuggling of coca
and its derivatives, and involved the Peruvian national police and the United
States Drug Enforcement Administration. The Peruvian armed forces were given
only token assistance. ''It represents a dramatic change from the past,'' the
American official said of the military aid program, which last year cost
$500,000. ''We haven't had a relationship with the military here in 20 years.''
New Ground for Bush The amount allocated for Peru represents less than half what
Washington spends on military aid for El Salvador this year, for instance, but
it is the first large financial commitment to a counterinsurgency effort in the
developing world to be initiated by the Bush Administration.

The $35 million figure was first mentioned in discussions between Peruvian and
United States officials last fall, but final approval was withheld pending
agreement on how the money would be spent. Also figuring in the negotiations was
the insistence by some members of Congress that the money be linked to a
Peruvian Government promise to improve its human-rights record. That promise was
apparently made.

A spokesman at the United States Embassy in Lima said the money comes ''from
different pots'' that are ''to be used by foreign militaries for anti-drug
activities.'' He said he did not have specific information on the sources of the
money.

Shining Path, which seeks to impose a worker-peasant state in Peru, has a
history of violence and terrorism against local officials. It is said to have
taken up the cause of growers of coca leaf in the Upper Huallaga Valley, source
of half the world's raw cocaine.

The organization, which takes its name from the writings of a Peruvian Marxist
philosopher, Jose Carlos Mariategui, has been fighting the Government for 10
years and controls large parts of the Upper Huallaga Valley. It levies ''war
taxes'' on the pasant growers and the Colombian traffickers who fly the
semi-refined coca base to Colombian jungle laboratories for final processing.

These activities, according to the United States, have made Shining Path an
increasingly important factor in anti-drug operations, blurring the line between
counterinsurgency and the cocaine war.

''In the case of the Upper Huallaga, the security situation is exacerbated by
subversion,'' an official at the United States Embassy said in March. ''You
can't draw a black-and-white line.''

On April 7, Shining Path attacked Santa Lucia, an American-built anti-drug base
in the Huallaga. The new training base is to be built within 15 miles of Santa
Lucia.

Protecting U.S. Agents

United States officials here emphasized that the counterinsurgency effort was
directed primarily at the Upper Huallaga in an effort to protect the D.E.A.
operation in the region.

Peruvian Army and Defense Ministry officials declined comment on the new
American program, which is to be formally announced here next week at a signing
ceremony for the first installment of the aid.

Support for the American program is thought to be high at the upper levels of
Peru's armed forces, which are ill-equipped to fight the decade-old
insurrection. Last year, 3,198 deaths were attributed to guerrilla violence -a
five-year high.

''It's positive,'' said Sinesio Jarama, a retired army general who commanded
military operations in the Huallaga in the mid-1980's. ''Peru does not have the
means to maintain its armed forces - rations, uniforms, rifles, helicopter
fuel.''

Kerry Is Skeptical

Others were skeptical about the wisdom of the United States commitment.

''I am concerned about our getting involved, without enough discussion, in the
middle of a civil war,'' Senator John F. Kerry, Democrat of Massachusetts and a
Vietnam War veteran, said in an interview from Washington.

In Peru, one expert on the Shining Path said that American involvement would
bolster the guerrillas' ''anti-imperialist'' claim.

''It is throwing gasoline on the fire,'' said the expert, Gustavo Gorriti, a
journalist who is writing a history of Shining Path. ''The bases will be
converted into visible symbols for Shining Path recruiting propaganda.''

Both candidates in Peru's presidential race, Alberto Fujimori and Mario Vargas
Llosa, have said they would accept the presence of foreign military advisers to
help Peru in its counterinsurgency effort, but Mr. Fujimori, the front-runner,
said last week that he opposed direct participation by Americans in the
fighting.

Mr. Fujimori has said that when it comes to cocaine trafficking, the United
States should place its highest priority on reducing domestic demand, and limit
its activities in Peru to helping to raid drug laboratories, blow up clandestine
airstrips and promote crop-substitution programs.

American officials did not say how many Americans would take part in the
training program, but emphasized that the American presence is to be kept to a
minimum.

''The goal is not to have a long-term American presence,'' the top American
official said of the military training base, which eventually is to be entirely
staffed by Peruvians.

Site Being Surveyed

American engineers are already surveying a site for the training base, which is
to be operating by the end of this year.

''They are talking about American military engineers going in there and throwing
up the base real fast,'' another United States Embassy spokesman said of the
training site.

Staffed at first with United States Army Special Forces instructors, the base is
to train company-size units in weapons care, marksmanship, jungle warfare, night
patrolling, map reading and jungle hygiene.

Under the program, all soldiers are to receive new equipment - field uniforms,
packs, boots and M-16 rifles. Companies will receive field radios. Under the
Peruvian-American agreement, finalized this month after several months of
negotiations, all soldiers in the five army battalions and the one marine
battalion now operating in the Upper Huallaga are to go through the training
course - roughly 5,500 men.

Help for Air Force and Navy

The program also includes aid for Peru's air force and navy.

The United States is to pay for the refurbishing and relocation of 20 A-37
ground-attack planes. The planes have been stationed in Piura, where they guard
the border with Ecuador.

Changing mission and location, this air wing will now be based in the northern
Huallaga, probably in Tarapoto, where it can be used to intercept planes
carrying semi-refined coca base to Colombia.

Peru's navy, which has an admiral based in the Amazonian river town of Iquitos,
is to receive six river patrol boats.

A River Battle

Last Wednesday, a fierce engagement on the Huallaga River underlined the
importance of motor launches for patrolling Peru's remote jungle area.

Traveling in two patrol boats about 50 miles downstream from the Santa Lucia
police base, an army unit encountered a Shining Path detachment preparing to
dynamite a bridge over the river.

In the engagement that followed, 12 guerrillas, the army platoon commander and
two of his soldiers were killed, the army said.

The top American official predicted that for the rest of this year, the Peruvian
police commander at Santa Lucia would be continuing a strategy of quick raids on
the growers' and processers' infrastructure. Since operations began last
September, the police have destroyed 90 laboratories and 13,000 square yards of
coca seedbeds.

Last month, the American and Peruvian helicopter pilots adopted a new refueling
technique involving remote fuel dumps that doubled the range of the nine UH-1H
Huey helicopters on loan from the United States. With this new range, the
helicopters can cover the entire Huallaga Valley, eliminating the need for a new
operations base in the area, American officials said here.

But American drug experts argued that as early as next year a second anti-drug
base may be needed to patrol a new coca-growing area emerging in farmlands
irrigated by the Ene and Tombo Rivers.



STATE DEPT. DEFENDS U.S. MOTIVES

WASHINGTON, April 21 (Special to The New York Times) - A State Department
official involved in Latin American matters disputed any suggestion that the new
military aid to Peru was specifically intended to combat Shining Path.

''This is not counterinsurgency funding,'' he said. ''We've been working with
the Peruvian military for a long time, and this is money that is related to the
drug war.''

But in Lima, a high United States official said the new aid has ''an element of
anti-subversion.'' He noted the 70-fold increase in assistance to the Peruvian
military and the fact that Peruvian soldiers will receive United States training
for the first time.

''The battalions will be going after terrorists who are aiding affickers,'' the
official said. ''The two phenomenon are inextricably linked in the Upper
Huallaga.''

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

CORRECTION-DATE: April 29, 1990, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

CORRECTION:

An article last Sunday about an agreement to send American military trainers to
Peru incorrectly identified the United States Ambassador there. He is Anthony C.
E. Quainton.

GRAPHIC: Map: Peru indicating Upper Huallage River Valley (pg. 18)

                   Copyright 1990 The New York Times Company


                              62 of 288 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                  April 22, 1990, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

HOME ENTERTAINMENT/VIDEO: AND KEEP IN MIND

SECTION: Section 2; Page 30, Column 1; Arts and Leisure Desk

LENGTH: 688 words



Here are some notable releases of the last few months.

THE ABYSS - ''A gigantic sea monster of a film about marriage, death, nuclear
war and alien life forms can be described in these words: E.T. Underwater.''
(Caryn James) 1989. CBS/fox. $89.98. LD, $49.98. 2:20. CC. PG-13.

THE BIG PICTURE - Christopher Guest's Hollywood sendup about the adventures of a
film student is ''consistently genial'' and ''intermittently funny.'' (Vencent
Canby) 1989. RCA/Columbia. $89.95. LD. $34.95. 1:40. CC. Pg-13.

CASUALTIES OF WAR - Sean Penn is ''extremely fine'' as a ''comradely
foul-mouthed naif'' in Brian De Palma's ''earnest, troubling'' film about rape
and murder in Vietnam. (Canby) 1989. RCA/Columbia. $89.95. LD, $34.95. 1:53. CC.
R.

DEAD POETS SOCIETY - Robin Williams is the most vivid character in Peter Weir's
film, which moves with such predictability that one must walk very slowly not to
walk ahead of it.'' (Canby) 1989. Touchstone. $89.95. LD: $39.99. 2:08. CC. PG.

FIELD OF DREAMS - This fantasy about baseball ''does the almost impossible trick
of turning sentimentality into true emotion.'' (James) 1989. MCA. No suggested
price. 1:46. CC. PG.

HONEY, I SHRUNK THE KIDS - Dad (Rick Moranis)makes the offsring knee-high to an
ant in an ''old-fashioned romp that conveys a sense of wonder.'' (James) 1989.
Disney. $22.99. LD, $34.95. 1:41. CC. PG.

JOHNNY HANDSOME - Walter Hill's film about a thief who sets out to get even with
the moll (Ellen Barkin) and others who have betrayed him is ''played by a
furiusly vibrant cast in the hard-boiled manner that Mr.Hill favors.'' (Maslin)
1989. I.V.E. $89.95. LD, $39.95. !:36. CC. R.

LETHAL WEAPON 2 - Richard Donner's sequel with Mel Gibosn and Danny Glover. ''If
you liked 'Lethal Weapon,' you'll like 'Lethal Weapon 2,' '' (James) 1989.
Warner. $24.98. LD. $24.98. 1:54. CC. R.

LOOK WHO'S TALKING - ''Cute is the operative word'' as a bay with the voice of
Bruce Willis looks for a suitable father. Kirstie Allie and John Travolta ''are
O.K.'' as mom and prospective dad. (Canby) 1989. RCA/Columbia. No price listed.
LD, $34.95. 1:36. CC. PG-13.

MURMUR OF THE HEART - Louis Malle's film about a young boy's incestuous
relationship with his mother. ''A comdey of uncommonly high order.'' (Canby)
1971. Orion. $79.98. LD, $49.95. 1:58. R.

THE PAJAMA GAME - Doris Day, John Rait, ''Hey There,'' Hernando's hideaway and
boy meets union girl in an Iowa shirt factory. ''The whole thing is splendid,''
said the Times reviewer. 1957. Warner. $59.95. 1:41. CC. No rating.

PRINCESS TAM TAM - Josephine Bker storms Paris as a reconstructed Indian
princess in a film that ''catches and preserves something of the star's singular
grace and frequently self-mocking humor.'' 1935. Kino. $59.95. 1:17. No rating.

QUEEN OF HEARTS - Jon Amiel's film about a woman, her son and her spurned former
finace leads to a ''conclusion that is very much about family matters,'' (James)
1989. M.C.E.G./Virgin. $89.95. LD, $39.95. 1:52. CC. PG.

SHOW BOAT - Irene Dunne, Allan Jones, Helen Morgan and Paul Robeson in the
Kern-Hammerstein adaptation of Edna Ferber's novel. ''One of the best muscial
shows of the century,'' wrote the Times critic. 1936. MGM/UA. $29.95. 1:54. No
rating.

WOMEN IN LOVE - Ken Russell's adaptation of the D.H. Lawrence novel stars Glenda
Jackson, Alan Bates and Oliver Reed. ''A movie of action that is almost as
romantic as something by a Bronte sister.'' (Canby) 1969. MGM/UA. $29.95. 2:09.
R.

YOUNG EINSTEIN - Yahoo Serius wrote, directed and stars is in a''smart-stupid
film'' filled with ''visual jokes so stupendously dumb they are actually
funny.'' (James) 1988. Warner. $89.95. LD, 4.98. 1:25. CC. PG.



FOR CHILDREN

THE ADVENTURES OF MILO AND OTIS - This picaresque odyssey of a cat and dog is
''occasionally fearful but never terrifying.'' (Holden) 1989. RCA/Columbia.
$89.95.LD, $34.95. 1:16. CC. G.

BAMBI - ''Walt Disney's wizards,'' as a contemporary critic called them, work
their magic. 1942. Disney. $26.99. LD, $39.99. 1:09. CC. G.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Review

                   Copyright 1990 The New York Times Company


                              63 of 288 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                  April 22, 1990, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

HOLOCAUST MUSEUM: A TROUBLED START

BYLINE: By Judith Miller; Judith Miller is deputy media editor of The Times.
This article is adapted from her book ''One, by One, by One: Facing the
Holocaust,'' to be published next month by Simon and Schuster.

SECTION: Section 6; Page 34, Column 1; Magazine Desk

LENGTH: 3611 words


IN THE HEART OF THE NATION'S CAPITAL, in sight of the Jefferson and Lincoln
Memorials, an extraordinary museum is slowly being built. While the other
buildings around the Mall pay tribute to the nation's achievements, the United
States Holocaust Memorial Museum will commemorate one of the world's most
terrible tragedies.

When it is completed in 1993, the 250,000-square-foot national museum will be
able to accommodate as many as one million visitors a year. Although the $100
million structure is America's most ambitious effort to commemorate the
Holocaust, it is not the only one. In October 1980, Congress unanimously
embraced in law and in the name of the American people the duty of ''Holocaust
remembrance'' - through the construction of memorials and the designation of an
annual Holocaust Remembrance Day (this year, it is today). Since then,
commemoration projects have proliferated. A 1988 directory of Holocaust
institutions lists 19 museums, 48 resource centers, 34 archives, 12 memorials,
26 research institutes and 5 libraries.

President Ronald Reagan unveiled the museum's cornerstone in October 1988. To
most onlookers, the ceremony seemed an exquisite occasion of harmony and
solidarity. But this was not the case. The lofty speeches and rhetoric about
remembrance masked a rancor that had worsened with each of the nine years it
took to bring the museum to that point. In fact, the acrimony was so intense
that Elie Wiesel - the chairman of the commission that first explored the
building of the museum - and others who had played important roles in the
project's early days chose not to attend the ceremony.

The tensions were not primarily a result of a clash of egos, although
personality differences exacerbated them. At the heart of the breach were
conflicting answers to crucial questions. What is the best way to honor the
memory of Holocaust victims? What sort of monument should be built? Since the
Holocaust had occurred in Europe, should the memorial be a national museum in
Washington? Most important, whose suffering should be included? That of the six
million Jews alone? Or of the 4 million to 20 million non-Jewish victims - whose
numbers depend on which historian or politician is counting?

THE IDEA OF A NATIONAL HOLOCAUST MEMORIAL was initially promoted in mid-1977 by
three Jewish officials in Jimmy Carter's Administration: Stuart Eizenstat,
Carter's chief domestic policy adviser; Mark A. Siegel, a liaison with the
Jewish community who worked on the White House staff, and Ellen Goldstein,
another staff member. Eizenstat had been concerned, he says, not only about the
erosion of memory of the war among people of his generation, but also about the
growing incidents of Holocaust revisionism.

Siegel asked Goldstein to prepare a memorandum on how other nations had
commemorated the Holocaust and what, if anything, the United States should do.
Siegel then sent President Carter a memorandum suggesting that the United States
consider establishing a national memorial. The proposal went nowhere, Siegel
recalls, until a year later when relations between Carter and the typically
pro-Democratic Jewish community plummeted.

Carter had angered American Jewish leaders by endorsing a ''homeland'' for
Palestinians. He had also overrun the usually invincible Jewish lobby on Capitol
Hill when Congress approved a major sale of F-15 fighter aircraft to Saudi
Arabia. Siegel resigned over the sale.

In March 1978, Goldstein sent a second memorandum about a national Holocaust
memorial, this time to Eizenstat, who in turn discussed the matter with the
President. Three months later, Carter surprised a group of rabbis he was meeting
in the Rose Garden by saying he had decided to appoint a commission to explore
the construction of a Holocaust memorial.

Almost immediately, the central divisive issue emerged: how universal should the
memorial be?

Although there was general agreement that the commission should be charged with
deciding what kind of memorial would be appropriate, there were divergent views
on its members. Anne Wexler, a Presidential aide who was the liaison with
various ethnic groups and Democratic constituencies, argued that neither the
commission nor the council that succeeded it in 1980 should be composed solely
of Jews. The panel had to be representative of all people who had suffered at
Hitler's hands during the war, she said; if the representation were not
broad-based, the recommendations would not win Congressional backing.

But Wiesel - the writer and survivor of Auschwitz - insisted that the groups be
composed mainly of Jewish survivors of the Holocaust. Slowly he accepted the
membership of a few ''righteous gentiles'' - those who had helped save Jews.
''Then Anne pressed for the inclusion of Lithuanians involved in resistance
against the Nazis, and Elie became very upset,'' Eizenstat recalls. ''The
Lithuanians, Elie argued, had been part of the problem, not the solution.'' But
Wexler prevailed.

Wiesel ultimately accepted a rather diverse group of Americans. His ''Report to
the President'' on the Holocaust commission's deliberations, issued in September
1979, for the first time articulated publicly the political compromise. ''The
Holocaust,'' he wrote, ''was the systematic, bureaucratic extermination of six
million Jews by the Nazis and their collaborators as a central act of state
during the Second World War; as night descended, millions of other peoples were
swept into this net of death.'' Or, as he also put it, ''The universality of the
Holocaust lies in its uniqueness: the Event is essentially Jewish, yet its
interpretation is universal.''

In this report, Wiesel also stated: ''While not all victims were Jews, all Jews
were victims.'' Hence, all would be represented in the museum. Through this
artful formulation, the museum would be able to focus on the Jewish aspect of
the tragedy, without denying a place in the suffering to non-Jews.

Many of the conflicts over universality sprang from the commission's initial
determination that the most appropriate memorial for those who had died in the
Holocaust was a ''living'' museum. According to commission members, all but one
member of the panel favored the construction of a museum rather than a monument
or other type of memorial. Wiesel and others felt strongly that whatever was
built had to help educate people, young Americans in particular.

Lucy S. Dawidowicz, a leading (Continued on Page 42) historian of the Holocaust,
disagreed. She favored building a memorial, one of ''compelling austerity,''
preferably in New York, ''the center of the Jewish population in the United
States and the cultural crossroads of the modern world,'' she wrote in an early
memorandum to the commission. At a meeting in 1979, she expressed her fear that
a grandiose museum might give the appearance of ''celebrating rather than
commemorating the Holocaust.'' She felt so strongly on this point that she,
alone, refused to sign the recommendations when the commission's final report
was issued in September 1979.

ONCE THE CONCEPT of a museum was endorsed, disputes over its enormous cost were
inevitable. From the beginning, Carter insisted that no money for construction
be appropriated from Federal funds. Moreover, Eizenstat says, ''Carter believed
that because the project was not a war memorial, but of particular interest to
the Jewish community, Jews should be able to raise money for it.''

Jews on the commission agreed. ''We thought it would look grubby for the Jewish
community to seek Federal funds,'' says Hyman Bookbinder, a Democrat and
longtime lobbyist for the American Jewish Committee. ''After $3 billion a year
for Israel, it would have been unseemly to beg for $100 million for a museum.''
Hence, despite talk of the project's universality, pragmatists acknowledged that
when it came to fund-raising, the museum would solicit funds primarily from the
Jewish community.

As it turned out, even fund-raising turned into a politically explosive issue.
Set Momjian, an American businessman of Armenian descent appointed to the
council in May 1980, insisted that the Turkish mass deportation of the Armenians
between 1915 and 1923, which had resulted in 1.5 million deaths, should be
included in the museum as an example of a previous genocide. He pledged $1
million to the fledgling project on behalf of the Armenian community.

But when the Turkish Ambassador to the United States learned of this, he visited
Stuart Eizenstat at the White House for what the Presidential aide called the
most blunt and difficult meeting he had ever had.

The Ambassador reminded him that Turkey had been hospitable to Jews over the
centuries. Though neutral during most of World War II, Turkey had given refuge
to many Jews fleeing Hitler. In modern times, it has been the home of a large
and thriving Jewish population, and it is one of the few states with a Muslim
majority that has maintained diplomatic relations with Israel. Including the
Armenians in the museum, Eizenstat remembers the Ambassador saying, would not
only affect relations between Turkey and Israel; it would also mean that
''Turkey could no longer guarantee the safety of Jews in Turkey.''

Israel, concerned about preserving its relations with Turkey, quietly lobbied
several council members to placate the Turks by leaving the Armenians out. In
the end, the council ignored Turkey's threats; the Armenians would have a place
in the museum.

Discord also emerged over the council's relationship with West Germany. From the
beginning, the project troubled Helmut Kohl, then the leader of the conservative
Christian Democratic Union. In 1980, Kohl expressed his concerns to his key
advisers, including Peter Petersen, a Christian Democrat and member of West
Germany's parliament, the Bundestag.

''What would a young German visiting the United States think when he passed the
Holocaust Museum on the Mall?'' Petersen says. ''What would he feel when he saw
his country's entire history reduced to these 12 terrible years? Was this the
way in which the United States was going to treat its most valued European
ally?''

A friend in Congress arranged a meeting in New York between Petersen and Wiesel
in the winter of 1983 to discuss West Germany's concerns. By that time, Kohl had
become Chancellor.

''It was an extraordinary conversation,'' Petersen recounts. ''I told him about
my background - that I had not only been a member of the Hitler Youth, that I
had been an enthusiastic one.''

Petersen admits he had been bitterly disappointed when Hitler lost the war, and
that he had initially dismissed the stories about the concentration camps as
lies, Allied propaganda. But in 1945, his father brought a Jewish survivor home
to talk to ''his crazy son who still believed in Hitler,'' Petersen says.

After hearing the stories about Bergen-Belsen, Petersen says his ''first
instinct was one of shame, to flee Germany.'' But, he continues, ''my father got
very angry. He told me: 'You ran after the Nazi flag like everybody else. Having
done that, you do not have the right to leave now that your country needs you.
You will stay here and work to make sure that what happened never occurs again.'
So I did.''

Wiesel listened as Petersen made his appeal. More than half of Germans alive
today were not even born when the war ended. The Federal Republic had worked
long and hard to become an ardent supporter of democracy at home and abroad.
Could the new museum not take account of West Germany's extraordinary evolution?
Could it not include West Germany's help in building a strong Israel, in making
more than 100 billion Deutsche marks in reparations? Could it not include some
kind words about the new Germany?

At the end of the lengthy meeting, Wiesel and Petersen agreed to form a group of
six Germans and six Americans to discuss what had been learned since the war and
some of the other issues raised that afternoon. The group met first in early
1984. Through these visits, he and Wiesel became friends, Petersen says. Wiesel
invited him and other German members of the group to attend some of the
Holocaust council meetings in Washington so that they could better appreciate
the memorial being planned.

''I came to respect Wiesel enormously,'' Petersen says. ''So when he was
nominated for the Nobel Peace Prize, I helped get 80 members of the Bundestag to
write the Nobel committee in support of his nomination. When he finally won the
prize, I attended the banquet in Oslo, the only German there.''

These contacts between the Germans and the Holocaust council ended abruptly
after Wiesel resigned as chairman in December 1986. After Harvey (Bud) Meyerhoff
took over, ''he reorganized our little group out of existence,'' Petersen says.
''I tried to (Continued on Page 47) meet with him several times. He and the
others have always refused to do so.''

In fact, most council members had not known of Wiesel's invitation to Petersen
to attend council meetings. Some were appalled when they were told, particularly
Holocaust survivors. Council members confirmed that after Wiesel's departure, it
became unofficial policy not to meet with German officials to discuss the
museum's thrust or contents. ''I don't make deals with Germans,'' William J.
Lowenberg, a survivor and vice chairman of the council, bluntly told a friend.

THE RELATIONSHIP with Germany, however, was not the issue that drove Wiesel from
the council. What made him resign, he has said, was his growing concern that the
project was becoming too politicized, too ''homogenized,'' and that these trends
would ultimately degrade the quality of the tribute he had hoped to pay to
Holocaust victims. ''Either this place will be a sanctuary, or it will be an
abomination,'' Wiesel told a friend before he resigned.

Even Wiesel's admirers acknowledge, however, that his strengths were spiritual,
not practical. He came to be seen by many on the council as a poor choice for
translating the themes of remembrance and commemoration into concrete and
mortar. He trusted only a handful of survivors and was reluctant to delegate
authority, they said. Since the council met infrequently, major decisions piled
up without resolution.

Wiesel felt himself miscast. He told one friend privately that he felt he lacked
the pragmatism and management skills needed to transform his vision into
reality. ''My monument is one of words,'' he said.

In the fall of 1986, Wiesel - aware that his council needed more funds - turned
for help to the developers on the panel: Albert (Sonny) Abramson and, later,
Meyerhoff. Within weeks of joining the museum's development committee, Abramson
got the project moving quickly and on a much grander scale. Wiesel had favored
opening a relatively small museum in two red-brick structures near the Mall, a
building known as the Auditor's Complex. But the developer favored tearing it
down and building a new, giant structure.

In November, Abramson demanded that his development committee be given authority
to act without approval of Wiesel or the council, and he threatened to resign
unless he was given more autonomy. He got it. But relations between Wiesel and
the developer deteriorated beyond repair. A few weeks later, Wiesel gave up his
post. His resignation, coming as it did less than three months after he won the
Nobel Peace Prize, created even greater rancor within the council.

Wiesel had fought against individual parts of the museum being named after
donors. Minutes from the council meeting of June 17, 1987, indicate that the
executive committee approved two proposals that crossed that line.

First, it voted unanimously not to accept funds from either West Germany or the
Soviet Union and to consider gifts from other governments and foreigners case by
case. Second, ''Chairman Meyerhoff noted that in addition to the $1 million
commitment from him and his wife, Lyn, the Meyerhoff family had pledged $5
million.'' The minutes state, without further explanation: ''The 500-seat Main
Auditorium will be named for his father, Joseph Meyerhoff.''

Since then, the council has approved the naming of the museum's cinema-lecture
hall for another large donor, the Helena Rubinstein Foundation. Michael
Berenbaum, the council's project director, stresses that the council has banned
named plaques in the heart of the museum - the Hall of Remembrance and the Hall
of Witness. But some council members have said privately that they are
uncomfortable with personal tributes as a quid pro quo for large contributions
in any part of the building.

Another reason for Wiesel's departure was the bitter and growing competition
within the Jewish community for membership on the council, a reflection of the
disconcerting rivalry among Jewish groups to seize the Holocaust as their
special preserve. Membership has not been growing in many of the established
Jewish groups, the American Jewish Committee, the American Jewish Congress and
the like. The Simon Wiesenthal Center in Los Angeles is one of the few
exceptions. By repeatedly making the Holocaust an issue in its fund-raising
appeals and warning that another genocide could happen, the center has become
the nation's fastest-growing Jewish organization. ''These groups are fighting
for survival and for prominence,'' says Deborah Lipstadt, a noted scholar of the
Holocaust. ''And the Holocaust is a very prominent issue.''

THINGS HAVE NOT gone that smoothly since Wiesel's departure. For several months
last year, a critical debate raged within the council's content committee over
how much and what kind of high technology would be appropriate in a museum that
would highlight the danger of technology when it is harnessed for mass murder.
''When applied to Treblinka,'' says Berenbaum, the project director, ''it
permitted 150 people to kill 900,000 in 18 months at a cost of 5 cents per
person.'' The issue has been particularly sensitive because plans by the Simon
Wiesenthal Center's Museum of Tolerance to make extensive use of glitzy
technology have prompted charges that it is turning Holocaust commemoration into
a Disneyland-type sideshow.

Many of the Holocaust survivors on the council's content committee would like
the emphasis placed on the museum's collection of more than 16,000 Holocaust
artifacts - striped camp uniforms, diaries of survivors, the ticket and passport
of an ill-fated passenger on the St. Louis: the ship loaded with Jewish
passengers that the United States turned away.

But even here ghoulish overtones are inescapable. What will tourists think of
walking through an actual railroad car that took Jews from the Warsaw Ghetto to
their deaths at Treblinka? How will they feel about walking down a corridor on
the original cobblestones from the Warsaw Ghetto? How will young visitors react
to the planned display of a room full of camp victims' clothes, another of shoes
and a third including victims' artificial limbs?

THE HOLOCAUST MUSEUM will not open its doors for three years, but a controversy
has been building over whether such ''chambers of horror,'' as critics have
called them, are the most appropriate way of commemorating the Holocaust in the
United States.

Supporters argue that the museum in Washington is long overdue. After Israel,
they note, the largest number of survivors of the Holocaust live in the United
States. Americans had helped free those in the concentration camps. And
America's defeat of fascism ultimately not only saved countless Jews, gypsies
and others who would surely have perished, but also restored freedom, democracy
and decency.

But many disagree. Henry A. Kissinger, who fled Nazi Germany with his family in
1938 and who supports a museum being built in New York that will place the
Holocaust in the broader context of Jewish history and culture, opposes the
Washington museum on pragmatic grounds. He voices fear that the national museum
constitutes ''too high a profile'' for American Jews. Putting such a museum on
national ground, he warns, might only serve to ''reignite anti-Semitism.''

Some question the wisdom of building a national museum that does not explore an
American experience. Others ask whether such a museum can be truly honest about
this country's past, or whether it will help promote self-serving history and
false memory. Will it teach visitors that the United States did little to help
prevent the Holocaust? That the United States did virtually nothing to stop the
slaughter once it began?

Some fear that these museums, and a national museum, in particular, will serve
to perpetrate what many regard as an unhealthy obsession with the Holocaust
among some Jews. Without ignoring the genocide, one must ask: Do American Jews
want their fellow citizens to see the Jewish people primarily as victims?

Officials of the Holocaust national museum insist that it will not lack dignity.
But critics say that given America's fascination with glitz and kitsch,
vulgarization may eventually triumph. If these critics are right, spending more
on education, or building a simpler, more austere memorial, such as the Vietnam
Veterans Memorial, now the most frequently visited monument in Washington, may
have been a wiser course.

Ultimately, however, views about how memory of the Holocaust can most honestly
and effectively be shared with future generations is a matter of personal taste.
If the critics are right, the memory of the Holocaust may defy the builders'
efforts to enshrine it in brick and stone. In that case, less would have been
more. But it will be the people who visit the national museum, or those who shun
it, who will eventually decide its value.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photos: Left: Metal cutlery, from buildings burned by Nazis at
Auschwitz and Birkenau, is in Holocaust Museum collection. (ARnold Kramer/United
States Holocaust Memorial Museum) (pg. 34); Right: Model of museum. (Eric
Schiller/Pei Cobb Freed & Partners) (pg. 35)

                   Copyright 1990 The New York Times Company


                              64 of 288 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                  April 22, 1990, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

FOOD;
CALIFORNIA: COASTING ALONG

SECTION: Section 6; Page 55, Column 1; Magazine Desk

LENGTH: 2541 words


Pork medallions snuggled next to creamy, garlicky potatoes. Prime rib rubbed
with olive paste. Chocolate-stuffed croissants soaked with creme anglaise. This
is California cuisine - a far cry from the raw baby vegetables, edible flowers
and pizzas that put the state on the culinary map. And while pork, potatoes and
bread pudding may seem at odds with the trim, tanned population, restaurants
that serve robust food are experiencing a mini-revival.

''California cuisine has stopped,'' says Joachim Splichal, the executive chef
and co-owner with his wife, Christine, of the restaurant Patina in Los Angeles.
''I'm moving away from the salad approach to cooking.''

''I don't even know what California cuisine is,'' says Michel Richard, the
executive chef and owner of the restaurant Citrus in Los Angeles. ''Maybe it's
lots of uncooked vegetables. I don't like that. I'm a cook, and I'm supposed to
cook. I think people are tired of grilled food, too.''

What remains from California's cooking boom is a love of experimentation, a
desire for informality and a relentless search for fresh, even exotic
ingredients. ''It's the whole concept of the restaurant,'' says Wolfgang Puck,
who owns, with his wife, Barbara Lazaroff, Spago and Chinois on Main in Los
Angeles, Postrio in San Francisco and the newly opened Eureka, a full-fledged
brewery and restaurant in Los Angeles. ''It's an experience that is
sophisticated but not stuffy.''

At the eight-month-old restaurant Patina in Los Angeles, Splichal serves food
that defies traditional California cuisine, not to mention the weather. There's
veal shank, rib-eye steak, wild duck with dates, turnips and shallots and a
gratin of lamb with mashed potatoes and garlic. ''I'm known for putting risky
things on the menu,'' he says.

Campanile, the California-Mediterranean restaurant in Los Angeles, is fueled by
robust food and assertive breads - onion anchovy, Greek olive, rye currant,
chocolate cherry and fig anise, for instance - made in La Brea Bakery next door.
Mark Peel, the chef, and his wife Nancy Silverton, the pastry chef, own both the
restaurant and the bakery. This is hardiness with a purpose. ''Seeing a lot of
food on the plate, and leaving the restaurant not hungry - that gives a feeling
of value,'' Peel says.

Citrus in Los Angeles is filled with canvas umbrellas, outdoor furniture and
palm trees - almost jokey California - but the food is French-based and serious.
Slices of squab rest on pearl pasta and shiitake mushrooms, bathed in a
reduction of butter and pureed shiitakes. Fish, veal and chicken sit atop mounds
of soft mashed potatoes, lentils or white beans. Often, a frippery of crispy
fried leeks, celery root or parsley is added for texture. There is no sense in
skipping dessert here, not when there is linzer tart spread with fig puree and
blackberries on the menu.

Wolfgang Puck's Eureka restaurant and brewery in Los Angeles is banking on a
sturdy appetite. The food is German, Alsatian, Chinese, South Asian - ''spicy
things that go well with beer,'' Puck says. ''It's a brewery, so people don't
expect the kind of portions for rich ladies.''

Puck brought the informal, energetic spirit of his Los Angeles restaurants to
San Francisco at Postrio. ''But I tried to make it fit into San Fransciso,'' he
says. ''They have Chinatown and the Italian North Beach section, so there are
Chinese and Italian dishes.'' The curried lobster risotto, for instance, covers
the globe.

The food of Asia - especially China, Vietnam and Thailand - is the focus at
Monsoon, the six-month-old restaurant in San Francisco. ''We might apply a
Chinese cooking technique - such as quick-cooked scallops - with a Thai-style
sauce of freshly ground cumin, turmeric and coconut milk,'' says Bruce Cost,
part owner. Other dishes, like whole shrimp fried in blistering oil for a few
seconds and tossed with white pepper, chili pepper and coarse salt, are
perfectly authentic.

Wood-fired ovens that hold roasting chickens, pork, cassoulet, breads and pizzas
are being built in restaurants throughout - and beyond - San Francisco. At the
Lark Creek Inn in Larkspur, the oven opens onto the main dining room, pumping
out the scent of smoke and roasting meat. At the less bucolic Embarcadero
Center, the wood oven at Splendido's Restaurant roasts poussin stuffed with pine
nuts and ricotta cheese, surrounded by prosciutto, leeks and artichokes.
Christopher Majer, Splendido's chef, limits most sauces to oils flavored by
herbs, spices or shellfish, or to drizzles of vinaigrette. The handsome napoleon
of Saint Pierre layers the fish with spinach, a garlic-and-thyme-scented tomato
confit and crisp potatoes in a tarragon and juniper berry vinaigrette.

In San Francisco, a snack at the bar or an early breakfast is not an incidental
meal. Many of the finest restaurants serve full breakfasts and square bar menu.
On a morning at Zuni Cafe, people drink cafe latte out of big bowls at the
copper bar. The bartender makes buckwheat waffles decorated with strawberries
and pours big glasses of fresh orange juice.

Even health-conscious Californians are eating well and, if restaurant menus are
any indication, eating robustly. In a place where fast-food restaurants have
valet parking and men in blue jeans and high-top sneakers dine next to women in
cinch-waist suits and big hair, it shouldn't raise an eyebrow.

BLACKBERRY LINZER TARTS

(From Michel Richard, Citrus)
1/3 cup sugar
 1/4 cup skinned pistachios
4 hard-boiled egg yolks
1 cup (8 ounces) unsalted butter
1 teaspoon cinnamon
1 cup flour
6 ounces dried figs, preferably Mission figs
2 tablespoons water
6 1/2 -pints blackberries
Powdered sugar.

1. Place the sugar and pistachios in a food processor. Process until the
pistachios are finely chopped.

2. Add the egg yolks, butter and cinnamon and process until smooth. Add a fifth
of the flour and process with short pulses until mixed. Transfer to a mixing
bowl and add the remaining flour, stirring with a wooden spoon until the flour
is combined.

3. Gather up the dough into a compact ball. Place on a piece of plastic wrap and
flatten into a disk shape. Wrap in the plastic wrap and chill for 1 hour.

4. Heat the oven to 375 degrees. Line a baking sheet with parchment paper.

5. Roll out the dough on a lightly floured surface until it is 1/4-inch thick.
(This dough is very fragile. It may be easier to place the dough directly on the
cookie sheet and, with a sheet of plastic wrap between the dough and the rolling
pin, roll it out.) Cut the dough into 5-inch circles, gather up the dough and
reroll it for the remaining circles. Transfer the circles to the baking sheet.
Bake for 12 minutes or until browned. Allow to cool before removing from the
baking sheet.

6. Place the figs in a food processor and process until chopped. With the
processor running, add the water and process until smooth. Spread the fig puree
over the baked circles.

7. Arrange the blackberries, standing up, over the fig puree. Sprinkle with
powdered sugar and transfer to dessert plates.

Yield: Six servings.

NAPOLEON OF SAINT PIERRE

(From Christoper Majer, Splendido's)
12 ounces russet potatoes, choosing large potatoes of equal size
 1/4 cup melted unsalted butter
Kosher salt to taste
Freshly ground black pepper to taste
4 ripe tomatoes
3 teaspoons, plus Y cup, virgin olive oil
4 cloves garlic, crushed
4 sprigs fresh thyme
4 teaspoons fresh lemon juice
36 juniper berries, crushed
1 large sprig fresh tarragon, plucked
8 4-ounce John Dory fillets, or substitute halibut or other white fish
2 1/2 tablespoons unsalted butter
1 pound spinach, cleaned and steamed.

1. Heat the oven to 375 degrees.

2. Peel the potatoes and trim each into a long, cylindrical shape. Using a
mandoline or a good kitchen slicer, cut the potatoes into paper-thin disks.

3. Brush a cookie sheet with melted butter and arrange the potatoes, overlapping
them by about a third, to create squares of potatoes. Press down firmly on the
potatoes to help them stick together. Make 8 potato squares. Drizzle them with
the remaining butter and season with salt and pepper. Bake for about 15 minutes,
or until the potatoes are golden brown. Carefully lift off the pan with a
spatula. Set aside.

4. Lower the oven to 200 degrees.

5. Fill a bowl with water and ice and set aside. Core the tomatoes and score the
underside with an ''X.'' Bring a pot of water to the boil and add the tomatoes,
cooking for 5 seconds. Remove the tomatoes and immediately place in the bowl of
ice water. Remove and peel the tomatoes. Place the tomato skins on a cookie
sheet.

6. Bake the tomato skins until brittle, about 20 minutes. Remove and roughly
chop the dried peels. Reserve.

7. Raise the oven to 250 degrees. Slice the peeled tomatoes in half crosswise
and remove the seeds. Place the tomato halves cut side down on a pan lined with
aluminum foil. Drizzle with 3 teaspoons of virgin olive oil, the crushed garlic
and 2 sprigs of thyme. Season with salt and pepper.

8. Bake the tomatoes for 2 hours.

9. Meanwhile, make the vinaigrette by whisking together Y cup of olive oil, the
lemon juice, juniper berries, tarragon leaves, 2 sprigs of thyme, salt and
pepper to taste and the dried tomato skins. Set aside.

10. Season the fish with kosher salt and freshly ground black pepper. In a saute
pan, melt the butter and add the fillets, cooking two to three minutes on each
side. Remove and set aside.

11. Season the steamed spinach with salt and pepper to taste.

12. Place the vinaigrette in a small pot and heat until just warmed. Assemble
the dish by placing some spinach on a plate, a tomato half on top, then a fish
fillet and one crisp potato square. Repeat layering. Repeat with other plates.
Drizzle with vinaigrette around the perimeter of the plate.

Yield: Four servings.

MONSOON SALT AND PEPPER WHOLE PRAWNS
1 pound whole fresh prawns, preferably with heads
1 tablespoon Sichuan peppercorns
2 teaspoons white peppercorns
2 whole small dried chili peppers
4 tablespoons kosher salt
 1/4 teaspoon five-spices, preferably homemade (see note)
1 teaspoon sugar
4 cups peanut oil
 1/4 cup coarsely chopped coriander leaves.

1. Rinse the shrimp. Dry thoroughly and set aside.

2. Combine the three peppers in a small skillet and heat, shaking, until the
Sichuan peppercorns begin to smoke. Remove from the heat and grind to a coarse
powder in a spice grinder. Combine with the salt, five-spices and sugar. Set
aside half of the mixture for another time.

3. Heat four cups of peanut oil in a wok until nearly smoking. Fry the prawns
quickly and remove to drain with a large slotted spoon or skimmer.

4. Heat a dry wok to smoking. Add the prawns and, while tossing them vigorously,
sprinkle them very liberally with the salt and pepper mixture. This should take
another 30 seconds or so. Turn off the heat, toss quickly with the coriander and
serve hot.

Yield: About six servings as an appetizer; four as a main course.

Note: To make homemade five-spice powder, toast 1 3-inch stick of cassia or
cinnamon, 5 whole star anise, 1 teaspoon cloves, 2 tablespoons coriander and 1
tablespoon fennel. Grind in a spice or coffee grinder.

NORTH CHINESE ROAST EGGPLANT

(from Bruce Cost, Monsoon)
2 1/2 pounds long, purple Chinese eggplants
Peanut oil for frying
3 tablespoons dark (mushroom) soy sauce
2 1/2 tablespoons sugar
2 tablespoons red wine vinegar
1 tablespoon chopped garlic
1 tablespoon chopped ginger
1 teaspoon sesame oil
Fine shreds of scallion for garnish.

1. Cut the eggplant into 2-inch fingerlike strips. A 7- or 8-inch eggplant will
yield about 18 to 24 pieces. Heat the peanut oil in a wok or large frying pan.

2. In a bowl, combine the soy sauce, sugar and vinegar. Fry the eggplant a batch
at a time until golden brown and drain on paper towels. The eggplant pieces
should have plenty of room to fry on the surface of the oil.

3. When all the eggplant is fried, heat a dry wok and add a little oil. When
hot, add the garlic and ginger and stir briefly. Add the vinegar mixture and
stir. It will quickly thicken, then add the eggplant and toss until most of the
sauce cooks away and the pieces are well coated. Turn off the heat, dribble in
the sesame oil and remove to a bowl.

4. When ready to serve (this improves as it sits at room temperature), garnish
with the scallion shreds.

Yield: Four to six servings as a side dish or salad.

POSTRIO'S LOBSTER WITH CURRY RISOTTO
2 1 1/2-pound lobsters
8 tablespoons olive oil
1 cup chopped green onions
5 large cloves garlic, sliced
1 cup sliced ginger root
 1/4 cup curry powder
1 teaspoon red chili flakes
1 cup plum wine
1 cup Port
14 ounces, plus 4 cups, chicken stock, preferably homemade
1 cup heavy cream
Salt and freshly ground pepper to taste
1 small carrot, diced fine
1 stalk celery, diced fine
1 small onion, diced fine
Pinch of saffron
1 1/2 cup white wine
2 cups Arborio rice
4 tablespoons butter
 1/2 cup Parmesan cheese

1. Fill a pot large enough to hold two lobsters with water and bring to a boil.
Add the lobsters and cook for 5 minutes. Drain and remove the lobsters, letting
them cool.

2. Separate the claws and the tail from the body. Remove the intestines. Chop
the body into quarters and cut the tail into 4 medallions, leaving it in the
shell.

3. In a large sauce pot, heat 4 tablespoons of the olive oil over medium heat.
Add the lobster bodies and saute for 4 minutes until lightly browned on all
sides. Add the green onions, garlic and ginger and saute until the onion is
wilted. Add the curry powder and chili flakes and stir for 2 minutes. Pour in
the plum wine and Port, stirring to disloge any bits that stick to the pan. Cook
over high heat until the liquid reduces by half. Add the 14 ounces of chicken
stock and reduce by half again.

4. Press the sauce through a strainer, getting all the juices from the lobster
and vegetables. Discard the lobster and vegetables. Pour the sauce into a
medium-sized pot and heat over medium heat. Add the cream and reduce until it
coats the back of a spoon. Season the sauce with salt and pepper to taste. Keep
the sauce warm while making the risotto.

5. In a 2-quart saucepan, heat 2 tablespoons of the olive oil over medium heat.
Add the vegetables and saute over until medium-tender. Add the saffron and wine
and reduce by half. Add the rice and 1/4 cup of the chicken stock. Stir
constantly until the liquid is absorbed. Repeat the procedure, adding 1/4 cup of
chicken stock at a time, until all the liquid is absorbed. The rice should be al
dente. If you prefer the rice cooked more, just add more liquid. Finish by
stirring in the butter and Parmesan cheese.

6. Heat a pan large enough to saute all the lobster. Add 2 tablespoons of olive
oil and the lobster. Cook only long enough to reheat the lobster, about three
minutes. Add the sauce to the pan and stir in 2 tablespoons of butter. Remove
from the heat.

7. To serve, divide the risotto among four serving plates and arrange the
lobster around the risotto. Pour the sauce over the lobster.

Yield: Four servings.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photos: Lunch at Maple Drive in Beverly Hills may be buffalo mozzarella
with grilled eggplant, roasted peppers. tomatoes or radicchio. (Todd Weinstein)
(pg. 56); Tower of Fish: At Splendido's in San Francisco, top, fillets of Saint
Pierre are sandwiched between tomato confit, spinach and potato crisps. (Todd
Weinstein) (pg. 57); Wake-Up Call: At Zuni in San Francisco, above, crowds
gather at the bar for strong coffee, fresh orange juice and buckwheat waffles.
(Todd Weinstein) (pg. 57); Asia Minor: A major new restaurant, Monsoon, in San
Francisco turns out sophisticated Vietnamese, Thai and Chinese food, like the
quick-cooked salt and pepper prawns, left. (Todd Weinstein) (pg. 57); Sturdy
Stuff: At Campanile in Los Angeles, hardy fare fills the menu, including ravioli
stuffed with tru

                   Copyright 1990 The New York Times Company


                              65 of 288 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                  April 22, 1990, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

Someone's in the Kitchen With Freud

BYLINE: By JANE SMILEY; Jane Smiley's most recent book is ''Ordinary Love & Good
Will.''

SECTION: Section 7; Page 1, Column 1; Book Review Desk

LENGTH: 1337 words



FAMILY PICTURES
By Sue Miller.
389 pp. New York: Harper & Row. $19.95.

Sue Miller's virtuoso new novel, ''Family Pictures,'' presents itself modestly.
The very title promises something unassuming, a stack of snapshots, nothing
grand or public. And the opening scene, a birthday party for a 14-year-old where
the gifts are amusingly transitory - Roy Orbison 45's, ''a nice sweater,''
homemade presents from the three younger daughters - may never have actually
happened the way Nina, the eldest of those three, remembers it. At the party,
did Randall, the autistic 12-year-old, really utter words? Probably not. As with
many families, each member recalls it differently. The reader slips into this
novel with a sense of comfort. The style is clear, specific, but almost plain.
No overweening ambitions here, right? Just a little story inside a house.
Something reassuringly domestic.

But the house is in Chicago, that mythically American city, and on the wall of
the kitchen, among the children's drawings and the taped-up photographs and news
clippings, are three pictures: two of the Annunciation, one in which Mary is
welcoming and one in which she is frightened, and a picture of Freud - not the
well-known portrait but ''a slightly overexposed photograph of him with his wife
in a garden.'' He looks (is it possible?) ''puzzled.'' And it is true that the
house contains a conundrum in the form of Randall, the autistic brother, who
never speaks but is not quiet, who grows but fails to change.

Ms. Miller doesn't make too much of Randall. He is a significant weight in the
family balance, but not everything. The others have adapted to him in the way
that families do, by taking care of him but working around him. In fact, Freud
in the kitchen has a lot to look at. This is where Lainey, the mother of the
family, ''brought Randall when he woke at night, which happened once or twice a
week. The children were used to hearing in their sleep the distant, muted noises
of their mother and their crazy brother as they led their separate peculiar
kitchen life.''

The domestic scene has not always been the preferred venue of respected American
novels. The road, the street, the work place, the bar, the battlefield, such
places as these have overshadowed private life. The kitchen is where Lucy and
Ethel perpetrate sitcom disasters. And yet, opening out from the kitchen, the
dining room and the bedrooms of a single house in Chicago, Sue Miller's book is
as spacious and encompassing as any respected American novel, a work whose
cumulative insight blossoms into wisdom and whose steady focus on a single
family reveals much of what there is to know about the American middle class in
the middle of our century.

Ms. Miller is the absolute mistress of her material. With daring confidence, she
shifts into and out of four different points of view, jumps backward and forward
in time, raises complex themes again and again in order to redefine and
reconsider them. At first, the complexity of her approach seems needless, given
the simplicity of her material. The family ''facts'' are few. David, the father,
becomes a psychiatrist in the Army. After World War II, three children are born
in quick succession, and the third of these is Randall. As if to prove that
Randall's impairment does not define her, Lainey gives birth to three more
children, all girls, and the marriage becomes strained. There is a separation, a
reconciliation; Randall outgrows the family's ability to fulfill his needs.
However, Ms. Miller aspires to write about the whole family, a total experience
that no single member knows. Her approach - split among the perspectives of
David and Lainey, as well as Mack and Nina, the two children closest in age to
Randall - is soon knitted into a whole by the quiet clarity of her vision.

Ms. Miller writes with convincing ease, for example, about a night when Mack
goes along with some of his teen-age friends in the cruel exploitation of a girl
in their class, dropping in on her one night when her parents are away and
taking advantage of her urgent need to be accepted. Dancing with her in her
darkened basement, one of the boys kisses and fondles her in front of the
others, then abruptly rejects her: ''It was as though she had just waked from a
nap; it reminded Mack of his sisters. Her eyes were puffy, her hair frazzled.
Her sweater was ruckled strangely above her breasts, on account of the pushed-up
bra. 'Well, ah,' Tucker said. His voice was loud and casual. 'I guess we better
go now.' He was backing up.''

Ms. Miller writes with equal ease about the tensions between David and Lainey
over the births of the later children - and not only about how these tensions
subtly affect the daughters' sense of themselves, but also about how the
tensions develop and change over the years as the family members grow older. She
is eloquent and honest about the sexual difficulties between the parents, about
Mack's decision to let himself be drafted and sent to Vietnam, later about his
regret over that decision. Most impressively, Ms. Miller returns frequently to
images of Lainey's body and David's intellect, and brilliantly transcribes the
way these two powerful poles of the children's imaginative world shift in
meaning as the children grow into an adult understanding of their parents'
circumstances and choices.

Ms. Miller's narrative technique, squarely in the realist mode, is dazzling -
understated but specific, always drawing the reader's attention to significant
moments but refusing to call attention to itself, establishing without apparent
effort not only the precise way in which a given scene is meaningful but its
precise emotional import. Feeling and intelligence are fluidly joined. Scene
after scene is illuminated by details that are exactly right, so that when Nina
at last questions her mother about Randall, the family conundrum that so puzzled
all the Freudian experts, Lainey reveals the fruit of her experience. And that,
too, is right, a truth that is at once wise and moving and surprising.

I was not a fan of Ms. Miller's first novel, ''The Good Mother.'' You could too
readily see the movie in it. The carefully drawn portrait of the mother and the
nicely realized child were too subtle to withstand the melodrama of the
courtroom fight, and then everything got wound up at the end as if the author
had lost interest. Certainly the flaws of the first novel did not presage the
mature skill with which Ms. Miller has assembled her story and realized her
vision in ''Family Pictures.''

Roughly 60 years ago, Virginia Woolf wondered what women would write, if and
when they got access to education and the larger culture, if learning should
come to them as a right and not as the shriveled fruit of a soul-destroying
battle with ''the beadle'' of the university and the gatekeeper of ''that famous
library where the treasure is kept.'' A generation of American women poets and
novelists whose right to such an education was not questioned is now reaching
maturity. ''Family Pictures'' is a novel that might have intrigued and startled
Woolf - profoundly honest, shapely, ambitious, engrossing, original and true, an
important example of a new American tradition that explores what it means, not
to light out for the territories but to make a home, live at home and learn what
home is.

THEN IT ALL WENT HAYWIRE

My parents had made their family, they had had the requisite three pretty
children. . . . They loved each other. And then it all went haywire. Randall sat
in their midst, more beautiful than the first two, but immobile. . . . He seemed
possessed, my mother has said. Enchanted. Under a spell. Sometime in the process
of Randall's diagnosis - he was variably and at different times thought to be
deaf, retarded, autistic, and schizophrenic - my mother got pregnant with me. .
. . Mary followed . . . and then Sarah. . . . From the start we knew what was
expected of us. We were to be normal, happy.

From ''Family Pictures.''

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo: Sue Miller at her home in Boston (The New York Times/Steve
Kagan) (pg. 45)

TYPE: Review

                   Copyright 1990 The New York Times Company


                              66 of 288 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                  April 22, 1990, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

A JOURNEY AROUND THE RIM

BYLINE: By BARBARA SLAVIN; Barbara Slavin is a former Beijing correspondent for
The Economist.

SECTION: Section 7; Page 34, Column 1; Book Review Desk

LENGTH: 831 words



PACIFIC DESTINY
Inside Asia Today.
By Robert Elegant.
533 pp. New York:
Crown Publishers.
$24.95.

Fans of Robert Elegant's Asia potboilers will find his latest book slow going. A
regional survey patterned after the old John Gunther series (''Inside Europe,''
''Inside Africa'' and others), ''Pacific Destiny'' contains nary a swelling
breast nor a steamy seduction. Neither is it loaded with facts and figures
despite Mr. Elegant's declared audience - ''the men and women who must strive to
restore the competitiveness of the West.''

Mr. Elegant, a former foreign correspondent and the author of a dozen Asia books
evenly divided between pseudohistorical best sellers such as ''Dynasty'' and
less commercial nonfiction, writes that his intention is to help Western
businessmen and planners by explaining the human qualities behind the
extraordinary development of most Asian nations since World War II. The longest
sections of his book are devoted to Japan and China. Taiwan, South Korea, the
Philippines and Indochina (Thailand, Vietnam and Cambodia, with little Laos
omitted) get briefer treatment, while Singapore, Malaysia, Indonesia, Australia
and Hong Kong are allotted one chapter each.

Such surveys are bound to be superficial, and ''Pacific Destiny'' is no
exception. It may be useful as an introduction for first-time travelers to Asia.
But original insights are few and most of the book reads like an assignment, not
a labor of love.

It is best where Mr. Elegant dips into his notebooks of 40 years ago, when he
was first posted to Asia as a young correspondent, and reminds us how far most
Asian nations have had to come to reach the gleaming reality of today. Of Taiwan
in 1951, he writes:

''Taipei, the capital, was dusty, grimy, and stench-ridden, and its atmosphere
medieval. Military police prodded deserters, wearing manacles and leg-irons,
across the broken cobblestones. . . . The ponderous red-brick edifices built by
the Japanese . . . loomed over ramshackle hovels. . . . The open-fronted shops
offered few goods beyond bamboo pails, iron dishpans, and coarse blue coolie
clothing. . . . The first skyscraper . . . occupied by the American economic aid
mission . . . was five stories high.''

Today, Mr. Elegant notes, Taipei boasts the biggest trade center in Asia if not
the world. Taiwan's per capita gross national product has increased more than
one hundredfold since the war and its foreign exchange reserves are an
incredible $75 billion, second only to Japan.

There are other interesting contrasts, such as a description of Nikita
Khrushchev's visit to Indonesia in 1960 and the clash of dictatorial styles
between the Russian leader, sweaty and clumsy in the unaccustomed tropical and
political climate, and Indonesia's sinuous Sukarno.

There are some good lines: ''When they are not overachieving, many Singaporeans
are bored stiff.'' ''The overwhelming pride that has made for China's survival
as a nation is today the single greatest obstacle to China's modernization.''
The Japanese are a tense people who are ''not much liked by outsiders because
they do not much like themselves.''

But Mr. Elegant's analysis of Japanese economic single-mindedness - based
partly, he explains, on fear of a return to postwar poverty - is familiar. So is
his discussion of the pluses and minuses of Asia's Confucian traditions: a
willingness to submit to authority, work hard and sacrifice for future
generations, marred by bureaucracy, nepotism and corruption.

While he asks the right questions, he comes up with few new answers. To resolve
United States trade frictions with Japan, for example, he suggests: ''We must
both do what comes unnaturally: for us, contraction in our living standard; for
them, expansion of their domestic economy and really joining the outside
world.'' He repeats the standard advice that American industry, academia,
government and finance must work better together and that executives must look
beyond short-term gain. And he seems to make an argument for greater
protectionism, noting favorably that ''West European nations do not bow down to
free trade as to a holy icon.''

Through no fault of the author, the book suffers from being somewhat outdated,
given the momentous events that have occurred in Europe and elsewhere over the
past few months. Mr. Elegant has inserted a discussion of last June's Tiananmen
massacre into his China section, but it was not possible for him to analyze how
snowballing democracy movements and ethnic nationalism in East Europe might
affect Asia. For example, who could have predicted last year that the two
Germanies would be on the verge of reuniting - and speculated about what
implications that development might have for ending World War II's other
division, of the Korean peninsula?

''Pacific Destiny'' concludes tamely that ''only change is inevitable, not its
direction.'' It is hard to imagine that this will come as news to a single one
of Mr. Elegant's readers.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Review

                   Copyright 1990 The New York Times Company


                              67 of 288 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                  April 22, 1990, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

PAPERBACK BEST SELLERS: April 22, 1990

SECTION: Section 7; Page 42, Column 1; Book Review Desk

LENGTH: 896 words




$

     Weeks
This    On
Week  List Fiction

 1     3    THE NEGOTIATOR, by Frederick Forsyth.
            (Bantam, $5.95.) An American expatriate tries to
            thwart terrorists.

 2     3    ALMOST HEAVEN, by Judith McNaught.
            (Pocket, $4.95.) A historical romance set in
            London's salons and Scotland's Highlands.

 3    106   THE HUNT FOR RED OCTOBER, by Tom
            Clancy. (Berkley, $4.50.) A submarine driver
            brings Soviet nuclear secrets to the United States.

 4     5    RIVALS, by Janet Dailey. (Fawcett, $5.95.)
            Families compete in love and business.

 5     4    RULES OF PREY, by John Sandford. (Berkley,
            $4.95.) The pursuit of a serial murderer.

 6     9    STAR, by Danielle Steel. (Dell, $5.95.) The crossed
            paths of a man and a woman destined for stardom.

 7     3    STRANGER IN SAVANNAH, by Eugenia Price.
            (Jove, $5.95.) Three families during the Civil War.

 8     3    THE PANDORA PRINCIPLE, by Carolyn
            Clowes. (Pocket, $4.50.) A ''Star Trek'' novel.

 9     2    THE NAKED HEART, by Jacqueline Briskin.
            (Dell, $5.95.) A woman's desire for revenge.

10     2    TEENAGE MUTANT NINJA TURTLES, by B. B.
            Hiller. (Yearling/Dell, $2.95.) A group of turtles
            saves New York City from a band of brigands.

11     2    LORD OF THE FLIES, by William Golding.
            (Wideview/Perigee, $4.95.) English schoolboys
            stranded on an uninhabited Pacific island.

12     7    MORNING GLORY, by LaVyrle Spencer. (Jove,
            $4.95.) Love answers a young widow's want ad.

13     2    KILLSHOT, by Elmore Leonard. (Warner, $5.95.)
            Two thugs out to assassinate a man and a woman.

14 *   27   THE HANDMAID'S TALE, by Margaret Atwood.
            (Fawcett, $5.95.) In America of the future, men
            and women perform the duties they're assigned.

15     56   THE SHELL SEEKERS, by Rosamunde Pilcher.
            (Dell, $4.95.) Three generations of a family.

16 *   1    THE RANSOM OF BLACK STEALTH ONE, by
            Dean Ing. (Doherty/Tor, $5.95.) The C.I.A. races
            to capture a stolen aircraft, the most sophisticated
            ever designed, before it falls into the wrong hands.

17 *   12   WEB OF DREAMS, by V. C. Andrews. (Pocket,
            $5.50.) The origin of a curse that has haunted a
            family of orphans in five previous novels.

     Weeks
This    On
Week  List Nonfiction

 1     22   ALL I REALLY NEED TO KNOW I LEARNED
            IN KINDERGARTEN, by Robert Fulghum. (Ivy,
            $5.95.) Inspirational essays.

 2     3    THE LIVES AND LOVES OF NEW KIDS ON
            THE BLOCK, by Jill Matthews. (Pocket, $3.95.)
            An account of the popular young singing group
            from Boston.

 3     3    SUMMER OF '49, by David Halberstam. (Avon,
            $4.95.) The year the Red Sox and the Yankees
            battled to the last game for the pennant.

 4     1    NEW KIDS ON THE BLOCK SCRAPBOOK, by
            Grace Catalano. (Signet/NAL, $5.95.)
            Photographs of and trivia about the singing group.

 5     4    DADDY'S GIRL, by Clifford Irving. (Zebra,
            $4.95.) The 1982 murder of a Houston lawyer and
            his wife, involving two other generations of their
            family.

 6     19   NEW KIDS ON THE BLOCK, by Grace Catalano.
            (Bantam, $3.50.) The five members of the singing
            group, in words and pictures.

 7    339
            THE ROAD LESS TRAVELED, by M. Scott Peck.
            (Touchstone/S&S, $10.95.) Psychological and
            spiritual inspiration by a psychiatrist.

 8     99   LOVE, MEDICINE & MIRACLES, by Bernie S.
            Siegel. (Perennial/Harper & Row, $8.95.) The
            importance of a patient's mind and emotions.

 9 *   13   BORN ON THE FOURTH OF JULY, by Ron
            Kovic. (Pocket, $4.50.) The autobiography of a
            former marine wounded in Vietnam.

10     78   THE POWER OF MYTH, by Joseph Campbell
            with Bill Moyers. (Doubleday, $19.95.) The ways in
            which mythology illuminates the stages of life.

     Weeks
This    On
Week  List Advice, How-to and Miscellaneous

 1     11   50 SIMPLE THINGS YOU CAN DO TO SAVE
            THE EARTH, by the Earthworks Group.
            (Earthworks Press/Publishers Group West,
            $4.95.) Ways to combat environmental problems.

 2     5    WEIRDOS FROM ANOTHER PLANET! by Bill
            Watterson. (Andrews & McMeel, $7.95.) ''Calvin
            and Hobbes'' cartoons.

 3     5    HAPPY TRAILS, by Berke Breathed. (Little,
            Brown, $8.95.) ''Bloom County'' cartoons.

 4     86   CODEPENDENT NO MORE, by Melody Beattie.
            (Hazelden/Harper & Row, $8.95.) Solving your
            own problems while caring for other people's
            afflictions.

 5     3    THE T-FACTOR DIET, by Martin Katahn.
            (Bantam, $4.95.) A new regimen for weight loss.


These listings are based on computer-processed sales figures from 3,000
bookstores and from representative wholesalers with more than 38,000 other
retail outlets, including variety stores and supermarkets. The figures are
statistically adjusted to represent sales in all such outlets across the United
States.

 *An asterisk before a book's title indicates that its sales, weighted to
reflect the book-selling industry nationally, are barely distinguishable from
those of the book above.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: LIST

                   Copyright 1990 The New York Times Company


                              68 of 288 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                  April 22, 1990, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

BEST SELLERS: April 22, 1990

SECTION: Section 7; Page 40, Column 2; Book Review Desk

LENGTH: 1482 words




$

          Weeks
This Last    On
Week Week  List Fiction

 1            1  SEPTEMBER, by Rosamunde Pilcher. (St.
                 Martin's, $22.95.) Guests from many parts of the
                 world encounter their often unexpected destinies
                 during a get-together in a small Scottish town.

 2      1   6    THE BOURNE ULTIMATUM, by Robert Ludlum.
                 (Random House, $21.95.) Jason Bourne plans to
                 infiltrate the ruthless Medusa Brigade as part of a
                 plot to trap his archenemy, Carlos the Jackal.

 3      2   9    OH, THE PLACES YOU'LL GO! by Dr. Seuss.
                 (Random House, $12.95.) The problems of finding
                 your way through life; in verse and pictures.

 4      8   3    MASQUERADE, by Janet Dailey. (Little, Brown,
                 $19.95.) A New Orleans heiress encounters a
                 masked man during a carnival in Nice.

 5      9   2    THE EVENING NEWS, by Arthur Hailey.
                 (Doubleday, $21.95.) Life as lived by two
                 competitive correspondents for a television
                 network obsessed with bottom-line accounting.

 6      3   34   CLEAR AND PRESENT DANGER, by Tom
                 Clancy. (Putnam, $21.95.) The C.I.A.'s Jack Ryan
                 fights Colombian drug lords.

 7      4   13   DEVICES AND DESIRES, by P. D. James. (Knopf,
                 $19.95.) Adam Dalgliesh puzzles over a series of
                 killings on the windy Norfolk coast.

 8      7   7    THE SCIONS OF SHANNARA, by Terry Brooks.
                 (Del Rey/Ballantine, $19.95.) The adventures of
                 two brothers who practice magic in a fantasy land.

 9      5   13   THE BAD PLACE, by Dean R. Koontz. (Putnam,
                 $19.95.) A troubled sleepwalker hires a detective
                 team to investigate his behavior.

10            1  SKINNY LEGS AND ALL, by Tom Robbins.
                 (Bantam, $19.95.) The horror and humor of the
                 upcoming apocalypse are played out at a
                 restaurant near the United Nations.

11      6   8    BITTER SWEET, by LaVyrle Spencer. (Putnam,
                 $18.95.) A widow's ordeal after meeting her high
                 school flame, now a less than happily married man.

12            1  BRIGHT STAR, by Harold Coyle. (Simon &
                 Schuster, $19.95.) An attempted assassination by a
                 Libyan terrorist brings American and Soviet
                 troops into a violent encounter.

13            2  DECEPTION, by Philip Roth. (Simon & Schuster,
                 $18.95.) The ambiguous relationship of an
                 American novelist and an English-born woman.

14     13   11   COUNTERATTACK, by W. E. B. Griffin. (Putnam,
                 $16.95.) The Marines in action, from Pearl Harbor
                 to Guadalcanal; third volume in ''The Corps'' series.

15 *   14   26   TALES FROM MARGARITAVILLE, by Jimmy
                 Buffett. (Harcourt Brace Jovanovich, $16.95.)
                 Short stories set on a mythical Caribbean island.

          Weeks
This Last    On
Week Week  List Nonfiction

 1      2   5    MEANS OF ASCENT, by Robert A. Caro. (Knopf,
                 $24.95.) Lyndon Johnson's seven-year pursuit of a
                 seat in the Senate, won in 1948 by 87 votes.

 2     15   2    MEN AT WORK, by George F. Will. (Macmillan,
                 $19.95.) The political pundit and baseball buff
                 describes the craft of the game as practiced by
                 three players and a manager.

 3      1   13   MEGATRENDS 2000, by John Naisbitt and
                 Patricia Aburdene. (Morrow, $21.95.)
                 Prognostications for the next decade.

 4      3   13   BARBARIANS AT THE GATE, by Bryan
                 Burrough and John Helyar. (Harper & Row,
                 $22.95.) The 1988 battle for control of RJR Nabisco.

 5      6   31   IT WAS ON FIRE WHEN I LAY DOWN ON IT, by
                 Robert Fulghum. (Villard, $17.95.) A new collection
                 of inspirational essays.

 6      4   24   LIAR'S POKER, by Michael Lewis. (Norton,
                 $19.95.) Wall Street's tumultuous 1980's.

 7      5   9    WHAT I SAW AT THE REVOLUTION, by Peggy
                 Noonan. (Random House, $19.95.) The memoirs of
                 a former Presidential speechwriter.

 8      8   12   THE CUCKOO'S EGG, by Clifford Stoll.
                 (Doubleday, $19.95.) An astrophysicist tells how he
                 stalked a computer hacker.

 9      7   6    PARTING WITH ILLUSIONS, by Vladimir
                 Pozner. (Atlantic Monthly, $19.95.) The
                 autobiography of a man, raised in New York, who
                 became a commentator on Radio Moscow.

10     10  105   A BRIEF HISTORY OF TIME, by Stephen W.
                 Hawking. (Bantam, $18.95.) A scientist reviews
                 efforts to create a unified theory of the universe.

11     11   2    KAREEM, by Kareem Abdul-Jabbar with Mignon
                 McCarthy. (Random House, $18.95.) A diary of the
                 Los Angeles Laker's last season in 1989.

12      9   77   ALL I REALLY NEED TO KNOW I LEARNED IN
                 KINDERGARTEN, by Robert Fulghum. (Villard,
                 $17.95.) Inspirational essays.

13     12   6    THE SPY WENT DANCING, by Aline, Countess of
                 Romanones. (Putnam, $19.95.) A World War II
                 O.S.S. operative resumes her work during the 60's.

14           11  HEAD FIRST, by Norman Cousins. (Dutton,
                 $19.95.) How the brain affects the body's endocrine
                 and immune systems.

15            2  RAW RECRUITS, by Alexander Wolff and Armen
                 Keteyian. (Pocket, $18.95.) How current
                 recruitment practices corrupt college basketball.

16 *   13   12   THE EMPEROR'S NEW MIND, by Roger
                 Penrose. (Oxford University, $24.95.) Why
                 computers will never replace human thinking.

          Weeks
This Last    On
Week Week  List Advice, How-to and Miscellaneous

 1      2   62   WEALTH WITHOUT RISK, by Charles J. Givens.
                 (Simon & Schuster, $19.95.) A Florida
                 entrepreneur's financial advice.

 2      3   19   THE GREAT WALDO SEARCH, by Martin
                 Handford. (Little, Brown, $10.95.) A book of
                 illustrations in which the game is to find a
                 ubiquitous chap named Waldo.

 3      4   8    SECRETS ABOUT MEN EVERY WOMAN
                 SHOULD KNOW, by Barbara De Angelis.
                 (Delacorte, $17.95.) Ways by which women can
                 improve their relationships with men.

 4      1   9    BEWARE THE NAKED MAN WHO OFFERS
                 YOU HIS SHIRT, by Harvey Mackay. (Morrow,
                 $19.95.) Advice on how to get ahead in business.

 5      5   34   THE WAY THINGS WORK, by David Macaulay.
                 (Houghton Mifflin, $29.95.) Explanations in
                 pictures and text.


These listings are based on computer-processed sales figures from 3,000
bookstores and from representative wholesalers with more than 28,000 other
retail outlets, including variety stores and supermarkets. The figures are
statistically adjusted to represent sales in all such outlets across the United
States.

 *An asterisk before a book's title indicates that its sales, weighted to
reflect the book-selling industry nationally, are barely distinguishable from
those of the book above.



AND BEAR IN MIND
 (Editors' choices of other recent books of particular interest)

SIMONE DE BEAUVOIR: A Biography, by Deirdre Bair. (Summit, $24.95.) Ms. Bair -
to whom de Beauvoir granted liberal access for the last six years of her life -
presents a detailed and demystifying account of the stellar French intellectual.


FLASHBACKS: On Returning to Vietnam, by Morley Safer. (Random House, $18.95.) A
postwar reinterpretation of the country by a CBS correspondent whose reporting
on the war was among the best broadcast journalism of the 1960's.

BITING AT THE GRAVE: The Irish Hunger Strikes and the Politics of Despair, by
Padraig O'Malley. (Beacon, $22.95.) The macabre enthusiasm of 10 I.R.A.
prisoners who starved themselves to death is made at least explicable in this
shrewd analysis.

RESTORATION: A Novel of Seventeenth-Century England, by Rose Tremain. (Viking,
$19.95.) Ms. Tremain's fine sixth novel restores the good name of historical
fiction as it propels its insecure hero through hassles high and low in Charles
II's England.

TRIBES WITH FLAGS: A Dangerous Passage Through the Chaos of the Middle East, by
Charles Glass. (Atlantic Monthly, $22.95.) An unfunny thing happened to this ABC
correspondent in Beirut: he got kidnapped. But he escaped, and his story,
despite its basic sadness, is entertaining, often even cheerful.

A MIRACLE, A UNIVERSE: Settling Accounts With Torturers, by Lawrence Weschler.
(Pantheon, $22.95.) A disturbing account of the uneasy compromises between new
civilian governments and the brutal military regimes they succeeded in Latin
America.

THE BOOK OF EVIDENCE, by John Banville. (Scribners, $17.95.) In this persuasive
novel we meet a first-person narrator who is a murderer and an existential
philosopher of exceptional depravity.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: LIST

                   Copyright 1990 The New York Times Company


                              69 of 288 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                  April 22, 1990, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

INTELLIGENCE DOWN THE DRAIN IN VIETNAM

BYLINE: By ROBERT MANNING; Robert Manning, an Assistant Secretary of State from
1962 to 1964 and a former editor of The Atlantic, is the editor of the 25-volume
illustrated history ''The Vietnam Experience.''

SECTION: Section 7; Page 12, Column 1; Book Review Desk

LENGTH: 799 words



SLOW BURN
The Rise and Bitter Fall
of American Intelligence in Vietnam.
By Orrin DeForest and David Chanoff.
Illustrated. 294 pp. New York:
Simon & Schuster. $19.95.

''In my view, we've had enough of the books by amateurs and disaffected CIA
folks whose version of reality and their personal roles are self-serving and
misleading,'' writes an Army military intelligence officer, Stuart Herrington,
in his laudatory introduction to ''Slow Burn.'' Be that as it may, Orrin
DeForest, the principal author of the book, certainly comes across as a
disaffected C.I.A. person, and its contents are certainly self-serving. Whether
the book is also misleading is difficult for someone outside the spook
fraternity of hired dissemblers to ascertain. Nevertheless, ''Slow Burn'' has
its virtues anyway.

Written in hard-boiled prose, it is, in part, a sort of play-by-play manual of
interrogation and penetration techniques and includes lessons on how to extract
military intelligence without resort to torture. It is also a disturbing tale of
Central Intelligence Agency obduracy, thickheadedness, incompetence and nasty
infighting. In telling the story of his seven years in South Vietnam as a chief
regional interrogation officer for the C.I.A., Mr. DeForest had the help of
David Chanoff, who has collaborated on several other books about Vietnam and
with Ariel Sharon on his book ''Warrior.''

When Mr. DeForest, with several years' experience as an Army Criminal
Investigations Division officer behind him, arrived for duty in 1968 he was in
his late 40's, and he joined some 600 C.I.A. officers already at work in the war
zone. He judged them to be poorly trained, ''most of them without a clue in the
world,'' and unable to penetrate the Vietcong guerrilla superstructure of
perhaps 700,000 men, women and children through which North Vietnam was laying
the groundwork for conquest.

Mr. DeForest was not a very high-ranking officer but, pleading lack of coherent
direction from his superiors in Saigon, he skirted rules to build a maverick
Joint Interrogation Center (J.I.C.) in Bien Hoa, Military Region Three, and
fashioned a network of informants and spies within some of the Vietcong's most
important operations. He and his crew of American and South Vietnamese
interrogators gained intimate intelligence about the Vietcong network by means
of guileful patience and gentle stroking, in contrast to the brutal techniques
of the South Vietnamese special police. By 1971, he claims, ''we had turned an
invisible enemy into a visible one. . . . In any given month between 60 and 80
percent of all intelligence being reported in Vietnam was coming directly out of
the JIC.''

Here comes the sad part: ''We were,'' he writes, ''years too late with our
intelligence.'' All of this penetration came long after the United States and
the South Vietnamese should have achieved it if they were to fight knowingly
against the Vietcong and their North Vietnamese backers. To make matters more
frustrating, the top brass in Saigon and at C.I.A. headquarters in Langley, Va.,
paid little if any attention to the stream of information coming from Bien Hoa.
The South Vietnamese Government took no advantage of it either.

Mr. DeForest says that the major South Vietnamese fuel dump, near Saigon, got
blown to Hades despite emphatic warning from the author's team that enemy
sappers were on the way. Nothing was done about his discovery of a major
Vietcong money-smuggling operation. A jealous and ''unbalanced'' C.I.A. base
chief made Mr. DeForest disband his network, then a new chief had him revive it.
Messages from Bien Hoa in 1975 indicating that the North Vietnamese were making
a final push for victory were brushed aside because, Mr. DeForest says, the
C.I.A. station chief in Saigon, Thomas Polgar, was so foolish as to think that
the Communists were about to negotiate a peace with the South Vietnamese and let
the Americans move out with leisurely dignity.

Instead, as we are all sick of remembering, Americans evacuated in chaos, taking
many well-placed South Vietnamese cronies and hangers-on with them, but leaving
behind hundreds of South Vietnamese Government employees to be punished or
executed for their loyalty to the United States. Mr. DeForest's wife-to-be, her
mother and two Vietnamese children got out with him. They now live in
California.

Beneath the hyperbole and self-celebration, much that is related in ''Slow
Burn'' adds to the steadily accumulating body of evidence that calls into
question the competence and worth of the C.I.A. and its worldwide operations.
Not exactly a comic matter, but after examining the evidence a citizen can be
excused for wondering if the men in charge all that time were Stan Laurel and
Oliver Hardy - in disguise, of course.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Review

                   Copyright 1990 The New York Times Company


                              70 of 288 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                  April 23, 1990, Monday, Late Edition - Final

Phnom Penh Journal;
Come to the Land of Angkor, War and Profiteers

BYLINE: By STEVEN ERLANGER, Special to The New York Times

SECTION: Section A; Page 4, Column 3; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 907 words

DATELINE: PHNOM PENH, Cambodia


In that hazy period more than 20 years ago, before Cambodia became a scene of
genocide, and notables like Jacqueline Kennedy were visiting the temples of
Angkor, some 60,000 tourists a year came to Cambodia and 200,000 visited
Thailand.

Last year, Thailand had nearly five million tourists. Cambodia had exactly
3,654, Shaking his head, Cheam Yeap, the new tourism chief, said the total
included Vietnamese visitors, who are not known as big spenders. ''We are so far
behind in everything,'' he said.

Mr. Cheam Yeap's job is to change all that. Last year he was named director of
Cambodia's national tourism department, created as the country's first effort to
bring coherence to city and provincial tourism authorities known for charging
whatever they think a foreigner might bear.

To fly to Siem Reap, near Angkor, for instance, costs a foreigner $91, American
cash, plus something extra if the plane is full. That is considerably more than
a Cambodian pays, but at least it tends to guarantee a seat while many
Cambodians are left to lounge on the luggage in the back or to squat in the
aisle. $100 for a Poor Guide Once in Siem Reap, Angkor Tourism officials insist
that the cost of a mandatory and poorly guided tour of the Angkor temples is
$100 a person.

''Many tourists have complained,'' Mr. Cheam Yeap said. ''I have complained,
directly, to the Council of Ministers. They are going to suggest that Angkor
Tourism reconsider and lower its price. And I am getting a law giving me the
responsibility for overseeing prices.''

Mr. Cheam Yeap, 43 years old, has some influence. A high school teacher of
history before the Khmer Rouge seized power in 1975, he was jailed as an
American spy. He escaped execution, fleeing to Vietnam, where he was jailed for
18 months as a Khmer Rouge spy.

But he was fortunate enough to find himself in jail with Sin Song, now the
Interior Minister, who was a good friend of Heng Samrin, now the Cambodian
President and party leader. So Mr. Cheam Yeap was among the first intellectuals
repatriated by the Vietnamese after Hanoi drove out the Khmer Rouge in 1979 and
put Mr. Heng Samrin in charge. Mr. Cheam Yeap was Deputy Minister of the Cabinet
before being asked to take on tourism, and he remains a member of the National
Assembly from Prey Veng Province, south of Phnom Penh.

A Writer of Pop Songs

From 1980 to 1986, in fact, he was chairman of the provincial committee of Prey
Veng, the province's governor, but his frankness got him into trouble, relief
workers say. He became engaged in a struggle with a young party member and the
central authorities made an example of both. Mr. Cheam Yeap was unemployed for
nearly two years, giving him more time to write the pop songs for which many
Cambodians know him.

He is frank, too, about the problems of promoting tourism in a country at war
and diplomatically isolated, and whose major ally, Vietnam, still controls
access for tourists. Since Cambodian visas are available only in Vietnam, Laos
or the Soviet Union, Vietnam has tied short tours to Cambodia to long ones in
Vietnam.

''Many tourists tell me they want to come here directly, or only transit through
Vietnam,'' Mr. Cheam Yeap said. ''But there is blockage from Vietnam, which
wants their money. So they waste their time in Vietnam.'' To respond, Mr, Cheam
Yeap has just obtained approval for Cambodian visas to be issued on arrival, but
it will take some time yet to arrange.

The Thais are a problem, too, he said. While the two nations have no formal
diplomatic relations, they agreed in principle late last year to allow direct
flights from Bangkok. But the Thai Foreign Ministry has not approved the
agreement, Mr. Cheam Yeap said, causing a number of tours to be canceled.

Only 372 Hotel Rooms

In some ways, he said, it is just as well. Phnom Penh has only 372 rooms
available for visitors. ''The Khmer Rouge destroyed many of the hotels,'' he
said. ''We can clean the floor and bath and put in a bed for you, but you
couldn't really give any stars yet to these places.''

But by the end of the year, the number of rooms will double as the 386-room
Cambodiana Hotel is finally finished. Begun in the late 1960's by Prince Norodom
Sihanouk, the shell was in place, plus a profitable casino, when he was
overthrown in 1970. The casino stopped, so did the work. Three years ago, a
wealthy Cambodian in Hong Kong and two Singaporeans decided to put at least $20
million into completing the hotel.

''Cambodia has so much to offer,'' Mr. Cheam Yeap said. ''It's not just Angkor
Wat - we have 1,082 monuments throughout the country.'' And here he pulled out a
remnant of another time: a map labeled, ''Royaume du Cambodge. Carte
Touristique,'' If what is now called the State of Cambodia is not a royaume, or
kingdom anymore, it is not a People's Republic, either, ''We will not use a lot
of political words,'' Mr. Cheam Yeap said. ''Tourists want to know the situation
and the history of the genocidal Pol Pot regime, but we won't raise complicated
problems.''

Mr. Cheam Yeap, who lost 37 members of his family to the Khmer Rouge, including
2 of his children, said simply: ''I think about it a a lot. It stays in my
mind.'' He took his glasses off, wiping his eyes. ''But foreigners don't have to
come here to Tuol Sleng,'' the high school the Khmer Rouge turned into a torture
chamber and killing ground, now a museum. ''They can also come for the beach.''

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: photo: Many tourists have complained about paying about $100 a person
for a poorly guided tour of the Angkor temples, according to Cheam Yeap, the new
tourism chief of Cambodia. He has the difficult job of promoting tourism in a
country at war and diplomatically isolated. (The New York Times/Steven Erlanger)

                   Copyright 1990 The New York Times Company


                              71 of 288 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                  April 23, 1990, Monday, Late Edition - Final

IN THE NATION;
This Is Where I Came in

BYLINE: By Tom Wicker

SECTION: Section A; Page 19, Column 6; Editorial Desk

LENGTH: 769 words


The more things change, the French say, the more they stay the same. Now that
Bush Administration officials have disclosed plans to spend $35 million to train
the Peruvian Army to fight the Shining Path guerrillas, Americans can sing, ''It
seems to me I've heard that song before.''

The lyrics are so familiar it hurts:

* American military personnel sent to Peru will not enter combat, of course;
they will only train Peruvians to fight.

* Americans will immediately build a base in the Upper Hualaga River Valley,
naturally with all necessary supporting personnel and facilities - PX, Officers'
Club, etc. No one is saying what will happen when this fat target in the heart
of Shining Path operations is attacked. Will U.S. soldiers not be allowed to
defend themselves? Or to patrol against attack?

* U.S. military men will train Peruvians in U.S. tactics, proven so effective
against guerrillas in Vietnam and Salvador, and will equip trainees with U.S.
boots and rifles, no doubt hoping that this will not provide - as it did in
Vietnam and Salvador - a prime source of supply for the guerrillas.

* ''The goal is not to have a long-term presence here,'' said a high U.S.
official who discussed the plan in Lima, but some other officials didn't get the
official word; they said another base in the Ene-Tombo basin area soon may be
necessary.

One major distinction, without much difference, is that the Peruvian effort
officially will be against guerillas who are aiding drug traffickers - not
against Communists. Shining Path, nevertheless, is well known to U.S. officials
and headline writers as ''leftist''; and another Administration official has
conceded ''an element of anti-subversion'' in the intervention.

A second difference in this counterinsurgency, perhaps soon to be rectified, is
that no suitably derogatory nickname, such as gooks, slopes or dinks, has as yet
been devised for Shining Path guerrillas, in order to assure American military
men in Peru of their superiority. How about ''Shinos''? Or ''Spinks''?

This new decision to intervene in a civil war lacks realism and local expertise,
as usual. Peru's struggle for example, has been going on for 10 years; it
resulted last year in 3,188 deaths attributed to the guerrillas; and they have
been successful enough that Shining Path can levy its own ''war taxes'' on some
Peruvians (if that recalls the Viet Cong, Nervous Nellies, close your minds to
the thought). By what stretch of arrogance and historical amnesia does official
Washington think it can defeat such an effective enemy, if at all, without ''a
long-term presence'' or a major investment of lives and money?

What effect, for another example, is U.S. participation bound to have in the
Shining Path war? It will make the U.S. and ''anti-imperialism'' the guerrillas'
obvious enemy; it will make the Government in Lima an ally of the gringos. A
guerrilla movement with unclear objectives will be converted from an insurgency
against a Peruvian government to a nationalistic movement against another U.S.
intervention in Latin America.

This new U.S. commitment to an American military effort abroad, moreover, comes
just as the U.S.-supported war in Nicaragua is coming to an end, as the
U.S.-supported war in Salvador looks as if it might be settled, and as prospects
rise for bringing home many U.S. troops from Europe and Asia. Apparently this
Administration cannot bear the thought of having no foreign threat against which
to pit U.S. dollars and lives, or of the savings to be had in reduced overseas
involvement.

Who thinks the announced $35 million will be spent once but never again? Where
is it to come from, when foreign aid funds already have to be stretched to cover
Panama and Nicaragua as well as the usual recipients? From the ''war on drugs''?
If so, like the millions wasted in the showboat invasion of Panama, the money
would be better spent on improved drug treatment at home.

This latest U.S. intervention in Latin America also was agreed upon with a
lame-duck Peruvian Government, just before the election of a new President. The
favored candidate, Alberto Fujimori, has been lukewarm to U.S. aid against the
Shining Path, and has been outspoken about the need for Washington to direct its
efforts against the vast demand for drugs in the U.S.

Mr. Bush's vaunted ''prudence'' might have suggested waiting to negotiate with
Mr. Fujimori, or whoever is elected. Going ahead now suggests that the
Administration wanted to mix into Peru's war, and would rather spend anti-drug
money on violence abroad than on education and treatment at home.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: OP-ED

                   Copyright 1990 The New York Times Company


                              72 of 288 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                  April 23, 1990, Monday, Late Edition - Final

EARTH DAY 1990;
FOCUS ON HUMANS, CARDINAL CAUTIONS

BYLINE: By ARI L. GOLDMAN

SECTION: Section B; Page 12, Column 4; National Desk

LENGTH: 508 words


Amid all the Earth Day hoopla, John Cardinal O'Connor of New York added a note
of caution yesterday. ''The earth exists for the human person and not vice
versa,'' he said in his homily at St. Patrick's Cathedral.

The outspoken Roman Catholic Archbishop of New York insisted that he supported
Earth Day, but that the accent had to be clear. Rather than focus on ''snails
and whales,'' he said, the focus must be ''on the sacredness of the human
person.'' He singled out the homeless, the hungry, those suffering from AIDS and
''unborn babies.''

''One of the most dangerous environments in the world today is the mother's
womb,'' he said. ''Millions of babies are killed there each year.''

A Warning From Theologians

Cardinal O'Connor, an ardent foe of legalized abortion, seemed to be echoing
misgivings about Earth Day expressed by some conservative Christian theologians:
They warn that the popular environmental argument that the world is ''one
organism'' relegates man to a subsidiary rather than the central role on earth,
as spelled out in the Bible.

At the same time, the Cardinal followed the lead of Pope John Paul II, who in
recent messages expressed concern about the ''ecological crisis'' as a moral
issue. In his sermon, the Cardinal quoted extensively from the Pope's most
recent talk on the subject, his World Day of Peace Message of Jan. 1, expressing
concern about the effects of pollution and the depletion of the ozone layer.

Just before Cardinal O'Connor's sermon yesterday, a woman, called on to read
from the Scripture at St. Patrick's, interjected that Earth Day was, in the
Psalmists' words, ''the day the Lord hath made.''

When he climbed to the pulpit, the Cardinal began by gently correcting her,
saying, ''This is not 'the day the Lord hath made,' but a day, I suspect, on
which the Lord rejoices.''

The Psalmists' phrase, he said, was interpreted by Catholic Bible scholars as
referring specifically to Easter.

'Respect for the Human Person'

Cardinal O'Connor went on to ask, ''What is Earth Day?'' It is not, he said, ''a
pagan Easter,'' ''a fad'' or ''an attack on the Establishment left over from the
Vietnam War.'' Nor, he said, is it an occasion for ''a political charade''
designed to promote ideas he called ''non-truths,'' including the idea that
overpopulation is a cause of the world's problems.

Citing several recent papers, including a 1988 study by the World Bank, he said,
''I do not think the total number of people in the world is an ecological and
environmental problem.''

If Earth Day is used to highlight such environmental threats as the spoiling of
the air and water, it can be ''a tremendous contribution to the preservation of
the world,'' he said.

But he added, ''The ecological crisis is a moral crisis.'' And until ''we've
developed respect for the human person, we are not going to have respect for our
planet,'' he said.

The Cardinal said Earth Day was a time to ''express our gratitude to God the
Creator'' for the world ''he has given us for our use, not abuse.''

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: photo: A flag with an image of the planet Earth being carried by a
demonstrator at a rally by half a million people on the Mall in Washington. (The
New York Times/Paul Hosefros)

                   Copyright 1990 The New York Times Company


                              73 of 288 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                  April 23, 1990, Monday, Late Edition - Final

EARTH DAY 1990: POLITICAL MEMO;
G.O.P. Fears It Is Losing Points on Environment

BYLINE: By MICHAEL ORESKES, Special to The New York Times

SECTION: Section B; Page 12, Column 1; National Desk

LENGTH: 1351 words

DATELINE: LA JOLLA, Calif., April 22


Rising public concern about the environment looms like smog across the
Republican Party's political horizon.

The Earth Day celebration was a case in point. Democrats treated it as if it
were their own organizing rally, while Republicans, showing how worried they are
by the issue, worked to insulate themselves from a public perception that they
are less environmentally committed.

Vice President Dan Quayle, who was here on Friday for a party gathering, accused
the Democrats of trying to politicize the environment, which is what a
politician says when he knows it would be bad for his side if the other side
succeeded in making an issue out of something.

Having to Work Harder

The Democrats sought to profit over the weekend from what many poll takers say
is a general belief that their party handles environmental issues better than
Republicans. The Democratic Congressional Campaign Committee ran television
commercials around the country proclaiming the party an aggressive protector of
the environment and saying that on issues like the handling of nuclear waste and
the Exxon Valdez oil spill ''the Republicans waited.''

Some Republicans are still able to position themselves favorably on
environmental issues. But even the most environmentally conscious Republicans
acknowledge that they must work harder than Democrats to establish environmental
credentials, just as Democrats must work harder to establish credentials as
being tough on crime or spending.

For most of the last two decades Republicans have benefited from an agenda of
public concerns on which they were better positioned than Democrats, either by
basic ideological leaning or through faster footwork. These central concerns
included crime, military strength and taxes.

But now everything in America, from fashion to politics (which often follow the
same drummer anyway) is going green. There has been an impression that every
politician is embracing the environment and that therefore it will be
neutralized as a partisan issue.

Conceding the Advantage

But that is not what many political insiders think. Democrats are convinced that
this heightened environmental concern will work substantially to their advantage
in the 1990's, and some prominent Republican analysts agree.

''The U.S. environmental tide is dividing rather than bolstering the Republican
political coalition,'' said Kevin Phillips, a Republican political expert, who
was among the first to recognize the Republican Presidential majority that was
emerging out of the schisms of the 1960's.

Mr. Phillips's thesis is that environmental concerns drive a wedge between
Republican supporters. The issue could divide corporate leaders, who are
concerned that tighter environmental regulation will damage their businesses,
from voters in middle-class suburbs, who have been a mainstay of Republican
victories and are now among the people most concerned about environmental
threats.

While voters are generally skeptical about politicians' doing anything to
improve the environment, they also make it clear they have greater faith that
the Democrats will do something.

Asked to choose between Republicans and Democrats for doing a better job of
protecting the environment, 55 percent picked the Democrats and 36 percent chose
the Republicans, according to a Harris poll in February.

By contrast, 64 percent said Republicans would do better negotiating with the
Russians, and 54 percent picked Republicans to keep the economy prosperous. The
margin of sampling error in the telephone poll of 1,250 people was plus or minus
three percentage points.

The heart of the problem for Republicans is that the environment is not just
another issue. It has become ''a modern secular religion,'' said Martin Levin, a
political scientist at Brandeis University.

A Changing Cultural Tide

Democrats are hoping, and Republicans are fearing, that rising environmental
concern is a central part of a larger shift in the political playing field that
will make crucial middle-class voters feel more comfortable again with
Democrats.

Politics in America is often driven as much by cultural differences as by more
obvious battles. And nothing so clearly indicates the nation's cultural change
in the last two decades as Earth Day.

In 1970, the first Earth Day was a liberal exercise. Former Senator Gaylord
Nelson, Democrat of Wisconsin, an organizer of the first event, said he got the
idea from the teach-ins against the Vietnam War. The point is that Earth Day
then was clearly on one side of the cultural schism that divided the country.

But Earth Day 1990 was a mainstream event. ''We love it,'' said Paul Tully, the
political director of the Democratic Party. ''On this one, the more you know,
the better off we are.''

Bush Makes an Effort

Many Republicans, in particular the poll taker Robert Teeter, have been warning
the party for several years that it needs to shed its image as an enemy of the
environment.

President Bush began that effort in his 1988 Presidential campaign. In office,
he has negotiated with Congress for the first revision of the Clean Air Act in a
decade.

''The Democrats hope they can politicize the environmental issue to their
advantage,'' Mr. Quayle told a meeting of state Republican leaders here.
''They've seen all the other issues slip away. They've lost the peace issue.
They've lost the education issue. They never had the tax issue. Drugs and crime
has always been our issue. So they're grasping onto the environmental issue. But
they're not going to get very far on that for one very fundamental reason.''

That reason, Mr. Quayle said, is that President Bush has been pushing clean air
legislation and will be the one to sign it.

That is true. But the political stress Mr. Phillips warned about was apparent
several days ago as Mr. Bush, at an international conference he had convened on
global warming, was forced to explain that his Administration's desire for more
scientific research was not meant as an alternative to action.

Facing Skepticism

Of course environmental concerns do not guarantee a Democrat victory. Voters
select candidates, not parties, and individual Republicans will succeed in
defining themselves as pro-environment.

Here in Southern California, Republicans have a candidate they hope can be a
prototype for their future. Senator Pete Wilson, running for governor, is using
a television commercial in which he claims to have been concerned about growth
and offshore drilling even before there was an environmental movement.

But Mr. Wilson must contend with a skepticism toward Republicans that was
illustrated by a front-page headline in The San Diego Tribune on Saturday:
''Bush Delaying on Oil Drilling to Aid Wilson?'' The article quoted
environmentalists and local political leaders as suggesting that the President
was helping Mr. Wilson by delaying a decision to lease ocean tracts off
California for oil drilling.

Other issues continue to matter, of course. While Americans tell poll takers
that they are willing to make economic sacrifices for a better environment, Mr.
Quayle said they still placed a higher priority on jobs.

Republicans seeking to play down the importance of the environment as a voting
issue note that Gov. George Deukmejian was re-elected in 1986 even though he
supported offshore drilling and opposed a ballot proposition on the dumping of
toxic wastes.

But another Republican on the California ballot that year without the benefit of
incumbency, Ed Zschau, lost because he opposed the proposition on toxic dumping,
said Mervin Field, California's most prominent poll taker. Mr. Zschau challenged
Senator Alan Cranston, a leading advocate of the initative, which set new limits
on the release of toxic chemicals in farming or manufacturing.

Mr. Zschau, a moderate, opposed the resolution, saying it was well-intentioned
but would cost jobs. The proposition won overwhelmingly, while Mr. Cranston won
narrowly over Mr. Zschau. Mr. Field said he was convinced Mr. Zschau would have
beaten Mr. Cranston if he had supported the initiative.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1990 The New York Times Company


                              74 of 288 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                  April 23, 1990, Monday, Late Edition - Final

James Stewart Nods at Lady Luck For His Golden Age Film Career

BYLINE: By LARRY ROHTER, Special to The New York Times

SECTION: Section C; Page 11, Column 4; Cultural Desk

LENGTH: 1835 words

DATELINE: BEVERLY HILLS, Calif., April 22


A director who worked with him just after he arrived in Hollywood in 1935 once
described him as ''unusually usual.'' Even with a pair of Oscars on his mantel
and after a distinguished career of more than 70 films in which he played
everything from idealistic young swains to ruthless bounty hunters, James
Stewart still likes to cast himself in the role of the average guy who owes
everything he has to hard work and lucky breaks.

''It's been an amazing 50 years, and so much of it has been pure good fortune,''
he drawled as he sat in the garden of his Tudor-style home here one sunny
afternoon a few days ago. ''I've been in the right place at the right time.''

In fact, he said, had his friend Joshua Logan not persuaded him to give the
University Players a try back when both were students at Princeton, ''I'd have
gone back to Indiana, Pa., and gotten into my father's hardware store'' and
probably lived no less wonderful a life.

Instead, Jimmy Stewart came West, signed a three-month contract with the old
M-G-M studios in 1935 and more than fulfilled the prediction of a comedian named
Ted Healy who, Mr. Stewart recalled, told him early on that ''it's a screwy
business'' but ''it's possible you just could make it out here.''

How an Actor Views Success

On Monday night in New York, the Film Society of Lincoln Center is to pay
tribute to the actor, who at nearly 82 years of age is now the last of the major
male stars of the golden era of pre-World War II Hollywood. But in typical
fashion, Mr. Stewart sees his success in films like ''Mr. Smith Goes to
Washington'' and ''The Philadelphia Story'' more as a triumph of persistence
than of sheer talent.

''The main thing was that you were busy all the time when you were working at a
studio,'' he said. ''People today don't realize that you didn't sit around and
wait for somebody to call you and send you a script you liked. You went to work
every morning at 8 and left at 6:30 and you had big parts in little pictures and
little parts in big pictures. You were working all of the time, learning your
craft by working, by tackling different things.''

''I've always been absolutely 100 percent for the studio system,'' he continued.
''I don't think it is something that will be seen again, but it's the ideal way
to make pictures. Those of us who had that experience - God, so many of us are
gone - I think had the good fortune to be connected with this thing, the making
of motion pictures, at the best possible time.''

Mr. Stewart's artisan's attitude extended even to the way he regarded his
instantly recognizable voice, with all its hemming and hawing and elongated
vowels and octave shifts, a voice that has been imitated in hundreds of comedy
acts and advertisements.

The Filibuster and Hoarseness

''I never thought about it, not even in 'Mr. Smith Goes to Washington,' '' he
said. In the moving scenes of Jefferson Smith's filibuster in the Senate, Mr.
Stewart explained, his almost hysterical hoarseness was achieved not by tapping
into deep wells of emotion, but simply by having a physician apply a mercury
solution to inflame and irritate his vocal cords.

''I'm sure the Method people wouldn't have approved of it, but I was in
trouble,'' he recalled. ''To this day I don't know what happened to the doctor's
practice while he was down at the studio with me. I'd come in every once in a
while and say: 'Doc, you've got to do something. It's getting better.' ''

With the same enthusiasm, Mr. Stewart also recalled the hours spent off the set,
particularly those in the company of his buddy Henry Fonda, a New Deal Democrat
who could not fathom Mr. Stewart's lifelong conservative Republicanism. ''On the
political thing, we were complete opposites,'' he said. ''We got into a fight
about it way back, in New York, and after not speaking to each other for quite a
while, one of us said, 'What about never mentioning politics again?' And you
know, we kept that and absolutely never mentioned it again.''

Mr. Fonda and Mr. Stewart roomed with Burgess Meredith on West 63d Street when
they were all young stage actors on Broadway. When Mr. Fonda and Mr. Stewart
went to Hollywood, they lived for a time in a rented house next door to Greta
Garbo, trying unsuccessfully to find a way to meet her.

Often the two went out together on double dates. He recalled that one night Mr.
Fonda was with Barbara Stanwyck and he was with Lucille Ball. ''We went over to
this railroad car diner on Santa Monica Boulevard for breakfast after being out
all Saturday night,'' he said, ''because this was our only free night. We were
busy with the girls, I'll tell you that.''

Still, for all his fondness for those days at M-G-M, Mr. Stewart was one of the
people who helped break the studio system by becoming a freelance star when he
returned from World War II, during which he served as a flight instructor and
bomber pilot and was awarded the Distinguished Flying Cross and the Croix de
Guerre. In addition, he was shortly thereafter perhaps the first of Hollywood's
big names to accept a percentage of the gross earnings of a film, rather than a
salary, as payment for his services, a practice that transformed the economics
of movie making and that is now standard. Changing Persona In a Changing Town
''I pretty much left the financial things up to my agents,'' he said. ''After we
had done it, people, including my agents Lew Wasserman and Leland Hayward, said
it was a gamble. I'm not very good with numbers, but they were very good at
explaining things. It was at the time I married my wife, Gloria, in 1949, and I
was starting my family, so I probably worked the thing out that way.''

In that changing Hollywood, Mr. Stewart found it easy to reinvent himself by
playing darker and more complicated characters. Throughout the 50's, perhaps the
period of his greatest popularity, he played cowboys, some of them of dubious
character, in a series of memorable westerns directed by Anthony Mann, as well
as mature men of experience in Alfred Hitchcock's ''Rear Window'' and
''Vertigo.''

''I've always thought acting is a job you work at and learn, and I don't think
you ever stop learning how to act,'' he said. ''The very idea of changing my
whole thing from the sort of shy, fumbling fellow to the western was just my
work. It's all hard work and dedication, to be able to make a go of it. These
things were offered to me. I didn't go to somebody and say I think it's time for
me to do a western. I had no idea Lew Wasserman had taken on Anthony Mann's
'Winchester '73' for me, but when he did, the first thing I wanted was to get a
horse.''

What is sometimes forgotten, though, is that when Mr. Stewart first returned
from World War II, having been drafted nine months before Pearl Harbor, he
endured something of a professional dry spell. He recalls being at loose ends
with Henry Fonda and the two of them trying to find ways to amuse themselves:
''We came back from the war, and he'd been in the Navy and was married and had a
house in Brentwood and he wasn't getting any calls either. And so we flew kites.
There were wonderful places to fly kites up there.''

And Then Came 'Wonderful Life'

When work did come it was in the form of ''It's a Wonderful Life.'' That movie
is now one of the most popular of all time, but when it was first released, it
lost money at the box office, and Mr. Stewart and Frank Capra, the director with
whom he had earlier worked on ''Mr. Smith Goes to Washington'' and ''You Can't
Take It With You,'' feared it would derail their careers.

''It was the first picture I did after the war, after being almost five years
away,'' he said. ''Frank did everything he could to get these wonderful
character people in the thing, people like Ward Bond, and that left everybody
feeling good about the picture. So when it didn't do well, it was absolutely a
slap in the face.

''It was sort of a bad time for all of us,'' he continued. ''It broke Frank's
company, Liberty Films, and he and Willie Wyler and George Stevens had to sell
their assets to Paramount. My contract with M-G-M had run out during the war,
and they had offered me a new one, but my agents had advised me not to do it. So
I wondered: Have I lost my audience? Aren't things working anymore?''

Largely because of those problems, Mr. Stewart has found the classic status
awarded ''It's a Wonderful Life'' to be especially welcome and said it was his
favorite of all the movies he has made. Its current popularity, ''I think, is
probably because today the idea of the family is going through some hard times
in this country,'' he said.

''Call the picture pro-family if you want,'' he continued. ''It's probably a
good thing to counter some of the things that are happening.''

These days, Mr. Stewart said, he still sees an occasional script, but most of
the roles call for ''a crotchety old grandfather'' and he would prefer something
that recognizes his age but would not force him to play what he regards as
stereotypes. In addition he uses a hearing aid and in recent years has had a
heart condition and a bout with skin cancer.

'An Old Grandfather' Has a Busy Schedule

''I'll be 82 in a couple of weeks, and so I'm an old grandfather,'' he said. ''I
don't think there's much point in getting myself fixed up so that I don't look
like that, to try to throw that away.''

Still Mr. Stewart said he remained busy, often showing up in Washington to
testify against the coloring of the classic movies in which he and his
colleagues of the 30's and 40's appeared, or to attend events honoring ''Mr.
Smith Goes to Washington,'' which he said ''about half the audience walked out
on'' when it was screened for members of Congress in 1938. But there is an even
more personal reason that draws him back to the capital.

''We lost our oldest boy in Vietnam,'' he said softly, speaking of his son
Ronald, a Marine lieutenant who was killed in action at Da Nang in 1970. ''I was
in on the memorial in Washington from the very start of it, and every time I go
to Washington I go there. There are 57,000 names there, but I can pick out my
son's name almost with my eyes closed.''

In addition, Mr. Stewart said he spent ''at least four or five hours a day at my
office, answering all my fan mail,'' which has zoomed past 500 letters a day
since the publication of a short collection of his poems last year. More than
300,000 copies of the book have been sold, and Mr. Stewart plans to read the
poems for a cassette version to be issued this fall. He also recently recorded a
six-minute introduction on the making of ''Harvey'' for the videocassette
version of that film, one of 12 Stewart movies to be rereleased on May 10 with a
whole new generation of movie viewers in mind.

''In the last couple of years, I've started getting letters from 13- and
14-year-olds, and they all start out, 'My mother and dad told me about so and
so, and I turned it on, and I liked it,' '' he said. ''You know, that's
enormously gratifying.''

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo: ''I've been in the right place at the right time,'' said James
Stewart, in his Beverly Hills, Calif., home. (The New York Times/Michael Tweed)

                   Copyright 1990 The New York Times Company


                              75 of 288 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                  April 23, 1990, Monday, Late Edition - Final

Business Scene;
Difficult Switch For Arms Makers

BYLINE: By Louis Uchitelle

SECTION: Section D; Page 2, Column 1; Financial Desk

LENGTH: 860 words


AS military spending shrinks, the big names in American weapons manufacturing -
companies like Raytheon, Grumman, General Dynamics and Boeing Helicopter -
should be making plans to switch to civilian products. They are not. Naturally,
these companies are reluctant to give up steady, profitable military work. More
important, America's weapons makers say their operations are not suited for
civilian production.

History tends to agree that the conversion process is tortuous. During the big
cutback in military spending in the 1970's, for example, the Army no longer
needed so many of the twin-rotor Chinook helicopters that carried troops in
Vietnam. So Boeing Helicopter, the manufacturer, started making subway cars at
its factory complex in Philadelphia. Various cities were buying these cars,
drawing heavily on Federal subsidies, and Boeing's great hope was to
mass-produce the same model for every customer.

''We thought the Federal Government, acting on behalf of the cities, would offer
a contractor the opportunity to bid on 1,000 standard railway cars for a package
of cities,'' said John Hayden, a Boeing vice president. But the Government did
not impose a single set of standards, and each city wanted a customized car: 50
of this model for Boston, 50 of that one for Chicago. Development and production
costs got out of hand.

Boeing also had problems with the quality of its new products. So did the
Grumman Corporation, manufacturer of the F-14 fighter, which made buses in the
1970's for New York and other cities -also with the hope that the Federal
Government would be the principal customer on behalf of cities.

Presumably, companies capable of manufacturing precisely controlled jet fighters
and helicopters solid enough to withstand enemy gunfire can eventually learn to
make buses and subway cars that function properly. Weyman Jones, a Grumman vice
president, certainly makes this claim.

The real issue, he said, is not quality, but marketing. If the Federal
Government is not the principal customer, then a company like Grumman has to go
through the painful process of developing a sales force that can win contracts
in the competitive civilian marketplace. Grumman, for example, developed and
tried to sell a mini-van before Chrysler popularized the vehicle. ''The project
failed,'' Mr. Jones said, ''because we did not have the distribution system.''

Military contractors have ways of dealing with the cutback in military spending.
The principal one is to jockey for a share of the shrinking weapons market. A
military budget that is expected to drop from $300 billion today to $200 billion
in the late 1990's, in dollars adjusted for inflation, will still buy a lot of
hardware.

A second approach is to try to repackage military goods as civilian products, a
tactic that generates some revenue, but not the vast sums spent on weaponry. For
example, the developer Donald J. Trump flies New Yorkers to his Atlantic City
casinos in two Chinook helicopters. Oil companies also use Chinooks to service
offshore drilling platforms. What is more, Boeing Helicopter developed for the
Army an aircraft that flies like a plane but tilts up its motors to land and
take off like a helicopter.

Clearly, giant helicopters and helicopter-like planes have civilian
applications. But the nation's system of public works limits their use; there is
not a network of landing pads nor the air-traffic control procedures to support
large-scale production, Mr. Hayden said.

Of course, many big military contractors also own subsidiaries dedicated to
civilian products, and much effort is going into the expansion of these
divisions. Still, conversion is an obstacle. For example, the General Dynamics
Corporation, a maker of jet fighters, also makes civilian aircraft at its Cessna
division. But retooling a jet fighter plant to make Cessnas would cost much more
than expanding the Cessna factory, said Herbert Rogers, president of General
Dynamics. That is partly because the engineers and workers at the jet fighter
factory would have to be retrained to deal in technologies much less exacting
than those used in making fighter planes.

A bill now in Congress would require military contractors to draw up retooling
plans and would offer some Federal help for the retraining process. One goal is
to prevent the layoffs that come with plant shutdowns. But even after World War
II, when huge pent-up demand for consumer goods offered wonderful opportunities
for weapons manufacturers, some factories went idle.

The Government sold hundreds of weapons factories at discount prices, but
converting them to civilian production was difficult, said Robert Gordon, a
Northwestern University economist who studied the period. ''Despite all of the
demand and the low unemployment rate, production fell and the economy shrank
because many of the factories weren't in use or were under-used,'' he said.

The Korean War provided a remedy to that situation. The factories were pressed
back into service and production rose, even with roughly the same work force.
The lesson is that companies, once hooked on weapons making, do not easily kick
the habit.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Drawing

                   Copyright 1990 The New York Times Company


                              76 of 288 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                April 25, 1990, Wednesday, Late Edition - Final

Sketches of Five Astronauts

SECTION: Section B; Page 6, Column 1; National Desk

LENGTH: 592 words



Loren J. Shriver; Mission Commander

Colonel Shriver, 46 years old, of the Air Force, has been an astronaut for 12
years. He spent three days in orbit aboard the space shuttle Challenger in 1985.

A 1967 graduate of the Air Force Academy, Colonel Shriver completed F-4 jet
fighter combat training in 1973 and was stationed in Thailand in 1974. Before
joining the National Aeronautics and Space Administration in 1978, he was a test
pilot for two years at Edwards Air Force Base in California. He has logged more
than 5,000 hours of flying time in jets and has flown 30 different kinds of
airplanes.

Colonel Shriver, who completed high school in Iowa, received a master's degree
in aeronautical engineering from Purdue University.

Charles F. Bolden Jr.; Pilot

Colonel Bolden, 44, of the Marine Corps, was also the pilot on his only previous
shuttle mission, a six-day flight on the shuttle Columbia in 1986.

On that flight the crew deployed a satellite and conducted experiments in
astrophysics and materials processing.

After graduating from the United States Naval Academy in 1968, he joined the
Marine Corps and became a naval aviator in 1970. He flew more than 100 sorties
over Vietnam in 1972 and 1973.

Colonel Bolden, a native of Columbia, S.C., graduated from the Naval Test Pilot
School shortly before he became an astronaut in 1980.

Bruce McCandless 2d; Mission Specialist

Captain McCandless, 53, of the Navy, has been an astronaut for 24 years. He
served as a member of the astronaut support crew for the Apollo 14 mission in
1971, for the third moon landing. He was also the backup pilot for the first
manned Skylab mission, in 1973, and has logged more than 5,200 hours of flight
time, most of it in jets.

On his first shuttle flight, aboard the Challenger in 1984, Captain McCandless
was one of two astronauts who successfully tested jet-propelled backpacks that
allow space fliers to float free of any lifeline outside the shuttle. Joining
him in the space walk was Lieut. Col. Rovert L. Stewart of the Army. Captain
McCandless, a native of Boston, graduated from the United States Naval Academy
in 1958. He holds master's degrees in electrical engineering from Stanford
University and in business administration from the University of Houston at
Clear Lake City.

Steven A. Hawley; Mission Specialist

Dr. Hawley, a 39-year-old native of Kansas, will be making his third shuttle
flight. His first mission, in 1984, was also the first flight for the shuttle
Discovery.

He graduated from the University of Kansas in 1973 and received a doctorate in
astronomy and astrophysics from the University of California. He has been an
astronaut since 1978, and is deputy chief of the space agency's astronaut
office.

Kathryn D. Sullivan; Mission Specialist

Dr. Sullivan, 38, became the first American woman to walk in space when, in her
first shuttle flight on the shuttle Challenger in 1984, she participated in a
three-and-a-half-hour test demonstrating that satellites can be refueled in
orbit.

A geologist at NASA, she specializes in remote sensing and planetary geology and
has flown on several high-altitude research flights over Alaska. She became an
astronaut in 1978. She was appointed to the National Commission on Space, which
laid out goals for the civilian space program, in 1985.

After graduating from the University of California at Santa Cruz in 1973, she
earned a doctorate in geology from Dalhousie University in Nova Scotia. She
speaks five foreign languages and is a private pilot.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1990 The New York Times Company


                              77 of 288 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                April 25, 1990, Wednesday, Late Edition - Final

EDUCATION;
About Education

BYLINE: By Fred M. Hechinger

SECTION: Section B; Page 9, Column 1; National Desk

LENGTH: 808 words


Why is college so expensive? The question won't go away until parents get more
believable answers.

''At some point, families will become sensitive to the price,'' writes Arthur M.
Hauptman. ''We are close to that point now.''

Mr. Hauptman is not a spokesman for disgruntled parents. On the contrary, he is
a consultant to the American Council on Education and the College Board, which
together sponsored the study, ''The College Tuition Spiral'' (Macmillan
Publishing Company). The two organizations are insiders, representing the
colleges, rather than outside critics.

College tuition in the 1980's rose drastically, often at more than twice the
inflation rate. In 1981, the peak year, the increase neared 13 percent.

The study identified some reasons why costs skyrocketed.

Faculty salaries had to be raised to protect the quality of teaching and
research. In the 1970's, while colleges had to cope with rising fuel costs,
health insurance and other expenses, faculty members lost nearly 20 per cent of
their purchasing power.

As the college-age population dwindled, recruiting became more important and
costly, and efforts to increase the number of students from minority groups
added to the cost.

As Federal student aid declined, more of the tuition paid by those who could
afford it had to be used for scholarships - a kind of Robin Hood policy of
taking from the rich to give to the poor. Donald M. Stewart, president of the
College Board, while conceding that colleges would ''have to cut corners
somewhere,'' expressed concern that ''aid to needy students could suffer.''

Colleges also point to the high cost of libraries and modern science equipment.

Still, families who are already struggling with inflated housing costs are less
patient with explanations, as the annual cost of attending a prestige college
creeps up to, and beyond, $20,000, and state university tuition rises as well.
The study's sponsors warn about an impending revolt against further increases.

Some colleges, Mr. Hauptman found, have begun to put brakes on tuition. He cited
Harvard and Stanford, which imposed hefty increases in the last decade but are
planning rises of only 5 or 6 percent in the coming academic year.

While studies conducted on behalf of the higher-education establishment tend to
justify or at least explain the high price tag, parents can be expected to ask
whether there is any fat in the budget.

One area likely to come under scrutiny is the growth of the campus bureaucracy.
A recent report in The Chronicle of Higher Education, a weekly publication,
shows dramatic increases in the support staffs of colleges - by more than
100,000 people, or 61 percent, from 1975 to 1985. These are people with academic
degrees but without teaching or research functions. They include financial aid
counselors, specialists dealing with problems of minorities and the handicapped,
auditors, lawyers, coaches, and systems analysts. They do not include executive,
administrative, and managerial employees, whose ranks also grew, by 17.9
percent.

In the same period, the number of full-time faculty grew by only 5.9 percent,
and service and maintenance personnel actually declined by 4.9 percent. Student
enrollment went up by about 9.5 percent.

Part of the reason for the growth in managerial and support staffs,
administrators say, is the need to comply with growing state and Federal
regulations and to cope with litigation. Others cite many new services to
students with special needs, like remedial help and special counseling.

Fund raising, too, does not come cheap.

Still, even some insiders admit that there is academic bloat. Robert V. Iosue,
president of York College in Pennsylvania, told The Chronicle, ''Everybody wants
to blame somebody else for their inability to control their own appetites.''

Some trimming has begun. In February, Stanford University announced it would
reduce its budget by $22 million over 18 months, with emphasis on cutting
nonacademic staffs and simplifying administration. Dartmouth plans to eliminate
52 administrative jobs.

The problem of bureaucratic bloat, some observers say, is not confined to
education; it is a part of American life. In his recent book, ''Flashbacks: On
Returning to Vietnam,'' Morley Safer reported that at one army post near Saigon
22,000 Vietnamese were employed as support staff for 26,000 Americans who were
themselves supposed to have been support troops.

Tomorrow's parents may hope that the tuition rise can be stemmed through
draining some fat from college budgets. But state and Federal governments could
help by making more financial aid available to needy students. This would reduce
the pressure on colleges to play Robin Hood, and help them to be able to stop
charging high tuition of middle-class parents and students to finance the
education of the poor.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1990 The New York Times Company


                              78 of 288 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 April 26, 1990, Thursday, Late Edition - Final

The High Cost of Peace Jolts a Connecticut Factory Town

BYLINE: By NICK RAVO, Special to The New York Times

SECTION: Section B; Page 1, Column 2; Metropolitan Desk

LENGTH: 2126 words

DATELINE: MONTVILLE, Conn.


For most of the 1980's, this town 10 miles north of New London was awash in
money from the nation's military build-up. Many of the 17,000 residents commuted
to the Electric Boat submarine shipyard in nearby Groton. Others worked at the
local UNC Naval Products plant, which builds nuclear reactors for submarines.

But as the cold war thaws and pressure grows to cut the defense budget, the
price of peace is starting to become evident here in southeastern Connecticut,
long among the nation's regions most dependent on military spending.

Electric Boat, maker of the Trident missile-launching submarine, has not lost
any jobs. But this year UNC laid off 166 of its 1,060 employees. This month the
company told the remaining workers that they would be dismissed within three
years. The next round of layoffs, about 100, are to occur on June 10.

'Tough Times Ahead'

Of the first layoffs, 117 have been prompted by a Navy decision to cut
production of its fast-attack submarines.

All the rest are because of a cost-cutting decision by the Department of Energy
to give all future marine reactor work to a single contractor, UNC's competitor.

''We are going to have some tough times ahead,'' said Montville's First
Selectman, Wayne D. Scott.

In many areas where military contracts help fuel the economy, immediate layoffs
remain more a distant fear than a reality. Just a few miles away in Groton, for
example, Electric Boat officials are almost bullish about the future. Besides
the Trident, the company is building the nation's first Seawolf submarine, a
nuclear-powered attack vessel.

'We Have a Backlog'

''There are uncertainties,'' said Electric Boat's director of communications,
Neil D. Ruenzel. ''Nevertheless we have a backlog and are looking ahead to
continuing programs.''

In Montville, though, the military contracts are scheduled to stop, and the
economic aftershocks are already rippling through the area's non-defense
businesses, from realtors to pizzerias. Town officials also worry about large
reductions in their tax bases.

UNC workers talk of winning the cold war only to lose their livelihood.

''The defense workers of America have paid the premiums of peace through their
labor and efforts and dedication, but the peace dividend is going to be paid
overseas,'' said James B. Rusiecki, a supervisor of electronic technologies.
''That dividend should be turned around and put back into the defense industry
for retooling. It's only fair.''

Elimination of Competition

The main blow to UNC is a directive by the Department of Energy giving all
future construction work on marine nuclear reactors to Babcock & Wilcox of
Lynchburg, Va. In some areas of work, particularly those that produce a small
volume of products, military officials consider using a single supplier more
cost-effective than requiring competition between contractors.

The layoffs astonished UNC employees, many of whom are highly skilled
technicians or engineers involved in classified work. As recently as December,
they believed that they would be spared projected spending cuts because the Navy
and its submarine program appeared the least vulnerable.

Indeed, when the layoffs were announced, UNC was two months shy of starting
operations at a new $60 million reactor factory at the 32-year-old, 242-acre
complex in the Uncasville section of Montville.

''It's now just sitting there, ready to be dismantled,'' Mr. Rusiecki said.

Petition Asks U.S. Aid

This month several hundred UNC employees and their families held a rally at the
town's St. Bernard High School to express their concerns to a panel of visiting
Congressmen. They also presented a 20,000-name petition asking the Government to
supply either enough work to sustain the company or funds to attract non-defense
industry to the area.

''We feel that some of the money that's being saved in defense should come back
to us,'' said Charla McDermott, a UNC quality-control worker who lives in nearby
Bozrah.

At the meeting were Representative John G. Rowland of Waterbury, who sits on the
sea power subcommittee of the Armed Forces Committee; Senator Christopher J.
Dodd of Connecticut; Representative Sam Gejdenson of Bozrah and Representative
Bruce A. Morrison of New Haven. Mr. Rowland, a Republican, and Mr. Morrison, a
Democrat, are candidates for governor.

''This may be the first economic blow because of the peace dividend,'' Mr.
Rowland said.  Joining them was Dr. Robert M. Rauner, director of the Office of
Economic Conversion. He noted that after World War II, the Korean War and the
Vietnam War, the nation endured greater military reductions.

''It's a growing problem,'' he said. ''But it's just part of the defense
industry dynamic.''

'Too Good for Too Long'

The lawmakers promised to a try a variety of remedies, including introducing
legislation that would allow UNC to continue to compete with Babcock & Wilcox.
They also promised to urge the Department of Energy to provide UNC with
non-defense projects and to allow the company to do work for some foreign
nations.

They cautioned, though, that diversification may arrive too late to save UNC.
Asked why Montville had not aggressively sought non-military businesses, Mr.
Scott said: ''Things have been too good for too long.''

Montville is home for 156 UNC employees and their families; the rest are
scattered in neighboring towns like Norwich, Bozrah and Ledyard. The company is
a subsidiary of UNC Inc. of Annapolis, Md., which has 12 divisions and 5,200
employees nationwide. A phase-out of a smaller UNC division in Montville, UNC
Aerospace, is expected to be completed later this year.

Help to Displaced Offered

Robert F. Bonito, the vice president for human resources at UNC, said the
company would offer job counseling and support services to laid-off workers for
as long as necessary. He also said he believed that most employees would have
little trouble finding work if they were willing to move.

''These are quality people,'' he said, adding that the average length of service
at the company was 13 years.

Mr. Bonito said UNC would continue to assist in efforts to obtain new Federal
work and attract non-defense industry. He was pessimistic about the prospects,
though.

''If something doesn't happen in six months, we'll lose our resources,'' he
said. ''Not equipment - people.'' By NICK RAVO MONTVILLE, Conn. - For most of
the 1980's, this town 10 miles north of New London was awash in money from the
nation's military build-up. Many of the 17,000 residents commuted to the
Electric Boat submarine shipyard in nearby Groton. Others worked at the local
UNC Naval Products plant, which builds nuclear reactors for submarines.

But as the cold war thaws and pressure grows to cut the defense budget, the
price of peace is starting to become evident here in southeastern Connecticut,
long among the nation's regions most dependent on military spending.

Electric Boat, maker of the Trident missile-launching submarine, has not lost
any jobs. But this year UNC laid off 166 of its 1,060 employees. This month the
company told the remaining workers that they would be dismissed within three
years. The next round of layoffs, about 100, are to occur on June 10.

'Tough Times Ahead'

Of the first layoffs, 117 have been prompted by a Navy decision to cut
production of its fast-attack submarines.

All the rest are because of a cost-cutting decision by the Department of Energy
to give all future marine reactor work to a single contractor, UNC's competitor.

''We are going to have some tough times ahead,'' said Montville's First
Selectman, Wayne D. Scott.

In many areas where military contracts help fuel the economy, immediate layoffs
remain more a distant fear than a reality. Just a few miles away in Groton, for
example, Electric Boat officials are almost bullish about the future. Besides
the Trident, the company is building the nation's first Seawolf submarine,
another missile launcher.

'We Have a Backlog'

''There are uncertainties,'' said Electric Boat's director of communications,
Neil D. Ruenzel. ''Nevertheless we have a backlog and are looking ahead to
continuing programs.''

In Montville, though, the military contracts are scheduled to stop, and the
economic aftershocks are already rippling through the area's non-defense
businesses, from realtors to pizzerias. Town officials also worry about large
reductions in their tax bases.

UNC workers talk of winning the cold war only to lose their livelihood.

''The defense workers of America have paid the premiums of peace through their
labor and efforts and dedication, but the peace dividend is going to be paid
overseas,'' said James B. Rusiecki, a supervisor of electronic technologies.
''That dividend should be turned around and put back into the defense industry
for retooling. It's only fair.''

Elimination of Competition

The main blow to UNC is a directive by the Department of Energy giving all
future construction work on marine nuclear reactors to Babcock & Wilcox of
Lynchburg, Va. In some areas of work, particularly those that produce a small
volume of products, military officials consider using a single supplier more
cost-effective than requiring competition between contractors.

The layoffs astonished UNC employees, many of whom are highly skilled
technicians or engineers involved in classified work. As recently as December,
they believed that they would be spared projected spending cuts because the Navy
and its submarine program appeared the least vulnerable.

Indeed, when the layoffs were announced, UNC was two months shy of starting
operations at a new $60 million reactor factory at the 32-year-old, 242-acre
complex in the Uncasville section of Montville.

''It's now just sitting there, ready to be dismantled,'' Mr. Rusiecki said.

Petition Asks U.S. Aid

This month several hundred UNC employees and their families held a rally at the
town's St. Bernard High School to express their concerns to a panel of visiting
Congressmen. They also presented a 20,000-name petition asking the Government to
supply either enough work to sustain the company or funds to attract non-defense
industry to the area.

''We feel that some of the money that's being saved in defense should come back
to us,'' said Charla McDermott, a UNC quality-control worker who lives in nearby
Bozrah.

At the meeting were Representative John G. Rowland of Waterbury, who sits on the
sea power subcommittee of the Armed Forces Committee; Senator Christopher J.
Dodd of Connecticut; Representative Sam Gejdenson of Bozrah and Representative
Bruce A. Morrison of New Haven. Mr. Rowland, a Republican, and Mr. Morrison, a
Democrat, are candidates for governor.

''This may be the first economic blow because of the peace dividend,'' Mr.
Rowland said.  Joining them was Dr. Robert M. Rauner, director of the Office of
Economic Conversion. He noted that after World War II, the Korean War and the
Vietnam War, the nation endured greater military reductions.

''It's a growing problem,'' he said. ''But it's just part of the defense
industry dynamic.''

'Too Good for Too Long'

The lawmakers promised to a try a variety of remedies, including introducing
legislation that would allow UNC to continue to compete with Babcock & Wilcox.
They also promised to urge the Department of Energy to provide UNC with
non-defense projects and to allow the company to do work for some foreign
nations.

They cautioned, though, that diversification may arrive too late to save UNC.
Asked why Montville had not aggressively sought non-military businesses, Mr.
Scott said: ''Things have been too good for too long.''

Montville is home for 156 UNC employees and their families; the rest are
scattered in neighboring towns like Norwich, Bozrah and Ledyard. The company is
a subsidiary of UNC Inc. of Annapolis, Md., which has 12 divisions and 5,200
employees nationwide. A phase-out of a smaller UNC division in Montville, UNC
Aerospace, is expected to be completed later this year.

Help to Displaced Offered

Robert F. Bonito, the vice president for human resources at UNC, said the
company would offer job counseling and support services to laid-off workers for
as long as necessary. He also said he believed that most employees would have
little trouble finding work if they were willing to move.

''These are quality people,'' he said, adding that the average length of service
at the company was 13 years.

Mr. Bonito said UNC would continue to assist in efforts to obtain new Federal
work and attract non-defense industry. He was pessimistic about the prospects,
though.

''If something doesn't happen in six months, we'll lose our resources,'' he
said. ''Not equipment - people.''

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: photos: Cuts in military spending are having an impact in Connecticut.
The UNC Naval Products plant in Montville has told its workers that all will be
laid off within three years. James B. Rusiecki, right, and Bernie McKenna are
among the company's 1,060 employees due to be dismissed. (The New York Times/Jim
Estrin) (pg. B1); Employees of UNC Naval Products applauding speakers at a rally
earlier this month in Montville, Conn. Workers expressed concerns about layoffs
to a panel of visiting Congressmen and presented a petition asking the
Government for enough work to sustain the company. (The New York Times/Rollin A.
Riggs) (pg. B6)

                   Copyright 1990 The New York Times Company


                              79 of 288 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 April 26, 1990, Thursday, Late Edition - Final

Review/Television;
Jennings Says U.S. Helps Khmer Rouge

BYLINE: By WALTER GOODMAN

SECTION: Section C; Page 22, Column 4; Cultural Desk

LENGTH: 728 words


''From the Killing Fields,'' tonight's report by Peter Jennings at 10 P.M. on
ABC, makes the argument that the United States is covertly supporting the return
to power in Cambodia of the Khmer Rouge. That is a heavy accusation, given the
death and devastation that the Communist movement under Pol Pot inflicted on the
country before it was driven out by the Vietnamese a decade ago.

Although based largely on inference, the case is only too plausible. Mr.
Jennings relies in part on American critics of Washington's policy, in
particular William E. Colby, the former Director of Central Intelligence, and
Rep. Chester G. Atkins, Democrat of Massachusetts. They agree with aid workers
on the scene that the Administration's favorite Cambodian, Prince Norodom
Sihanouk, the putative leader of a coalition of anti-Government forces, is in
fact a puppet of the Khmer Rouge. The program states without any ifs or buts
that American arms are finding their way to the Communist fighters, who are said
to be dominant in the alliance and most effective on the battlefield.

Mr. Jennings' main problem in confirming the assertions is the stonewalling by
Washington. The spokesman assigned to him, Richard H. Solomon, Assistant
Secretary of State for East Asian and Pacific Affairs, admits nothing, but his
denials seem pro forma. He says cooperation with the Khmer Rouge is ''absolutely
a no-no'' but offers no detailed rebuttal of evidence to the contrary. Instead,
he gives forth diplospeak about creating ''a process here which will end the
civil war in Cambodia.''

In what may have been a slip, Secretary Solomon says that if the non-Communists
whom Washington supports were found to be cooperating with the Khmer Rouge, ''we
would cut off arms.'' When Mr. Jennings picks up on the startling admission from
a high official that the United States is sending arms to the insurgents, the
Secretary says: ''Well, I made a mistake there. We do not supply any lethal
assistance to the non-Communists.'' He does not seem to be trying hard to sound
persuasive.

Prince Sihanouk, as mercurial as ever, announces that the Khmer Rouge has
reformed and welcomes them as allies in driving out the regime left behind by
the Vietnamese when they withdrew from Cambodia last September. He concedes that
there is military cooperation between Communist and non-Communist elements in
his coalition and refers to ''a few Americans who appreciate the efficiency of
the Khmer Rouge army on the battlefield,'' but he declines to give Mr. Jennings
any names.

The correspondent is less tough when talking about the Vietnamese-installed
Government in Phnom Penh. He calls those who have investigated the mistreatment
of political prisoners ''Cambodia's harshest critics'' (a peculiar designation
for Amnesty International) and credits the Government with political and social
reforms. He speaks sharply of efforts by Presidents Jimmy Carter, Ronald Reagan
and Bush ''to weaken, even humiliate Vietnam.'' Well, he is not the first
journalist to evince soft feelings for Hanoi. His warning that the United States
is ''in danger of being on the wrong side of history,'' a phrase that might have
been borrowed from Marxist texts, seems a touch dated after the anti-Communist
upheavals of 1989.

Whatever one makes of the various assertions in this provocative hour, it is
plain that the Cambodian people are once again the victims. Mr. Jennings has
done a service in drawing public attention to what seems to be yet another
covertly conducted war, and his outrage at the possibiity that the United States
would in any way consort with the Khmer Rouge will, one hopes, be shared by many
viewers.

The issue is further addressed on ABC tonight in a live 90-minute forum called
''Beyond Vietnam'' at 11:30 P.M. Among the participants are Gen. William C.
Westmoreland, once commander of American forces in Vietnam; Frances FitzGerald,
author of ''Fire in the Lake''; Sen. John McCain, Republican of Arizona, who was
a prisoner of war in Vietnam, and Thomas R. Pickering, the chief American
delegate to the United Nations.

The Victim Again
PETER JENNINGS REPORTING: FROM THE KILLING FIELDS, an ABC News special, written
by Peter Jennings, Leslie Cockburn and Tom Yellin; produced by Ms. Cockburn for
ABC News; Mr. Yellin, executive producer; Mr. Jennings, anchor. Tonight at 10
P.M. on ABC.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Review

                   Copyright 1990 The New York Times Company


                              80 of 288 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                  April 27, 1990, Friday, Late Edition - Final

AT THE MOVIES

BYLINE: By Lawrence Van Gelder

SECTION: Section C; Page 12, Column 1; Weekend Desk

LENGTH: 944 words



Another Clancy

''I've always been fascinated by submarine stories,'' the producer Mace Neufeld
was saying. ''They generally make for great movies. They deal with men in
confined circumstances under great pressure.''

Mr. Neufeld was recalling how, in February 1985 on the basis of galley proofs,
he optioned a novel that had not yet been published by the Naval Institute
Press. It was, of course, Tom Clancy's ''Hunt for Red October,'' a perennial
best seller and of late a hit movie starring Sean Connery as a Soviet submarine
commander and Alec Baldwin as the American intelligence analyst who helps him
defect with his technologically advanced vessel.

But Mr. Neufeld was also discussing the plans he and his partner Bob Rehme
(pronounced RAY-mee) have for a series of movies under their new exclusive
production deal with Paramount Pictures, including a film based on Mr. Clancy's
latest best seller, ''Clear and Present Danger.'' And Mr. Neufeld was also
discussing Hollywood's trend toward such production deals.

From the independent producer's point of view, he said, ''While there's a lot of
production money available from private groups, the difficulty is getting really
viable distribution and marketing because making a movie is a difficult,
long-term process.''

Mr. Neufeld added: ''From the studios' point of view, they have this marketing
and distribution apparatus, but they need minimally 15 pictures a year, and
they'd like a lot more; and since they're in competition with the other majors,
there's only so much good material and so many experienced producers. It
becomes, I think, incumbent on them to try and make exclusive deals with
producers they feel can deliver successful material to them.''

Talking about the first session with Frank Mancuso, Paramount's chairman, he
said: ''Frank told us they had a long-term plan to become a 'producers' studio,'
to encourage producers to find a home there. And I think up to that point, they
had four exclusive deals - with Simpson and Bruckheimer, Jaffe-Lansing and the
Zucker brothers and, I believe, Eddie Murphy. And we liked that approach.''

Coming up in July from Paramount, Mr. Neufeld said, is ''Flight of the
Intruder,'' a film made before Neufeld-Rehme Productions started producing
exclusively for Paramount. Based on the Stephen Coonts novel and starring Danny
Glover, Willem Dafoe and Brad Johnson, the film deals with Navy carrier pilots
who fly an unarmed all-weather low-level bomber called the Intruder in 1972,
shortly before President Richard M. Nixon ordered unrestricted bombing of North
Vietnam.

Mr. Neufeld had also just received the screenplay for a film he hopes to start
this summer under the arrangement he and Mr. Rehme, a longtime executive with
such companies as Paramount, Avco Embassy, Universal and New World, have with
Paramount.

Written by Dean R. Koontz, it is based on Mr. Koontz's best seller ''Midnight,''
a thriller that deals with the owner of a computer company in northern
California who is, in effect, taking over a town ''with dire results,'' Mr.
Neufeld said.

In addition to ''Midnight,'' Mr. Neufeld said, Paramount has acquired ''Clear
and Present Danger,'' the Clancy best seller about a President who mounts a
covert operation against a Colombian drug cartel. And John Milius, who directed
''Flight of the Intruder,'' is writing the screenplay, he said. Because the
novel has as its central character Jack Ryan, the analyst portrayed by Alec
Baldwin in ''Red October,'' Mr. Neufeld said, yes, he'd love to have the actor
in the new movie, on which he would like to begin production early next year.

''Then we have an original comedy called 'They Froze My Mother,' written by Ryan
Brooks and Todd Komarnicki,'' Mr. Neufeld said. ''And that deals with a
successful woman who is an author and a lecturer on how to combine a career and
a family. Suddenly she finds out that her mother, who had been cryogenically
frozen when our leading lady was a child, returns; and what we have is a
daughter and a mother who are the same age. But one is out of the 50's, and one
is out of the 80's.''

And, he said, ''We also have a script called 'Dancing Cross the River,' written
by Stephen Glantz and Calliope Brattlestreet, a husband and wife.'' The script,
Mr. Neufeld said, deals with a lawyer named Danny Sheehan, who in 1982
successfully defended the first black mayor in Chula County, Miss., who was
framed in a murder case. ''Ted Danson will play Danny Sheehan,'' Mr. Neufeld
said, noting that this film will be a co-production by Neufeld-Rehme and Mr.
Danson's production company, which also has an exclusive deal with Paramount.
But, he said, filming will have to wait until next spring because of Mr.
Danson's starring role in the long-running television series ''Cheers.''

As for Neufeld-Rehme in the long run, Mr. Neufeld said, ''We just want to make
high-quality, successful films.''

Israel Festival

The 1990 Israel Film Festival, featuring 12 of the latest films from Israel, is
to open Tuesday and run through May 13 at the Biograph Cinema on 57th Street,
east of Broadway. Admission is $7 for a single ticket, but a $30 ticket,
offering admission to any five films, excluding opening and closing nights, is
also available. Additional information may be obtained from the Israfest
Foundation, 350 Fifth Avenue, Suite 1908, New York, N.Y. 10118; 714-2241.

The opening attraction, at 7 P.M. Tuesday, is Uri Barbash's ''One of Us,''
Israel's entry in the 1990 Academy Awards. The film is a tale of intrigue in
which the loyalty and morals of three close friends are tested three years after
they complete military service.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo: Mace Neufeld

TYPE: Review

                   Copyright 1990 The New York Times Company


                              81 of 288 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                  April 27, 1990, Friday, Late Edition - Final

A Talk on Design

SECTION: Section C; Page 26, Column 6; Weekend Desk

LENGTH: 69 words


Maya Ying Lin, the sculptor who designed the Vietnam Veterans Memorial in
Washington and the Civil Rights Memorial in Montgomery, Ala., will give a slide
lecture, ''Design Processes: Recent Work,'' on Sunday at 3 P.M. in the Grace
Rainey Rogers Auditorium of the Metropolitan Museum of Art. The talk is free
with museum admission of $5; $2.50 for students and the elderly. Information:
879-5500, extension 3792.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1990 The New York Times Company


                              82 of 288 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                  April 29, 1990, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

200,000 Demonstrate Against Abortion

BYLINE: By ROBIN TONER, Special to The New York Times

SECTION: Section 1; Part 1, Page 1, Column 1; National Desk

LENGTH: 1411 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, April 28


Hundreds of thousands of people rallied in the nation's capital today to pledge
their commitment to outlawing abortion, hearing promises of support from
President Bush and Vice President Dan Quayle and hoping to send a powerful
message to other elected officials about the strength of the anti-abortion
movement.

Mr. Bush told those cheering at the rally around the Washington Monument, ''Your
presence on the Mall today reminds all of us in Government that Americans from
all walks of life are committed to preserving the sanctity and dignity of human
life.''

The President, who spoke to the crowd by telephone, said the ''widespread
prevalence of abortion is a tragedy'' that ''fundamentally contradicts the
values that we as a nation hold dear.'' He urged those present to ''continue to
work for the day when respect for human life is sacrosanct and beyond
question.''

Rally Underscores Determination

Mr. Bush's remarks underscored the message that the rally's organizers hoped to
send today: that contrary to the perception in many political circles and
despite some setbacks in recent months, the anti-abortion movement is unflagging
and determined to keep pushing in the new climate created by the Supreme Court
decision last year opening the way for states to restrict abortion.

''We are not losing,'' Olivia Gans, an anti-abortion leader, told the crowd.
''We are winning. We are the majority of America.''

The United States Park Police estimated at 4 P.M. that 200,000 people had
gathered at the rally. But organizers said the crowd was more than three times
that size, as large as 700,000.

Mr. Quayle, who appeared at the rally, gave an unstinting statement of support,
saying he hoped the event could ''begin a healing of the terrible wound which
for almost two decades has torn at our country's heart.''

'Not Now. Not Ever.'

''The pro-life movement is the humanitarian movement of our time,'' Mr. Quayle
declared to warm applause. ''Will the American people continue to accept the
notion that an unborn child is disposable?'' The crowd roared back, ''No!'' Mr.
Quayle said: ''Our answer is: Not in this country. Not now. Not ever.''

The crowd wore T-shirts declaring their political purpose: ''Now Is the Time to
Be Counted.''

Dr. John C. Wilke, president of the National Right to Life Committee, which
organized the march, said: ''We feel that it is important that we show we are
still strong and still powerful. Our numbers will be impressive to Congress and
the country.''

So the demonstrators gathered on the grassy rise around the base of the
Washington Monument with umbrellas and coolers to counter a daunting sun, with a
watchful eye on the toddlers and on the children who rambled through the crowd,
and with signs and banners declaring their conviction.

''Equal Rights for Unborn Children,'' many signs implored. ''It's a Child, Not a
Choice,'' declared another. ''Save the Baby Humans,'' said a third.

'Simple, Moral People'

Many demonstrators came a long way to be counted, like those aboard the five
buses that traveled overnight from a group of towns in central Minnesota. ''We
are just normal people,'' said Cindy Burgess, a farmer from Starbuck, Minn.
''I'm so sick of being called religious radicals. We're Americans - simple,
moral people.''

Hubert Joski, the owner of a utility construction company, drove with his wife
and four daughters from Green Bay, Wis. Mr. Joski said his experiences in
Vietnam had helped forge his attitude toward abortion. ''It's when you taste
death - when it's a taste in your mouth - that you understand,'' he said.

The rally did not have the Hollywood glitter of the abortion rights march on
April 9, 1989, that drew a crowd that the park police estimated at 300,000. Many
of those who gathered here today had the clear sense that they were struggling
against an unsympathetic establishment, in politics and in the news media. One
man held aloft a sign that declared, ''The Press and the Media Make Us Lose -
The Only Believable TV News Is the Weather Forecast.''

'Tell the Truth!'

John Cardinal O'Connor, the Archbishop of New York, set off a round of chants
and cheers when he looked toward the press gallery and declared: ''I am amazed
at the number of television cameras here, because I have to wonder what will
happen to all the footage.'' The crowded chanted to the journalists: ''Tell the
truth! Tell the truth!''

Cardinal O'Connor defended the recent decision by the nation's Roman Catholic
bishops to hire a poll taker and a public relations firm to produce a new
anti-abortion campaign. ''It is only when the bishops address the subject of
abortion that they are subject to criticism, to slander, to every kind of
accusation,'' he said. ''But the bishops will not back down.''

There were harsh words as well for politicians who have reversed their
opposition to abortion in recent months, at a time when many political analysts
say support for abortion rights is a political plus. Dr. James Dobson, who heads
a group called Focus on the Family, declared, ''Politicians are running from
this issue like scared rabbits today.''

He added, to the cheers of the crowd, ''We will not win this battle until we
retire some of these folks.''

Many people in the audience gave high marks to Mr. Bush, but some worried about
his party, which in recent months has said it can accommodate differing views on
abortion even though its platform opposes it.

'One-Day Show of Strength'

''I was disappointed that the Republican Party hasn't kept its standards,'' said
John Rehborg of Milwaukee. ''You have to stand up and take a stand and stick
with it.''

Mr. Bush's telephone speech, made when he returned from a fishing trip on the
Potomac River, while generally expressing support for their cause, was less
specific than his comments in the past. In 1989, for example, he told another
anti-abortion rally that he believed that the 1973 Supreme Court decision
legalizing abortion was wrong and ''should be overturned,'' and he specifically
pledged himself to a ''a human life amendment'' to the Constitution to override
it.

Today, he did not mention the amendment.

Still, his comments today were assailed by Kate Michelman, head of the National
Abortion Rights Action League, who said, ''As long as this small, vocal minority
of Americans has the support of our two most powerful politicians - President
George Bush and Vice President Dan Quayle - the threat to choice is real and a
fundamental American freedom hangs by a thread.''

Ms. Michelman added, however, ''A one-day show of strength cannot match the
growing political power of America's pro-choice majority.''

The official rally began with a morning of music, from Christian rock to ''The
Battle Hymn of the Republic.'' But some abortion opponents began their day
earlier: at 6 A.M., a block of downtown Washington echoed with the anger of the
abortion debate as a group of protesters gathered outside a Planned Parenthood
clinic.

As patients jumped from taxis and ran to the door guided by escorts, the
protesters shouted, ''They're killing babies in there!''

Prayer and Passion

But there were many gentle moments in this weekend, a blending of prayer with
political passion. James Cardinal Hickey, the Archbishop of Washington, took the
pulpit of St. Matthew's Cathedral at a Mass on Friday night and told the people
who filled the pews, ''We gather in the conviction of the humanity of the unborn
child.''

In the cool silence of the cathedral, where scores of candles flickered against
statues of the saints, Cardinal Hickey preached quietly about the struggle
against abortion: ''We have no right to destroy the unborn, to wash our hands of
them. So, too, we have no right to walk away from the expectant mother.''

The mood turned hostile for a time at the end of the day's demonstrations.
Several people were threatened with arrest after they sat down and prayed in the
driveway outside the White House, the park police said. Across the street in
Lafayette Park, more than 20 officers armed with night sticks confronted praying
demonstrators.

Randall Terry, whose Operation Rescue has led blockades at abortion clinics
around the country, persuaded the park protesters to leave, saying, ''We need to
recognize the danger we are in.'' Mr. Terry, who recently served four months in
jail in Atlanta for a demonstration, told the group: ''Go to your home. Write
your Congressman.''

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photos: Anti-abortion protesters praying at the rally yesterday in
Washington (The New York Times/Michael Geissinger) (pg. 1); Vice President Dan
Quayle addressing abortion opponents estimated to number 200,000 on the Mall
near the Washington Monument. He said he hoped the rally could ''begin a healing
of the terrible wound which for almost two decades has torn at our country's
heart.'' (The New York Times/Paul Hosefros); Randall Terry, of Operation Rescue,
an anti-abortion group, outside the Planned Parenthood clinic in Washington
where he argued with Mary Vandebrouke, clinic manager. (The New York
Times/Michael Geissinger) (pg. 26)

                   Copyright 1990 The New York Times Company


                              83 of 288 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                  April 29, 1990, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

EVOLUTION IN EUROPE;
Lithuania Pays the Price And Acquires a Stoicism

BYLINE: By BILL KELLER, Special to The New York Times

SECTION: Section 1; Part 1, Page 18, Column 1; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 1361 words

DATELINE: VILNIUS, Lithuania, April 28


By squeezing Lithuania's economic lifeline, President Mikhail S. Gorbachev may
have brought his conflict with the errant republic closer to compromise, but
many Lithuanians say his embargo has had another, unintended effect: the quick
maturing of an independent Lithuania.

From factory managers to taxi drivers, from the grocery stores to the
President's office, Lithuanians say Mr. Gorbachev has unwittingly forced them to
think more seriously about how they will live outside the paternalistic Soviet
system.

In the short run, although the selective economic blockade now in its second
week has not yet caused serious hardship here, it has concentrated the
politicians' attention on the quest for a compromise.

Lithuanian political leaders realize that it is only a matter of weeks before
their citizens begin to suffer. Mr. Gorbachev no doubt recognizes that Lithuania
in misery would distract attention from his meeting next month in Washington
with President Bush.

Way to Save Face

The appeal by France and Germany on Thursday for the republic to temporarily
suspend enforcement of its March 11 independence declaration seems to have given
both sides a face-saving way to the bargaining table. The Lithuanians can
portray any concessions as a gesture to the European leaders rather than
capitulation to the Kremlin's economic pressure.

But the deeper effect of the sanctions, Lithuanians interviewed here say,
appears to be quite the opposite from what Moscow intended. The blockade of
fuel, industrial materials and other goods has unified Lithuanians more than
ever in their feeling of alienation from Moscow and hardened their resolve to be
free.

The layoffs and black market gasoline prices, Lithuanians say, have introduced
market economics faster than the republic's leaders might have dared on their
own. The workers raised with the security of the Soviet safety net are now
getting a small lesson in unemployment and inflation and seeing that it is
unpleasant but bearable.

An estimated 10,000 workers have been sent home from factories idled by the fuel
embargo, and officials predict the number will triple in a week. But it will be
several weeks before they exhaust unemployment benefits and begin to feel the
pinch.

Encouraging Independence

The embargo has also spurred the independence Government on a search for direct
economic ties with the West and with insurgent city councils and factories
inside the Soviet Union.

Nothing much has come of it yet. A few factories have reportedly managed small
freelance deals with neighboring Soviet republics, bartering bricks for a
truckload of fuel oil or meat for machinery.

Nonetheless, Prime Minister Kazimieras Prunskiene said, people are beginning to
calculate the real value of what they produce.

''Up to now our entire economic structure, everything we buy and everything we
sell was based on Moscow,'' she said today. ''Now those connections are being
demolished, not by us but by Moscow, and we are trying to manage on our own.''

Officials say the embargoes of oil, natural gas and now coal have has forced
industrial managers to begin contemplating conservation, which never mattered
when oil and everything else came from Moscow according to a plan.

Most striking, the showdown with Moscow has introduced a sobering note of
pragmatism into the sometimes romantic politics of independence.

Kicking the Giant's Shins

From a distance, the Government of Lithuania sometimes resembles a comic opera,
in which the amateur leaders of a pipsqueak republic kick the shins of the
lethal giant next door.

In fact, judging from talks here with dozens of Lithuanians, their political
leaders are playing out deep national feelings of pride and suspicions of the
Soviet Union - feelings that are almost always locked behind a stoic Northern
demeanor. But then there are such moments as the one when a woman suddenly
bursts into tears in a crowded grocery store recalling her childhood in a
Stalinist camp for Lithuanian deportees.

''Moscow does not understand why France is afraid of them, Germany is afraid of
them, and little Lithuania is not afraid,'' said Virgilius Cepaitis, a member of
Parliament and a fervent nationalist. Mr. Gorbachev, he adds, ''seems to forget
that from 1944 to 1953 we fought against the Soviets. Longer than Vietnam.''

The Lithuanians' intense national pride and deep mistrust of the Soviet Union
are embodied in the republic's president, Vytautis Landsbergis, a musicologist
whose public pronouncements sometimes seemed to flow from a kind of mystic
nationalism.

A Visceral Distaste

Mr. Cepaitis, who works closely with the Lithuanian President and shares his
visceral distaste for the notion of placating Moscow, talks of the conflict with
Mr. Gorbachev as a climactic battle, one which will speed the demise of a doomed
Soviet system.

''Moscow only understands one language, the language of strength,'' Mr. Cepaitis
said.

''We understand that this is a big inconvenience for the whole world,'' said Mr.
Cepaitis, wearily acknowledging the Western views that Mr. Gorbachev's stability
outweighs Lithuania's liberty, but suggesting that the collapse of the Soviet
Union would be a blessing. ''It is our duty to the world to destroy this
empire.''

In the new world of Lithuanian politics, this strain of messianic nationalism
struggles with a more conventional political pragmatism.

While few deny that Mr. Landsbergis represents the aspirations of many
Lithuanians, many questioned his political tactics, his seemingly boundless
moral stubborness that could not be more remote from the cut-a-deal politics of
Mr. Gorbachev.

By most estimates about one-third of the Lithuanian Parliament shares Mr.
Landsbergis's reluctance to compromise. Another third is loyal to Mr.
Landsbergis, but ambivalent about his tactics. The remaining third, while no
less committed to independence, supports the idea of dealing more flexibly with
Mr. Gorbachev.

Gain for Compromise

Arvydas Juozaitis, a young politician who dropped out of the leadership of the
Lithuanian independence movement because ''I personally don't trust feelings in
politics,'' said this week that he believed the conflict with Moscow may
embolden the pro-compromise faction.

''The absolute majority of Lithuanians are not satisfied with the Landsbergis
position, but at the same time the absolute majority does not see how to
overcome what they have already done,'' said Mr. Juozaitis, who caused a stir
last month with an article calling the election of Mr. Landsbergis ''a historic
mistake.''

''The support for Landsbergis is still strong because there is no clear
alternative program,'' he said.

Eduardas Vilkas, one of the most influential members of the group favoring
compromise, said he senses that Mr. Landsbergis is moving slowly toward a more
conciliatory stand.

Mr. Vilkas favors a six-month moratorium on the independence declaration,
accompanied by a guarantee from Mr. Gorbachev to honor Lithuania's sovereignty
afterward.

''Inflexibility is also a kind of strategy, but I do not think it is the right
one,'' he said. ''We can hold out against economic sanctions for quite a long
time. A lot of people are prepared to ride it out to the end. But there is no
purely economic solution to the blockade, unless we learn to live without oil.''


Caring About Neighbors

Mr. Vilkas said Lithuania will never be safely free until people in the Soviet
Union themselves have absorbed enough democracy to care about their neighbors.

''I used to think the democratization of Russia would take three to five years,
but it is happening much more quickly,'' propelled by the example of Eastern
Europe.

''It is dangerous to live with angry neighbors,'' said Mr. Vilkas, explaining
why Lithuania has an interest in Mr. Gorbachev's fate.

''The position of the West is understandable, because the risk to the world is
great,'' he said. ''If there is serious instability in the U.S.S.R., this will
not be simply the civil war of 1917. Now it is a question of nuclear weapons,
atomic power stations, chemical factories. All of this represents a global
danger.''

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photos: Many Lithuanians say the Soviet embargo has fostered the
republic's independence rather than forcing a compromise. In Vilnius, a
militiaman talked with drivers blocking a street to protest Soviet intervention
(Reuters); In its second week, the blockade has not caused serious hardships. A
shortage of oil has severely curtailed the number of cars on Vilnius streets.
(Associated Press); map: Lithuania indicating Vilnius (The New York Times/April
22, 1990)

                   Copyright 1990 The New York Times Company


                              84 of 288 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                  April 29, 1990, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

Sorry to Get Personal, but. . .

BYLINE: By J. William Fulbright; J. William Fulbright was chairman of the Senate
Foreign Relations Committee for 15 years.

SECTION: Section 4; Page 21, Column 1; Editorial Desk

LENGTH: 699 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON


It is a matter of concern that after many ups and downs over the years,
educational exchange is once again coming on hard times. Despite rising costs,
it appears that the Administration and Congress intend to let stand a flat
budget for Fulbright scholarships for the fifth straight year. In doing so, they
will ratify a 23 percent decline in the number of participants over this
five-year period.

It is a small item in the Federal budget, but a highly significant element of
our foreign policy and national interest.

The year 1945 and the destruction of Hiroshima and Nagasaki marked a profound
break in the thread of human history. Only in the last few years have the
dimensions of that break become apparent to the leaders of the military
superpowers. Hesitantly and haltingly, they seem to be beginning to recognize
how profoundly, criminally and stupidly wasteful it has been to squander the
greater part of humanity's creative energies on war and the preparation for war.

Even before the failure of Marxist economics led Mikhail Gorbachev toward a new
approach at home and abroad, there began to dawn an awareness of the
obsoleteness of war. In Europe and East Asia, people have discovered that wealth
is power in the new international system. While the superpowers expended vast
sums on vast military establishments, the European Community, Japan and some
smaller Asian countries captured world markets, enabling their people to live in
growing freedom, prosperity and dignity.

How has this come to pass? For the most part from experience - but experience
can be vicarious, too. Sometimes we profit from historic as well as proximate
example. That is what education is all about.

The Fulbright exchange program, initiated in 1946, has been a long-term,
low-cost investment and it is beginning to yield high dividends. Nearly 50,000
living American alumni, among 60,000 grantees over all, have gained knowledge
and perspective on other nations by participating in the Fulbright program.

Some are now contributing to the education of another generation; some are
strengthening American competitiveness; and a considerable number are serving
with distinction in the executive and legislative branches of our Government.

The rewards are perhaps even greater from the contributions of foreigners who
study here, numbering to date about 116,000. Fulbright alumni hold influential
positions in countries all over the world, over 30 of which now contribute
substantially to the costs of the exchange. The West German Government, for
example, now pays almost 80 percent of the costs of its exchange.

Three members of Poland's Solidarity-led Government are Fulbright alumni; so are
the majority of the South Korean Cabinet. Many of the Chinese students who
demonstrated last year in Tiananmen Square were returnees from study in the U.S.
It is a fair guess that among the many thousands of Chinese who have been and
are still studying in America are some who will govern China when the frightened
old men who now rule have passed from the scene.

It doesn't take many to make a difference. A single leader or a few legislators
or writers who know something about what other countries are like can contribute
to making a wise decision or to forestalling a disastrous one. If Khrushchev had
had more than a rudimentary sense of what the United States was like, there
might have been no Cuban missile crisis. If President Johnson or his senior
advisers had had a deeper understanding of the Chinese and Vietnamese, we might
have been spared the Vietnam War.

Conversely, I think it quite likely that President Gorbachev has a more
realistic perspective on the United States because of the advice he receives
from his friend and senior adviser Aleksandr Yakovlev, who studied American
history and wrote on the New Deal as a Fulbright scholar at Columbia University
in 1958.

There is power here - immediate and potential, the kind of power that counts in
the new post-cold-war world. I hope that President Bush and the Congress will
give close and careful consideration to restoring and strengthening the
Fulbright exchange. I may be prejudiced, but I think it's a terrific investment.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Op-ed

                   Copyright 1990 The New York Times Company


                              85 of 288 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                  April 29, 1990, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

Southeast Asia's Healthful Fare

BYLINE: Nancy Harmon Jenkins; Nancy Harmon Jenkins is editor of the Journal of
Gastronomy.

SECTION: Section 6; Part 2, Page 52, Column 1; The Good Health Magazine

LENGTH: 2134 words


FRESH GREEN CORIANDER AND fragrant lemongrass, pungent fish sauces laced with
garlic and hot chili peppers, sweet and sour tamarind and exotic fruits like
durians and star-shaped carambolas: the last 10 years have seen a proliferation
of interest in these and other Southeast Asian foods. It started with
restaurants, primarily Thai and Vietnamese. Then city greenmarkets began selling
Southeast Asian ingredients. Now they are available even at suburban
supermarkets and roadside stands in areas where farmers from Thailand and
Vietnam have started to cultivate the foods of home.

Immigrants from Southeast Asia who have flocked to the United States since the
late 1970's are proving once again the importance of food in maintaining a sense
of identity. Like the Italians, Poles, Germans and other groups who preceded
them, Southeast Asians are growing, selling and serving the foods that mean home
to them. In the process the rest of us are becoming familiar with these dishes -
and learning how to prepare them, as several new cookbooks focus on Southeast
Asian cuisines. Three that were published recently are Vatcharin Bhumichitr's
''The Taste of Thailand,'' Nicole Routhier's ''The Foods of Vietnam'' and Madhur
Jaffrey's ''Far Eastern Cookery.''

The food of each Southeast Asian nation has its own characteristic flavors. Thai
seasoning, for example, which relies on a variety of chili peppers, tends to be
a good deal hotter than Vietnamese. Vietnamese cooks lean toward the cool
flavors of cucumber, mint and coriander. That said, it must be noted that Thais
use coriander and Vietnamese use chilis. Thai cooks also frequently use a small
amount of sugar to take the burn out of the peppers.

These foods are undeniably good tasting. Whether they are good for you is
another question, one that can be answered, with two small caveats, in the
affirmative. The cuisines of Vietnam, Thailand and other Southeast Asian
countries all rely on a basic complex carbohydrate, rice, sometimes served as
rice noodles, and a proliferation of lightly cooked fresh vegetables. Protein
comes primarily from low-fat seafood, chicken or bean curd (tofu), as well as
from small amounts of iron-rich pork. These ingredients are served in freshly
prepared, flavorful sauces. A number of fragrant soups often served for
breakfast are also eaten all day long in the street markets of Vietnam. They are
so filling, however, that they make healthful and refreshing main dishes,
perhaps preceded by a salad and followed by dessert, for an American-style meal.
Desserts in Southeast Asia are seldom more complicated than a piece of fresh
tropical fruit or a light fruit-flavored pudding.

The caveats? One flavor common to Vietnamese and Thai food comes from the
fermented fish sauces called nam pla in Thailand and nuoc mam in Vietnam. These
sauces are very salty, which could present a problem for people with
hypertension, who are advised to keep their salt intake low. ''This doesn't mean
you should avoid Southeast Asian food,'' says Jeffrey Shotland, until recently
the director of nutrition at Public Voice for Food and Health Policy, a consumer
group in Washington. ''If a recipe calls for, say, half a cup of fish sauce,
reduce the amount to a tablespoon and use extra garlic or ginger to compensate
for the lost flavor.''

Speaking from strictly personal experience, I think that nam pla and nuoc mam
are culinary treasures on the order of a fine French cheese. Culinary historians
believe these fish sauces are close to the liquamen and garum that were favorite
seasonings in ancient Rome. They are widely available in Asian markets and are
essential for an authentic Thai or Vietnamese flavor - although it takes only a
small amount to impart that taste.

THE OTHER CAVEAT IS that some Southeast Asian dishes are enriched with coconut
milk or cream, which, although utterly delicious, has a high concentration of
saturated fat. People who are attempting to lower their fat intake should avoid
coconut in any form. Most Thai and Vietnamese curry sauces call for either
coconut milk or cream, but curry is a small part of the culinary repertory of
these countries.

With the exception of coconut products, Southeast Asian food is very low in
saturated fat. Indeed, Southeast Asians have a much lower rate of heart disease
than Americans and Europeans, notes Shotland, and one reason may be their diet.
Shotland, who spends a lot of time in Thailand, confirms what other
nutritionists have suggested: coconut products, taken in the context of the
typical Southeast Asian diet, don't present the problem they do in this country,
where most people consume far too much fat.

Perhaps the most sensible approach to eating Southeast Asian food is, when in
Thailand, do as the Thais do. If you are concerned about the level of saturated
fat in your diet, then avoid Thai and Vietnamese curry sauces. But don't avoid
these cuisines altogether, because they are, on the whole, healthful and
delicious. Or, if you can afford to do so, put curry dishes on an imaginary
shelf with chocolate layer cake - have them once in a while for a special treat
and eat a lot of good food otherwise.

SEAFOOD WITH LEMONGRASS
(Adapted from ''The Taste of Thailand,'' by Vatcharin Bhumichitr.)

2tablespoons lemon juice
2tablespoons fish sauce
 1/2teaspoon chili powder
 1/2teaspoon sugar
2tablespoons chicken stock or fish broth
1 1/2 pounds whole bay scallops or quartered sea scallops (see note)
1 kaffir lime leaf, finely slivered
1 stalk lemongrass, crushed and minced
1 shallot, finely minced
1 scallion, cut on the diagonal in 1-inch slices
1teaspoon finely minced fresh coriander leaves
Boston lettuce leaves.

1. Place the lemon juice, fish sauce, chili powder, sugar and chicken stock or
fish broth in a saute pan and bring to a boil. Add the scallops and cook over
high heat, stirring for about 3 minutes or until the scallops are opaque. The
liquid should be considerably reduced.

2. Add the lime leaf, lemongrass, shallot and scallion slices and cook for about
a minute, stirring continuously. Put in the coriander and toss the mixture
briefly.

3. Serve immediately on a bed of lettuce leaves.

Yield: Four to six servings.

Note: A variety of seafood can be prepared according to this recipe, including
shrimp, lobster or halibut. Cooking times must be adjusted to the density of the
fish being used.

HANOI BEEF AND RICE-NOODLE SOUP
(Adapted from ''The Foods of Vietnam,'' by Nicole Routhier.)

5 pounds beef bones
5 pounds oxtails
2 pounds short ribs
2 large onions, unpeeled, halved and studded with 8 whole cloves
3 shallots, unpeeled
1 2-ounce piece of fresh ginger, unpeeled
8 star anise (see note)
1 cinnamon stick
4 medium parsnips, cut into 2-inch chunks
2 teaspoons salt
1 pound sirloin steak
2 scallions, thinly sliced
1 tablespoon minced fresh coriander leaves
2 medium onions, sliced very thin
 1/4 cup hot chili sauce (see note)
1 pound 1/4-inch dried rice sticks (see note)
 1/2 cup fish sauce
Freshly ground black pepper

Accompaniments:

2 cups fresh bean sprouts
2 fresh red chili peppers, sliced, with seeds removed
2 limes cut into wedges
1 bunch fresh mint, leaves only
1 bunch basil, leaves only (use Asian basil if available).

1. Make the beef broth (this takes about a day to prepare but can be made ahead
of time and frozen). Clean the beef bones under cold running water, then place
them in a pot, cover with water and soak overnight at room temperature.

2. The next day, place the beef bones, oxtails and short ribs in a large
stockpot. Cover with water and bring to a boil. Cook for 10 minutes, then drain
and rinse the pot and the bones.

3. Return the bones to the pot, add 6 quarts of water and boil. Skim the foam
off the surface and stir occasionally. Add 3 quarts of water and bring to a
boil. Skim whatever residue rises to the top. Turn heat to low.

4. Meanwhile, char the clove-studded onions, shallots and ginger - either by
piercing them with a fork and holding them over a gas flame or by putting them
in the broiler - until they release their fragrance. Tie the charred vegetables,
star anise and cinnamon stick in a double thickness of dampened cheesecloth. Add
the spice bag, parsnips and salt to the broth and simmer for 1 hour.

5. Remove the short ribs and cut the meat away from the bones. Reserve the meat,
discard the fat and return the bones to the pot. Continue simmering the broth,
uncovered, for 4 to 5 hours. Keep an eye on it; as the liquid boils away, add
enough water to cover the bones.

6. Meanwhile, cut the sirloin steak against the grain into paper-thin slices,
roughly 2 inches by 2 inches. Slice the meat from the short ribs paper-thin. Set
aside.

7. In a small bowl, combine the scallions, coriander and half the onion slices.
Place the remaining onion slices in another small bowl and stir in the hot chili
sauce, blending well.

8. Soak the rice sticks in warm water for 30 minutes. Drain and set aside.

9. Discard all the bones from the broth. Strain the broth into a clean pot
through a strainer or colander lined with a double layer of dampened
cheesecloth. Refrigerate for several hours to allow the fat to rise to the top
and harden. Remove the fat, heat the broth and add the fish sauce. When the
broth boils, reduce the heat and simmer.

10. In another pot, boil 4 quarts of water and put in the soaked rice sticks.
Drain immediately. Divide the rice sticks among 6 to 8 large soup bowls and top
them with the sliced meats. Bring broth to a rolling boil and ladle it directly
over the meat in each bowl (the boiling broth will cook the raw sirloin
instantly). Garnish with the scallion mixture and freshly ground black pepper.

11. Serve the onions in hot chili sauce and the accompaniments on the side.

Yield: Six to eight servings.

Note: Star anise is a licorice-flavored spice that comes from seeds in a
star-shaped pod. It can be found, along with hot chili sauce and dried rice
sticks, in Asian markets.

A GLOSSARY OF SOUTHEAST ASIAN INGREDIENTS

TRANSLATIONS APPEAR IN PARENTHESES, first in Vietnamese, then in Thai. For foods
used chiefly in just one of these countries, only one translation is given.

*  Asian basil (rau que; horapa): This basil has a deep purple color and a
strong anise flavor.

*  Chili peppers (ot; prik): Bird's eyes, serranos and green Italian peppers are
the three types - listed in descending order of fieriness - used most often in
Southeast Asian cooking. In general, the Thais favor the hottest peppers, and
the Vietnamese the milder ones.

*  Chinese cabbage (cai xanh; pak kad kao): This variety is milder and more
tender than the cabbage Westerners are most familiar with. It is used sliced in
salads or in stir-fried dishes.

*  Coriander (rau ngo; pak chee): Not to be confused with dried coriander seeds,
this is a fresh green herb that looks something like parsley. For the fullest
flavor, add it to cooked dishes just before serving.

*  Eggplant (ca tim; maku yao): Dozens of varieties are used either raw or
cooked in many Southeast Asian cuisines. They include long, thin, pale lavender
ones and those that look like green golf balls or even grapes.

*  Fish sauces (nuoc mam; nam pla): These fermented sauces are essential to
authentic Southeast Asian cooking. But because they have a high sodium content,
they should be used sparingly by people on a low-salt diet.

*  Ginger (gung; king); galangal, or laos root (kha); turmeric (kamin): All
three roots are closely related. Ginger has the most vibrant flavor, galangal is
sweeter and more subtle, and turmeric is added to dishes as much for its yellow
coloring as for its dry, earthy flavor. All of them are used in Thai cooking,
but only ginger is called for in Vietnamese cuisine.

*  Lemongrass (xa; takrai): This is a grasslike herb that smells like lemon. Cut
off the stiff upper leaves, peel away the outer layers of the bulbous base and
use only the bottom six inches of each stalk. Crush slightly before chopping or
slicing to release the flavor. Do not use dried.

*  Kaffir lime (bai makrut): The leaves and rind provide a distinctive citrus
fragrance and flavor and are used primarily in Thai food. Fold each leaf in
half, cut away the center rib and sliver the remainder. Grate the rind to flavor
sauces.

*  Mint (bac-ha): The leaves of this herb are used in Vietnamese food, almost
always as a garnish.

*  Tamarind (me chua; som ma kham): The paste made from the pods of this fruit
imparts a sour flavor to soups and sauces. Southeast Asian markets sell both the
pods themselves and blocks of dried pulp from the pods, which can be softened
with warm water.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photos: Hanoi beef and rice-noodle soup: This hearty dish, made with
defatted meat, is flavored with chili sauce; Seafood with lemongrass: In this
Vietnamese recipe, shrimp cooked with a medley of herbs is served on a bed of
lettuce; Chinese cabbage (Cai xanh, Napa); Kaffir lime (Makrud, Bai makrut);
chili peppers (Prik, Ot); lemongrass (Xa, Takrai); Asian basil (Rue que,
Horapa); coriander (Rau ngo, Pak chee); tamarind (Me chua, Som ma kham);
eggplant (Ca tim, Maku yao) (pgs. 52-53); mint (Bac-ha); Ginger (Gung, King)
(pg. 56) (Photographs by Martin Jacobs)

                   Copyright 1990 The New York Times Company


                              86 of 288 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                  April 29, 1990, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

BEST SELLERS: April 22, 1990

SECTION: Section 7; Page 44, Column 2; Book Review Desk

LENGTH: 1482 words




$

          Weeks
This Last    On
Week Week  List Fiction

 1            1  SEPTEMBER, by Rosamunde Pilcher. (St.
                 Martin's, $22.95.) Guests from many parts of the
                 world encounter their often unexpected destinies
                 during a get-together in a small Scottish town.

 2      1   6    THE BOURNE ULTIMATUM, by Robert Ludlum.
                 (Random House, $21.95.) Jason Bourne plans to
                 infiltrate the ruthless Medusa Brigade as part of a
                 plot to trap his archenemy, Carlos the Jackal.

 3      2   9    OH, THE PLACES YOU'LL GO! by Dr. Seuss.
                 (Random House, $12.95.) The problems of finding
                 your way through life; in verse and pictures.

 4      8   3    MASQUERADE, by Janet Dailey. (Little, Brown,
                 $19.95.) A New Orleans heiress encounters a
                 masked man during a carnival in Nice.

 5      9   2    THE EVENING NEWS, by Arthur Hailey.
                 (Doubleday, $21.95.) Life as lived by two
                 competitive correspondents for a television
                 network obsessed with bottom-line accounting.

 6      3   34   CLEAR AND PRESENT DANGER, by Tom
                 Clancy. (Putnam, $21.95.) The C.I.A.'s Jack Ryan
                 fights Colombian drug lords.

 7      4   13   DEVICES AND DESIRES, by P. D. James. (Knopf,
                 $19.95.) Adam Dalgliesh puzzles over a series of
                 killings on the windy Norfolk coast.

 8      7   7    THE SCIONS OF SHANNARA, by Terry Brooks.
                 (Del Rey/Ballantine, $19.95.) The adventures of
                 two brothers who practice magic in a fantasy land.

 9      5   13   THE BAD PLACE, by Dean R. Koontz. (Putnam,
                 $19.95.) A troubled sleepwalker hires a detective
                 team to investigate his behavior.

10            1  SKINNY LEGS AND ALL, by Tom Robbins.
                 (Bantam, $19.95.) The horror and humor of the
                 upcoming apocalypse are played out at a
                 restaurant near the United Nations.

11      6   8    BITTER SWEET, by LaVyrle Spencer. (Putnam,
                 $18.95.) A widow's ordeal after meeting her high
                 school flame, now a less than happily married man.

12            1  BRIGHT STAR, by Harold Coyle. (Simon &
                 Schuster, $19.95.) An attempted assassination by a
                 Libyan terrorist brings American and Soviet
                 troops into a violent encounter.

13            2  DECEPTION, by Philip Roth. (Simon & Schuster,
                 $18.95.) The ambiguous relationship of an
                 American novelist and an English-born woman.

14     13   11   COUNTERATTACK, by W. E. B. Griffin. (Putnam,
                 $16.95.) The Marines in action, from Pearl Harbor
                 to Guadalcanal; third volume in ''The Corps'' series.

15 *   14   26   TALES FROM MARGARITAVILLE, by Jimmy
                 Buffett. (Harcourt Brace Jovanovich, $16.95.)
                 Short stories set on a mythical Caribbean island.

          Weeks
This Last    On
Week Week  List Nonfiction

 1      2   5    MEANS OF ASCENT, by Robert A. Caro. (Knopf,
                 $24.95.) Lyndon Johnson's seven-year pursuit of a
                 seat in the Senate, won in 1948 by 87 votes.

 2     15   2    MEN AT WORK, by George F. Will. (Macmillan,
                 $19.95.) The political pundit and baseball buff
                 describes the craft of the game as practiced by
                 three players and a manager.

 3      1   13   MEGATRENDS 2000, by John Naisbitt and
                 Patricia Aburdene. (Morrow, $21.95.)
                 Prognostications for the next decade.

 4      3   13   BARBARIANS AT THE GATE, by Bryan
                 Burrough and John Helyar. (Harper & Row,
                 $22.95.) The 1988 battle for control of RJR Nabisco.

 5      6   31   IT WAS ON FIRE WHEN I LAY DOWN ON IT, by
                 Robert Fulghum. (Villard, $17.95.) A new collection
                 of inspirational essays.

 6      4   24   LIAR'S POKER, by Michael Lewis. (Norton,
                 $19.95.) Wall Street's tumultuous 1980's.

 7      5   9    WHAT I SAW AT THE REVOLUTION, by Peggy
                 Noonan. (Random House, $19.95.) The memoirs of
                 a former Presidential speechwriter.

 8      8   12   THE CUCKOO'S EGG, by Clifford Stoll.
                 (Doubleday, $19.95.) An astrophysicist tells how he
                 stalked a computer hacker.

 9      7   6    PARTING WITH ILLUSIONS, by Vladimir
                 Pozner. (Atlantic Monthly, $19.95.) The
                 autobiography of a man, raised in New York, who
                 became a commentator on Radio Moscow.

10     10  105   A BRIEF HISTORY OF TIME, by Stephen W.
                 Hawking. (Bantam, $18.95.) A scientist reviews
                 efforts to create a unified theory of the universe.

11     11   2    KAREEM, by Kareem Abdul-Jabbar with Mignon
                 McCarthy. (Random House, $18.95.) A diary of the
                 Los Angeles Laker's last season in 1989.

12      9   77   ALL I REALLY NEED TO KNOW I LEARNED IN
                 KINDERGARTEN, by Robert Fulghum. (Villard,
                 $17.95.) Inspirational essays.

13     12   6    THE SPY WENT DANCING, by Aline, Countess of
                 Romanones. (Putnam, $19.95.) A World War II
                 O.S.S. operative resumes her work during the 60's.

14           11  HEAD FIRST, by Norman Cousins. (Dutton,
                 $19.95.) How the brain affects the body's endocrine
                 and immune systems.

15            2  RAW RECRUITS, by Alexander Wolff and Armen
                 Keteyian. (Pocket, $18.95.) How current
                 recruitment practices corrupt college basketball.

16 *   13   12   THE EMPEROR'S NEW MIND, by Roger
                 Penrose. (Oxford University, $24.95.) Why
                 computers will never replace human thinking.

          Weeks
This Last    On
Week Week  List Advice, How-to and Miscellaneous

 1      2   62   WEALTH WITHOUT RISK, by Charles J. Givens.
                 (Simon & Schuster, $19.95.) A Florida
                 entrepreneur's financial advice.

 2      3   19   THE GREAT WALDO SEARCH, by Martin
                 Handford. (Little, Brown, $10.95.) A book of
                 illustrations in which the game is to find a
                 ubiquitous chap named Waldo.

 3      4   8    SECRETS ABOUT MEN EVERY WOMAN
                 SHOULD KNOW, by Barbara De Angelis.
                 (Delacorte, $17.95.) Ways by which women can
                 improve their relationships with men.

 4      1   9    BEWARE THE NAKED MAN WHO OFFERS
                 YOU HIS SHIRT, by Harvey Mackay. (Morrow,
                 $19.95.) Advice on how to get ahead in business.

 5      5   34   THE WAY THINGS WORK, by David Macaulay.
                 (Houghton Mifflin, $29.95.) Explanations in
                 pictures and text.


These listings are based on computer-processed sales figures from 3,000
bookstores and from representative wholesalers with more than 28,000 other
retail outlets, including variety stores and supermarkets. The figures are
statistically adjusted to represent sales in all such outlets across the United
States.

 *An asterisk before a book's title indicates that its sales, weighted to
reflect the book-selling industry nationally, are barely distinguishable from
those of the book above.



AND BEAR IN MIND
 (Editors' choices of other recent books of particular interest)

SIMONE DE BEAUVOIR: A Biography, by Deirdre Bair. (Summit, $24.95.) Ms. Bair -
to whom de Beauvoir granted liberal access for the last six years of her life -
presents a detailed and demystifying account of the stellar French intellectual.


FLASHBACKS: On Returning to Vietnam, by Morley Safer. (Random House, $18.95.) A
postwar reinterpretation of the country by a CBS correspondent whose reporting
on the war was among the best broadcast journalism of the 1960's.

BITING AT THE GRAVE: The Irish Hunger Strikes and the Politics of Despair, by
Padraig O'Malley. (Beacon, $22.95.) The macabre enthusiasm of 10 I.R.A.
prisoners who starved themselves to death is made at least explicable in this
shrewd analysis.

RESTORATION: A Novel of Seventeenth-Century England, by Rose Tremain. (Viking,
$19.95.) Ms. Tremain's fine sixth novel restores the good name of historical
fiction as it propels its insecure hero through hassles high and low in Charles
II's England.

TRIBES WITH FLAGS: A Dangerous Passage Through the Chaos of the Middle East, by
Charles Glass. (Atlantic Monthly, $22.95.) An unfunny thing happened to this ABC
correspondent in Beirut: he got kidnapped. But he escaped, and his story,
despite its basic sadness, is entertaining, often even cheerful.

A MIRACLE, A UNIVERSE: Settling Accounts With Torturers, by Lawrence Weschler.
(Pantheon, $22.95.) A disturbing account of the uneasy compromises between new
civilian governments and the brutal military regimes they succeeded in Latin
America.

THE BOOK OF EVIDENCE, by John Banville. (Scribners, $17.95.) In this persuasive
novel we meet a first-person narrator who is a murderer and an existential
philosopher of exceptional depravity.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: LIST

                   Copyright 1990 The New York Times Company


                              87 of 288 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                  April 29, 1990, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

PAPERBACK BEST SELLERS: April 22, 1990

SECTION: Section 7; Page 36, Column 1; Book Review Desk

LENGTH: 896 words




$

     Weeks
This    On
Week  List Fiction

 1     3    THE NEGOTIATOR, by Frederick Forsyth.
            (Bantam, $5.95.) An American expatriate tries to
            thwart terrorists.

 2     3    ALMOST HEAVEN, by Judith McNaught.
            (Pocket, $4.95.) A historical romance set in
            London's salons and Scotland's Highlands.

 3    106   THE HUNT FOR RED OCTOBER, by Tom
            Clancy. (Berkley, $4.50.) A submarine driver
            brings Soviet nuclear secrets to the United States.

 4     5    RIVALS, by Janet Dailey. (Fawcett, $5.95.)
            Families compete in love and business.

 5     4    RULES OF PREY, by John Sandford. (Berkley,
            $4.95.) The pursuit of a serial murderer.

 6     9    STAR, by Danielle Steel. (Dell, $5.95.) The crossed
            paths of a man and a woman destined for stardom.

 7     3    STRANGER IN SAVANNAH, by Eugenia Price.
            (Jove, $5.95.) Three families during the Civil War.

 8     3    THE PANDORA PRINCIPLE, by Carolyn
            Clowes. (Pocket, $4.50.) A ''Star Trek'' novel.

 9     2    THE NAKED HEART, by Jacqueline Briskin.
            (Dell, $5.95.) A woman's desire for revenge.

10     2    TEENAGE MUTANT NINJA TURTLES, by B. B.
            Hiller. (Yearling/Dell, $2.95.) A group of turtles
            saves New York City from a band of brigands.

11     2    LORD OF THE FLIES, by William Golding.
            (Wideview/Perigee, $4.95.) English schoolboys
            stranded on an uninhabited Pacific island.

12     7    MORNING GLORY, by LaVyrle Spencer. (Jove,
            $4.95.) Love answers a young widow's want ad.

13     2    KILLSHOT, by Elmore Leonard. (Warner, $5.95.)
            Two thugs out to assassinate a man and a woman.

14 *   27   THE HANDMAID'S TALE, by Margaret Atwood.
            (Fawcett, $5.95.) In America of the future, men
            and women perform the duties they're assigned.

15     56   THE SHELL SEEKERS, by Rosamunde Pilcher.
            (Dell, $4.95.) Three generations of a family.

16 *   1    THE RANSOM OF BLACK STEALTH ONE, by
            Dean Ing. (Doherty/Tor, $5.95.) The C.I.A. races
            to capture a stolen aircraft, the most sophisticated
            ever designed, before it falls into the wrong hands.

17 *   12   WEB OF DREAMS, by V. C. Andrews. (Pocket,
            $5.50.) The origin of a curse that has haunted a
            family of orphans in five previous novels.

     Weeks
This    On
Week  List Nonfiction

 1     22   ALL I REALLY NEED TO KNOW I LEARNED
            IN KINDERGARTEN, by Robert Fulghum. (Ivy,
            $5.95.) Inspirational essays.

 2     3    THE LIVES AND LOVES OF NEW KIDS ON
            THE BLOCK, by Jill Matthews. (Pocket, $3.95.)
            An account of the popular young singing group
            from Boston.

 3     3    SUMMER OF '49, by David Halberstam. (Avon,
            $4.95.) The year the Red Sox and the Yankees
            battled to the last game for the pennant.

 4     1    NEW KIDS ON THE BLOCK SCRAPBOOK, by
            Grace Catalano. (Signet/NAL, $5.95.)
            Photographs of and trivia about the singing group.

 5     4    DADDY'S GIRL, by Clifford Irving. (Zebra,
            $4.95.) The 1982 murder of a Houston lawyer and
            his wife, involving two other generations of their
            family.

 6     19   NEW KIDS ON THE BLOCK, by Grace Catalano.
            (Bantam, $3.50.) The five members of the singing
            group, in words and pictures.

 7    339
            THE ROAD LESS TRAVELED, by M. Scott Peck.
            (Touchstone/S&S, $10.95.) Psychological and
            spiritual inspiration by a psychiatrist.

 8     99   LOVE, MEDICINE & MIRACLES, by Bernie S.
            Siegel. (Perennial/Harper & Row, $8.95.) The
            importance of a patient's mind and emotions.

 9 *   13   BORN ON THE FOURTH OF JULY, by Ron
            Kovic. (Pocket, $4.50.) The autobiography of a
            former marine wounded in Vietnam.

10     78   THE POWER OF MYTH, by Joseph Campbell
            with Bill Moyers. (Doubleday, $19.95.) The ways in
            which mythology illuminates the stages of life.

     Weeks
This    On
Week  List Advice, How-to and Miscellaneous

 1     11   50 SIMPLE THINGS YOU CAN DO TO SAVE
            THE EARTH, by the Earthworks Group.
            (Earthworks Press/Publishers Group West,
            $4.95.) Ways to combat environmental problems.

 2     5    WEIRDOS FROM ANOTHER PLANET! by Bill
            Watterson. (Andrews & McMeel, $7.95.) ''Calvin
            and Hobbes'' cartoons.

 3     5    HAPPY TRAILS, by Berke Breathed. (Little,
            Brown, $8.95.) ''Bloom County'' cartoons.

 4     86   CODEPENDENT NO MORE, by Melody Beattie.
            (Hazelden/Harper & Row, $8.95.) Solving your
            own problems while caring for other people's
            afflictions.

 5     3    THE T-FACTOR DIET, by Martin Katahn.
            (Bantam, $4.95.) A new regimen for weight loss.


These listings are based on computer-processed sales figures from 3,000
bookstores and from representative wholesalers with more than 38,000 other
retail outlets, including variety stores and supermarkets. The figures are
statistically adjusted to represent sales in all such outlets across the United
States.

 *An asterisk before a book's title indicates that its sales, weighted to
reflect the book-selling industry nationally, are barely distinguishable from
those of the book above.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: LIST

                   Copyright 1990 The New York Times Company


                              88 of 288 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                  April 29, 1990, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

SHAPING HIS OWN PAST

BYLINE: By ROGER MORRIS; Roger Morris, who served on the staff of the National
Security Council under Presidents Lyndon B. Johnson and Richard Nixon, is the
author of ''Richard Milhous Nixon: The Rise of an American Politician.''

SECTION: Section 7; Page 3, Column 1; Book Review Desk

LENGTH: 1568 words



IN THE ARENA
A Memoir of Victory, Defeat, and Renewal.
By Richard Nixon.
Illustrated. 384 pp. New York:
Simon & Schuster. $21.95.

When Richard Milhous Nixon was a student at Whittier College in the early
1930's, he took 11 courses - far more than with any other professor - from a
young English literature instructor named Albert Upton. Scoffing, sophisticated,
a somewhat worldly exception on the faculty of the little Quaker school, Upton
was an ardent disciple of two Cambridge University scholars, C. K. Ogden and I.
A. Richards, whose work on language probed deeply into the symbolic power of
words in human affairs, especially in politics and propaganda. ''The citizen of
today is the victim of new forms of word magic so universal and so subtle,''
Ogden had written, ''that he is unable ever to escape their influence.'' Nor did
Upton's students escape the point, certainly not avid ones like Dick Nixon.

In a sense, of course, the classes were vocational training for this future
President and author. Words - or rather what the Cambridge dons would have
called more precisely the meaning of meaning - have been, and remain, an
important fixture in Mr. Nixon's long, twisting career. His rise was propelled
in large measure by a skillful use of language against his early opponents. He
saved himself politically in the famous 1952 ''Checkers'' speech by what he
said, and meant, before millions of television viewers. When words somehow
failed, so did the man, as in his 1960 Presidential debate with John F. Kennedy,
or in his vain defense against the Watergate scandal in 1973-74.

Since his resignation in disgrace more than 15 years ago, however, Mr. Nixon has
returned to the battle with no fewer than seven books, including this latest,
advertised as a memoir but more nearly a kind of final testament to his
experience - or at least, as he was once taught, to what it might be made to
mean.

For those who have read earlier Nixon works, the new one will often seem a
recycled product, full of recognized scenes and stories, especially those
recounting in earnest detail the former President's numerous conversations with
''paramount'' leaders around the world. In what must be a record for
summitry-in-retirement, Mr. Nixon has visited nearly 30 countries and heads of
state in the last decade - at the same time, he tells us, receiving foreign
envoys, consulting with myriad experts, giving ''backgrounders'' to newspaper
editorial boards (''to provide insights that might be useful'') and, not least,
writing about it all.

Altogether, there have been millions of words spoken and written by Mr. Nixon,
the virtual output of a medium-sized foreign ministry, which the prolific former
President in some ways resembles. When he resigned the White House in such
ignominy in 1974, he remembered how he had turned public opinion back to his
side in a single stroke with the ''Checkers'' speech. ''This time,'' he recalls
thinking at the moment of his resignation, ''I knew it might never be possible
to reverse it.'' Might never. As usual for Mr. Nixon, it would not be for want
of trying.

''In the Arena'' comes to us in a familiar idiom of ''mountaintop experiences,''
''merciless pounding in the media,'' ''massive political and personal attack.''
What may distinguish the book most, in fact, are the aphorisms that flow from
the resonant and authentic Nixon voice, arrayed over 40 small chapters from
''Peaks and Valleys'' to ''Twilight'' - the collected maxims of Richard Nixon.
For example: ''Any public figure who claims he doesn't think about his image is
either a liar or stupid.'' ''Conning unsuspecting people is wrong.'' ''Thinking
is particularly vital for politicians.'' ''The go-for-it ethos of the 1980s was
a refreshing change from the gone-to-pot era of the 1960s.'' ''But in the end it
usually comes down to a contest between allies and enemies, white hats and
black.''

Between adages, old myths abound. Once again, we hear of Franklin D. Roosevelt
feebly surrendering at Yalta, of John Kennedy blundering into Indochina and
leaving no exit later for Mr. Nixon and Henry A. Kissinger, of Vietnam the
''winnable'' war lost by a cowardly elite and a dishonorable Congress. There are
even, 40 to 45 years later, the hoary ghosts of the ''socialist'' background of
Mr. Nixon's first opponent, the Democratic Congressman Jerry Voorhis, the fine
work of the House Un-American Activities Committee combating the ''insidious
threat to American interests posed by domestic communism,'' the ''membership in
and support of a number of Communist front organizations'' by his 1950 opponent
in the California Senate race, Helen Gahagan Douglas. Most of all, perhaps,
there is Watergate, in which the President is once again the unwitting victim of
unscrupulous aides - ''some members of my staff,'' as he writes, who ''had a
personal stake in covering up the facts.''

It is all enough to make one thankful for the aphorisms. So shallow and
inaccurate are the dips into the past, so at odds is the Nixon version with the
known and much-published record - even, ironically, when the realities might
tend to exonerate or justify Mr. Nixon more than crude old inventions - that
''In the Arena'' cannot be picked up as serious history.

Still, this is a revelatory book, eloquent of the man and thus, in a way, of the
history he made, even if he didn't mean us to understand it. No Nixon book has
been more expressive of the bitterness he brought to the White House and nursed
there with such historic consequences. His rancor toward the press and Democrats
may run deep, but a special circle is reserved for traitors in the midst - ''a
cold and when necessary even ruthless'' Dwight D. Eisenhower who used Mr. Nixon
and others as a ''prat boy''; friends who felt it ''unfashionable . . . to say
anything positive about the Nixon era'' after Watergate and the resignation. Not
least, we learn that ''America's leadership class will be remembered for the
role it played in helping lose two wars: the war in Vietnam and, at least so
far, the war on drugs. . . . [It is] characterized by intellectual arrogance, an
obsession with style, fashion, and class, and a permissive attitude on drugs. .
. . For years, the enemy was them.''

This is a testimonial, above all, of hard knocks, from a mother's absence and a
family's sacrifice to care for his older, tubercular brother to the betrayal by
White House patrons and staff. The voice belongs to a wounded, wounding man
whose own epitaph is probably contained in this book: ''I played by the rules of
politics as I found them.''

The real tragedy lies not in a humiliated former President but in what this
proud politician seeking exculpation or even vindication does not vouchsafe - a
perspective. One suspects finally, from this book as from no other, that he does
not really have a perspective to offer.

No American politician of the postwar era was more a creature of the great
forces of finance and power that have dominated our politics for a generation.
No politician more embodies the ethos and opportunism of the cold war at home
and abroad, from which the planet is now writhing to emerge. No politician so
revolutionized the Republican South and with it the electoral college arithmetic
of Presidential campaigns. No politician so characterized the fateful
transfiguration of the body politic from public to audience; so epitomized our
age.

Yet of that America - of the realities of class and power of our time - ''In the
Arena'' offers almost no trace. We are back, in the end, to Professor Upton at
Whittier College, and the meaning, if not the words. A pivotal and
representative figure of the century is writing these books because he believes,
and surely expects us to believe, the fragmented personal and national history
they convey. Understanding what is missing in these pages makes the reading
worthwhile.

This is by no means one more installment in the hackneyed drama of Richard Nixon
as enigma. In this book and much else, he is the most self-revealed man in
modern politics. The question is whether we want to see what he is showing us.



NIXON ON CHINA

When I met with President Bush upon my return [from China], I predicted that in
the wake of Deng's retirement there would be a major battle for power between
the reformers and the reactionaries who want to return China to the policies
that existed before 1972. If the United States adopts a policy of isolating
China, it will only be grist for the mill of the reactionaries. Contact and
cooperation with all the major Western countries are essential if those who
support Deng's reforms and his opening to the West are to prevail in the
inevitable struggle for power. . . .

As much as we might not like it, we must accept that fact that our relations to
other countries should be determined primarily by what they do outside, not
inside, their borders. But apart from our strategic concerns, a policy of
sanctions and isolation would run contrary to the interests of the Chinese
people. In our efforts to punish the leaders of China, we would punish the
people of China even more. Such a policy would tend to enhance the position of
leadership factions that would turn toward Moscow. It would also undercut those
in the Chinese leadership who seek to put their country's progressive reforms
back on track.

From ''In the Arena.''

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Drawing: Richard Nixon (Ian Darragh)

TYPE: Review

                   Copyright 1990 The New York Times Company


                              89 of 288 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                  April 29, 1990, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

DEATH WAS LIVELIER THAN LIFE

BYLINE: By SUSAN FROMBERG SCHAEFFER; Susan Fromberg Schaeffer's most recent book
is ''Buffalo Afternoon,'' a novel about Vietnam.

SECTION: Section 7; Page 13, Column 1; Book Review Desk

LENGTH: 1137 words



THE SECOND WAR
By G. C. Hendricks.
196 pp. New York: Viking. $17.95.

There are more than 58,000 names on the Vietnam Memorial in Washington. But
almost any Vietnam veteran will be able to tell you that there is a second,
invisible wall: since the war ended, more than 58,000 veterans have died of
causes less tangible but no less deadly than bullets and land mines. They are
victims of the aftershocks of war - what the Government and the medical
profession now recognize as post-traumatic stress disorder.

The aftereffects of combat are the same in any war. Half of the mail I received
after writing ''Buffalo Afternoon'' was from family members of veterans of
previous ''good wars'' who said that, for the first time, they understood why
their husbands or sons had returned from combat radically changed. The United
States Government and its people may repudiate the war in Vietnam, but what is
indisputably true is that Vietnam provides this country with an unparalleled
opportunity to study the effects of combat. Thanks to soldiers who have gone
public with their experience, the psychology of the combat survivor is now a
book whose cover has finally been pried open; almost no one has read it as well
as G. C. Hendricks. He does not pretend to understand, much less explain, the
origins or nature of the war itself. He is interested instead in delineating the
effects of combat, and his is both a very good and a very important book.

In ''The Second War,'' Mr. Hendricks's protagonist, Horace Harding, is a
preacher's son, a farm boy from the South where ''we were all poor but did not
know it because we ate good food and had the church.'' He is, in short, an
innocent who will, in due time, join the Marine Corps, become a fighter pilot,
acquire the nickname Truck and be shot down over Laos (where, before he is
rescued, he will be missing for 115 days). He will survive by killing enemy
soldiers, one of whom is a woman he murders and then rapes. When he returns to
his home in Hepzebiah Community, and begins to fight his second war, he will
still be an innocent. How he can remain an innocent after these experiences
-how, in fact, he can ever again know what he is - is the question at the heart
of this incandescent novel.

Truck kills his first Vietcong on the 24th day he is missing (throughout the
novel, he insists he was never missing: ''All the time they said I was missing I
wasn't missing. I was there!''):

''Why couldn't he let me have some food? He had to be greedy and not let me have
his food. He could have gotten some more food but I didn't know anybody in the
area. If I had been in Hepzebiah Community I could have gotten food anywhere. I
know all those people. If he had been in Hepzebiah Community I would have helped
him get food. But around here I don't know anybody. But the gook knows these
folks. He should have given me what food he had and gotten himself more.''

In this scene, as in others to come, we are in the process of watching a
personality split open when it cannot accommodate two fundamentally different
moral imperatives. Truck does not change from an innocent to a savage; instead,
he becomes an unholy creature who is both killer and Boy Scout. Bloody knife in
hand, he still believes the world should operate by the rules of Hepzebiah
Community. For his personality, for his soul to remain intact, the savage and
the innocent must somehow become aware of one another, become reconciled. But
Truck returns home before this can happen. Which half is the alien half? Is
either half real? Truck doesn't know - doesn't know he needs to know - and so
comes to experience himself as less than real:

''There was a pair of hands working the steering wheel and the gears, and a pair
of feet working the gas, brake, and clutch. I wanted the hands and feet to know
which way the bridge was pointed, but I couldn't figure it out. So I let the
hands and feet drive me home. They stopped at all the stop lights. They observed
the speed limits. They always signaled before they turned.''

From this point on, the novel moves with the inevitability of fate. Truck
resigns from the military, and must seem normal enough, to himself and to
others, since he marries and has a child. Yet his existence has become a
struggle to accommodate two contradictory natures and to make life prevail over
death, to make life seem more vivid than death. The best day of his postwar
existence takes place when he manages to save the life of an almost-dead cow and
her calf, Sammy, whom Truck watches grow into a fine bull. But Sammy breaks out
of his field to follow a calf in heat on the same night Truck's pregnant wife
gives birth, and on his way to the hospital, Truck sees the bull dead on the
highway. His daughter is born, but her birth is eclipsed by the death of the
bull; for Truck, death is more real, more powerful, more the rule, than life.

Late in the novel, Truck remembers his general saying, ''War is a whore and a
man's got to have her.'' This is the vision Mr. Hendricks leaves with us. Men go
to war like animals in heat; they survive because, like animals, they have to.
They come home death-ridden and broken, and still they survive. In the book's
final scene, Truck picks up another veteran, a man on his way to Philadelphia to
murder his wife; in this dreamlike sequence, the novel's realistic surface
dissolves as the two men become almost indistinguishable.

The veteran picked up by Truck seems to be real, but is he? Or is he another,
more terrible version of himself? When the man he picks up kills himself, who
has died? Is it Truck or the hitchhiker or both? Mr. Hendricks seems to be
saying it doesn't matter. If Truck has survived, part of him is just as dead as
the hitchhiker, killed when he was missing in action. But, as Truck repeatedly
tells us, he was never missing. He was always there. Unless those of us who were
here can understand what it was to be there, men like Truck, from this war and
from wars to come, will live - and probably die - beyond hope, hopelessly alone.




SHOT DOWN AND SHOCKED

I turned and fire ripped into the cockpit from below. . . . Two more
eighty-five-millimeter rounds went past to starboard. I grabbed the face curtain
with both hands, palms toward my face, and pulled the curtain down in front of
my face, and my seat blasted out of the airplane. My legs and arms flailed in
the stream of cold air; my breathing was taken: then my parachute opened and I
looked straight ahead and crossed my legs, tight . . . and I grunted, like they
taught us, and got my breath back. After the shock of the opening parachute I
floated, breathing heavy. . . . [My] airplane rolled and the engine blew and the
airplane tumbled and came apart in fire. I heard it crash way away.

From ''The Second War.''

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Drawing

TYPE: Review

                   Copyright 1990 The New York Times Company


                              90 of 288 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                  April 29, 1990, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

THE SHAME OF THE SECRETARIAT

BYLINE: By PAUL LEWIS; Paul Lewis is the United Nations bureau chief of The New
York Times.

SECTION: Section 7; Page 13, Column 1; Book Review Desk

LENGTH: 745 words



COUNTENANCE OF TRUTH
The United Nations and the Waldheim Case.
By Shirley Hazzard.
179 pp. New York: Viking. $17.95.

Over the years, and in several books and articles, Shirley Hazzard has
established herself as one of the United Nations' most eloquent critics.

After a decade of working in the United Nations Secretariat, she resigned in
1962 to publish her first study in disillusion, ''Defeat of an Ideal,'' followed
by ''People in Glass Houses,'' a collection of biting fictional satires on life
among the bureaucrats in the green glass colossus on First Avenue in Manhattan.

Now Ms. Hazzard has polished and republished in book form a long article that
first appeared in the New Yorker last year. In ''Countenance of Truth,'' she
seeks to show how an organization that should have been the conscience of
mankind has been debased by the weakness of its leaders, a process that reached
its nadir in the career of its fourth Secretary General, Kurt Waldheim, now the
President of Austria. Her demonstration is elegant, angry and predictable. While
she points up some undoubted weaknesses in the organization, she does not see
clearly enough that the root cause lies not so much in the failure of those who
serve in the United Nations as in the disinclination of member governments to
take the organization seriously.

Her retelling of the tale of how Mr. Waldheim misled the world about his Nazi
associations and his wartime record is based on known sources and breaks no new
ground. She stresses the intriguing likelihood that the big powers knew the
truth about him all along (Mr. Waldheim has boasted that he had been checked by
their secret services), but chose to ignore it because he was the kind of
compliant figure they regarded as ideal.

Less well known is the book's account, drawn from largely forgotten records, of
how the United Nation's first Secretary General, Trygve Lie, surrendered to
McCarthyite pressure and let the United States investigate the loyalty of
American staffers, even establishing an F.B.I. office in United Nations
headquarters for this purpose.

This led to the suicide of Lie's legal adviser, the dismissal of many Americans
and ultimately Lie's own resignation in 1952, besides dealing a blow to staff
morale from which, Ms. Hazzard contends, the United Nations never recovered.

From that moment, she believes, any hope the organization might become a moral
beacon for the world was dashed. Successive Secretaries General sought mainly to
avoid offending powerful governments that in turn packed the Secretariat with
their nominees, consigning the organization to bloated irrelevance.

The now revered Dag Hammarskjold stemmed the decline for a while. But it resumed
under U Thant, who watched powerlessly the unfolding tragedies in Vietnam,
Czechoslovakia and Biafra before obediently withdrawing the United Nations
peacekeeping force from Sinai to make way for the 1967 war between Israel and
Egypt.

The organization's deepest day of shame, however, came with the appointment of
Kurt Waldheim in 1972. For Ms. Hazzard, Mr. Waldheim was a shallow, vain figure
who achieved little and strove mainly for a second and then a third term, which
the big powers were ready to give him until China intervened.

All this makes for an enraging and depressing tale, and Ms. Hazzard gets across
effectively a sense of frustrated idealism. However, her indignation about the
bureaucracy seems sometimes misdirected. She argues that ''the latent power of
the U.N. concept has always resided in the public confidence it might generate
by high performance and demonstrated integrity.'' But it is naive to imagine
that the organization could appeal to world opinion over the heads of member
governments who for 40 years have treated it as an ideological battlefield.

This may be changing. As East-West tensions fade, the Soviet Union has dropped
its traditional suspicion of the organization, and over the last two years the
major powers have begun trying to settle regional conflicts and tackle problems
no country can solve alone, like drug abuse and environmental degradation.

But forging world-scale agreements is hard. And if the ''third-generation World
Organization'' Ms. Hazzard advocates as a successor to the present-day United
Nations and its precursor, the League of Nations, should ever come about, it is
more likely to take the form of regional groupings between like-minded countries
than another global forum.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo: Kurt Waldheim, Secretary General of the United Nations, 1973.
(The New York Times/William E. Sauro)

TYPE: Review

                   Copyright 1990 The New York Times Company


                              91 of 288 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                  April 29, 1990, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

STREETSCAPES: The Judson Memorial Church;
A Problem Solver Is Now Facing Its Own Problems

BYLINE: By CHRISTOPHER GRAY

SECTION: Section 10; Page 10, Column 1; Real Estate Desk

LENGTH: 834 words


IN its century as a fixture of Washington Square in Greenwich Village, the
Judson Memorial Church has been dedicated to solving the problems of others. Now
it has problems of its own.

The house of worship, designed by Stanford White, John Lafarge and Augustus St.
Gaudens and standing at the southwest corner of Washington Square South and
Thompson Street, must raise $1.5 million just to address such urgent physical
problems as crumbling stained-glass, a leaky roof and buckling marble panels.

In the early 1880's, the Rev. Dr. Edward Judson, pastor of the Berean Baptist
Church at Downing and Bedford Streets, had a small congregation but big ideas.
As the first American Baptist missionary, his father, Adoniram, served in Burma
from 1812 to 1850 and his son sought to found a church memorializing the
missionary spirit.

In 1888, he chose a large site bordered on the south by a tenement district of
saloons and prostitution where, The New York Tribune wrote in 1891, ''one cannot
pass through the streets, even in daytime, without being subjected to gross
insults.'' On the other hand, Washington Square was still an address for the
gentry and the new church would be close enough ''to feel their refining and
helpful influences'' as well as enjoy their financial support.

John D. Rockefeller, who had been impressed with Judson's work, gave $40,000
toward building the new church. Judson sought a building that was not just a
space for worship and called for a reading room, library, gym, children's home,
industrial school and an apartment house to generate revenue for further
missionary activity.

He hired McKim, Mead & White as architects, and White designed a great
basilica-like sanctuary, an adjacent bell tower with an electrically lighted
cross and a five-story apartment house, all in straw-colored brick,
ivory-colored terra cotta and marble. Although it was described at the time as
''Graeco-Romanesque'' in its sense of amalgamation of styles - Greek, early
Christian, Romanesque - it is distinctly Renaissance in character.

The entrance to the sanctuary is unassuming, up a no-nonsense flight of stairs
and into a rectangular basilican space with a coffered ceiling and arcades
running down each side. St. Gaudens designed marble wainscoting with relief
sculpture and Lafarge designed 16 stained-glass windows with his soft, rich
pre-Raphaelite colors.

The organ screen is one of the most magnificent in New York, a gilt and gesso
confection with slender, free-standing angels guarding the pipes.

JUDSON opened the church on an activist stance, with a citizens meeting on the
subject ''Problems of a Great City'' in 1893. The entire endeavor, he told The
New York Times, ''deserves the support of all true friends of humanity.''

The level of activities kept the church open seven days a week, often until late
at night, but the ''helpful influence'' of those with the financial resources to
provide support did not materialize.

In 1912, Judson gave control of the church to a parent body, the New York City
Baptist Mission Society. The apartment house and even the tower were sold - and
eventually resold to New York University - but the church kept its activist
role. In the 30's it organized support for labor unions and sharecroppers and in
the 50's it really hit its stride in the ascendancy of beatnik Greenwich
Village.

In 1958, it offered gallery space to unknown artists like Robert Rauschenberg
and Tom Wesselman. A year later, the Judson Literary Quarterly was founded
followed by the Judson Poet's Theater and the Judson Dance Theater.

The church, under the Rev. Dr. Howard Moody since 1956, has continued to
emphasize social issues including abortion, the war in Vietnam, disarmament,
homelessness, prostitution, AIDS and housing discrimination.

In the mid-70's, the church regained control over its building but it remains
distinctly unlike most other houses of worship. It is among the most prominent
in the city, but, according to Dr. Moody, the congregation now numbers only
around 250, many of whom are not Baptists. ''We're trying to be faithful to
Edward Judson's idea of serving people who are outside the walls of the
church,'' he said.

BUT early this year the church had to remove and store two of the stained-glass
windows, which were about to collapse. Others are only somewhat more secure and
they must be removed and reassembled with new lead cames. This will cost
$600,000.

A new red-tile roof will cost $300,000 and $100,000 is needed to remedy the
buckling of marble paneling in the sanctuary. The delicate brick, terra-cotta
and marble exterior needs initial repairs of $150,000 and remaining urgent work,
such as plumbing, raise the figure for critical work to $1.5 million.

A Centennial Committee including Yoko Ono, Kate Millett, Jules Pfeiffer and the
Right Rev. Paul Moore Jr., the former Bishop of the Episcopal Diocese of New
York, has been formed to raise the initial amount as well as $4 million for a
complete restoration.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo: The Judson Memorial Church on Washington Square South in 1893
(American Architect/O.M.H.)

                   Copyright 1990 The New York Times Company


                              92 of 288 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                  April 29, 1990, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

FOOD;
Weather Warms, and It's Time for Stews

BYLINE: By MOIRA HODGSON

SECTION: Section 12CN; Page 24, Column 1; Connecticut Weekly Desk

LENGTH: 1109 words


STEWS are not just for winter. Going through some old diaries recently, I came
across an entry describing a picnic I had gone on as a child when my father was
posted at the British Embassy in Vietnam. The tropical heat had been even worse
than usual and we had taken shelter from the sun in the ruins of a French villa
by a beach not far from Saigon. What did we eat? Not sandwiches, not hamburgers,
sausage rolls or even cold chicken. We ate hot stew, which was cooked on a
portable gas stove brought along for the occasion.

I don't remember what was in the stew we ate that day but in my childhood
diaries when I refer to a meal I particularly enjoyed, it always seems to center
around a stew. Our Asian picnic ended rather abruptly when I looked up at the
rafters to see a large snakeskin waving over my head (was the snake still
around?). Then I saw a group of Vietnamese cowherds huddled over a charcoal
burner at the bottom of the villa's wild, neglected garden. They were cooking
their lunch: it was a stew. Perhaps we British weren't so mad after all.

At this time of year, I love the light spring stews that make use of the young
vegetables that are now in season. Especially good is a veal stew made along the
lines of a French navarin, with white wine and finished with spring vegetables -
new potatoes, green beans, peas, whole baby carrots and young white turnips.

Rabbit, a meat that is becoming more widely available in supermarkets and at
butchers, takes particularly well to stewing because the liquid prevents the
meat from drying out, as it sometimes does when roasted or grilled. In the
recipe below, the rabbit is cooked with celery and the cooking juices are
flavored with lemon juice and thickened with egg to make a creamy sauce. Lamb is
cooked with white wine and tomatoes and garnished with fried baby artichokes
that are sprinkled over the top, after the stew is cooked. A dry white or blush
wine goes best with these dishes.

Rabbit Braised With Celery

Preparation time: 15 minutes

Cooking time: 30 to 40 minutes
1 rabbit, cut up
 Coarse salt and freshly ground pepper to taste
2 tablespoons olive oil
1 onion, chopped
1 clove garlic, minced
3 stalks celery, cut in chunks
 1/2 cup dry white wine
1 cup chicken stock, preferably homemade
1 egg
2 to 3 tablespoons lemon juice
2 tablespoons Italian parsley, chopped.

1. Wipe the pieces of rabbit dry with paper towels and season with salt and
pepper to taste. Heat the oil in a large heavy skillet and brown the pieces.
Remove them to a plate and add the onion and garlic to the skillet. Cook over
moderate heat until soft.

2. Return the rabbit to the skillet along with the celery, white wine and
chicken stock. Cover and simmer gently for one hour, or until the rabbit is
tender (if the rabbit seems too dry, add a little more chicken stock or water).
Put the rabbit pieces and vegetables onto a heated serving dish, reserving as
much of the cooking liquid as possible in the skillet. Keep the rabbit warm in a
low oven while you make the sauce.

3. Break the egg into a small saucepan and beat with a whisk for a minute or
two. Add the lemon juice and beat well. Then gradually pour in the hot sauce
from the rabbit and cook over low heat until thickened (be careful not to curdle
the sauce). Pour the sauce onto the rabbit, sprinkle with parsley and serve.

Yield: 3 to 4 servings.

Note: Serve this with new potatoes and steamed spring vegetables.

Lamb Stew With Baby Artichokes

Preparation time: 30 minutes

Cooking time: 1 1/2 to 2 hours
3 pounds boned shoulder of lamb cut in two-inch cubes, fat trimmed
 1/4 cup flour
2 tablespoons peanut or vegetable oil
2 cups beef or chicken stock, preferably homemade
2 cloves garlic, minced
1 cup canned peeled tomatoes, chopped
1 tablespoon tomato paste
1 cup dry white wine
 1/2 teaspoon thyme leaves
 Coarse salt and freshly ground pepper to taste
12 whole baby carrots
18 pearl onions, trimmed
 For the garnish:
2 pounds baby artichokes
 Juice 1/2 lemon
2 tablespoons olive oil
1 clove garlic, minced (green part removed).

1. Dredge the lamb lightly with flour. Heat the oil in a large heavy casserole
and brown the lamb pieces a few at a time, on all sides, turning them with
tongs. Remove the browned pieces to a bowl.

2. Add the stock, garlic, tomatoes, tomato paste and white wine. Scrape up the
cooking juices with a spoon, stir well, and return the lamb pieces to the
casserole along with the thyme, salt and pepper. Cover and simmer over
medium-low heat.

3. After the meat has simmered for 30 minutes add the carrots. After 15 more
minutes, add the onions. Cook the stew for one-and-a-half to two hours total, or
until the meat is tender.

4. Meanwhile, trim the tops (cutting off about two-thirds of an inch) and stalks
from the artichokes. Remove tough outer leaves. Slice the artichokes vertically
top to bottom in quarter-inch pieces. Place them in a large bowl filled with
water and lemon juice to stop them from turning brown.

5. Heat the olive oil in a large skillet. Saute the artichokes until brown and
keep warm. Add the garlic to the skillet and cook just enough to change color.
Sprinkle over the top of the artichokes. Just before serving the stew, sprinkle
the artichokes over the top.

Yield: 6 servings.

Veal Stew With Spring Vegetables

Preparation time: 20 minutes

Cooking time: 1 1/2 hours
2 pounds stewing veal cut in 1 1/2-inch cubes
2 tablespoons peanut or vegetable oil
2 shallots, chopped
1 clove garlic, minced
1 cup white wine
1 cup chicken stock
1 tablespoon tomato paste
1 tablespoon fresh thyme leaves
1 piece lemon peel
 Coarse salt and freshly ground pepper to taste
8 baby carrots, left whole
8 new potatoes, scrubbed
3 small white turnips, peeled and quartered
 1/2 pound green peas
 1/4 pound green beans.

1. Brown the pieces of veal a few at a time in a heavy casserole in the oil and
remove with a slotted spoon. Pour off any excess fat. Add the shallots and
garlic and saute until soft.

2. Add the white wine and stir, scraping up any cooking particles from the
bottom of the pan. Add the chicken stock, tomato paste, thyme, lemon peel and
salt and pepper and bring to boil. Turn down heat, cover and cook gently for one
hour.

3. Add the carrots and cook for 20 minutes or until the vegetables are tender.
Meanwhile, in a steamer cook the new potatoes and turnips until tender (about 20
minutes). Cook the green beans and peas until tender (about five minutes). Add
them to the stew and serve.

Yield: 4 servings.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: drawing

                   Copyright 1990 The New York Times Company


                              93 of 288 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                  April 29, 1990, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

FOOD;
Weather Warms, and It's Time for Stews

BYLINE: By MOIRA HODGSON

SECTION: Section 12LI; Page 16, Column 1; Long Island Weekly Desk

LENGTH: 1109 words


STEWS are not just for winter. Going through some old diaries recently, I came
across an entry describing a picnic I had gone on as a child when my father was
posted at the British Embassy in Vietnam. The tropical heat had been even worse
than usual and we had taken shelter from the sun in the ruins of a French villa
by a beach not far from Saigon. What did we eat? Not sandwiches, not hamburgers,
sausage rolls or even cold chicken. We ate hot stew, which was cooked on a
portable gas stove brought along for the occasion.

I don't remember what was in the stew we ate that day but in my childhood
diaries when I refer to a meal I particularly enjoyed, it always seems to center
around a stew. Our Asian picnic ended rather abruptly when I looked up at the
rafters to see a large snakeskin waving over my head (was the snake still
around?). Then I saw a group of Vietnamese cowherds huddled over a charcoal
burner at the bottom of the villa's wild, neglected garden. They were cooking
their lunch: it was a stew. Perhaps we British weren't so mad after all.

At this time of year, I love the light spring stews that make use of the young
vegetables that are now in season. Especially good is a veal stew made along the
lines of a French navarin, with white wine and finished with spring vegetables -
new potatoes, green beans, peas, whole baby carrots and young white turnips.

Rabbit, a meat that is becoming more widely available in supermarkets and at
butchers, takes particularly well to stewing because the liquid prevents the
meat from drying out, as it sometimes does when roasted or grilled. In the
recipe below, the rabbit is cooked with celery and the cooking juices are
flavored with lemon juice and thickened with egg to make a creamy sauce. Lamb is
cooked with white wine and tomatoes and garnished with fried baby artichokes
that are sprinkled over the top, after the stew is cooked. A dry white or blush
wine goes best with these dishes.

Rabbit Braised With Celery

Preparation time: 15 minutes

Cooking time: 30 to 40 minutes
1 rabbit, cut up
 Coarse salt and freshly ground pepper to taste
2 tablespoons olive oil
1 onion, chopped
1 clove garlic, minced
3 stalks celery, cut in chunks
 1/2 cup dry white wine
1 cup chicken stock, preferably homemade
1 egg
2 to 3 tablespoons lemon juice
2 tablespoons Italian parsley, chopped.

1. Wipe the pieces of rabbit dry with paper towels and season with salt and
pepper to taste. Heat the oil in a large heavy skillet and brown the pieces.
Remove them to a plate and add the onion and garlic to the skillet. Cook over
moderate heat until soft.

2. Return the rabbit to the skillet along with the celery, white wine and
chicken stock. Cover and simmer gently for one hour, or until the rabbit is
tender (if the rabbit seems too dry, add a little more chicken stock or water).
Put the rabbit pieces and vegetables onto a heated serving dish, reserving as
much of the cooking liquid as possible in the skillet. Keep the rabbit warm in a
low oven while you make the sauce.

3. Break the egg into a small saucepan and beat with a whisk for a minute or
two. Add the lemon juice and beat well. Then gradually pour in the hot sauce
from the rabbit and cook over low heat until thickened (be careful not to curdle
the sauce). Pour the sauce onto the rabbit, sprinkle with parsley and serve.

Yield: 3 to 4 servings.

Note: Serve this with new potatoes and steamed spring vegetables.

Lamb Stew With Baby Artichokes

Preparation time: 30 minutes

Cooking time: 1 1/2 to 2 hours
3 pounds boned shoulder of lamb cut in two-inch cubes, fat trimmed
 1/4 cup flour
2 tablespoons peanut or vegetable oil
2 cups beef or chicken stock, preferably homemade
2 cloves garlic, minced
1 cup canned peeled tomatoes, chopped
1 tablespoon tomato paste
1 cup dry white wine
 1/2 teaspoon thyme leaves
 Coarse salt and freshly ground pepper to taste
12 whole baby carrots
18 pearl onions, trimmed
 For the garnish:
2 pounds baby artichokes
 Juice 1/2 lemon
2 tablespoons olive oil
1 clove garlic, minced (green part removed).

1. Dredge the lamb lightly with flour. Heat the oil in a large heavy casserole
and brown the lamb pieces a few at a time, on all sides, turning them with
tongs. Remove the browned pieces to a bowl.

2. Add the stock, garlic, tomatoes, tomato paste and white wine. Scrape up the
cooking juices with a spoon, stir well, and return the lamb pieces to the
casserole along with the thyme, salt and pepper. Cover and simmer over
medium-low heat.

3. After the meat has simmered for 30 minutes add the carrots. After 15 more
minutes, add the onions. Cook the stew for one-and-a-half to two hours total, or
until the meat is tender.

4. Meanwhile, trim the tops (cutting off about two-thirds of an inch) and stalks
from the artichokes. Remove tough outer leaves. Slice the artichokes vertically
top to bottom in quarter-inch pieces. Place them in a large bowl filled with
water and lemon juice to stop them from turning brown.

5. Heat the olive oil in a large skillet. Saute the artichokes until brown and
keep warm. Add the garlic to the skillet and cook just enough to change color.
Sprinkle over the top of the artichokes. Just before serving the stew, sprinkle
the artichokes over the top.

Yield: 6 servings.

Veal Stew With Spring Vegetables

Preparation time: 20 minutes

Cooking time: 1 1/2 hours
2 pounds stewing veal cut in 1 1/2-inch cubes
2 tablespoons peanut or vegetable oil
2 shallots, chopped
1 clove garlic, minced
1 cup white wine
1 cup chicken stock
1 tablespoon tomato paste
1 tablespoon fresh thyme leaves
1 piece lemon peel
 Coarse salt and freshly ground pepper to taste
8 baby carrots, left whole
8 new potatoes, scrubbed
3 small white turnips, peeled and quartered
 1/2 pound green peas
 1/4 pound green beans.

1. Brown the pieces of veal a few at a time in a heavy casserole in the oil and
remove with a slotted spoon. Pour off any excess fat. Add the shallots and
garlic and saute until soft.

2. Add the white wine and stir, scraping up any cooking particles from the
bottom of the pan. Add the chicken stock, tomato paste, thyme, lemon peel and
salt and pepper and bring to boil. Turn down heat, cover and cook gently for one
hour.

3. Add the carrots and cook for 20 minutes or until the vegetables are tender.
Meanwhile, in a steamer cook the new potatoes and turnips until tender (about 20
minutes). Cook the green beans and peas until tender (about five minutes). Add
them to the stew and serve.

Yield: 4 servings.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: drawing

                   Copyright 1990 The New York Times Company


                              94 of 288 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                  April 29, 1990, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

FOOD;
Weather Warms, and It's Time for Stews

BYLINE: By MOIRA HODGSON

SECTION: Section 12NJ; Page 16, Column 1; New Jersey Weekly Desk

LENGTH: 1109 words


STEWS are not just for winter. Going through some old diaries recently, I came
across an entry describing a picnic I had gone on as a child when my father was
posted at the British Embassy in Vietnam. The tropical heat had been even worse
than usual and we had taken shelter from the sun in the ruins of a French villa
by a beach not far from Saigon. What did we eat? Not sandwiches, not hamburgers,
sausage rolls or even cold chicken. We ate hot stew, which was cooked on a
portable gas stove brought along for the occasion.

I don't remember what was in the stew we ate that day but in my childhood
diaries when I refer to a meal I particularly enjoyed, it always seems to center
around a stew. Our Asian picnic ended rather abruptly when I looked up at the
rafters to see a large snakeskin waving over my head (was the snake still
around?). Then I saw a group of Vietnamese cowherds huddled over a charcoal
burner at the bottom of the villa's wild, neglected garden. They were cooking
their lunch: it was a stew. Perhaps we British weren't so mad after all.

At this time of year, I love the light spring stews that make use of the young
vegetables that are now in season. Especially good is a veal stew made along the
lines of a French navarin, with white wine and finished with spring vegetables -
new potatoes, green beans, peas, whole baby carrots and young white turnips.

Rabbit, a meat that is becoming more widely available in supermarkets and at
butchers, takes particularly well to stewing because the liquid prevents the
meat from drying out, as it sometimes does when roasted or grilled. In the
recipe below, the rabbit is cooked with celery and the cooking juices are
flavored with lemon juice and thickened with egg to make a creamy sauce. Lamb is
cooked with white wine and tomatoes and garnished with fried baby artichokes
that are sprinkled over the top, after the stew is cooked. A dry white or blush
wine goes best with these dishes.

Rabbit Braised With Celery

Preparation time: 15 minutes

Cooking time: 30 to 40 minutes
1 rabbit, cut up
 Coarse salt and freshly ground pepper to taste
2 tablespoons olive oil
1 onion, chopped
1 clove garlic, minced
3 stalks celery, cut in chunks
 1/2 cup dry white wine
1 cup chicken stock, preferably homemade
1 egg
2 to 3 tablespoons lemon juice
2 tablespoons Italian parsley, chopped.

1. Wipe the pieces of rabbit dry with paper towels and season with salt and
pepper to taste. Heat the oil in a large heavy skillet and brown the pieces.
Remove them to a plate and add the onion and garlic to the skillet. Cook over
moderate heat until soft.

2. Return the rabbit to the skillet along with the celery, white wine and
chicken stock. Cover and simmer gently for one hour, or until the rabbit is
tender (if the rabbit seems too dry, add a little more chicken stock or water).
Put the rabbit pieces and vegetables onto a heated serving dish, reserving as
much of the cooking liquid as possible in the skillet. Keep the rabbit warm in a
low oven while you make the sauce.

3. Break the egg into a small saucepan and beat with a whisk for a minute or
two. Add the lemon juice and beat well. Then gradually pour in the hot sauce
from the rabbit and cook over low heat until thickened (be careful not to curdle
the sauce). Pour the sauce onto the rabbit, sprinkle with parsley and serve.

Yield: 3 to 4 servings.

Note: Serve this with new potatoes and steamed spring vegetables.

Lamb Stew With Baby Artichokes

Preparation time: 30 minutes

Cooking time: 1 1/2 to 2 hours
3 pounds boned shoulder of lamb cut in two-inch cubes, fat trimmed
 1/4 cup flour
2 tablespoons peanut or vegetable oil
2 cups beef or chicken stock, preferably homemade
2 cloves garlic, minced
1 cup canned peeled tomatoes, chopped
1 tablespoon tomato paste
1 cup dry white wine
 1/2 teaspoon thyme leaves
 Coarse salt and freshly ground pepper to taste
12 whole baby carrots
18 pearl onions, trimmed
 For the garnish:
2 pounds baby artichokes
 Juice 1/2 lemon
2 tablespoons olive oil
1 clove garlic, minced (green part removed).

1. Dredge the lamb lightly with flour. Heat the oil in a large heavy casserole
and brown the lamb pieces a few at a time, on all sides, turning them with
tongs. Remove the browned pieces to a bowl.

2. Add the stock, garlic, tomatoes, tomato paste and white wine. Scrape up the
cooking juices with a spoon, stir well, and return the lamb pieces to the
casserole along with the thyme, salt and pepper. Cover and simmer over
medium-low heat.

3. After the meat has simmered for 30 minutes add the carrots. After 15 more
minutes, add the onions. Cook the stew for one-and-a-half to two hours total, or
until the meat is tender.

4. Meanwhile, trim the tops (cutting off about two-thirds of an inch) and stalks
from the artichokes. Remove tough outer leaves. Slice the artichokes vertically
top to bottom in quarter-inch pieces. Place them in a large bowl filled with
water and lemon juice to stop them from turning brown.

5. Heat the olive oil in a large skillet. Saute the artichokes until brown and
keep warm. Add the garlic to the skillet and cook just enough to change color.
Sprinkle over the top of the artichokes. Just before serving the stew, sprinkle
the artichokes over the top.

Yield: 6 servings.

Veal Stew With Spring Vegetables

Preparation time: 20 minutes

Cooking time: 1 1/2 hours
2 pounds stewing veal cut in 1 1/2-inch cubes
2 tablespoons peanut or vegetable oil
2 shallots, chopped
1 clove garlic, minced
1 cup white wine
1 cup chicken stock
1 tablespoon tomato paste
1 tablespoon fresh thyme leaves
1 piece lemon peel
 Coarse salt and freshly ground pepper to taste
8 baby carrots, left whole
8 new potatoes, scrubbed
3 small white turnips, peeled and quartered
 1/2 pound green peas
 1/4 pound green beans.

1. Brown the pieces of veal a few at a time in a heavy casserole in the oil and
remove with a slotted spoon. Pour off any excess fat. Add the shallots and
garlic and saute until soft.

2. Add the white wine and stir, scraping up any cooking particles from the
bottom of the pan. Add the chicken stock, tomato paste, thyme, lemon peel and
salt and pepper and bring to boil. Turn down heat, cover and cook gently for one
hour.

3. Add the carrots and cook for 20 minutes or until the vegetables are tender.
Meanwhile, in a steamer cook the new potatoes and turnips until tender (about 20
minutes). Cook the green beans and peas until tender (about five minutes). Add
them to the stew and serve.

Yield: 4 servings.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: drawing

                   Copyright 1990 The New York Times Company


                              95 of 288 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                  April 29, 1990, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

FOOD;
Weather Warms, and It's Time for Stews

BYLINE: By MOIRA HODGSON

SECTION: Section 12WC; Page 24, Column 1; Westchester Weekly Desk

LENGTH: 1109 words


STEWS are not just for winter. Going through some old diaries recently, I came
across an entry describing a picnic I had gone on as a child when my father was
posted at the British Embassy in Vietnam. The tropical heat had been even worse
than usual and we had taken shelter from the sun in the ruins of a French villa
by a beach not far from Saigon. What did we eat? Not sandwiches, not hamburgers,
sausage rolls or even cold chicken. We ate hot stew, which was cooked on a
portable gas stove brought along for the occasion.

I don't remember what was in the stew we ate that day but in my childhood
diaries when I refer to a meal I particularly enjoyed, it always seems to center
around a stew. Our Asian picnic ended rather abruptly when I looked up at the
rafters to see a large snakeskin waving over my head (was the snake still
around?). Then I saw a group of Vietnamese cowherds huddled over a charcoal
burner at the bottom of the villa's wild, neglected garden. They were cooking
their lunch: it was a stew. Perhaps we British weren't so mad after all.

At this time of year, I love the light spring stews that make use of the young
vegetables that are now in season. Especially good is a veal stew made along the
lines of a French navarin, with white wine and finished with spring vegetables -
new potatoes, green beans, peas, whole baby carrots and young white turnips.

Rabbit, a meat that is becoming more widely available in supermarkets and at
butchers, takes particularly well to stewing because the liquid prevents the
meat from drying out, as it sometimes does when roasted or grilled. In the
recipe below, the rabbit is cooked with celery and the cooking juices are
flavored with lemon juice and thickened with egg to make a creamy sauce. Lamb is
cooked with white wine and tomatoes and garnished with fried baby artichokes
that are sprinkled over the top, after the stew is cooked. A dry white or blush
wine goes best with these dishes.

Rabbit Braised With Celery

Preparation time: 15 minutes

Cooking time: 30 to 40 minutes
1 rabbit, cut up
 Coarse salt and freshly ground pepper to taste
2 tablespoons olive oil
1 onion, chopped
1 clove garlic, minced
3 stalks celery, cut in chunks
 1/2 cup dry white wine
1 cup chicken stock, preferably homemade
1 egg
2 to 3 tablespoons lemon juice
2 tablespoons Italian parsley, chopped.

1. Wipe the pieces of rabbit dry with paper towels and season with salt and
pepper to taste. Heat the oil in a large heavy skillet and brown the pieces.
Remove them to a plate and add the onion and garlic to the skillet. Cook over
moderate heat until soft.

2. Return the rabbit to the skillet along with the celery, white wine and
chicken stock. Cover and simmer gently for one hour, or until the rabbit is
tender (if the rabbit seems too dry, add a little more chicken stock or water).
Put the rabbit pieces and vegetables onto a heated serving dish, reserving as
much of the cooking liquid as possible in the skillet. Keep the rabbit warm in a
low oven while you make the sauce.

3. Break the egg into a small saucepan and beat with a whisk for a minute or
two. Add the lemon juice and beat well. Then gradually pour in the hot sauce
from the rabbit and cook over low heat until thickened (be careful not to curdle
the sauce). Pour the sauce onto the rabbit, sprinkle with parsley and serve.

Yield: 3 to 4 servings.

Note: Serve this with new potatoes and steamed spring vegetables.

Lamb Stew With Baby Artichokes

Preparation time: 30 minutes

Cooking time: 1 1/2 to 2 hours
3 pounds boned shoulder of lamb cut in two-inch cubes, fat trimmed
 1/4 cup flour
2 tablespoons peanut or vegetable oil
2 cups beef or chicken stock, preferably homemade
2 cloves garlic, minced
1 cup canned peeled tomatoes, chopped
1 tablespoon tomato paste
1 cup dry white wine
 1/2 teaspoon thyme leaves
 Coarse salt and freshly ground pepper to taste
12 whole baby carrots
18 pearl onions, trimmed
 For the garnish:
2 pounds baby artichokes
 Juice 1/2 lemon
2 tablespoons olive oil
1 clove garlic, minced (green part removed).

1. Dredge the lamb lightly with flour. Heat the oil in a large heavy casserole
and brown the lamb pieces a few at a time, on all sides, turning them with
tongs. Remove the browned pieces to a bowl.

2. Add the stock, garlic, tomatoes, tomato paste and white wine. Scrape up the
cooking juices with a spoon, stir well, and return the lamb pieces to the
casserole along with the thyme, salt and pepper. Cover and simmer over
medium-low heat.

3. After the meat has simmered for 30 minutes add the carrots. After 15 more
minutes, add the onions. Cook the stew for one-and-a-half to two hours total, or
until the meat is tender.

4. Meanwhile, trim the tops (cutting off about two-thirds of an inch) and stalks
from the artichokes. Remove tough outer leaves. Slice the artichokes vertically
top to bottom in quarter-inch pieces. Place them in a large bowl filled with
water and lemon juice to stop them from turning brown.

5. Heat the olive oil in a large skillet. Saute the artichokes until brown and
keep warm. Add the garlic to the skillet and cook just enough to change color.
Sprinkle over the top of the artichokes. Just before serving the stew, sprinkle
the artichokes over the top.

Yield: 6 servings.

Veal Stew With Spring Vegetables

Preparation time: 20 minutes

Cooking time: 1 1/2 hours
2 pounds stewing veal cut in 1 1/2-inch cubes
2 tablespoons peanut or vegetable oil
2 shallots, chopped
1 clove garlic, minced
1 cup white wine
1 cup chicken stock
1 tablespoon tomato paste
1 tablespoon fresh thyme leaves
1 piece lemon peel
 Coarse salt and freshly ground pepper to taste
8 baby carrots, left whole
8 new potatoes, scrubbed
3 small white turnips, peeled and quartered
 1/2 pound green peas
 1/4 pound green beans.

1. Brown the pieces of veal a few at a time in a heavy casserole in the oil and
remove with a slotted spoon. Pour off any excess fat. Add the shallots and
garlic and saute until soft.

2. Add the white wine and stir, scraping up any cooking particles from the
bottom of the pan. Add the chicken stock, tomato paste, thyme, lemon peel and
salt and pepper and bring to boil. Turn down heat, cover and cook gently for one
hour.

3. Add the carrots and cook for 20 minutes or until the vegetables are tender.
Meanwhile, in a steamer cook the new potatoes and turnips until tender (about 20
minutes). Cook the green beans and peas until tender (about five minutes). Add
them to the stew and serve.

Yield: 4 servings.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: drawing

                   Copyright 1990 The New York Times Company


                              96 of 288 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                  April 30, 1990, Monday, Late Edition - Final

After 15 Years, Thieu and Ky Offer To Help Bring Down Hanoi's Rule

BYLINE: By SETH MYDANS, Special to The New York Times

SECTION: Section A; Page 1, Column 4; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 967 words

DATELINE: LOS ANGELES, April 29


Fifteen years after the fall of Saigon, the two most prominent former leaders of
South Vietnam - Nguyen Van Thieu and Nguyen Cao Ky - are becoming active again,
seeking to find a role for themselves in the future of the country they fled.

Encouraged by the fall of Communist governments in Eastern Europe, they have
recently begun touring the United States, Europe and Asia, seeking to build a
personal following as they agitate for changes in Vietnam.

Their activities have raised eyebrows among some overseas Vietnamese, who
question the credibility of the leaders of the failed Saigon Government.

In separate interviews last week on the eve of the April 30 anniversary of the
fall of Saigon, the two men, like seasoned politicians, denied personal
ambitions but offered themselves to help rebuild a post-Communist Vietnam.

The two former political rivals, who now live in the United States, were reached
by telephone during their separate travels, Mr. Thieu in Paris and Mr. Ky in
Bangkok, Thailand. They made it clear that for them, the Vietnam War is still
not over.

''The whole people of Vietnam are ready to stand up against the oppressor and to
launch a national revolution,'' said Mr. Thieu, 66 years old, who was President
of South Vietnam during its final years and who now lives mostly in Boston. ''I
am ready to participate with them in the struggle by any means available.''

He said that if that struggle became violent, he stood ready to offer whatever
support he could.

Ky Sees 'Final Victory'

Mr. Ky, 60, a former Prime Minister and Vice President who now lives in
Westminster, Calif., said, ''With all the changes in Eastern Europe and even in
Soviet Russia, we now have more hope, more confidence that soon the Vietnamese
Communists will have to accept change.

''I think Americans and Vietnamese can achieve today what we could not achieve
during the Vietnam War: a final victory over the Communists,'' he said.

Among overseas Vietnamese who sounded a skeptical note was Dam Phuong Tran, who
heads a private group in Washington called the Committee for Human Rights in
Vietnam. ''When they were in power, all that money and all those armed forces
poured in from this country, and they failed,'' she said. ''What do they think
they can do now?''

Both men said they were operating on their own as they re-entered public life,
and there was no sign that they were receiving encouragement or support from
Washington.

''Is there a buck to be made in Vietnam? That is one possible objective,'' said
Douglas Pike, director of Indochina studies at the University of California at
Berkeley. ''Another objective could be a maneuvering for what you might call the
leadership, the eminence grise, or emperor of Vietnamese abroad.''

Until recently, both Mr. Thieu and Mr. Ky led relatively quiet lives while the
highly factionalized and sometimes violent world of Vietnamese emigre politics
swirled around them.

After first fleeing to Taiwan, Mr. Thieu lived for many years in London, rarely
speaking or appearing in public. His higher profile began only in recent months
after he moved last year to join family members in Boston.

His supporters would say little about his activities or his means of support
during his years abroad.

Mr. Ky, who said he saw his future role in Vietnam as helping to rebuild the
economy, has not found economic success in the United States.

He owned a liquor store from 1977 to 1984, when he declared bankruptcy, and
subsequently failed in a shrimp fishing venture in Louisiana. He now lives with
a sister in the Vietnamese community in Westminster, near Los Angeles.

In 1984 the columnist Jack Anderson accused him of being involved in Vietnamese
criminal gangs in the United States. Mr. Ky heatedly denied the accusation.

The former fighter pilot has been somewhat more politically active than Mr.
Thieu, particularly among Vietnamese war veterans. He drew attention a year ago
when he called for political and economic pressure on the Hanoi Government,
saying the time for armed resistance by guerrilla groups had passed.

That position, which Mr. Thieu now also voices, has in the past prompted violent
attacks and even some killings by hard-line Vietnamese emigres who oppose any
contacts with the Communist Government.

Doan Van Thoai, a writer and political speaker, was shot and badly wounded in
Fresno last August after voicing a similar position. In an interview last month,
he said changes in the Communist world and growing cynicism among overseas
Vietnamese had led men like Mr. Thieu and Mr. Ky to shift toward his more
moderate stand.

Referring to events in Eastern Europe, Nepal and Mongolia, Mr. Thieu described a
number of factors that he argued could touch off an uprising in Vietnam,
including divisions in the Communist Party and the military and tensions between
officials from the northern and southern parts of the country.

''I would like to say that sooner or later there will be an explosion,'' he
said.

''I have no political ambition,'' Mr. Thieu said. ''I only want to participate,
to do the best I can do to support the movement for democracy and freedom inside
Vietnam.''

He said he was determined to return home, possibly even before a change of
government.

Mr. Ky, rather than speaking of an uprising, said he advocated diplomatic and
economic pressure to force changes by the Hanoi Government.

''The Government is corrupt,'' he said. ''The people are unhappy. They are going
out begging for economic aid from the so-called capitalist countries, and my
idea is to use that kind of pressure to make changes in Vietnam.''

''As for my personal role, I would like to do something to help in the eocnomic
field,'' Mr. Ky continued. ''I am 100 percent sure I will not be involved in
politics in Vietnam.''

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1990 The New York Times Company


                              97 of 288 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                  April 30, 1990, Monday, Late Edition - Final

NEWS SUMMARY

SECTION: Section A; Page 2, Column 5; Metropolitan Desk

LENGTH: 1321 words



INTERNATIONAL    A3-9

A Japanese computer initiative, organized by the Government, will focus on
mastering a highly promising advanced computer technology in which the United
States now holds a substantial lead.    Page A1



Two former South Vietnam leaders, Nguyen Van Thieu and Nguyen Cao Ky, are
becoming active again, seeking to find a role for themselves in the future of
the country. Some overseas Vietnamese question their credibility.    A1



Thousands of Korean protesters clashed with riot policemen in the streets of
downtown Seoul to protest a police raid on strikers at the world's largest
shipyard on Saturday.    A3



Czechoslovaks want Thomas Bata, head of the world's largest footwear company, to
come home and help revive the shoe industry that his father created in the
Moravian village of Zlin earlier in the century.    A1



A supply of Norwegian heavy water was improperly diverted by the Ceausescu
Government to India in 1986, according to Norwegian officials. Heavy water can
be a crucial ingredient in the manufacture of nuclear weapons.    A9



A call for changes in NATO was made by East Germany's new Prime Minister, who
was visiting the Soviet Union. President Gorbachev reiterated his opposition to
a united Germany's belonging to NATO.    A8



All the arms talks: where they stand as the summit nears    A8


Romanians demand that the President quit    A9


Polish Jewish festival elicits mixed emotions    A9


The quest for European stock unity    D1



The Peace Corps is reblossoming after years of decline that followed an
enthusiastic beginning during the Kennedy Administration. The change is partly a
result of new demands for volunteers in Eastern Europe.    A8



News analysis: Nicaragua's leader, Violeta Barrios de Chamorro, seems to be
firmly, even defiantly, in control of her new Government's political direction.
    A7



South Africa's leading Communist, Joe Slovo, said apartheid would be perpetuated
under another name unless the Government agrees to majority rule and a
redistribution of wealth and land.    A6



Pope criticizes settlers in the Old City    A3


Shamir adamant on P.L.O. talks    A3


Arab investment overseas: a vast empire    D1


Lisbon journal: City's heart to beat as it did in days of old    A4



NATIONAL    A10-15, B7-8

Former hostages describe freedom as something that is regained in the small
details of life, in the ability to walk about or to choose when and what to eat.

    A1



A second hostage will be released within 48 hours, according to an unsigned
statement delivered to an international news agency in Muslim West Beirut. The
hostage is Frank Herbert Reed.    B8



Bob Dole's positions on Israel have provoked an emotional debate within the
Republican Party about how far supporters of Israel should go in accusing its
Government of moving slowly in the Middle East peace process.    A13



A former aide to Samuel Pierce says that he will contradict testimony by the
former Housing Secretary and show that Mr. Pierce and officials of the Reagan
White House were involved in the political manipulation of housing programs.
A1



A woman charged with adultery is scheduled to stand trial in Wisconsin. The case
is a curious tale of contemporary morals and manners in an area where no one can
remember another such case in their time.    A1



A youth service program in Boston allows young people to help the poor, the
homeless and the disabled. The program's members come from diverse ethnic,
economic and social backgrounds.    A10



The space shuttle landed safely, but the Hubble Space Telescope, which it
launched into orbit, continued to be plagued with problems that the space agency
acknowledged were more serious than previously thought.    A10



A self-sustaining environment is the goal of the creators of Biosphere II, an
airtight, watertight glass-walled structure in which eight people plan to live
for the next two years.    B7



Colleges' academic and social values have been undermined by a breakdown of
civility and other disruptive forces, according to a report.    A15



Kansas City journal: After fall, statue is back on top    A10


Are there fewer viewers? Networks challenge Nielsen    D9



REGIONAL    B1-6

Black life in prosperous suburbs is fraught with police harassment, housing
discrimination, job bias and social slights, say many black residents of
Teaneck, N.J., and Bloomfield, Conn.    A1



The goal of home ownership is far more elusive today in the metropolitan area
than it was 10 years ago. While average incomes increased by half in the 1980's,
the average price of houses and apartments escalated at three times that rate.
    B1



People flock to Long Island's affordable-housing fair    B6



Two Bronx teen-agers were killed and two others were wounded on Saturday night
when another teen-ager opened fire on them in a schoolyard, the police said.
B1



Strife on an Indian reservation between feuding Mohawk factions intensified last
week as the area of St. Regis was beset by rampant violence. The reservation is
on the United States-Canadian border near Massena, N.Y.    B1



Student do-gooding 101: a graduation prerequisite    B1


Assemblyman to seek Rep.

Green's seat    B3


Inmate on work release arrested in slaying    B3


Armenians observe a grim anniversary    B3



BUSINESS DIGEST    D1



SPORTSMONDAY

The era of the ''stat'' in baseball and other sports seems to have arrived as
analytical techniques that have made economics and the physical sciences clearer
are being applied to the world of games.    A1



Auto Racing: Ruling stalls Porsche team    C9


Baseball: Yanks get Claudell Washington, lose to Angels    C1


Mets fall to Astros in 10th    C1


Basketball: 76ers take 2-0 lead over Cavaliers    C6


Jordan paces Bulls    C6


Boxing: Benn stops DeWitt    C9


Hearns wins with usual twists    C9


Column: Berkow on Knicks and Celtics    C6


Hockey: Rangers look ahead    C7


Horse Racing: A look at Mister Frisky    C1


Outdoors: Tackle-checkup time for surf casters    C10


Squash Racquets: Fine season for Nimick    C6



ARTS/ENTERTAINMENT

''A Chorus Line'' closed on Saturday, ending the longest run in Broadway
history. It was evening of sadness, nostalgia and celebration for the audience
who attended the 6,137th and final show.    C11



East bloc film makers at festival    C11


The words of Gwendolyn Brooks    C11


Music: Linda Ronstadt    C14


A piano recital    C12


Yale Concert Band    C14


Schoenberg song recital    C13


Red Hot Chili Peppers    C12


Dance: Dean's ''Shaman II''    C14


Paul Taylor's troupe    C13


Wendy Perron    C13


Neil Greenberg's ''Branches''    C13


Word and Image: ''Family Pictures''    C15


New look at ''Twin Peaks''    C16


''Gorbachev's U.S.S.R.''    C16



OBITUARIES    D15



Courtney C. Brown, former dean of Columbia's business school
Michael Shawn, director and choreographer

EDITORIALS/LETTERS/OP-ED

Editorials    A16



Military aid vs. drugs?
Mr. Brown's revealing secret
Blacks in college
Leon V. Sigal: Europe's borders

Letters    A16



Tom Wicker: Battling for the Senate    A17


William Safire: Repeal the Fourth of July    A17


Elliott Abrams: Bush's unrealpolitik    A17


Jean Mayer: South Africa schools aren't leper colonies    A17


LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Summary

                   Copyright 1990 The New York Times Company


                              98 of 288 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                  April 30, 1990, Monday, Late Edition - Final

EVOLUTION IN EUROPE;
Startled by Demand, Peace Corps Asks What It Can Do for Eastern Europe

BYLINE: By BARBARA GAMAREKIAN, Special to The New York Times

SECTION: Section A; Page 8, Column 1; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 1218 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, April 27


After years of decline that followed an enthusiastic beginning during the
Kennedy Administration, the Peace Corps is again starting to flourish, partly as
a result of new demands for volunteers in Eastern Europe, where they will be
sent for the first time in the organization's 30-year history.

''It's a reblossoming,'' said Paul D. Coverdell, the Peace Corps director. The
agency is starting programs in Hungary, Poland, Malta, Uganda, Haiti, Congo and
Bolivia, he noted, and additional countries have inquired about its programs.

''There are some 26 nations asking us about the possibilities of sending a
contingent of Americans,'' Mr. Coverdell said. ''We've never had so many
countries seeking this relationship.''

That is a welcome change for the Peace Corps, which has had its ups and downs
over the years - from a high point of 15,500 volunteers in the Johnson
Administration, to a low of 5,500 during Gerald R. Ford's Presidency, to the
6,100 enrolled today. If funds are appropriated, that number is likely to rise
sharply.

Heading to Hungary and Poland

Under current plans, two groups of 60 volunteers will head for Hungary and
Poland in June to teach English to instructors at universities and secondary
schools. ''We have another team holding conversations in Czechoslovakia, and
Romania and Bulgaria have contacted us,'' Mr. Coverdell said. ''And I plan to
stop in East Germany next week.''

In addition to Governments in Eastern Europe, fledgling democracies in Latin
America are also seeking more United States volunteers. In one example, a Peace
Corps team is discussing the possibility of a project on watershed management in
Panama.

Mr. Coverdell said the Peace Corps was also planning to send an exploratory
mission to Nicaragua where, he said, ''the needs are dramatic, especially in
health care.''

Besides language training, countries have asked for technical assistance in
areas like computer science, small-business development and environmental
programs. The Peace Corps has just signed an agreement with the Environmental
Protection Agency to train volunteers and foreign nationals in environmental
matters.

Support From Congress

The revitalization of the corps is supported by many in Congress, which counts
about 20 former volunteers in its ranks. The Peace Corps has also drawn support
from President Bush, who incorporated the idea of volunteerism in his campaign
platform when he spoke of a ''thousand points of light.''

In 1985, Congress called for an expanded program of 10,000 volunteers by 1992.
Mr. Coverdell projects a total force of 12,000 around the world by the end of
this decade. The Administration has proposed that funds be increased by 10
percent or $16 million this year, bringing the 1991 budget to $181 million.

The decision to send volunteers to Europe is a striking departure for the
agency, which was created in 1961 to spread American ideals and expertise
primarily to developing countries.

No Third World Cutbacks

Some former volunteers have questioned whether the move into Eastern Europe
means cutting back on programs in the third world, but Mr. Coverdell maintains
that it will not be at the expense of these areas.

''The 1990 consumption of resources for Eastern Europe is just 2 percent of our
budget.'' he said, ''And our expansion this year into some 16 countries in
Africa and Central and South America is larger than ever.''

The president of the Overseas Development Council, John W. Sewell, who initially
questioned the wisdom of the new ventures in Eastern Europe, now supports the
program. ''The name of the game has changed,'' he said.

''Clearly, their budget is going up so it will not be taking resources from poor
areas,'' he said. ''All of our assistance efforts need to be reassessed and
realigned in terms of these new opportunities.''

Decline in the '70s

In nearly 30 years, the agency has sent 120,000 volunteers overseas. Born in the
heady days of John F. Kennedy's New Frontier, the Peace Corps got off to a fast
start, with more than 15,500 volunteers by 1966. Over the next decade the corps
suffered substantial budget cuts and lost some of its indentity as it was merged
with a new agency, Action.

After Watergate and the war in Vietnam, voluntary service fell out of fashion.
By 1976, the number of volunteers had dropped below 5,500.

In 1982, the Peace Corps was re-established as an independent agency under a
directive from President Reagan. With a new director, Loret Miller Ruppe, it
began to recruit mid-career professionals. Slowly the corps began to regain
bipartisan support.

Today, the Peace Corps has 6,100 volunteers in 70 countries. Many of them are
older and better trained than the early volunteers.

The first Peace Corps classes were often dominated by liberal-arts majors in
their early 20's who worked on community development programs.

The average age of today's Peace Corps volunteers in 31. About 60 percent of
those accepted for service are trained in specific skills or professions like
engineering, veterinary medicine, health and nutrition, computer sciences,
forestry, special education, industrial arts and vocational training.

Those who are accepted with bachelors' degrees, but without specialized training
or work experience, most commonly teach English.

Shift in Emphasis

Rural-development programs are still relevant, Mr. Coverdell said, but in
developing countries, the Peace Corps is focusing as well on urban and
environmental programs and small-business ventures.

He pointed to a loan program in the West African nation of Guinea that has
enabled small bakeries and textile-manufacturing operations to get started.
About $90,000 in seed money donated by a Columbus, Ohio, businessman has
generated hundreds of new jobs, ''and we've had a 95 percent payback on the
loans,'' he said.

''Forty-four percent of the people the Peace Corps works with now live in
cities,'' Mr. Coverdell said. ''And we've been slow to come to grips with this
in our foreign assistance, which tends to be rurally based.''

He said the corps now has 550 volunteers working on environmental projects like
water sanitation, pesticide management and reforestation. ''We've just sent a
young man to be managing director of the Regional Environmental Center in
Budapest,'' he added.

Worked on Bush's Campaign

Mr. Coverdell, who is 50 years old, served 18 years as a Georgia State senator
and worked on Mr. Bush's Presidential campaign. He was appointed director last
May.

Five years ago, the Peace Corps started a Fellows program at Teachers College of
Columbia University as a way of finding a use at home for the skills that
volunteers acquired abroad.

Returning volunteers are offered scholarships to pursue graduate degrees in
education in exchange for teaching full time for two years in New York City
public schools.

''We've enrolled 90 ex-volunteers,'' said the director of the program, Henry L.
Fernandez. ''And we've discovered that about 60 percent continue to teach in New
York after they have completed their studies.''

''Peace Corps volunteers are an awfully pragmatic group,'' Mr. Coverdell said.
''And that shocks people who think of them as idealists. But they are a
substantive, well-trained, persistent, quite elegant group of people.''

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: photo: Paul D. Coverdell, director of the Peace Corps, which is
starting to flourish again after years of decline and is expanding its programs
to include Eastern Europe. (The New York Times/Paul Hosefros)

                   Copyright 1990 The New York Times Company


                              99 of 288 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                  April 30, 1990, Monday, Late Edition - Final

Military Aid vs. Drugs? Yes, but . . .

SECTION: Section A; Page 16, Column 1; Editorial Desk

LENGTH: 550 words


Washington is finally about to release $230 million in aid money, much of it for
military support, to help Andean governments combat cocaine. Is expanded
military aid and advice the right way to address the drug problem in Latin
America?

The answer is yes, with three conditions: Military aid should be funneled
through civilian governments with due attention to supporting democracy. U.S.
advisers have to abstain from any combat role. And the aid has to be part of a
broader strategy that includes economic development.

Some argue that the cocaine supply can't be reduced enough to affect drug use on
the street. And it's true that only a cut in supply large enough to force a
dramatic increase in prices could make a difference. It's also true that Andean
coca farmers feeling pressured in one area have plenty of opportunity to plant
in another.

But this futility theory is premature. The serious attempt of Andean governments
(Bolivia, Colombia and Peru) to reduce cocaine production began only last year.
And until now, Washington has provided only minimal support.

Even so, there are some surprisingly positive results. Colombia's campaign
against drug traffickers, followed by a less publicized campaign in Bolivia,
broke up the production pipeline, making it harder for growers to sell their
crop. As a result, the price for raw coca leaves plummeted. The hundred pounds
that once brought $60 now sells for around $10, well below the $30 cost of
production.

In Bolivia, the market collapse has impelled coca growers to sign up in
impressive numbers for a program paying them to tear up coca and plant other
crops. In all of 1989, crop substitution eliminated only 2,500 hectares of coca;
so far this year the acreage eliminated exceeds 3,000. Meanwhile, U.S. drug
officials note that the wholesale price of cocaine in American cities has
increased since last September by 10 percent to 25 percent, while purity of
cocaine on the street has decreased by 10 percent.

However modest, these are promising signs and reason to welcome the $230 million
in new aid money. Yet the prospect of greater military aid still stirs concern
about Vietnam-style escalation. Perspective is important: yes, the new aid might
double U.S. military advisers in the Andes, but only to about 400 for the three
countries. And they would be there to support police, not combat operations.

The Administration also has to be very careful about Peru at a time when the
civilian government is in the process of changing hands. The aid ought to be
given in a way that does not feed anxieties about supporting the Peruvian
military.

Finally, and most important, there is a danger of too much reliance on military
solutions. A policy of military pressure alone risks replacing narcoterrorism
with severely disrupted economies. Washington officials dismiss such concerns by
pointing to plans for $175 million in economic aid next fiscal year. But
skeptics worry over the firmness of that commitment given budget pressures.

Reassurance is important, both at home and in Latin America, and there is one
obvious way to achieve it: Give Bolivia more money for its expanding crop
substitution program right now. Such an investment in agriculture could also
yield big dividends in credibility throughout the hemisphere.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Editorial

                   Copyright 1990 The New York Times Company


                              100 of 288 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                  April 30, 1990, Monday, Late Edition - Final

IN THE NATION;
Battling for the Senate

BYLINE: By Tom Wicker

SECTION: Section A; Page 17, Column 5; Editorial Desk

LENGTH: 759 words


Some Democrats are worried about losing control of the Senate this year. More
are concerned, and with more reason, that they might drop one or two seats in
1990, then see the Republicans win a majority in the Presidential year 1992.

Though they now hold a 10-seat advantage, Democrats who are staying up nights
worrying about this two-year outlook have good reason for concern. Seventeen
Democratic seats, one opened by the recent death of Spark Matsunaga of Hawaii,
are at stake this year, and at least four of them (in Iowa, Illinois, Michigan
and Rhode Island) are under heavy Republican challenge.

In 1992, when the general expectation is that George Bush will head the
Republican ticket, 20 Democratic senators - not including deaths and
retirements, which can't be predicted - will be up for re-election. Eleven of
them will be ''freshmen'' who were elected to the Senate in the Democratic,
non-Presidential year of 1986. Most of the 11 are from states where Democratic
Presidential tickets have been faring poorly, and only one of them won by more
than 55 percent.

This year, 18 Republican senators must seek re-election, but most are regarded
as holding safe seats. In 1992, the year of maximum peril for the Democrats,
only 14 Republican seats will be at issue. It's not just these discouraging
numbers, however, or even Mr. Bush's anticipated run for re-election, that give
Democrats the willies (Hortons). The six-year cycle of politics since 1966
consistently has signaled trouble for the party.

Nineteen sixty-six was the mid-year of Lyndon Johnson's term, when the war in
Vietnam was becoming a divisive political issue; the Democrats lost heavily in
Congressional elections. Six years later, in 1972, Richard Nixon scored his
landslide victory over the Democratic Presidential nominee, George McGovern.

The unpopular President Carter was at the mid-year of his single term in 1978,
and again the Democrats ran poorly in Congressional - particularly Senate -
elections. In 1984, Ronald Reagan was re-elected in another Republican
landslide.

That brings this unhappy six-year cycle to 1990 and renewed Democratic fears.
The Republicans, meanwhile, having done their usual thorough job of ''candidate
recruitment,'' are confident that they are fielding the better and more
experienced slate - more well-known state officials, members of Congress, etc.

Few except professional Republican boosters, however, argue that outright
control of the Senate can be won next November. Historically, the party
occupying the White House usually has lost Congressional seats in mid-term
elections. This year, Republican prospects seem reasonably good for picking up
at least a few seats and good field position for 1992, when no doubt Mr. Bush
will be at the top of the ticket.

On the other hand, Democrats can comfort themselves that Republican campaigners,
adept though they are at winning Presidential elections, have not seemed so
skillful in Senate contests. Over the last four elections, with Ronald Reagan
and George Bush in the White House - Mr. Reagan rolling up another landslide in
1984 and Mr. Bush winning a substantial victory in 1988 - only three Democratic
senators have been ousted by Republican challengers: Howard Cannon of Nevada in
1982, Walter Huddleston of Kentucky in 1984, and John Melcher of Montana in
1988.

Beginning in 1982, in fact, the Democrats have recovered from being 10 seats
down in the Senate to being 10 seats up - despite great Republican success in
Presidential politics in the same period.

Republican Senate candidates also may be somewhat strapped this year and in 1992
for the kind of issues on which many have flourished in the past. Militant
anti-Communism and hawkishness on defense matters, for instance, should be less
effective as a result of events in Eastern Europe and the Soviet Union.

Similarly, the emotional ''choice'' issue - now that state action to curb a
woman's right to abortion has been made possible - seems a threat to some
Republican candidates, rather than the boon it used to be. In Iowa, for example,
Democratic Senator Tom Harkin faces strong challenge from Representative Tom
Tauke, who lately and significantly has been playing down his anti-choice
record.

Issues don't always win elections, however, and the next two elections seem
certain to present a strong Republican threat to Democratic control of the
Senate. Stay tuned for another article offering a cold-blooded, fearless,
bipartisan, nonpartisan, armchair campaign manager's view of 1990's first-round
races.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: OP-ED

                   Copyright 1990 The New York Times Company


                              101 of 288 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                  April 30, 1990, Monday, Late Edition - Final

Books of The Times;
At the Silent Heart Of a Family in Pain

BYLINE: By CHRISTOPHER LEHMANN-HAUPT

SECTION: Section C; Page 15, Column 1; Cultural Desk

LENGTH: 1093 words



Family Pictures
By Sue Miller
389 pages. Harper & Row. $19.95.

David Eberhardt, the father of the large Chicago family so feelingly portrayed
in Sue Miller's new novel, ''Family Pictures,'' is a psychoanalyst. His god is
Sigmund Freud, a fact he celebrates by putting up on the kitchen wall the famous
photograph in which Freud seems almost to be glaring at the camera.

David's wife, Elaine, or Lainey, is more traditional in her beliefs. Because the
piercing stare of her husband's god frightens one of her children, she
substitutes a photograph in which a puzzled-looking Freud is standing in a
garden with his wife, whose hand rests on his shoulder like a claim. ''Well,
Lainey,'' her husband says, ''quite a reach you've got. You've managed to
domesticate even Freud.''

So the scales are balanced in this mid-20th-century American family, which once
upon a time looked forward to a joyful future. But then in 1948, after a
daughter and a son had been born, a figurative bomb exploded in the family's
midst. A third child, Randall, arrived and refused to develop normally. The
family practiced denial about his condition until the 2-year-old Randall rode on
a float in a Fourth of July parade. A woman spectator in David's earshot
exclaimed, ''What on earth is wrong with that child?'' David finally accepted
that his son was autistic.

Whether childhood autism is genetically or psychologically caused has been one
of the more heatedly debated questions of child rearing in recent times and a
frequent source of blame and guilt among parents of those afflicted. The reader
learns that David wanted to put Randall in Bruno Bettelheim's Orthogenic School,
an institution famous for getting responses from psychically withdrawn children.
Understandably interpreting David's wishes as a criticism of her mothering,
Lainey insisted on holding onto and nurturing Randall.

In short, the lines are quickly drawn in ''Family Pictures'' for an Ibsenesque
problem drama in which the issues involving autism can collide head-on and be
didactically resolved.

But as readers of the author's first novel, ''The Good Mother,'' will recall,
Ms. Miller is not merely interested in bare-bones moral conflict. In that
earlier book, she treated the problem of reconciling sexual freedom and
responsible parenthood with disturbing psychological acuity. Now, in this new
novel, she allows Randall to stay at home, and instead of making him a cause of
war she traces the infinite subtle ways in which his presence reshapes his
family.

Lainey's reaction to her son's autism is to conceive as quickly as nature will
permit three more children, all daughters, as proof of her worth as a mother and
to heal the wound caused by Randall. David, a good father, sublimates his anger
into subtle but wounding mockery, calling the three additional girls ''the
unexpected guests'' or ''the surprise party'' or ''the little pitchers of
health'' or ''the last straws.''

Ms. Miller is particularly good at dramatizing scenes of domestic chaos and the
complex interplay of adults and children. In one of the novel's typically
well-drawn episodes, Randall clumsily breaks a Christmas ornament and Macklin,
his 8-year-old big brother, steps on it. David takes Mack to the hospital
emergency room. Waiting for stitches, Mack wonders how the family is celebrating
Christmas in their absence. To Mack's amusement, David fantasizes about what
everyone is doing.

''Mack snorted and giggled, watching his father. After a moment he said, 'You
didn't do Sarah.'

'' 'Ah, Sarah!' David said. 'How could I forget? Sarah. Our little last straw.
Sarah is wearing the most gorgeous, glorious, brand-new, spanking-clean diaper
you ever saw. She doesn't care that her hair looks glued to her head, she
doesn't care that her skin is yellow, that there are lumps and bumps all over
her skull. She prances, she twirls, she curtsies on her wobbly yellow sticks,
our Sarah.'

''Mack looked suddenly uncomfortable. 'That one's dumb, Dad,' he said. ''David
saw that he'd gone too far.'' Mack's tiny rift with his father will grow, and
the nature of his wound will be altered. He will learn to match David's mockery
and then some. Grown to angry adolescence, he will drop out of Harvard and leave
himself exposed to being drafted and sent to Vietnam. David will suggest that he
find a test ''that just hurts me, not you.''

''I don't believe it,'' Mack will explode in reaction to David's psychoanalytic
outlook. ''You've got me coming and going, but I don't care. I don't care if
this is Oedipal, or acting out. . . . Those are just words, Dad, just your words
for it. And I'm not interested, I'm just not interested anymore.''

What's so effective is left unstated by the author: that for Mack his parents'
devotion to the hollow Randall is emasculating. In fact, each child, each of the
family members, is wounded by the presence of Randall in a different way. Yet
the reader is irresistibly drawn through their pain by the author's exquisite
eye for psychological detail and sexual nuance, and also by her method of
keeping the narrative slowed down in that way that suggests something explosive
is about to happen.

This measured pace does get tedious at times; there's not always enough going on
beneath the surface to justify the length of the story. Yet whenever the
narrative lags, it soon snaps back to life again. Sexually turned off by
Lainey's further pregnancies, David takes up with a neighbor and moves out. When
he's drawn back to the family by another of Randall's crises, he insists that
his son be institutionalized.

Eventually, the family members are freed from Randall. But why don't they feel
liberated? It is Nina, the first of the last straws and the novel's primary
narrator, who comes to understand. A professional photographer, she is hired to
take pictures of someone's huge family reunion. When she looks at the picture
she has taken of this family, she sees ''it was really a portrait of a kind of
reckless courage, a testament to the great loving carelessness at the heart of
every family's life, even ours.''

She understands that ''each child represented such risk, such blind daring on
its parents' parts - such possibility for anguish and pain - that each one's
existence was a kind of miracle.'' And so, in glad celebration of the miracle,
she leads the reader up to the point where Randall's sad but inevitable story
begins all over again. And the reader understands that the burden of Randall's
life is the same as the burden of unreasoned, committed love.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: photo: Sue Miller (Jerry Bauer)

TYPE: Review

                   Copyright 1990 The New York Times Company


                              102 of 288 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                   May 1, 1990, Tuesday, Late Edition - Final

U.S. Says China Sent Large Arms Supplies to Khmer Rouge

BYLINE: By ROBERT PEAR, Special to The New York Times

SECTION: Section A; Page 13, Column 2; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 936 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, April 30


In defiance of numerous requests from the Bush Administration, China has
recently sent large new shipments of weapons to Khmer Rouge guerrillas battling
the Cambodian Government, Administration officials say.

The weapons, they said, include mortars, rifles, rocket-propelled grenades,
antiaircraft machine guns, rocket launchers, 122-millimeter howitzers,
130-millimeter field guns and other heavy artillery.

On trips to Beijing in July and December, President Bush's national security
adviser, Brent Scowcroft, and Deputy Secretary of State Lawrence S. Eagleburger
asked the Chinese to curtail military support for the Khmer Rouge. More than a
million Cambodians died under Khmer Rouge rule, from 1975 through 1978, when
Vietnam invaded Cambodia. The United States has repeatedly said the Khmer Rouge
must never return to power.

In a confidential report to Congress this month, the State Department said there
had been no discernible decrease in Chinese arms deliveries to the Khmer Rouge
over the last six months. Indeed, Administration officials said the quantity and
quality of the weapons had increased as fighting in Cambodia intensified.

Policy Setback for Bush

The last seven months have seen the heaviest fighting in Cambodia since 1985,
when Vietnamese soldiers pushed many guerrillas over the border from Cambodia
into Thailand.

The Chinese have been arming the Khmer Rouge for years. But the discovery of
large new arms shipments represents a setback for Mr. Bush's policy and is the
latest example of the failure of United States attempts to change Chinese
behavior through the Scowcroft missions.

ABC News reported on Thursday that American aid to non-Communist Cambodian
guerrillas had the effect of helping the Khmer Rouge because they cooperate on
the battlefield. But the Administration has said sees ''no pattern of
cooperation.''

A Bush Administration official said the Chinese appeared to be ''thumbing their
nose'' at the United States on Cambodia, as on other issues like human rights
and the case of the dissident Fang Lizhi. Mr. Fang has been given refuge at the
American Embassy in Beijing since June. The Chinese authorities have issued a
warrant for his arrest on charges of organizing the demonstrations in Tiananmen
Square last spring, and Beijing has spurned American requests to let him leave
the country.

Supplies to Non-Communists

The State Department quoted the Chinese as saying they would stop their aid to
the Khmer Rouge ''when the Vietnamese troop withdrawal has been independently
verified, when all other external assistance to the Cambodian factions ceases
and when a comprehensive settlement is in place.''

Mr. Eagleburger said the United States had urged China, ''in any number of
forums on a number of different occasions,'' to reduce and preferably to end its
military support for the Khmer Rouge, even in the absence of a political
settlement. French, Soviet and Thai diplomats said they saw no chance of such a
settlement in the near future.

Even while criticizing China for arming the Khmer Rouge, Administration
officials said they were grateful to Beijing for supplying weapons to two
non-Communist Cambodian guerrilla groups supported by Washington. The
non-Communist factions are led by Prince Norodom Sihanouk and Son Sann, a former
Prime Minister of Cambodia.

''We encourage China'' to continue supplying the non-Communist factions, an
Administration official said, adding, ''The non-Communist resistance would be
vulnerable if it were not armed.''

'More Flexibility' Urged

American officials said Chinese military aid to the Khmer Rouge far exceeds that
to the other guerrilla factions. The Phnom Penh Government has received large
amounts of weapons, including tanks, from the Soviet Union and Vietnam.

China and the other permanent members of the Security Council, the United
States, the Soviet Union, Britain and France, have held three rounds of talks
this year in an effort to arrange a cease-fire and a framework for a political
settlement in Cambodia. But a State Department official said the Chinese ''need
to display more flexibility'' for the talks to succeed.

A professor of political science at the Massachusetts Institute of Technology,
Lucian W. Pye, said the Chinese leaders who suppressed the democracy movement
last year were ''obsessed with the need for stability'' inside China and were
now subordinating foreign policy to that goal.

Washington openly provides the non-Communist Cambodian guerrillas with food,
medicine, clothing and money. Critics of Administration policy, including some
in Congress, say the non-Communist guerrillas have used American aid funds to
buy arms in Thailand or from Singapore. They also assert that American aid to
the non-Communist guerrillas indirectly benefits their coalition partner, the
Khmer Rouge.

A State Department spokesman, Adam M. Shub, said on Friday: ''We have no
indication at all that any of the assistance we've provided to the
non-Communists has been turned over to the Khmer Rouge. We provide no arms. We
provide only nonlethal assistance to the non-Communist resistance.''

But battlefield reports sent to the Pentagon from the American Embassy in
Thailand give details of increasingly close cooperation and ''joint military
operations'' conducted by the Khmer Rouge and the non-Communist factions.

In the last two months, the reports say, Khmer Rouge guerrillas and their
non-Communist allies have stepped up joint operations in northwestern and
central Cambodia, and Prince Sihanouk has said his troops fight ''side by side''
with the Khmer Rouge.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1990 The New York Times Company


                              103 of 288 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                   May 1, 1990, Tuesday, Late Edition - Final

School Mural: Sociology or Religion?

BYLINE: By KEVIN SACK, Special to The New York Times

SECTION: Section B; Page 1, Column 2; Metropolitan Desk

LENGTH: 928 words

DATELINE: SCHUYLERVILLE, N.Y., April 30


For 25 years, Craig Martin's mural of a crucifixion scene has hung undisturbed
in the dimly lighted auditorium of the Central School here.

From time to time, someone has noticed the 10-by-12-foot painting while
attending the annual spring concert or winter show and has complained about the
display of a seemingly religious work in a public school. But no one in this
mill village on the Hudson River protested too loudly until 1988, when Robert
and Susan Joki took their case to the school principal's office, then to the
Board of Education and, after losing in both places, to Federal court.

Since then the couple - she is Jewish, he was raised a Baptist but now says he
is an agnostic - report they have been subjected to anti-Semitic slurs and
anonymous telephone threats. Some parents have instructed their children not to
play with the Jokis' children, the Jokis said.

A Constitutional Question

But with a lawsuit that experts say could embroider recent Supreme Court
decisions, the Jokis are confident they will prevail, both in their fight to
maintain the separation of church and state and in their effort to bring a
morsel of change to a town that has proudly resisted it.

Because the school board contends that the mural is simply an inspirational
piece of student art and not explicitly religious, the case sits at the legal
intersection of national debates about freedom of artistic expression and the
use of public facilities for religious activities.

''Of particular interest in this case is the relationship between the
constitutional guarantee of freedom of expression, as is represented in the art,
and the constitutional prohibition on governmental endorsement or promotion of
religion,'' said Scott N. Fein, an Albany lawyer who is representing the Jokis
on behalf of the New York Civil Liberties Union.

The Jokis had their first day in court today as Mr. Fein asked Judge Howard J.
Munson in Federal District Court to grant summary judgment in their favor during
a hearing in Albany. Judge Munson said he would rule on that later.

Mr. Fein told Judge Munson that the mural clearly depicts the crucifixion of
Jesus Christ and that its size and placement could create the perception in a
youngster's mind that the school endorses Christianity or religion in general.
He pointed out that the mural's symbolism was heightened because it dominates a
wall that is also decorated with an American flag and a painting of a
Revolutionary War scene.

He cited a 1989 Supreme Court decision that prohibited the placement of a creche
in the Allegheny County, Pa., courthouse during the Christmas season. The Court
ruled that the Nativity scene displayed by the county was illegal because it
crossed the boundary between church and state.

'Man's Inhumanity to Man'

Kathryn McCary, a Schenectady lawyer who represents the Schuylerville Board of
Education, told Judge Munson that Craig Martin, who painted the mural as a
17-year-old senior in 1965, intended his work to symbolize ''man's inhumanity to
man'' and not the crucifixion of Christ.

She stressed that while the painting depicts three crucifixions, it also has
other scenes. She said the mural was painted during the Vietnam War, which Mr.
Martin opposed. He later served in Vietnam as a medic after winning
conscientious-objector status.

''Even assuming that the painting has some symbolic religious content, it does
not have the effect of endorsing or promoting any particular religion,'' Ms.
McCary said. Battle of Affidavits Mr. Fein has taken affidavits from two
ministers, a rabbi and an art historian who believe the mural portrays the
crucifixion of Christ. He also presented an affidavit from a child psychiatrist
who said that children ''will experience extreme discomfort, stress and anxiety
when confronted with a situation in which school authority figures are perceived
as stressing a set of beliefs which conflicts with those taught by the child's
family.''

Ms. McCary, meanwhile, has affidavits from Mr. Martin's art teacher and two
other art students in the class, each of whom said the young artist's intended
theme was man's inhumanity.

Mr. Martin has not provided an affidavit. He long ago left Schuylerville, which
is about 35 miles north of Albany, and now lives in Louisiana, where he spends
much of his time painting oil rigs, his parents said. He could not be reached
for comment.

As the controversy winds through the courts, the Jokis fear the hostility they
faced when they first sued may be revived. Many Schuylerville leaders, including
Mayor Kim Gamache, a groundskeeper at the school, said the majority of the
village's 1,250 residents favored keeping the mural.

Superintendent Cites Support

Peter M. Brenner, the school district superintendent and a defendant in the
case, said he had received more than 150 letters of support, including some from
Mississippi and California, as well as a petition bearing 500 names. Several
local officials said that public opinion had influenced the seven-member Board
of Education's unanimous vote to keep the painting last June.

Some residents share the opposition of Charles Martin, the artist's father.
Saying the ''Holocaust is over,'' Mr. Martin added: ''It's been over for years.
If they would just shut their mouths, we could all go on living.''

But Ms. Joki said it was precisely because of the Holocaust that she felt
obligated to fight for religious freedom. An anonymous phone caller who told her
that ''Hitler should have gassed'' all the Jews only strengthened her resolve,
she said.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo: usan and Robert Joki are seeking the removal of Craig Martin's
mural of a crucifixion scene from the auditorium of the Central School in
Schuylerville, N.Y., where it has hung for the last 25 years. After taking their
case to the school principal's office and the Board of Education, and losing in
both places, they took it to Federal District Court yesterday. (David Jennings
for The New York Times)

                   Copyright 1990 The New York Times Company


                              104 of 288 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                   May 1, 1990, Tuesday, Late Edition - Final

Review/Television;
Show About Black People, With Winfrey in Charge

BYLINE: By JOHN J. O'CONNOR

SECTION: Section C; Page 13, Column 1; Cultural Desk

LENGTH: 972 words


Although off to a sluggish start, ''Brewster Place'' represents an
Olympics-sized leap in prime-time programming. Television has had dramas and
dramatic series about black people and for black people. Now it has one
controlled by a black person. The star of ''Brewster Place'' is Oprah Winfrey.
More important, she is one of the executive producers. The show is being filmed
on location in Chicago at Ms. Winfrey's Harpo (spell that backwards) Studios,
also the production center for ''The Oprah Winfrey Show.'' ABC is broadcasting
special presentations of ''Brewster Place'' tonight and next Tuesday at 9:30,
before the series settles into its regular slot Wednesdays at 9:30.

Many of the characters, including Ms. Winfrey's matriarchal Mattie Michael, come
from ''The Women of Brewster Place,'' the Gloria Naylor novel that was turned
into last season's highest-rated mini-series. There are, though, several
changes, most of them far more significant than the fact that, having lost
considerable weight in the interim, Ms. Winfrey is considerably less dowdy.
Romance is obviously not out of the question for this Mattie.

By far the biggest adjustment can be detected in the treatment of men. In the
mini-series, the women of the title held almost total sway over the neighborhood
of Brewster Place, an inner-city black community struggling to survive against
formidable socioeconomic odds. Men were either invisible or downright rotten.
The message seemed to be that black men everywhere were hopeless. The series is
clearly attempting to make amends for that bad rap.

That may mean bending statistics a bit. The single-parent family in this story
is headed not by a mother but by a father. Ralph Thomas (John Cothran Jr.) is
Mattie's cousin, a widower arriving from the South with his three young
children, who are not too happy about leaving the country for a city without
large backyards. Ralph is the nurturing breadwinner and disciplinarian. It's a
good, positive image for the new Brewster Place.

Tonight's episode is titled ''Partners,'' and Ms. Winfrey has been astute in
choosing her own partners for the series. The other executive producers, and the
writers of the first show, are Donald Sipes and Earl Hamner. Mr. Hamner created
''The Waltons,'' and clearly knows a thing or two about solid family
entertainment built around shared hopes and dreams. ''Brewster Place'' is set in
1967. There's a radio report about a new young heavyweight champion named
Cassius Clay having his crown taken away because of refusing to fight in
Vietnam. Mattie is beginning to feel the winds of change flowing through her own
life.

Losing her job at the local beauty parlor because of refusing to use a lye
solution on a customer's hair, Mattie is a strong-willed, religious woman. ''I
have no superior but God,'' she tells her imperious boss. But she knows that the
Lord works in mysterious ways. Her best friend, Etta Mae Johnson (Brenda
Pressley), hears that La Scala Restaurant is up for sale. Facing the realities
of a changing neighborhood, the old white owner is moving to Florida. Etta Mae
decides the business would be perfect for Mattie and herself. ''You are
dreaming,'' says practical Mattie. ''Damn right,'' counters spirited Etta Mae,
''and you look to me like you could use a good dream.''

Mattie is still reeling from the betrayal of her only son, the adored Basil,
born out of wedlock. Getting involved in drugs, he disappeared with her life
savings. But the persistent Etta Mae reminds her friend that ''a broken heart
doesn't have to be a cold one.'' Well, after more hemming and hawing than is
really quite necessary, the two women will get their restaurant, which, like the
series itself, holds out the promise of a new beginning. Among the other more
prominent characters: Miss Sophie (Olivia Cole), the neighborhood gossip and
meanest of troublemakers; the young lovers Kiswana and Abshu (Rachel Crawford
and Kelly Neal), who are active in social causes; Mickey (John Speredakos), the
white La Scala cook who is still learning how to thicken up the grits.

The black sensibility that informs this series is not heavyhanded. The details
are sketched in lightly, from the street sign urging voter registration to the
photograph of the Rev. Dr. Martin Luther King Jr. hanging in Mattie's
restaurant. There is also a scene next week in which Mattie tells off Mickey for
pouting. ''I feel people are looking at me because I'm white,'' he complains.
''I know how you feel,'' she assures him. The tables are turned adroitly.

Despite her widely publicized dieting efforts, Ms. Winfrey remains a performer
of natural and enviable heft. When she's around, there's not doubt about it.
That alone makes ''Brewster Place'' still another late-entry start is this
suddenly lively television season.

BREWSTER PLACE - PARTNERS

Producer, Reuben Cannon; supervising producer, Stan Kallis; executive producers,
Oprah Winfrey, Earl Hamner and Donald Sipes; supervising executive, Jerry
Isenberg; written by Mr. Hamner and Mr. Sipes, based on characters in the novel
''The Women of Brewster Place,'' by Gloria Naylor; director, Bill Duke; director
of photography, Joe Wilcots; editors, Joe Morrisey, Quinnie Martin Jr., Dann
Cahn; costumes by Kaye Nottbusch; music by David Shire; production designer,
Michael Merritt; presented by Hearst Entertainment Productions in association
with Harpo Productions. Tonight on ABC at 9:30 P.M.

Mattie Michael...Oprah Winfrey
Etta Mae Johnson...Brenda Pressley
Miss Sophie...Olivia Cole
Kiswana Browne...Rachael Cole
Abshu Kamau...Kelly Neal
Ralph Thomas...John Cothran Jr.
Jessie...Oscar Brown Jr.
Mickey Adriano...John Speredakos
Margaret Thomas...DeLeon Richards
Matthew Thomas...Jason Weaver
Miles Thomas...Steven Crump
Mr. Willie...John Beasley

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: photo: Oprah Winfrey in a scene from ''Brewster Place.'' (Dean
Williams/ABC)

TYPE: Review

                   Copyright 1990 The New York Times Company


                              105 of 288 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                  May 2, 1990, Wednesday, Late Edition - Final

Washington at Work;
Two Unlikely Voices That Find Harmony On the Military Budget

BYLINE: By SUSAN F. RASKY, Special to The New York Times

SECTION: Section A; Page 18, Column 1; National Desk

LENGTH: 1731 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, May 1


It took Sam Nunn three months of research to pronounce the Bush Administration's
1991 military budget irrelevant. His series of carefully timed speeches on the
Senate floor was front-page news.

It took Representative Les Aspin 24 hours to make virtually the same observation
the day after the Pentagon announced the budget plans in January. His
off-the-cuff remarks, delivered during a news conference on military-base
closings, went largely unremarked upon.

The contrast speaks volumes about the two Democrats who as heads of the Armed
Services Committees of Congress are as central to the debate about the United
States role in the post-cold war world as their onetime colleague on Capital
Hill, Secretary of Defense Dick Cheney.

To the degree that ''new thinking'' on the nation's military programs emerges
from Capitol Hill, it will almost certainly come from either Mr. Aspin or Mr.
Nunn, partly because they are the members of Congress who think hardest about
such issues and partly because their positions mean their thoughts and words
will be heeded at the Pentagon, at the White House and in the press.

Sam Nunn is a small-town Georgia lawyer. Les Aspin is a Wisconsin economist with
Ivy League credentials. For all their surface differences, they enter the
military budget deliberations with a number of broad areas of agreement. (One of
them is that they have both had their fill of odd-couple comparisons. ''You're
going to say I'm owlish and he's effusive,'' grumped Mr. Nunn.) Different Routes
Traveled Mr. Nunn is not just another go-along-get-along holder of a safe seat,
Mr. Aspin is not merely a darling of the Northern liberal clique. And each has
traveled a route that took him beyond the limitations of his political roots and
his natural inclinations.

''We have very different backgrounds and a very different consultation process,
but we often come out the same way,'' Mr. Aspin said. ''If you ask what's
different between me and Sam Nunn, I tend to be more of a Congressional
activist; my reaction is to do something, write it into a bill. Sam's reaction
is to make a phone call or write a letter.''

Mr. Nunn's roots are the South -the tradition of patriotic responsibility and
respect for authority, especially for the uniformed military. The ''Georgia
heritage,'' as he calls it, virtually ordained his career path. He came to the
Senate in 1972. His great-uncle, Carl Vinson, who ran the House Armed Services
Committee, had left. But the Southern warlord tradition and influence - and the
desire to perpetuate regional influence in Congress - was embodied in Senator
John Stennis of Mississippi. Mr. Nunn was positioned for his chairmanship.

''I found out then, even though some people view manpower as boring, that this
is the heart and soul of the military,'' Mr. Nunn said of his work as Mr.
Stennis's cadet on the Senate armed services panel. ''I spent hundreds of hours
in the manpower subcommittee; many times I was the only one there. But I learned
an awful lot about personnel and people, promotion systems, numbers and generals
and admirals - why that's such an emotional subject.''

Mr. Aspin's roots are a more complicated mixture of Midwestern populism and the
Eastern establishment. His delight in challenging authority and his ready resort
to a press release reflect his work as an intern and a campaign aide to William
Proxmire, a Wisconsin Democrat who was a master at both while a Senator. But Mr.
Aspin, who ran for Congress as an anti-Vietnam War Democrat, also had a stint at
the Pentagon as one of Robert McNamara's whiz kids, in the early years of the
Vietnam War.

''Informing and defining,'' he said when pressed to describe how that experience
affected him. ''I at the time thought that gradual escalation was the right
policy. In retrospect, that was not the right policy.'' As to what he learned in
the Pentagon, he said, ''You learn the limitations on the political use of
force.''

No Apologies From Aspin

The Aspin press releases are still pithy, if not quite as frequent as they were
during his political adolescence. But even now he makes no apologies for the
unabashed publicity seeking.

''You start out as a junior member of a committee,'' he said. ''How do you make
an impact? One of the ways you do it is to call attention to problems. You kind
of fall into it because it's one of the few outlets you have. As you get more
seniority, you can move things without that device. You can get broader.''

In Mr. Aspin's case, getting broader meant disappointing the House liberals who
in 1985 helped him leapfrog to the Armed Services chairmanship over half a dozen
more senior committee members. By 1987, they were angry enough to win a
no-confidence vote. He won the chair back two weeks later, and has spent two
years trying to mend fences. He speaks of the abortive coup now as though it
were some ancient tribal conflict rather than a reprimand for a nonconsulting
style of operating.

''Every revolution sets up a counterrevolution,'' he said. ''It comes from a
combination of people who don't think the original revolution went quite far
enough and the people who think it went too far. If you survive the
counterrevolution, then it's O.K.''

In the four years they have shared as chairmen, Mr. Nunn and Mr. Aspin have
fundamentally agreed, brokering budget-driven compromises. Yet each year,
politics and personality conspire to reinforce the typecasting: methodical Sam
Nunn, a preeminent spokesman on defense because he finds bipartisan consensus;
gadfly Les Aspin, with an academic's interest in arms control, driven to the
middle by the tension between his committee's conservatives and the liberal
House majority.

Uneasy With Interviews

''I hate this, I hate it,'' Mr. Nunn said, wincing at the prospect of having to
talk about himself and adamant in his refusal to talk about any differences or
similarities with Mr. Aspin. Mr. Aspin is no less uneasy with conversations that
stray too far from the cerebral.

''I always have difficult problems with these interviews where I'm asked,
'Underneath, what do you really think?' '' he said with a sigh.

The clue to what Mr. Aspin thinks is the way he thinks - in big, analytical
constructs and scenarios, as if the world were a gigantic puzzle and his job
were to try the pieces in various combinations. Often he thinks out loud, a
habit born of his years at Yale, Oxford and the Massachusetts Institute of
Technology, but one that leads some colleagues to complain that he is
inconsistent.

''If I look at the Soviet Union now, in the spring of 1990, putting together the
1991 budget,'' he begins, ''what do I see?'' As he speaks, he is repositioning
his gangling body sideways in his swivel chair so that his head is thrown back
against one of its arms and his legs are dangling over the other. Staring up at
the ceiling, he continues to spin out the arguments, pro and con - for cutting
the Administration's military budget request.

But what does the chairman of the House Armed Services Committee believe?

''I say I want to hedge my bets,'' Mr. Aspin concludes, snapping back to an
upright posture. ''I don't know whether the hawks are right or the doves are
right, but it tells me that we probably ought not jump too much one way or the
other until we see more evidence.''

The Body Language Clue

Mr. Aspin's body language should not be taken lightly, said Senator John Warner
of Virginia, the senior Republican on Armed Services Committee, who has spent
hours across the bargaining table from him.

''As the discussions go on, Les slides further and further down in his chair,''
said Mr. Warner, eagerly demonstrating the Aspin slouch. ''When he's slid almost
to the floor, that's when you know he's going to cut his deal.''

Mr. Nunn gives away almost nothing with his body language and, 90 percent of the
time, not a great deal more when he talks. The painstaking insistence on
building a case before making it is a character trait that his colleagues find
both admirable and irritating.

''If I know what I'm going to do, I don't mind telling people,'' he said,
acknowledging that the more common impression is that he is simply avoiding a
question until he has his political ducks in order. ''A lot of times, I really
have not thought through it, or even if I know which way I'm going to lean, I
don't have the clear rationale behind my answer at that stage.''

James Schlesinger, the former Defense Secretary and Central Intelligence
director who is part of Mr. Nunn's kitchen cabinet, said, ''He is willing to
reach judgments quickly in private, but unwilling to express them publicly until
he has overwhelming evidence for them.''

Mr. Nunn did not spend a lifetime around Southern politicians without learning a
few things about the grease that makes a legislature run. ''One of the great
challenges around here is not just knowing the substance of something,'' he
said, ''but knowing how to relate it to the timing and knowing how to relate it
to other people's thoughts and ideas and knowing how to express it and knowing
how many people and who you need to bounce it around with to get their input
before you ever do it.''

For Sam Nunn, this is a proving time. His predecessor, Richard Russell of
Georgia, decided to be a ''super-Senator'' after failing to win his party's
Presidential nomination in 1952, and the conventional wisdom is that Mr. Nunn
will take Mr. Russell's path.

Les Aspin's ambitions once included the Senate. But that flame has banked, and
he is now busy doing what comes most naturally, tutoring. His latest pupils are
the Russians, through an ad-hoc committee exchange program that brings Soviet
military brass and legislators to his panel to observe the American brand of
defense politics and policy making. ''Aspin was a self-proclaimed gadfly taking
on the Pentagon powers, while Nunn was taking the role of uncle,'' said Norman
Ornstein of the American Enterprise Institute. ''Now Aspin is taking positions
where gadflies criticize him, and Nunn is taking positions where his traditional
allies often look at him with bewilderment. As they have changed they've become
more alike.''

Mr. Aspin acknowledges that perhaps the two have moved closer together. ''We can
speak to each other in shorthand,'' the Representative said of the Senator. On
Capitol Hill, the view is that they'll need to.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo: ''We have very different backgrounds and a very different
consultation process, but we often come out the same way,'' Representative Les
Aspin, left, chairman of the House Armed Services Committee, said of his
relationship with Senator Sam Nunn, chairman of the Senate Armed Services
Committee. (Andrea Mohin/The New York Times)

                   Copyright 1990 The New York Times Company


                              106 of 288 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                  May 2, 1990, Wednesday, Late Edition - Final

OBSERVER;
At the End of The Polls

BYLINE: By Russell Baker

SECTION: Section A; Page 27, Column 6; Editorial Desk

LENGTH: 743 words


''There's light at the end of the tunnel,'' a New York politician said the other
day upon learning that capital punishment may finally be returning to the Empire
State. What did he have in mind? Burning at the stake? Not likely. Politicians
receiving big news tend to grasp for the nearest cliche, and ''light at the end
of the tunnel'' happened to be lying around when he heard the cheery news.

Imagine the messenger's arrival: ''O champion of the officially implemented
grave, oft hast thou cried, 'Death, where is thy sting-a-ling-a-ling?' At last I
bring good tidings. Capital punishment draweth nigh.'' A man with an ounce of
gallows humor might have instantly fallen into the broad hortatory style of the
ham Shakespearean by crying, ''O grave, my vic-to-ree!'' But no. ''There's light
at the end of the tunnel,'' was the reply sent via Associated Press.

Light at the end of the tunnel first started appearing to politicians during the
Vietnam War. Eventually, when generals and politicians said they had seen it in
Vietnam, people took them to mean, ''We might just possibly win something out
there yet if we keep fighting another three or four years. All right, maybe five
or six.''

This curious light's long association with death continues this year.
Manipulators of public psychology have advised sundry politicians running for
governorships that if they want to see that ever-loving light at the end of
their own tunnels, capital punishment can do the trick this season.

I have a friend so passionate against smoking that he wonders how people working
in the tobacco industry can stand to live with themselves. Don't they know they
are peddling death? he asks. Tobacco people don't interest me that much, but
there are people who do.

These are the people who manipulate public psychology to get inferior people
elected. My friend thinks tobacco is a deadly weapon endangering the people; I
think the entire public is in danger of being done in by polling.

The result of polling is to help politicians tell people what they want to hear.
The assumption: When you tell people what they want to hear, they will elect
you, the poor gullible saps.

The problem becomes serious after you're elected if you keep polling to find out
what people want. You are not leading, then, but only jerking and twitching in
response to poll stimuli. And if you are not leading, what's the point of being
in politics? Any well-groomed nonenity with enough money to take a poll every 30
minutes can tell the public what it wants to hear.

The deadly aspect of polling is its tendency to burden us with non-leaders,
timorous and third-rate people who rather think they'd like to be in government,
but don't have much idea of what to do when they get there.

Winston Churchill warned against such people when a country is at war, but they
are scarcely more desirable today. Churchill, 1941:

''Nothing is more dangerous in wartime than to live in the temperamental
atmosphere of a Gallup Poll, always feeling one's pulse and taking one's
temperature. I see it said that leaders should keep their ears to the ground.
All I can say is that the British nation will find it very hard to look up to
leaders who are detected in that somewhat ungainly posture.''

Polls showing that support for capital punishment is good for people who want to
be governor are godsends to politicians at a time like ours, when other polls
show sullen public rage about taxes.

Why? Because capital punishment is cheap, at least compared with what it would
cost to, say, bring the school system up out of the pits or to halt the decay of
the transportation system.

Getting a start on those two jobs would require a leader capable of persuading
the public that it's worth spending money to save the country from becoming a
run-down, second-rate, rinky-dink operation.

Today's political reliance on polling and other devices for manipulating the
public's psychology makes it unlikely we will get much leadership on matters of
much consequence. (I almost said ''except in foreign affairs,'' before recalling
that President Bush dismissed critics of his Lithuanian policy the other day by
observing that polls show the public supports it.) Capital punishment is the
perfect cause for today's pol who lives by the polls. It satisfies the polled
people's hunger for more savage application of law but doesn't disturb their
dream of maintaining national greatness through tax-free living.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Op-Ed

                   Copyright 1990 The New York Times Company


                              107 of 288 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                  May 2, 1990, Wednesday, Late Edition - Final

Dinkins Names 3 More Community Directors

SECTION: Section B; Page 2, Column 1; Metropolitan Desk

LENGTH: 180 words


Mayor David N. Dinkins named directors of homosexual, veteran and Asian-American
affairs yesterday, the last of his ''constituency'' office appointments.

Dr. Marjorie Hill, 33 years old, a psychologist, will head the Office for the
Gay and Lesbian Community. Robert S. Greene, 43, a Vietnam veteran with a degree
in social work, is to direct the Office of Veterans' Affairs, and Virgo Lee, 40,
a Postal Service employee and chairman of the Chinese Progressive Association, a
social service agency, will head the Office of Asian-American Affairs.

In making his first three appointments in March, Mayor Dinkins described the
constituency office directors as ''my eyes and ears in their communities.'' He
said yesterday that he had no plans to name more directors.

Dr. Hill is now director of the Psychology Internship Program and coordinator of
psychiatric education at Lincoln Hospital in the Bronx. She will be paid $55,000
a year, the same as Mr. Lee. Mr. Greene is a counseling team leader at the
Brooklyn-Staten Island Veterans Center. He will be paid $50,000 a year.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1990 The New York Times Company


                              108 of 288 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                  May 2, 1990, Wednesday, Late Edition - Final

Books of The Times;
Gay Men and Lesbians Serving in World War II

BYLINE: By HERBERT MITGANG

SECTION: Section C; Page 20, Column 5; Cultural Desk

LENGTH: 807 words



Coming Out Under Fire
The History of Gay Men and Women in World War II
By Allan Berube
Illustrated. 377 pages. The Free Press.
$22.95.

While in an Army Air Corps bomber wing in North Africa and then in a
Mediterranean Theater of Operations unit in Italy during World War II, this
reviewer came to know some dozen officers and enlisted men who were gay. With
one exception, they all performed their special assignments with skill and
devotion. Some sought combat roles, others were chairborne warriors. They were,
in short, pretty good soldiers -as good as anyone else.

One of that group, Sgt. Klaus Mann, who is identified by name in this original
and well-documented book by Allan Berube, was highly motivated and for good
reason. He was a son of Thomas Mann, the 1929 Nobel laureate in literature
living in California, whose books had been burned in his native Germany because
of his anti-Nazi lectures and writings. Sergeant Mann was an Army combat
correspondent in Italy and Germany, writing with great depth about the meaning
of totalitarianism. If any of his fellow soldiers knew of his sexual preference,
they didn't care.

What ''Coming Out Under Fire'' documents is that medical ignorance and military
prejudice were the ligatures that bound the official anti-gay service rules
together. Nevertheless, untold hundreds of thousands of homosexual, lesbian and
bisexual men and women served in the armed forces. So many gay men were able to
hide their homosexuality from medical examiners because they wished to serve and
did not want the stigma of rejection - and so many examiners looked the other
way and allowed them in - that the military officially rejected only about 4,000
to 5,000 after examining nearly 18 million men.

''The anti-homosexual wall that psychiatrists began to build around the military
during World War II, although full of holes, was a new feature on the American
sexual landscape,'' Mr. Berube writes. ''Posted at the gates were psychiatric
examiners, many of them looking for hidden homosexuals while trying to meet
military quotas and not ruin rejectees' lives. To help examiners distinguish gay
men from other inductees, psychiatrists wrote into military regulations lists of
stereotyped signs that characterized gay men as visibly different from the rest
of the population.''

Gay women found it much easier to enlist. Mr. Berube says that ''officials in
the women's branches, to deal with their personnel shortages, downplayed the
importance of the lesbian stereotype, challenging the popular notion that
masculine women were lesbians.'' During the Army physical for men, an examiner
would ask: Do you like girls? Apparently, women were not asked the parallel
question: Do you like boys? The author notes that female masculinity, unlike
male effeminacy, was not considered to be a disqualifying defect, reflecting the
need for women who could perform traditional male work.

The military's rigid anti-homosexual policies have had a cumulative effect. By
the late 1980's the total number of men and women discharged as homosexuals or
lesbians since the beginning of World War II approached 100,000. Purges of
lesbians occurred during periods when the status of women in the armed forces
was under attack. While some Federal agencies and private corporations have
adopted policies of nondiscrimination, the Defense Department remains staunchly
anti-homosexual. Gay activists were greatly disappointed by a recent Supreme
Court decision not to hear their challenge to regulations barring homosexuals
from the armed forces.

This unusual study of homosexuals and lesbians in all branches of the service is
the product of 10 years of interviews with World War II veterans, including
military psychiatrists, by Mr. Berube, a San Francisco writer. Some veterans
used pseudonyms, but about 50 gay men and women allowed the use of their names
and in some cases their photographs in the book because they believed that the
restrictions against military service by homosexuals and lesbians should be
exposed. The author also examined thousands of pages of military documents, such
as discharge records, in the National Archives under the Freedom of Information
Act.

''Coming Out Under Fire'' is a pioneering work so far as it goes. There are
gaps: current psychiatric information about homosexuals and their legal rights;
figures and attitudes about them in the armed forces after World War II,
including the Vietnam War, and the relationships between uniformed gay men and
lesbians and other servicemen and -women. It would also be interesting to know
what rights and restrictions on homosexuals exist in foreign armies.
Nevertheless, Mr. Berube deserves plaudits for making a strong contribution to
our knowledge about those who marched to a different drummer. Maxwell
Communicationd(Free Press)

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo: Allan Berube (Rick Gerharter)

                   Copyright 1990 The New York Times Company


                              109 of 288 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                  May 2, 1990, Wednesday, Late Edition - Final

Review/Television;
Nixon On His Ups and Downs and Ups

BYLINE: By WALTER GOODMAN

SECTION: Section C; Page 21, Column 1; Cultural Desk

LENGTH: 717 words


For about 40 years, off and on, America has been treated to a new Richard Nixon,
a newer Richard Nixon, the newest Richard Nixon. This marvel of recycling is
back again this week, on NBC's ''Today'' show, the occasion being his latest
account of his triumphs and his troubles, ''In the Arena: A Memoir of Victory,
Defeat and Renewal,'' recently published by Simon & Schuster. Bryant Gumbel
engaged him for a few minutes on Monday and Tuesday and will be continuing the
conversation this morning and tomorrow.

On Monday, under merciless questioning, Mr. Nixon was forced to reveal that he
had written his latest book to inspire others with his own example: ''If I can
come back, they can come back.'' The trick, he explained, is to learn from the
past and look to the future. On Tuesday, he earned a big laugh from Mr. Gumbel
by confessing that if he had it to do over, he would be a sports commentator.

A more substantial session with the former President can be seen at 9 P.M. on
Friday on Channel 13, when Morton Kondracke spends 90 minutes chatting with Mr.
Nixon about friends and enemies past and present. ''Richard Nixon Reflects: An
American Interests Special'' is a variation on ''Great Men I Have Known and Been
One Of.'' Even as he pontificates, often shrewdly, on the strengths and
weaknesses of George Bush, Ronald Reagan, John F. Kennedy, Mario M. Cuomo,
Mikhail S. Gorbachev, Zhou Enlai and others, Mr. Nixon seems mainly interested
in Mr. Nixon. The insistent subtext is that his accomplishments (the opening to
China) were great, that his mishaps (Watergate) were minor and that he owes his
fall to Nixon-hating liberals in Congress, the Federal bureaucracy and,
especially, the press and television.

The usual newsreel clips of high or low points of the Nixon career, from the
Hiss case to his resignation, provide breaks in the interviews, which are
conducted in a cozy den and on the pleasant grounds of the Nixon residence. The
former President, as stiff as ever, hunches a bit as he strolls, and favors his
left leg, but otherwise seems fit and energetic; his responses are sharp but
become less persuasive as his illusions of prowess set in. He declares, for
example, that if not for Watergate, he could have saved South Vietnam.

Whatever his dissatisfactions about his past treatment by television
interviewers, Mr. Nixon has nothing to complain about this time out. When he
does some tongue-clicking over the way television has trivialized politics, Mr.
Kondracke does not mention his Checkers speech, or his ''silent majority''
speech about Vietnam, excerpts from which viewers have just seen. When he says
he avoided using details of John F. Kennedy's personal life in his 1960 campaign
because such negative campaigning would have been ''counterproductive,'' Mr.
Kondracke does not mention his earlier campaigns in California against Jerry
Voorhis and Helen Gahagan Douglas, where negative campaigning won the day.

Mr. Nixon allows that, at worst, he failed to enforce the law effectively. His
actions in the Watergate affair, as he tells and retells the story, were not
moral lapses but lapses of judgment. He presents himself as the injured party,
brought down by the foolish acts of some of his associates and the hatred of
those who were out to get him: ''I gave them the club.''

In these latest appearances, the old Nixon, the new Nixon and the recycled Nixon
come together as an unapologetic figure. Television has never been his strong
suit, and although he seems better shaved and cooler than he once did, his
relationship with the medium is still not truly comfortable. He cannot manage
even the appearance of spontaneity; there is calculation in every answer.
Viewers, drawing on their own memories and predilections, may find it possible
to admire him for his ability to bounce back and for his insights into the
workings of politics, yet given the record, difficult to trust.

Richard Nixon Reflects
An American Interests Special

Producer, Larry Delaney; executive producer, Neal B. Freeman; host, Morton
Kondracke; presented by the Blackwell Corporation in association with South
Carolina Educational Television. On Friday, at 9 P.M., on Ch. 13, and at 10 P.M.
on Ch. 49; on Saturday, at 2 P.M., on Ch. 31; on Sunday, at 10:30 P.M., on Ch.
21.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Review

                   Copyright 1990 The New York Times Company


                              110 of 288 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                  May 3, 1990, Thursday, Late Edition - Final

Asia Bank Chief Sees 90's Challenge

BYLINE: By BARBARA CROSSETTE, Special to The New York Times

SECTION: Section D; Page 6, Column 5; Financial Desk

LENGTH: 370 words

DATELINE: NEW DELHI, May 2


The president of the Asian Development Bank warned today that the political and
economic changes in Eastern Europe may divert attention from this region
throughout the 1990's, forcing Asians to rely on their own momentum for further
growth.

The shift in focus comes at a critical time for Asia, the bank's new president,
Kimimasa Tarumizu, said in his opening address to the bank's annual general
meeting.

Although Asian economies continue to grow, he said, the gaps between the rich
and poor nations are widening and growth rates among the least developed are
declining.

Over all, the cumulative growth rate of those nations the Manila-based bank
calls ''developing Asia'' - most of the region excluding China, Hong Kong, South
Korea, Singapore and Taiwan -dropped from 9.3 percent in 1988 to 5.4 percent in
1989. Most of that growth was in Southeast Asia, with Thailand and Indonesia
among the better performers.

''The spectacular success of the newly industrializing economies is proof of the
dynamism of the region,'' Mr. Tarumizu told his audience of bankers and
government leaders from more than 40 countries today. ''Yet in many parts of
Asia, modest economic growth, growing populations and severe constraints on
development keep millions of people desperately poor.''

He said that Asians would be increasingly thrown on their own resources to close
those gaps. Asia has some of the developing world's richest and poorest
countries. While the per capita gross national product is more than $9,000 in
Singapore and Hong Kong, the figures for India, Bangladesh and Vietnam are all
below $400, the bank said.

At meetings this week, the subject of Vietnam's exclusion from bank programs is
likely to be raised. Vietnam, along with China and Afghanistan, is suspended
from most activities on political or security grounds.

Reviewing the Asian Development Bank's activities for 1989, Mr. Tarumizu said
that the institution had approved $3.6 billion in loans for 60 projects, a 15
percent increase in lending.

The Asian Development Bank is owned by the governments of 49 countries in the
Asia-Pacific region and in North America and Europe. It was established in 1966
to assist in developing Asian nations.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1990 The New York Times Company


                              111 of 288 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                   May 4, 1990, Friday, Late Edition - Final

20th Anniversary at Kent State

BYLINE: AP

SECTION: Section A; Page 12, Column 5; National Desk

LENGTH: 86 words

DATELINE: KENT, Ohio, May 3


Residents of Kent and the surrounding community flocked to the Kent State
University campus today to see a new memorial that is to be dedicated on Friday,
the 20th anniversary of the slaying of four students by Ohio National Guardsmen.
Speakers at the dedication of the abstract memorial - four granite slabs flanked
by a walkway - will include Florence Schroeder, whose son was among those slain,
and Dean Kahler, now an Athens County Commissioner, who was among the nine
wounded by the guardsmen's gunfire.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1990 The New York Times Company


                              112 of 288 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                   May 4, 1990, Friday, Late Edition - Final

ABROAD AT HOME;
The Killing Fields

BYLINE: By Anthony Lewis

SECTION: Section A; Page 35, Column 2; Editorial Desk

LENGTH: 749 words

DATELINE: BOSTON


Suppose a Nazi army had stayed intact at the end of World War II, and held out
in a remote area with Hitler, Goering and Himmler. Then imagine an American
Government insisting that the Nazis must be included in arrangements for a
German political settlement.

No, that is beyond imagination, but the United States Government is doing
something like that in Cambodia today. Its policies, political and military,
benefit the murderous Khmer Rouge.

When the Khmer Rouge ruled Cambodia, from 1975 to 1978, they killed at least a
million people. It is the one episode since the Nazi holocaust that qualifies
for the term genocide.

The Khmer Rouge leadership survives intact, with an army of 40,000, in camps
along the Thai-Cambodian border. Pol Pot, the murderer-in-chief, is still there,
directing the Khmer Rouge in its war on the Vietnamese-backed Government of
Cambodia.

A report last week by the human rights group Asia Watch showed that the Khmer
Rouge are still using familiar methods. Refugees are forced to carry military
equipment into Cambodia through areas planted with land mines. Those who refuse
are denied food. Asia Watch interviewed children aged 11, 13 and 14 who had been
made to act as military porters.

The Khmer Rouge are supplied by China, which uses them to carry on its
millennial struggle with Vietnam. Thailand lets that aid go through and makes
possible the Khmer Rouge camps on the border and the military attacks launched
from them.

The United States has helped the Khmer Rouge diplomatically by keeping them in
Cambodia's seat at the United Nations. It has put no pressure on Thailand, a
good friend, to cut the arms flow.

The U.S. insists that any political settlement in Cambodia must include a
transitional role for three parties in addition to the present government: two
tiny non-Communist opposition groups and the Khmer Rouge. In effect, that means
recognition of the Khmer Rouge.

The way American policy works in the Khmer Rouge interest was explored last week
in a superb television documentary, an ABC News special with Peter Jennings as
anchor, ''From the Killing Fields.'' It said that arms supplied by the U.S. to
the non-Communist opposition have made their way to the Khmer Rouge.

The State Department said the U.S. sent only ''nonlethal'' materiel and denied
that it helped the Khmer Rouge. But the ''nonlethal'' supplies, if indeed they
do not secretly include weapons, do include guerrilla boats and combat gear. And
the Khmer Rouge forces are so much stronger that they dominate the so-called
opposition coalition.

There was some revealing reaction to the Jennings program. A review in The Wall
Street Journal attacked it in McCarthyite terms as pro-Vietnamese. President
Bush's press secretary, Marlin Fitzwater, endorsed the Journal attack.

That reaction showed one reason for an American policy that on its face seems
inexplicable. That reason is sheer hostility to Vietnam, a resentment that has
continued to burn since the end of the Vietnam War.

In that hostility, U.S. officials seem almost to forget the Khmer Rouge record.
When the latest conference attempting to arrange a Cambodian settlement broke
up, the United States blamed Vietnam for insisting on using the word
''genocide'' in reference to recent history.

Some Americans who have reason to remember the war bitterly take a more rational
view. Senator John McCain of Arizona, who was a prisoner of war in Hanoi for six
years, urges reconciliation. William Colby, the former Director of Central
Intelligence, who has published a book defending what the U.S. did during the
war, appeared on the Jennings program to criticize our Cambodia policy now.

The other major explanation for the policy is China. From the President down,
the Bush Administration seems determined to do nothing that might offend China.
That evidently includes nothing effective against the Khmer Rouge.

The Bush Administration has asked China to cut down its military support of the
Khmer Rouge. But this week it was reported that Chinese weapons shipments have
in fact increased in quantity and quality, including anti-aircraft guns and
rocket launchers.

The Administration and those in Congress who share responsibility for the policy
- particularly, and surprisingly, Representative Stephen Solarz of New York -
seem to believe that they can somehow detach themselves from the consequences.
But if the mass murderers take power again in Phnom Penh, Washington's role will
not be forgotten.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Op-Ed

                   Copyright 1990 The New York Times Company


                              113 of 288 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                  May 5, 1990, Saturday, Late Edition - Final

Kent State: In Memory of 4 Slain, 1970

BYLINE: Reuters

SECTION: Section 1; Page 11, Column 1; National Desk

LENGTH: 620 words

DATELINE: KENT, Ohio, May 4


Twenty years to the day after a 13-second burst of gunfire by Ohio National
Guardsmen killed four students, injured nine others and became a landmark event
in American history, Kent State University quietly dedicated a monument to the
dead and wounded.

There were candles held in a cold spring rain, bitter memories recalled, an
apology from the Governor of Ohio and a small, silent protest by students and
others who said the monument was too little and too late. It consists of four
tombstone-like pink granite slabs settled into the top of a hill.

The keynote speaker at the dedication ceremonies today, attended by about 4,000
people, was former Senator George S. McGovern of South Dakota, whose position
against the Vietnam War was a centerpiece of his unsuccessful 1972 campaign for
the White House against President Richard M. Nixon.

''This was the most tragic episode in American foreign policy history,'' Mr.
McGovern said of the war. ''I thought so at the time, and nothing in the interim
has changed my mind.''

''I came here out of duty and honor,'' he said, predicting that the Kent State
monument would take its place in history next to the Vietnam Veterans Memorial
in Washington.

Protests Around Country

The shootings occurred on May 4, 1970, in the aftermath of Mr. Nixon's decision
to send American troops across the South Vietnamese border into Cambodia for an
assault on North Vietnamese sanctuaries there.

Mr. Nixon's decision had brought protests at colleges and universities around
the country, including Kent State, where 900 National Guardsmen were called out
to occupy the campus after violence and vandalism had erupted. After another
violent outburst during a demonstration on May 4 against the presence of the
troops, 28 guardsmen opened fire into a crowd. Those killed were Allison Krause,
Jeffrey Miller, Sandra Scheuer and William Schroeder.

The shootings led to more protests on campuses nationwide and helped to further
galvanize American public opinion against the war. Guard officials said at the
time that the soldiers had fired because they felt threatened by stones hurled
by some of the protesters. Eight of the guardsmen were later indicted by a
Federal grand jury on chrges of violating the civil rights of the dead and
wounded strudents, but midway through the trial the judge threw out the charges
for lack of evidence.

'Day for Us to Come Together'

''It's been a long process of healing,'' Michael Schwartz, president of the
university, said at today's ceremonies. ''This is a day for all of us to come
together, a day for all of us to remember. And having remembered, we must now
move on.''

Gov. Richard F. Celeste delivered a more direct apology than any of his
predecessors had offered.

''Speaking your mind, casting a stone or hurling an obscene comment - none of
these deserve death,'' he said. ''To all those who were wounded and all who have
suffered, I am sorry.'' But painful memories persist. Florence Schroeder, whose
son William was among those killed, said: ''Bill was still a teen-ager when he
died, and we were ultraconservative parents. But now we realize that the passing
years have cemented May 4 in history. We must maintain a vigilance to make sure
that May 4, 1970, doesn't happen again, ever.''

After the dedication, the crowd walked to four roped-off spots in an adjacent
parking lot where the four mortally wounded students fell. They picked up
candles that had been placed on the asphalt during an all-night vigil and walked
back to the monument, placing the flickering lights on the ground.

On the hill leading up to the monument, 58,175 daffodils, one for each of the
Americans killed in the Vietnam War, were in bloom.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo: Students at Kent State University in Ohio yesterday protested a
monument to the memory of students killed and wounded 20 years ago, and recalled
two deaths in a protest at Jackson State University in Mississippi. (Associated
Press)

                   Copyright 1990 The New York Times Company


                              114 of 288 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                  May 5, 1990, Saturday, Late Edition - Final

Lagging African Economies Perplex Aid Organizations

BYLINE: By CLYDE H. FARNSWORTH, Special to The New York Times

SECTION: Section 1; Page 33, Column 1; Financial Desk

LENGTH: 920 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, May 4


Even though aid programs pump $15 billion a year into sub-Saharan Africa, the
living standards of the region's 450 million people have declined in the 30-odd
years since its independence.

Now the area, whose troubles have been frustrating global economic managers and
challenging traditional thinking about development for some time, is competing
with Eastern Europe for scarce world capital.

''I often hear Africans express a fear that they will be forgotten, or
marginalized: this fear is not unreal,'' warns Michel Camdessus, managing
director of the International Monetary Fund. Preliminary sessions of the spring
meetings of the fund and the World Bank, the continent's main providers of
money, started today. Among the subjects before the formal sessions, which open
Monday, is: what to do with Africa.

To avoid ''marginalization,'' the donors are calling for a much bigger effort by
the Africans themselves, increasingly linking the flow of funds both to policy
changes by African governments and to more governmental accountability to the
governed. Under a proposal that is chiefly the idea of the Bush Administration,
which the I.M.F. membership of more than 150 governments is expected to
consider, countries that are in arrears - almost half of which are in Africa -
risk losing their voting rights in the organization.

Some African leaders join the industrialized nations in supporting the linkage
between aid and accountablity. One is President Abdou Diouf of Senegal, who
said, ''Africa requires not just less government but better government.''

Along with such countries as the Central African Republic, Gambia, Ghana, Guinea
and Mauretania, Senegal has started a comprehensive program of administrative
changes. The programs aim at improving the civil service through competitive
entrance examinations, regular staff appraisals and selective improvements in
the pay structure.

''I fear that many of Africa's leaders have been more concerned about retaining
power than about the long-term development interests of their people,'' said
Barber B. Conable Jr., the World Bank's president, who criticized the region's
autocratic political systems, as well as the ''nepotism'' and ''corruption''
that arise from them.

Conditions in Zaire illustrate the difficulties. Many African experts believe
that President Mobutu Sese Seko has worsened Zaire's poverty by diverting well
over $5 billion of state money into his personal accounts and assets abroad,
including a 16th-century castle in Spain, a 32-room palace in Switzerland and
estates in Portugal and Italy.

Voice for People Urged

''The only way to halt the continued impoverishment of the African people is to
give them a voice in making decisions that affect their livelihood,'' said Kofi
K. Apraku, a Ghanaian-born professor of economics at the University of North
Carolina. Noting that Africans must do more to help themselves, Pierre
Beregevoy, the French Finance Minister, said that in the competition for capital
it was important to improve conditions for foreign investors. He added that the
Africans should start by offering safe and remunerative savings for their own
citizens.

Bush Administration officials also see much room for self-help. ''There's been
capital flight, lack of performance, an unwillingness to change policies,'' a
senior Treasury official said. ''I'm not saying it's all their fault, but theirs
is an important part of the deficiency.''

On the list of policy changes sought by the World Bank and the I.M.F. are the
phasing out of the more than 3,000 so-called ''parastatal'' or governmental
enterprises, most of which lose money and fail to deliver adequate services; the
simplification of customs procedures, legal systems and tax regimes; the
deregulation of prices, interest rates and foreign exchange, and added scope for
market mechanisms and the private sector.

Programs Are Criticized

Many such measures are incorporated in so-called structural adjustment programs
being put into effect by some 30 African countries under the guidance of the
World Bank and the monetary fund, the two large lending organizations founded 45
years ago at Bretton Woods, N.H. But not all Africans are happy about the
situation.

''Many Africans claim that the Bretton Woods institutions today exercise more
power over Africa than the colonial authorities could ever have dreamt of during
the colonial era,'' said Adebayo Adedeji, a Nigerian who is the executive
secretary of the Economic Commission for Africa.

The proposal to cut off voting rights for countries in arrears illustrates the
point. As of last Jan. 31, the monetary fund reported, arrears of more than six
months amounted to $3.4 billion, more than $500 million of which was more than
three years overdue.

Contributions Could Be Sold

To get their voting rights restored, the governments would have to undertake
even more closely supervised economic changes. Should they fail to live up to
their obligations, the hard currency or gold that these countries had
contributed to the monetary fund when they became members could be sold to
satisfy the fund's claims against them.

Five of the 11 countries in arrears are African: Liberia, Sierra Leone, Somalia,
the Sudan and Zambia. The other six are Guyana, Honduras, Kampuchea, Panama,
Peru and Vietnam.

With a surge in debt in the last two decades, from $6 billion in 1970 to $134
billion in 1988, most experts agree that there is little likelihood that the
African debt will be repaid.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1990 The New York Times Company


                              115 of 288 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                  May 5, 1990, Saturday, Late Edition - Final

George W. Latimer IS Dead at 89; Lawyer In My Lai Massacre Trial

BYLINE: AP

SECTION: Section 1; Page 30, Column 5; National Desk

LENGTH: 312 words

DATELINE: SALT LAKE CITY, May 4


George W. Latimer, a former Justice of the Utah Supreme Court who defended
Lieut. William L. Calley Jr. in the court-martial arising from the My Lai
massacre in Vietnam, died on Wednesday in a Salt Lake City nursing home. He was
89 years old.  In 1946, Mr. Latimer was elected to the Utah Supreme Court, where
he served five years until he was appointed by President Harry S. Truman to a
10-year term as an associate judge on the United States Court of Military
Appeals in Washington.

As one of three original members of the court, he was instrumental in
interpreting the Uniform Code of Military Justice adopted after World War II.

In 1969 Mr. Latimer was hired to represent Lieutenant Calley in his
court-martial for the slayings in 1968 of more than 22 civilians at the hamlet
of My Lai in the Vietnam War.

Lieutenant Freed From Prison

He worked on the case from 1969 to 1974. He appealed the lieutenant's murder
conviction in 1971 through the military courts into the civil courts until
Lieutenant Calley was released from prison by a United States District judge who
found violations of his constitutional rights at the military trial.

In 1965 Mr. Latimer was appointed to the Utah State Board of Pardons, eventually
serving as its chairman. In 1976, during his 14-year tenure on the board, he
presided over the commutation hearings of Gary M. Gilmore, a murderer who was
later executed.

Mr. Latimer was a 1924 graduate of the University of Utah Law School and
practiced with a Salt Lake City firm. In World War II, he spent three years in
the South Pacific, rising to colonel in the 40th Infantry Division. He
participated in four assault landings and became the division's chief of staff.

He is survived by his wife, Rhoda; two sons, George Jr. of Bryan, Tex., and
Ronald G. of Santa Barbara, Calif.; five grandchildren and three
great-grandchildren.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo: George W. Latimer (Associated Press, 1970)

TYPE: OBITUARY

                   Copyright 1990 The New York Times Company


                              116 of 288 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                   May 6, 1990, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

Kneeling With Death Haunted a Life

BYLINE: By The Associated Press

SECTION: Section 1; Part 1, Page 32, Column 4; National Desk

LENGTH: 495 words


A long-awaited memorial dedicated at Kent State University on Friday symbolizes
a desire to record what happened there 20 years ago, but the woman whose
photographic image became an enduring symbol of that era would rather forget.

The photograph was of Mary Ann Vecchio, then a 14-year-old runaway from the
Miami area, kneeling in anguish beside the body of one of four students slain by
Ohio National Guardsmen on May 4, 1970.

The photograph won a Pulitzer Prize for John Filo, a student photographer who is
now deputy picture editor at Sports Illustrated magazine. It became a classic
image of the Vietnam War and its repercussions at home.

She Sought Seclusion

But the photograph hounded Ms. Vecchio into seeking seclusion. Now a 34-year-old
casino worker in Las Vegas, Nev., she told The Orlando Sentinel this week, ''It
really destroyed my life, and I don't want to talk about it.''

She said she was not interested in discussing the new Kent State monument. ''Big
deal,'' she said. ''It has nothing to do with my life.''

But her image cannot be separated from memories of that sunny afternoon. She was
pictured with her arms raised, her face in a grimace, kneeling over the body of
Jeffrey Miller, who had been shot in the mouth after lobbing a tear-gas canister
back at guardsmen called onto the campus to control antiwar demonstrators.

Ms. Vecchio later had a number of run-ins with the law, problems she said were
caused by what the photograph came to symbolize.

Big Burden for Adolescent

Ms. Vecchio's mother, Claire, interviewed in the house in Opa-Locka, Fla., where
she reared Mary Ann and five other children, recalled some of Mary Ann's ordeal
after the Kent State shootings. Claude Kirk, who was then Governor of Florida,
''said she was planted there by the Communists, and people wrote letters that
she was responsible for murdering all those children,'' Mrs. Vecchio said. ''Can
you imagine a 14-year-old girl having to deal with that?''

Ms. Vecchio's father, Frank, a maintenance worker for the Dade County Port
Authority who has since died, recognized his daughter's face in the photograph,
traced her to Indianapolis and had her returned home.

Later, Ms. Vecchio was sent to a juvenile home, and she was arrested for petty
crimes like loitering and marijuana possession. The press hounded her, she said.


Building a New Life

''I've been miserable since Kent State,'' she said five years after the
shootings. ''Not for any political reasons, but after all the publicity I've
received, I feel the police have been unnecessarily harassing me.''

Ms. Vecchio soon tired of the annual remembrances at the Kent State campus and
refused to take part.

She married a plumber from Kentucky in Las Vegas 11 years ago. They live in a
quiet, elm-shaded mobile-home park filled with retirees.

She returned to school for her high school diploma and has worked her way into a
management position at a casino, supervising cashiers.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo: ''It really destroyed my life,'' Mary Ann Vecchio said of the
Pulitzer Prize-winning photograph of her, then a 14-year-old runaway, kneeling
beside one of the students slain 20 years ago by Ohio National Guardsmen.
(Associated Press)

                   Copyright 1990 The New York Times Company


                              117 of 288 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                   May 6, 1990, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

R.O.T.C. Under Siege for Ousting Homosexuals

BYLINE: By JANE GROSS

SECTION: Section 1; Part 1, Page 24, Column 1; National Desk

LENGTH: 1171 words


The Pentagon's ban on gay men and lesbians in the armed forces, upheld by the
courts and unchanged by Congress, is facing attack on a new front: the nation's
college campuses.

In recent months, administrators, professors and students on more than a dozen
campuses have been asking with increasing fervor why the Reserve Officers
Training Corps, which has been discharging gay cadets and seeking to reclaim
scholarship money it had given them, is allowed to operate at schools that
prohibit discrimination based on sexual orientation.

The protests have taken various forms, including a rally on Friday at the
University of Wisconsin at Madison, a statement of disapproval last Wednesday by
the Faculty Council at Harvard University and a stinging letter to Defense
Secretary Dick Cheney last month from the provost of the Massachusetts Institute
of Technology.

''I am as astonished as I am delighted by what appears to be happening,'' said
Representative Gerry E. Studds, a Massachusetts Democrat who is a homosexual and
has been pushing the military to overturn the ban. ''A groundswell of outrage
like this is not something I expected to see in my lifetime. There is no
question which way the tide is running. We just don't know when high tide will
be.''

'New Angle of Attack'

The Supreme Court in February refused to hear two challenges to the Pentagon
regulation, which states that ''homosexuality is incompatible with military
service.'' Opponents say they hope growing attention to the issue on campuses
will stir broader public opinion and perhaps embolden Congress or the President
to intervene.

A Pentagon spokesman, Maj. Doug Hart, characterized the campus protests as a
''new angle of attack'' by opponents of the ban. He noted that none of the
universities has asked R.O.T.C. to leave campus, as several did in the years of
protest against the Vietnam War. But Major Hart acknowledged that the Department
of Defense could suffer if that happened, since about 70 percent of its new
officers came from the nation's 529 R.O.T.C. programs.

The recent furor was prompted by three cases of officer cadets who told their
superiors that they were gay and were dismissed and ordered to repay scholarship
money they received from the R.O.T.C. Gay members of the armed forces are
forcibly discharged at the rate of 1,400 a year, the Pentagon says, and while
gay R.O.T.C. members are also routinely let go, it is rare that they are asked
to return scholarship money.

The three who were recently dismissed are James M. Holobaugh, 24, who was an
Army cadet at Washington University in St. Louis; David E. Carney, 23, a Navy
cadet at Harvard, and Robert L. Bettiker, 22, a Navy cadet at M.I.T. . All three
have refused to return the scholarship money.

Anger About Scholarship Move

The longstanding military policy states that homosexuals cannot serve in the
armed forces since their presence causes discomfort for heterosexuals serving in
close proximity, makes recruiting more difficult and endangers national security
because of the risk of blackmail. Asked to explain the policy, Pentagon
spokesmen said they distribute the 130-word directive but are not permitted to
discuss it.

Two Pentagon studies disclosed last year by Representative Studds found no
evidence that homosexuals disrupted the armed forces and urged their retention.
The department dismissed the reports as draft recommendations that were rejected
because they were ''not responsive to the original research request.''

Gay organizations on many campuses, including Wisconsin, Harvard and M.I.T., had
been protesting about R.O.T.C. long before the cadets were dismissed during the
winter. But the military's effort to reclaim the scholarship money seems to have
galvanized additional opposition.

''That is more mean-spirited than the policy itself,'' said William Rubenstein,
staff counsel at the American Civil Liberties Union. ''It strikes a lot of
people as going too far,'' even people who accept the original policy.

Representative Studds sought signatures in March on a pair of protest letters to
the Army and Navy about the R.O.T.C. actions. Two dozen members of Congress
signed the first letter and three dozen the second.

Protest by Longtime Adviser

The provost at M.I.T., John M. Deutch, was also inspired to more vocal protest
by the recent dismissals, Mr. Deutch's letter last month summarized the argument
made by academic opponents nationwide by citing the ''contradiction between the
university's principle of nondiscrimination against individuals on the basis of
sexual orientation and the presence of an R.O.T.C. that does discriminate.''

Mr. Deutch predicted in his letter that ''many universities will withdraw'' from
R.O.T.C. because of the discriminatory policy, although he neither made specific
threats nor set deadlines for M.I.T. He warned Mr. Cheney that failure to
reverse the ban will make it easier for ''dedicated critics of the nation's
defense establishment'' to advance their cause, at a time when the military
faces significant cutbacks in money.

Mr. Deutch's letter, which begins ''Dear Dick'' and ends ''Best Regards, John,''
has a special resonance because the provost is a longtime Pentagon adviser and
the university receives substantial research money from the military - $47.9
million last year.

''What we hope,'' said David M. Halperin, a literature professor who is a
protest leader at the school, ''is that the closeness of the relationship
between M.I.T. and the military means that M.I.T.'s decisions will be heard more
loudly than those of a liberal arts college that doesn't have those
connections.''

The University of Wisconsin at Madison, in the first full faculty meeting since
the Vietnam War era, voted six months ago to urge the Board of Regents to sever
contracts with the R.O.T.C. by 1993 if discrimination did not end. But rather
than taking the issue to the board, the university's chancellor, Donna E.
Shalala, and its president, Kenneth Shaw, who support ending the ban, chose to
lobby the state's Congressional delegation to change the policy.

At the rally in Madison on Friday, a day other campuses also held protests, Mr.
Holobaugh, one of the dismissed cadets, commended the 200 Wisconsin students in
attendance, calling them trend setters. Mr. Holobaugh was joined at the
rain-swept podium by Miriam Ben-Shalom, a former sergeant in the Army Reserve
whose discharge was appealed to the Supreme Court but was refused review, and
Joseph C. Steffan, who is now challenging his expulsion from the United States
Naval Academy at Annapolis.

The campus activity comes at a time when gay rights advocates concede that the
courts are unlikely to force change upon the Pentagon and that lobbying Congress
or applying direct pressure on the military is the best route. ''The litigation
strategy has about come to a close,'' said Mr. Rubenstein of the civil liberties
union. ''For a long time there was almost gridlock on this issue, and this may
loosen the logjam.''

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo: Furor over the Reserve Officers Training Corps's dismissal of
gay men and lesbians has grown since three cadets were ''disenrolled'' and
ordered to repay scholarship money. All three, including James M. Holobaugh,
speaking at a conference on R.O.T.C. policy in Madison, Wis., have refused to
return the money they had received. (Tom Capp for The New York Times)

                   Copyright 1990 The New York Times Company


                              118 of 288 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                   May 6, 1990, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

Rush for Asian Resources Prompts A Race for Weapons and Security

BYLINE: By STEVEN ERLANGER, Special to The New York Times

SECTION: Section 1; Part 1, Page 18, Column 4; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 660 words

DATELINE: BANGKOK, Thailand, May 2


With the humbling of Vietnam in Cambodia, political and ideological tensions in
Southeast Asia have been significantly reduced. But an arms race in the Asian
and Pacific region is eating up the potential benefits from peace.

With a growing economic competition for fish, petroleum and gas, all the
countries of the Association of Southeast Asian Nations - Brunei, Indonesia,
Malaysia, Singapore, Thailand and the Philippines - are seeking ways to extend
their power to the outer reaches of their territorial waters and beyond. That
includes areas like the Spratly Islands, which are the subject of conflicting
claims by China, Taiwan, Malaysia and the Philippines.

This involves heavy capital investment in ships and planes, and coincides with
an expensive modernization of forces after a long period of concentration on
fighting rebellions.

The countries of Asean, as well as Japan, South Korea and Taiwan, will spend
about $40 billion this year on the military. Add China, India and Australia and
the figure is $60 billion. By the end of this decade, analysts expect it to
reach $130 billion.

The Asean countries have had to deal with leftist insurgencies, but except for
the one in the Philippines, these rebellions have been smothered. This created
the necessary stability for current economic development, says Kusuma
Snitwongse, head of the Institute of Strategic and International Studies at
Thailand's Chulalongkorn University, and also allowed a reorganization of armies
to deal with external threats.

After Cambodia, New Trouble

That trend was accelerated by the Vietnamese occupation of Cambodia, which
brought Vietnamese troops to the Thai border and gave the Soviet Union and China
more excuses to involve themselves in the region.

But now that the Vietnamese have largely returned home, Mrs. Kusuma said,
''there is at the same time a demand for better and more modern arms, especially
for the air force and the navy.''

Noordin Sopiee, director of Malaysia's Institute of Strategic and International
Studies, said that throughout Southeast Asia, ''border concerns'' are being
replaced by ''territorial concerns,'' which means an unparalleled push for naval
and air power to police sovereign and potentially wealthy offshore waters.
''That's the real arms race going on, and it's not so quiet,'' he said.

The Thai military budget is a good example of what is happening. Despite severe
cuts in American arms aid, which has plummeted from $102.3 million in 1985 to
$5.2 million now, the Thai arms budget this year will be $2.1 billion, up 16
percent from last year.

The Malaysian military budget has grown along with the economy by 20 percent
over the last two years, diplomats say. But it does not reflect a $1.6 billion
memorandum of understanding, signed with Britain in September 1988, for the
purchase of 8 to 12 Tornado fighters, anti-aircraft missiles, naval corvettes
and possibly submarines.

A City With an Arsenal

Singapore continues to spend about $1.5 billion a year on arms, 23 percent of
its budget and 5.5 percent of its gross national product. While it says it has
only deterrence in mind on the model of Switzerland, its advanced weapons,
including American F-16's, provides reach far beyond its borders.

Even Brunei is extending its armed forces to insure the security of its
oilfields and territorial waters. Brunei is buying patrol boats and the
country's first fixed-wing combat aircraft, 16 British Aerospace Hawks. If
Vietnam and China start fighting again over the Spratlys, which most diplomats
regard as inevitable, then Brunei wants to be sure there is no spillover.

In Indonesia, tight military budgets have slowed planned modernization,
especially the purchase of naval patrol vessels and aircraft, to defend some of
the most extensive territorial waters in the world.

For that reason, Indonesia, like other Asean countries, wants American forces to
retain their bases in the Philippines.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Map: Southeast Asia indicatng Bangkok, Thailand (The New York Times)

                   Copyright 1990 The New York Times Company


                              119 of 288 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                   May 6, 1990, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

HOME ENTERTAINMENT/VIDEO: CRITICS' CHOICES;
But Does He Collect Tickets?

BYLINE: By LAWRENCE VAN GELDER

SECTION: Section 2; Page 28, Column 1; Arts and Leisure Desk

LENGTH: 386 words


Sometimes he directs. Sometimes he produces. Sometimes he makes comedies.
Sometimes he makes musicals, and sometimes he makes dramas. But mostly he makes
movies that people remember. He is Norman Jewison, the Canadian-born film maker
who has been practicing his trade for close to 30 years.

On videocassette the latest example of Mr. Jewison the director is IN COUNTRY
(1989, Warner Home Video, $89.95), an often-poignant and always well-acted drama
starring Bruce Willis and Emily Lloyd and based on the Bobbie Ann Mason novel
about a troubled Vietnam veteran and his niece, whose father was killed in the
war.

The generous supply of Jewison tapes also includes A SOLDIER'S STORY (1984,
MGM/UA Home Video, $39.95), the solidly constructed drama adapted by Charles
Fuller from his Pulitzer Prize-winning play about the murder of a black officer
on a Southern military reservation. Another title not to be neglected is the
gripping IN THE HEAT OF THE NIGHT (1967, MGM/UA, $19.95), which won five Oscars,
including best picture. The thriller about a black detective from the big city
(Sidney Poitier) who helps a reluctant Southern sheriff (Rod Steiger) solve a
murder inspired not only a couple of sequels but the current television series.

Anyone who doesn't think chess is a sexy game should have a look at THE THOMAS
CROWN AFFAIR (1968, withdrawn from distribution by CBS/FOX Video, but there are
still copies around), whose smoldering leads are the edgy Steve McQueen as a
rich, larcenous Bostonian; and the elegant Faye Dunaway as the insurance
investigator out to get her man.

Mr. Jewison as a director of musicals is represented by FIDDLER ON THE ROOF
(1971, MGM/UA, $29.95) and JESUS CHRIST SUPERSTAR (1973, MCA Home Video,
$29.98); he and Mr. McQueen teamed up again in THE CINCINNATI KID (1965, MGM/UA,
$59.95), with Mr. McQueen as poker's answer to pool's Paul Newman in ''The
Hustler.'' And the list goes on.

But no account of Jewison films would be complete without MOONSTRUCK (1987,
MGM/UA, $19.95), with Academy Award-winning performances by Cher and Olympia
Dukakis in John Patrick Shanley's Oscar-winning screenplay about the widow
(Cher) swept up in a passionate romance with the brother of the man she is
supposed to marry. Like so many of Mr. Jewison's movies, it lingers in the
memory.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Bruce Willis in ''In Country'' (Warner Brothers)

TYPE: Review

                   Copyright 1990 The New York Times Company


                              120 of 288 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                   May 6, 1990, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

HOME ENTERTAINMENT/VIDEO: AND KEEP IN MIND

SECTION: Section 2; Page 28, Column 1; Arts and Leisure Desk

LENGTH: 760 words



Here are some notable releases of the last few months.

THE ABYSS - ''A gigantic sea monster of a film about marriage, death, nuclear
war and alien life forms can be described in these words: E. T. Underwater.''
(Caryn James) 1989. CBS/Fox. $89.98. Laser disk, $49.98. 2:20. Closed captioned.
PG-13.

BLACK RAIN - Ridley Scott's police melodrama starring Michael Douglas is ''easy
to sit through'' mostly because of how it captures ''the singular look of
contemporary urban Japan.'' (Vincent Canby) 1989. Paramount. No price listed.
2:05. CC. R. CASUALTIES OF WAR - Sean Penn is ''extremely fine'' as a
''comradely foul-mouthed naif'' in Brian De Palma's ''earnest, troubling'' film
about rape and murder in Vietnam. (Canby) 1989. RCA/Columbia. $89.95. LD,
$34.95. 1:53. CC. R. CHOCOLAT - Claire Denis's film, set in colonial Cameroon in
the 1950's, about a little French girl's friendship with her parents' houseboy
is ''some kind of a miniature classic.'' (Canby) 1989. Orion. $79.98. 1:45.
PG-13.

DEAD POETS SOCIETY - Robin Williams is the most vivid character in Peter Weir's
film, ''which moves with such predictability that one must walk very slowly not
to walk ahead of it.'' (Canby) 1989. Touchstone. $89.95. LD: $39.99. 2:08. CC.
PG. A DRY WHITE SEASON - Euzhan Palcy's film about apartheid has a sincerity
that works best ''when it avoids flourishes and concentrates simply and
forcefully on the painful story at hand.'' (Janet Maslin) 1989. CBS/Fox. $89.98.
1:33. CC. R. FIELD OF DREAMS - This fantasy about baseball ''does the almost
impossible trick of turning sentimentality into true emotion.'' (James) 1989.
MCA/Universal. No suggested price. 1:46. CC. PG.

HONEY, I SHRUNK THE KIDS - Dad (Rick Moranis) makes the offspring knee-high to
an ant in an ''old-fashioned romp that conveys a sense of wonder.'' (James)
1989. Disney. $22.99. LD, $34.95. 1:41. CC. PG.  JOHNNY HANDSOME - Walter Hill's
film about a thief who tries to get even with the moll (Ellen Barkin) and others
who have betrayed him is ''played by a furiously vibrant cast in the hard-boiled
manner that Mr. Hill favors.'' (Janet Maslin) 1989. I.V.E. $89.95. LD, $39.95.
1:36. CC. R. LIBELED LADY - Jean Harlow, Myrna Loy, William Powell and Spencer
Tracy make about as ''perfect a light-comedy foursome as you will encounter
anywhere.'' 1936. MGM/UA. $29.95. 1:38. No rating.

LOOK WHO'S TALKING - ''Cute is the operative word'' as a baby with the voice of
Bruce Willis looks for a suitable father. (Canby) 1989. RCA/Columbia. No price
listed. LD, $34.95. 1:36. CC. PG-13.

MURMUR OF THE HEART - Louis Malle's film about a young boy's incestuous
relationship with his mother is ''a comedy of uncommonly high order.'' (Canby)
1971. Orion. $79.98. LD, $49.95. 1:58. R.4/08 THE PAJAMA GAME - Doris Day, John
Rait, ''Hey There,'' Hernando's hideaway and boy meets union girl in an Iowa
shirt factory. ''The whole thing is splendid,'' said the Times reviewer.
''Fresh, funny, lively and tuneful.'' 1957. Warner. $59.95. 1:41. CC. No
rating.4/08 PRINCESS TAM TAM - Josephine Baker storms Paris as a reconstructed
Indian princess in a film that ''preserves something of the star's singular
grace, energy and frequently self-mocking humor.'' 1935. Kino. $59.95. 1:17. No
rating.

QUEEN OF HEARTS - Jon Amiel's film about a woman, her son and her former fiance
leads to a ''conclusion that is very much about family matters.'' (James) 1989.
M.C.E.G./Virgin. $89.95. LD, $39.95. 1:52. CC. PG.

SEA OF LOVE - As a New York cop after a killer, Al Pacino gets involved with
Ellen Barkin, the prime suspect in the case, in a film that ''finds itself in a
corner from which it can't be plausibly extricated.'' (Canby) 1989.
MCA/Universal. No price listed. LD: $34.98. 1:53. CC. R. SEX, LIES AND VIDEOTAPE
- Steven Soderbergh's astonishing first film is a ''Liaisons Dangereuses'' of
the video age, a ''rich, absorbing tale of sexual greed and fear, love and
betrayal.'' (James) 1989. RCA/Columbia. $89.95. LD: $34.95. 1:40. CC. R. SHOW
BOAT - Irene Dunne, Allan Jones, Helen Morgan and Paul Robeson in the
Kern-Hammerstein adaptation of Edna Ferber's novel. ''One of the best musical
shows of the century,'' wrote the Times critic. 1936. MGM/UA. $29.95. 1:54. No
rating.



For Children

THE ADVENTURES OF MILO AND OTIS - A picaresque odyssey of a cat and dog.
(Stephen Holden) 1989. RCA/Columbia. $89.95. LD, $34.95. 1:16. CC. G.

BAMBI - ''Walt Disney's wizards,'' as a contemporary critic called them, work
their magic. 1942. Disney. $26.99. LD, $39.99. 1:09. CC. G.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Review

                   Copyright 1990 The New York Times Company


                              121 of 288 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                   May 6, 1990, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

On Language;
Lay Down Your Marker

BYLINE: BY WILLIAM SAFIRE

SECTION: Section 6; Page 18, Column 1; Magazine Desk

LENGTH: 1085 words


THESE POLITICIANS want Bush to lay down a marker for all the world to see,''
wrote the columnists Evans and Novak in their muscular style, ''no matter how
much discomfort it brings Gorbachev and his trading pals in Bonn.''

Former President Jimmy Carter, just before the upset victory of the
anti-Sandinistas in Nicaragua, dismissed as highly exaggerated the complaints of
the forces of Violeta Chamorro about Sandinista campaign practices. Carter
characterized them as ''laying down a marker so if they do lose they can say,
'Well, there were some irregularities.' ''

What is this marker that political figures are said to lay down? We have here a
clash of slang meanings that cries out for clarification.

A marker, to a gambler, is an I.O.U. (I capitalize that fanciful abbreviation,
which is a speedy way of writing ''I owe you''; several stylebooks, including
The Times's, prefer i.o.u., which looks like an abbreviation used by the
anticapitalization poet e.e. cummings. This device of using letters that sound
like words to create a phrase is the progenitor of license-plate messaging, from
the net-leaping 10S-NE1 to the ultra-polite XQZE ME. The rule: when kidding
around, capitalize.) The gambler's definition of marker as ''promissory note''
appeared first in 1887, but was popularized in Damon Runyon's ''Guys and Dolls''
in 1932: ''Now I am going to pay my landlady, and take up a few markers here and
there, and feed myself up good.'' A 1934 film based on a Runyon tale about a
little girl used as an I.O.U. was titled ''Little Miss Marker.''

This sense - rooted in a mark made on a piece of paper to signify a debt,
probably influenced by the scorecard in bridge and whist - has been extended
beyond the promise of money payment. Sidney Zion's new novel, ''Markers,'' deals
with promises, loyalties and favors owed in a power network. In his blurb for
the book, Frank Sinatra writes, ''This book gives Sid Zion a royal-flush marker
against all those people who thought they knew everything.'' I think Mr. Sinatra
means marker there in the sense of ''weapon'' or ''asset'' and would appreciate
hearing from him if I am mistaken.

A wholly different line of slang meanings exists. This is rooted in marking a
boundary. ''You are to employ . . . an assistant surveyor . . . and also proper
chainbearers and markers,'' reads a 1743 New Jersey document. A marker is not
only a person who marks boundaries, but also a stone used to mark that
demarcation line. The military uses dyes and colored powders to mark targets or
boundaries.

That military use may be the root of the political phrase lay down a marker. It
issues a warning, or sets off territory that may not be challenged. It is akin
to draw a line in the sand, but not as bellicose as put a chip on your shoulder.
In 1970, ''You left your calling card'' was the way Yitzhak Rabin, then Israel's
Ambassador to the United States, characterized an unsuccessful American attempt
to rescue P.O.W.'s in North Vietnam.

In political usage today, lay down a marker ranges in meaning from ''send a
signal'' to ''announce a presence'' to ''issue a warning of 'this far, no
farther.' ''

OUTING

IN THE JAN. 29 ISSUE of Time, William A. Henry 3d was among the first to note
''the spread of a phenomenon known as 'outing,' the intentional exposure of
secret gays by other gays.''

The language is dexterous in giving sinister meanings to familiar words. Outing
comes from ''coming out of the closet,'' which has meant the public assertion of
previously secret homosexuality.

''Outing we used to call 'telling on,' '' writes an anonymous Irregular, ''and
an outing was what the family took in the car on weekends.''

Lexies take note: we are witnessing the birth of new meaning to a gerund.
Outing, as a noun, has meant ''excursion,'' from ''going out''; now it also
means ''exposure,'' from ''forcing out.''

NO USE OF FORCEABLE

JIMMY CARTER, STUNG by criticism of his human-rights silence while a visitor to
Syria, fired off a letter of complaint to The New York Times: ''What would your
columnists' policy be if an Arab leader was taking Jewish mothers and children
away from their homes and husbands, and forceably deporting them to a foreign
country?''

Louis Jay Herman of New York cites another story in the newspaper about ''the
forceable seizure of territory'' and writes, ''What gives here? Are these people
Greshamizing the correct spelling, namely forcible/y?'' He notes that the word
forceable exists, meaning ''capable of being forced,'' as in ''This door is
forceable'' (not to be confused with ''This door is alarmed''), but its meaning
is not the same as forcible. He adds, ''The super-permissive Webster III did
accept forceable as a variant of forcible, but I'm glad to see that it's been
dropped from Webster's Collegiate.''

Forcible is worth preserving just the way it is. As noted, forceable is useful
in describing what can be forced; forceful means ''strong, powerful, potent,
puissant,'' which is far more general than forcible, which means ''using
physical force.'' A forceful entrance, like that made by politicians bent on
comeback, is not a forcible entry undertaken by burglars.

CONFLICTING ADVICE

THE TELEVISION REPORTER Robert MacNeil asked Vernon A. Walters, Ambassador to
West Germany. about a diplomatic anomaly, concluding with ''Don't you feel
conflicted about that?'' The Ambassador - an accomplished linguist - replied
promptly, ''Yes, of course I do.''

''One can be afflicted,'' writes Phil Chimento of Durham, N.C., ''but one cannot
be conflicted because conflict is intransitive. . . . Kindly scold Mr. MacNeil
for his solecism.''

Because it follows a linking verb (''feel''), conflicted in this case is a
predicate adjective - a past participle used as an adjective after a linking
verb - and is not a verb. For that reason alone, Mr. MacNeil is not in error;
however, conflicted is an interesting bit of psychojargon.

''Conflicted as a verb is fairly recent,'' notes Dr. Ellen McGrath, a Brooklyn
Heights psychotherapist. ''It's an active verb to describe an ongoing emotional
experience. Therapists have to work on resolving what conflicts the patient.''

To be conflicted, then, is to be under the stress of influences that tug in
opposite directions. The term is too much in vogue; a better old word is
troubled, with its synonyms ''worried, upset, concerned.'' If you prefer to wow
your friends with highfalutin language, try ''Doesn't that give you cognitive
dissonance?''

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Drawing

                   Copyright 1990 The New York Times Company


                              122 of 288 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                   May 6, 1990, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

CASEY AT THE MIKE

BYLINE: By Susan Orlean: Susan Orlean is the author of ''Saturday Night,''
published this month.

SECTION: Section 6; Page 50, Column 1; Magazine Desk

LENGTH: 3550 words


A FEW FACTS ABOUT Kemal Amen Kasem: As the voice behind the pop music countdown
radio show ''Casey's Top Forty,'' he may be the most-listened-to person on radio
except for the commentator Paul Harvey. He is of Lebanese Druse parentage, the
son of a grocer, born and raised in Detroit. His first radio job was playing
Scoop Ryan, Cub Reporter. He subsequently had roles on ''The Lone Ranger'' and
''Sergeant Preston of the Yukon.'' He was a disk jockey in Detroit, Cleveland,
Buffalo, Oakland and Los Angeles. He was the voice of Robin on the
''Superfriends'' cartoon series, Shaggy on ''Scooby Doo,'' Waldo on ''Mr.
Magoo'' and various letters of the alphabet on ''Sesame Street.'' He has been
heard, he says, on some 10,000 television and radio commercials. He was the
exclusive promo announcer for NBC-TV from 1977 to 1981.

He is a hard-core vegetarian, a reformed heavy smoker, an anti-nuclear activist,
and an advocate of animal rights, homeless rights, Palestinian rights,
reincarnation, topsoil and peace. He went through Werner Erhard's est training
in 1979. Four days a week he devotes to political and humanitarian causes; one
day a week he tapes ''Casey's Top Forty.''

He and his wife, Jean Kasem, who played Loretta on ''Cheers,'' were married by
the Rev. Jesse Jackson. For four years the couple lived in a big, plush suite in
the Beverly Wilshire Hotel. They moved recently, and anticipate the birth in
July of their first child, whom they plan to name Justice if it's a boy, and
Liberty if it's a girl. He has three teen-age children from his first marriage.

Though Kasem did fail to achieve his early goal of being a major-league baseball
player, and his acting career plateaued after his appearance in ''The Incredible
Two-Headed Transplant,'' his life has otherwise taken the form of one of those
triumphant tales he likes to impart on his radio show.

Kasem started the show in 1970, a curious time to start a show about Top 40
mainstream pop, because the format had just been pronounced dead and progressive
album-oriented radio was on the rise. He infused the show with corny reverence
for conventional American values exactly when cynicism had become the more
fashionable posture. He even gave it an old-fashioned, square name. Being
someone who is uninclined toward self-doubt, he disregarded all these
inauspicious signs. And not only was the show a success, it ultimately proved
that radio, long considered too regional and homemade to have stars or economic
clout on a par with network television, could indeed have both.

During the ensuing 20 years, singles sales collapsed, radio has gotten
increasingly narrow-cast and specific, and music has gone in a million
directions. But Kasem's appeal has transcended all of that, and his success has
virtually launched an industry, inspiring a score of other nationally syndicated
radio shows, including numerous countdown programs, with grosses totaling tens
of millions of dollars. Last year, when his contract with Capital Cities/ABC was
up for renewal and the network offered him what he considered an unsatisfactory
sum to renew, there was speculation that the 58-year-old Kasem might be counting
down for the last time. Instead, he upended those expectations and signed a
reported five-year, $20-million-dollar-plus contract - a heftier deal than the
one Dan Rather is said to have with CBS News - with Westwood One Radio Networks.

''Casey's Top Forty,'' like ''American Top Forty,'' is a four-hour-long program
in which the 40 most popular songs of the week are played in order. Between
songs, Kasem, in his sunny, crackly tenor, recounts oddball statistics about the
musicians, tells tales of their triumph over pain and adversity and shyness and
financial ruin on their way to the Top 40, and reads letters sent to him by
listeners - as he has been doing since 1970. ''Casey's Top Forty'' made its
debut on Jan. 21, 1989, on more than 400 stations across the country, more than
any other syndicated show had ever begun with. It's also heard in 27 other
countries around the world, with a total audience estimated at eight million.

''Garbage,'' Kasem says, speculating on his extraordinary appeal. ''It's a
natural quality of huskiness in the midrange of my voice that I call 'garbage.'
It's not a clear-toned announcer's voice. It's more like the voice of the guy
next door.'' He clears his throat and says: ''Hear that? In the midrange?

''But I really don't think it's that I have a God-given voice that's so special.
I just found a showcase that made good use of my particular voice. It's all
storytelling. It's an ancient form. Even when I do commercials, I try to tell a
story about the product. With music, I try to tell the story of the person's
struggle for success. And I believe every word I say. I never read anything on
the air I don't believe in. I think people sense that about me, and they respond
to it.''

ON A RECENT THURSDAY MORNING, KASEM IS sitting in his Mercedes in the driveway
of the Beverly Wilshire drinking a cup of coffee substitute, preparing to drive
with me to the studio where he tapes ''America's Top Ten.'' He'll do a taping
blitz, starting at 6 A.M. with his television show and ending many hours later,
when the radio program is completed. ''The TV taping gives my voice a chance to
warm up for the radio show,'' he says. ''Doing both in one day also satisfies
the dream I always had to find a way to work just one day a week.''

The television show, an abbreviated version of his radio program, has been
broadcast for 10 years. This morning, he is wearing one of his trademark richly
colored patterned sweaters - this one is a pullover with red and yellow blobs
that look like melted 45's, shiny black slacks and reptile-skin shoes with Cuban
heels. Kasem drives with the radio off. He doesn't listen to music anymore. When
he tapes his show, he listens to special cassettes of the first and last 20
seconds of the songs, so he can get in the right mood. ''If I were doing a real
rock show, slapping the phone book in time to the music, grooving with the
songs, then it would matter to know how I felt about what I was playing,'' he
explains. ''You can't fake it in that situation. But I'm just counting them down
as they appear on the chart, 1 through 40. What really matters is what I say
between the songs.''

Kasem looks about a decade younger than he is, but without the usual Hollywood
preserved-in-amber look that implies tanning salons and plastic surgery. He
credits his boyishness to his recently adopted vegetarian diet (no animal
products at all). He is 5 feet 6 1/2 inches tall, trim, high-waisted, wiry
haired, and has a big forehead, dark eyes, a downturned smile, and a relaxed,
dreamy aspect. His voice, in person, sounds like his voice on the radio - reedy,
with a light coarseness - although in person he doesn't dip and swoop and pause,
as he does on the radio. Self-deprecating humor is a Kasem standard; but in a
group of people, he will often be the quietest one.

Kasem's on-air style dates from his days as a disk jockey in Oakland, when the
station manager told him to replace the frenetic comedy routines he was
deploying between songs with something more low-key. That night, using a book he
found in the studio wastebasket with statistics and information about musicians,
he started his ''teaser and bio'' technique: before a commercial, he would hint
at his next song with an obscure fact about the singer (''Coming up - a song by
a musician who credits his success to a rocker named Mick and a barber named
Melvin!'') and then, after the break, give the listener the biographical payoff.

''I was drawing on the Arabic tradition of storytelling one-upmanship,'' Kasem
says. ''When I was a kid, men would gather in my parents' living room and tell
tales and try to outdo each other. I couldn't understand the language, but I was
fascinated. And I was way ahead of 'Trivial Pursuit' with my trivia - I was
doing trivia before anyone was doing trivia.''

Within months, his show hit No. 1 in Oakland. He still hoped to break into
acting, however, so he soon left for KRLA in Los Angeles, to get closer to
Hollywood. Again, his show led the market. Soon after, he and Don Bustany, an
acquaintance from his Detroit days, approached an upstart broadcasting company
called Watermark and proposed that they combine Kasem's teaser-bios with a
revamp of the 1940's radio standard ''Your Hit Parade.'' Kasem also proposed a
business plan: give the show to radio stations in exchange for a percentage of
the commercial time. Thus, all stations could afford to run it, and Watermark
could amass a ''network'' of commercial time that could attract national
advertisers who are normally reluctant to buy piecemeal radio spots across the
country. (This system of ''bartering'' shows has since become the standard in
the industry, and accounts for the growth of syndicated radio in the last two
decades.) On July 4, 1970, ''American Top Forty'' made its debut on seven
stations. ''It's still interesting to me that I came up with an old idea and
even language that was archaic, but I believed the idea of the countdown and the
appeal of the stories would never die,'' Kasem says. ''It was also a time when
everyone was out protesting about Vietnam, and I came along with these tales
about the great American possibility of making it. I just felt it was my job to
show that there is no easy way to success, and that anyone who gets even just
one Top 40 hit deserves their moment in the sun. I accentuate the positive and
eliminate the negative. That is the timeless thing.''

What has proved less timeless is Top 40 itself. Top 40 developed in the 1950's
and 60's as a term for the most popular pop singles (many radio stations kept 40
songs in their playing rotation). It still exists on the charts, but has given
rise to categories for audiences in every demographic bulge: Adult Contemporary
(mainstream pop, with heavy metal taken out and crooners like Neil Diamond
thrown in); Urban Contemporary (a blending of Top 40 and black acts); Dance
Crossover (more dance music, no metal); Rock 40 (more Motley Crue, no Paula
Abdul); Oldies (former mainstream hits and occasional new songs); and Album Rock
(cuts from albums, some of which may have been released as singles).

In 1967, the enormous success of ''Sgt. Pepper's Lonely Hearts Club Band,'' from
which no singles were released, heralded the coming dominance of LP's. By 1987,
singles sales appeared to be bottoming out - with few regrets on the part of the
record industry, which generally profits on albums only - so the singles charts
tracked an ever smaller segment of record buyers, especially compared to the
album charts or, with the advent of MTV, video charts. That trend has finally
turned: people are once again buying singles, in the form of cassettes,
introduced in 1987, and compact-disk singles, introduced a year later. ''Casey's
Top Forty,'' using playlists made up by local program directors from all over
the country, is played on the whole range of post-Top 40 formatted stations. His
40 songs overlap but rarely ever match any one station's playlist anymore.

Drawing on his years in the business and building on his recent success, Kasem
last month started a new daily show. Called ''Casey's Biggest Hits,'' it runs
five minutes and features a single hit song from anywhere in the the last 20
years. Before and after the song, Kasem, in his patented style, gives the inside
story behind the hit.

THE TAPING OF THE television show goes smoothly, except for one interlude when
Kasem begins to fade; the director hollers: ''Come on, Casey, real friendly now!
Give me the Dr. Feelgood we all know and love!'' From there, we drive to the
Westwood One studios in Culver City. Now one of the largest radio networks in
the country (ABC is the biggest), Westwood One provides news, sports, talk and
entertainment programming to some 6,000 radio stations. The ''Larry King Show''
and the ''Dr. Demento Show'' are two other popular Westwood One programs.

The terms that got Kasem to Westwood were, obviously, generous. Not
surprisingly, the people at ABC consider them insanely generous. Tom Cuddy,
until recently ABC Radio Networks vice president of entertainment programming,
says some ''American Top Forty'' affiliates have dropped out in the last few
years because the show's sound didn't fit with the harder, younger style of many
stations. ''They used my show to get stations into their network,'' Kasem says.
''I made them millions and millions and millions and millions of dollars. When
they made me an offer to renew, we weren't even in the same ball park.''

When Kasem announced his new show, some radio stations followed him; others
decided to stay put and see what would happen. ABC has hired Shadoe Stevens, a
tan, handsome former disk jockey and Hollywood Square, to take over ''American
Top Forty.'' Both shows now have about the same number of affiliates (over 400)
and annual revenue (probably $8 million to $10 million dollars, although the
exact figures are not released). The parting of the ways, however disparate the
versions of it may be, was gentlemanly. Happily, that is - because when
Watermark was bought by ABC in 1982, Kasem received a ''profit participation''
for the lifetime of ''American Top Forty,'' whether he is its host or not. ''I
could retire on what I still make from 'American Top Forty,' '' Kasem adds,
''but I wanted to continue on the air. The split with ABC was handled very
politely. Shadoe and I won't cancel each other out. We're just a couple of guys
working.'' The Westwood One studios do not have the lavish presence one might
expect from such a remunerative enterprise. The building is unmarked and drab.
Inside, it is functional-looking but crowded. Kasem's two writers, Merrill
Shindler and Leonard Pitts Jr., share a narrow office decorated with pictures
and letters that have been sent in. (A third writer, Brian Carroll, has recently
joined the show.) One letter has been written on a flattened McDonald's
french-fries box. Seven or eight cents are also taped up on the wall, income
from fans who think they have to pay to get their letter read on the air.

As we walk in, Shindler, Pitts and Kasem's producer, a bearded, excitable radio
veteran named Bert Kleinman, are passing out copies of this week's script. It is
85 pages long, has one music-history story (the jukebox's hundredth birthday);
four artist stories (why the guitarist for Starship took accordion lessons, why
the B-52's are called the B-52's, how the guitarist Vernon Reid was inspired by
his barber, and how Janet Jackson used to hide under the bed rather than watch
her videos); two listener letters; the trademark introduction (''Hello again,
everybody!''); the classic sign-off (''Keep your feet on the ground and keep
reaching for the stars!''), and songs by such acts as Belinda Carlisle, Billy
Joel, Kix, Warrant, Roxette, Dino, Soul Sister and Milli Vanilli.

''Did we fix that B-52's story?'' Pitts asks Kleinman. ''I just realized that
the B-52 wasn't a World War II bomber.'' Each of the stories - there is an
inventory of dozens, ready and waiting for the artist to hit the charts - is
edited by Kasem, who has specific rules about what he'll read.

''Songs always move up 'notches,' not 'spots' or 'places,' '' Pitts says to me.
''Songs 'leap' or 'jump' or 'move' up the chart, and they 'fall' or 'drop' or
'slide' down. (''I say 'notch' because I can envision it,'' Kasem once
explained. ''I can't see a 'place' or a 'spot.' And I don't want to say a song
'plummets' because that's very negative. It's like saying, This lousy song,
which I'm about to play and hope you'll listen to. . . .'') Shindler, who is
also an alumnus of ''American Top Forty,'' says: ''In the stories, we emphasize
the Horatio Alger aspect - the pluck and luck, the uplifting tales. Casey can
sense when a story isn't going to work for him. He talks about himself in third
person - he'll say, 'That's not a story Casey would tell.' He has a very strong
concept of who this character is that he's spent so many years creating.''

Kasem has settled in the announcer's booth, put on his reading glasses and
perused the script. He has said that he doesn't feel old when he's on the radio,
and doesn't see the gap between his age and the age of the Top 40 audience as an
issue. His contract with Westwood is for five years. He says he would like to be
on the radio for 10 or 20 more.

''Ready, Casey?'' Kleinman asks. Kasem nods, and a technician plays the opening
jingle - a swell of delicate voices in crowded harmony singing, ''Caaaasey's . .
. Top . . . Fooorty!''

''Hello again, everybody, and welcome to 'Casey's Top Forty!' I'm Casey Kasem,
and I'm all set to count down the 40 most popular songs in the U.S.A.'' During
the taping he is in almost constant motion, using his hands and body for
emphasis. He does a low-key lead-in for a pounding rock song, then retapes the
lead-in with more appropriate verve. He whips through the second hour of the
show, then works for 10 minutes to get the proper emotional reading for a letter
from a pregnant girlfriend about her drug-dealing boyfriend.

''Radio is very intimate,'' Kleinman whispers to me as Kasem is reading. ''It's
very one-on-one. The most one-on-one this show gets is when Casey reads the
letters. It creates the same kind of 'click' that occurs when people relate to
great art.''

Soon we are up to No. 1 - Janet Jackson's ''Miss You Much.'' The writers are
desperate for Jackson to fall off the charts. Anymore, she rarely gives
interviews, so their inventory of Janet stories is perilously low.

When he gets to the story about how she used to hide under her bed, Kasem holds
up his hand and says, ''Wait a minute - what is this? This is Mickey Mouse
stuff. This doesn't mean a damn thing.'' ''It's about how she overcame her
shyness, Casey,'' Kleinman says. ''It's good. I think you should try it again.''
''O.K., O.K., maybe I'm not giving it the right feel,'' Kasem says,
apologetically. He reads it several times to himself, and then tries it a few
more times. On the third take, the story has ceased meaning anything and has
just become the comfortable buzz of his voice. With that, and his signature
sign-off, the session is over. The tapes will be edited, timed, pressed into
albums, and shipped overnight to the affiliates.

IT HAS BEEN A LONG week. On Monday, Kasem was the guest host of a local radio
talk show. That was the first time we'd met; as I walked into the announcer's
booth, he was saying, in that familiar voice, something that interests him more
these days than which band has had three No. 1 singles in April: ''O.K., coming
up at noon, we'll be talking about the C.I.A. and how it has contributed to
deaths all around the world.'' Wouldn't it be tempting for him to lead his own,
''Top 40,'' audiences into some of these muddy waters? ''I don't choose to bring
up those issues on the music show,'' he says. ''Simple reason - if it ever
looked like I was using the show for other purposes, I would compromise any
credibility I have.''

For today, his Top 40 life is attended to, and he wants to get home quickly,
because he is setting up a conflict-resolution workshop in Detroit for Arabs and
Jews, similiar to the ones he is involved with in Los Angeles. He also has a
meeting in a few days of the Cousins Club, an Arab-Jew discussion group that he
helped establish. Last weekend, he and Jean and a planeload of other celebrities
flew to Washington to participate in a march for the homeless. The Kasems worked
on the march for months; their suite in the Beverly Wilshire became the staging
site for mailings and volunteer powwows. Kasem calls it ''a great, great
experience - my priority these days.'' (When asked about a recent Los Angeles
Times article that referred to him and Jean as trendy ''Penthouse
Progressives,'' he says: ''I thought it was a nice, tongue-in-cheek thing. I'm
glad she wrote about our fund-raiser. And it's good to have a little humor.'')
Occasionally, the two parts of his life overlap. When Kasem asked Jesse Jackson
to marry him and Jean, Jackson's children warned him that they would disown him
if he didn't accept the offer to marry Mr. Radio. Kasem is impressed by
Jackson's communication skills. Kasem is, after all, someone who appreciates the
art of getting a point across.

Before I leave, he loads me up with a few things he wants me to have: a copy of
''The TV Arab,'' the book that got him thinking about negative Arab stereotypes
in the media; a reading list from John Stockwell, a critic of the Central
Intelligence Agency; a book about vegetarianism; a can of coffee substitute. I
demur; he is amiably and unavoidably insistent.

Just then, the phone rings. Someone is canceling for the Detroit workshop. This
is not a positive thing, so Kasem turns on the appeal that gets eight million
people listening to him each week. ''I think you should reconsider,'' he says
into the phone. ''I think the Detroit thing will be very powerful. We're on the
verge of something happening.'' By the time I reach the door, the person on the
phone has obviously given in.

At that moment, Casey Kasem looks absolutely pleased. He communicated.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photos: Casey Kasem spends one day a week taping ''Casey's Top Forty'';
four others he devotes to favorite causes. (Alon Reinnger/Contact) (pg. 50);
Kasem and his actress wife, Jean, in Los Angeles, where they live. (Alon
Reinnger/Contact) (pg. 54)

                   Copyright 1990 The New York Times Company


                              123 of 288 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                   May 6, 1990, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

MORE COPS, MORE JAILS, MORE CRIME

BYLINE: By RICHARD GID POWERS; Richard Gid Powers is the author of ''Secrecy and
Power: The Life of J. Edgar Hoover.''

SECTION: Section 7; Page 7, Column 1; Book Review Desk

LENGTH: 1205 words


THE JUSTICE JUGGERNAUT
Fighting Street Crime, Controlling Citizens.
By Diana R. Gordon.
335 pp. New Brunswick, N.J.:
Rutgers University Press.
$24.95.

THE POLICE MYSTIQUE
An Insider's Look at Cops, Crime,
and the Criminal Justice System.
By Anthony V. Bouza.
299 pp. New York:
Plenum Press. $23.50.

''It is better to know nothing,'' the 19th-century humorist Josh Billings used
to claim, ''than to know what ain't so.'' Here are two experts on law
enforcement who say politicians and the news media are feeding us illusions
about crime that not only ain't so but are tearing the country apart. These two
fine studies of the crime problem argue that what we think we know about crime
is wrong, that the law-and-order approach to crime control is not working and
that today's war on crime will produce higher crime rates tomorrow along with
ever more intrusive legal scrutiny of our daily lives.

Diana R. Gordon and Anthony V. Bouza draw on their different experiences - Ms.
Gordon teaches political science at City College and has worked at the National
Council on Crime and Delinquency; Mr. Bouza served in the New York City Police
Department for 24 years, ending as commander of the Bronx division, before
running the Minneapolis Police Department for nine years - to argue convincingly
that the conditions that produce our exceptionally high levels of crime are not,
and cannot be, significantly remedied by the machinery of surveillance,
apprehension and punishment.

Ms. Gordon's book, ''The Justice Juggernaut,'' based on a staggering amount of
research into the current state of law enforcement, tells how the country has
come to rely on increasingly comprehensive surveillance to deter crime and to
supervise convicts who can no longer be housed in prisons, despite the surge in
cell construction (and while the country invests billions building prisons, it
cuts off Government support for housing). This surveillance is advertised as a
logical response to crime, but the connection, Ms. Gordon maintains, is
symbolic. (Her explanation of the symbolism of crime and punishment is
fascinating, exhibiting a sound and confident grasp of Durkheim's sociological
theory.) When this surveillance fails to reduce crime, as it must, the justice
juggernaut's managers claim that the surveillance has not been comprehensive
enough, that the next infusion of money, equipment and manpower will do the
trick. The result: ''Just as much crime, much more control.''

This reliance on escalating investments in weaponry and manpower creates an
analogy to Vietnam that is not lost on Mr. Bouza, whose book, ''The Police
Mystique,'' combines a practical guide to police administration with reflections
on a lifetime in law enforcement: ''We paid a fearful price for our silences and
hypocrisies during the Vietnam war. . . . Our generals should have warned us;
instead, they asked for more time, more funding, and more of our children. Our
urban generals, even as they bail furiously against an overwhelming tide, should
be crying out an alarm warning of the holocaust they clearly see coming.''

In Vietnam, the American military could finally pull out and leave its failures
behind. And as the war on crime bogs down hopelessly, Mr. Bouza's ''overclass''
removes itself from American cities. This country's de facto solution to the
crime problem is to abandon its cities to criminals and those willing to live
with them, or unable to leave. But a civilization is its cities, and the United
States' refusal to face the facts about crime has put the country on the verge
of having no cities at all.

The film ''Roger and Me'' showed unforgettable scenes of jails rising out of the
rubble of General Motors' auto plants, as the prison system replaced the car
industry as the biggest employer in Flint, Mich. ''The Justice Juggernaut''
could serve as a commentary on that disturbing documentary, a demonstration of
how ''U.S. economic development in recent decades has taken directions that rend
community bonds and accentuate economic divisions, looking more like the
patterns of 'disruptive development' characteristic of third world countries
than like the growth of other advanced industrial societies.'' Both authors
argue that in those vast sections of this country from which industry has fled,
the poor have gathered and crime has flourished. Society will have to be
reconstructed before crime subsides; but, as one of Ms. Gordon's authorities
sarcastically observes, ''the system of criminal justice provides a very narrow
base from which to launch movements of fundamental social reconstruction.''

These two intellectually stimulating books paint a bleak picture. Ms. Gordon
asks: ''What else can be done? Are we doomed to present levels of criminality
for the foreseeable future?'' Her answers: ''very little'' and ''probably.''
''To make major inroads into the crime problem in the United States,'' she says,
''would require changes in both general ideology and political economy that run
counter to current trends.''

But waiting for changes in ''general ideology and political economy'' assumes
(falsely, I think) that community and a commitment to social justice are
impossible within the cultural and economic order the United States has evolved
over centuries and which will probably persist in familiar forms far into the
future.

Mr. Bouza's outlook is more optimistic and more realistic. He blames the selfish
attitudes of the overclass for America's crime-generating social conditions:
''As the underclass has grown and its conditions have worsened, the overclass's
fate has been increased prosperity, heightened indifference, and induction into
the ranks of the neoconservatives. . . . Increased mobility, anonymity,
alienation, and concern for self have ensured that those in a position to remedy
society's flaws are too self-absorbed to bother.'' Like the classic English
conservatives, Mr. Bouza believes that ''the overclass sets the tone and
establishes the moral climate. . . . A nation full of zest and vigor, growing
under values that emphasize 'us' rather than 'me,' altruism over hedonism,
sacrifice over pleasure, and service over self, will provide for a much safer
society than the one we have today, which is fast sinking into dissolution in
the pursuit of happiness.''

What is needed, Mr. Bouza says, is enlightened leadership, ''a muse of fire that
would touch the public conscience . . . and awaken the nation to the danger of
neglecting the fateful problems of its cities.'' The country's police chiefs, he
feels, if they would tell the public what they know, could furnish that
leadership.

The ritual of crime and punishment - in newspaper headlines and on television
screens - has become America's great reality-avoidance mechanism, its
all-sufficient substitute for knowledge and thought: let a scapegoat be found,
let a culprit be punished, and the public relaxes, confident that the crisis has
been surmounted. These two well-informed and intelligent books argue that while
newspapers and television bemuse us with police chases and courtroom dramas, the
real conditions that make our society unlivable are surging to explosive force
beneath our very feet.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Review

                   Copyright 1990 The New York Times Company


                              124 of 288 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                   May 6, 1990, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

New & Noteworthy

BYLINE: By GEORGE JOHNSON

SECTION: Section 7; Page 38, Column 1; Book Review Desk

LENGTH: 943 words



AN EXPOSURE OF THE HEART, by Rebecca Busselle. (Penguin, $8.95.) A photographer
spends a year at a state institution for the retarded, learning that some truths
cannot be captured on film. ''Her words force a reader beyond the barrier of
invisibility that usually separates the rest of us from those beings whose
damaged minds represent a largely arbitrary and therefore infinitely terrifying
human possibility,'' Susan Jacoby said here last year. ''This enforced awareness
makes the book as impossible to put down as it is to read without intense
distress.''

FABULOUS NOBODIES, by Lee Tulloch. (Perennial/Harper & Row, $7.95.) Reality
Nirvana Tuttle (nicknamed Really) loses her job as a doorperson at the East
Village's hottest nightclub after turning away a boringly dressed Jackie O. Last
year our reviewer, Cynthia Heimel, praised ''Fabulous Nobodies'' as a night-life
novel in which ''nobody speaks in the second person singular, no 12-year-old
girls are tied up and raped, nobody is a slave. . . . Ms. Tulloch's voice is
sharp, affectionate and hilarious. She reminds me of the master, P. G.
Wodehouse, because although her world is totally unrealistic, it is much more
true to life than any of its sordid predecessors.'' Atlantic Monthly Press has
republished another entry into this genre, Peter J. Smith's MAKE-BELIEVE
BALLROOMS ($9.95), in which a starving New York artist runs off with Mary-Ann, a
rather ordinary Texan. The author's ''absurdist plot devices are initially
jarring,'' Margot Mifflin said here last year, ''but they become wrenchingly
funny once you realize that 'Make-Believe Ballrooms' isn't intended to be a
McInerney-style dark night of the soul, which is precisely what makes this the
better, more compelling book.''

STALIN AND THE KIROV MURDER, by Robert Conquest. (Oxford University, $7.95.)
Opposing the revisionist view that Stalin wasn't so bad after all, a leading
Sovietologist offers new evidence that he was responsible for the murder of the
Leningrad party leader Sergei Kirov in 1934. Last year our reviewer, Peter H.
Solomon Jr., called the book ''an impressive dossier.''

IF THE RIVER WAS WHISKEY, by T. Coraghessan Boyle. (Penguin, $7.95.) In one of
these stories, a chef tries to boost his career by seducing - gastronomically
speaking - a restaurant critic. Last year our reviewer, Elizabeth Benedict, said
the collection shows ''the linguistic acrobatics and hip, erudite audacity we've
come to expect'' from the author. He ''lampoons our most terrible fears - that
our homes are not safe and our lovers are riddled with communicable diseases.''

WHEN HEAVEN AND EARTH CHANGED PLACES: A Vietnamese Woman's Journey From War to
Peace, by Le Ly Hayslip with Jay Wurts. (Plume, $9.95.) A refugee from Vietnam
remembers how the war looked through the eyes of a child. This memoir is ''a
searing and human account of Vietnam's destruction and self-destruction,'' David
K. Shipler said here last year.

DISLOCATIONS, by Janette Turner Hospital. (Norton, $7.95.) In the first of these
short stories about displaced souls, two Indian immigrants from different rungs
of the social ladder meet at a festival in Canada. In 1988 our reviewer, Barbara
Thompson, said Janette Turner Hospital writes about ''characters who find
themselves in unfamiliar terrain - psychic as well as material - where the
encoded lore they have brought with them is no longer a sure guide or measure.''


THE COMING SOVIET CRASH: Gorbachev's Desperate Pursuit of Credit in Western
Financial Markets, by Judy Shelton. (Free Press/Macmillan, $9.95.) An expert on
Soviet economics says the country has been skillfully hiding deficits so
lopsided that they almost make the United States budget seem balanced. Last year
our reviewer, Nicholas Eberstadt, said the author ''has a talent for making the
arcane and complex seem vivid and clear.''

UNDER THE JAGUAR SUN, by Italo Calvino. Translated by William Weaver.
(Harvest/HBJ/Harcourt Brace Jovanovich, $7.95.) Italo Calvino had planned to
write stories about each of the five senses; he got as far as taste, hearing and
smell before he died in 1985. In 1988 our reviewer, Cynthia Ozick, said these
three tales cut through to ''the primary ground of perception: ganglia and
synapse. He fuses fable with neuron. By driving story right down to its
biological root, to cell and stimulus, he nearly annihilates metaphor.''

YOU MUST REMEMBER THIS: An Oral History of Manhattan From the 1890s to World War
II, by Jeff Kisseloff. (Schocken, $14.95.) By collecting reminiscences of New
York, a journalist tries to capture what the city was like in the early part of
the century. Last year our reviewer, Meredith Tax, called this ''an interesting
and original project.''

HOMELAND: And Other Stories, by Barbara Kingsolver. (Perennial/Harper & Row,
$8.95.) In short stories about the downwardly mobile, Barbara Kingsolver writes
about life in trailer parks and shopping malls. ''There is a moral toughness in
her characters,'' Russell Banks said here last year, ''a determination to find
value and meaning in a world where value and meaning have all but disappeared.''


THE CROSSWINDS OF FREEDOM: The American Experiment. Volume Three, by James
MacGregor Burns. (Vintage, $16.95.) In the final installment of his history of
the United States, James MacGregor Burns starts with the New Deal and ends with
the Reagan Presidency. ''The entire work is an impressive achievement,'' John A.
Garraty said here last year. ''Mr. Burns possesses a keen eye and ear for
anecdote and quotation. He is a master at summarizing clearly the most complex
events.''

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo: Lee Tulloch (Tony Amos)

TYPE: Review

                   Copyright 1990 The New York Times Company


                              125 of 288 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                   May 6, 1990, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

FICTION: NEW GUYS ON THE BLOCK;
'IS THAT A JOKE, DEAR?'

BYLINE: By JOHN CASEY; John Casey's most recent novel, ''Spartina,'' won the
1989 National Book Award for fiction.

SECTION: Section 7; Page 12, Column 1; Book Review Desk

LENGTH: 1558 words



IN A FATHER'S PLACE
By Christopher Tilghman.
214 pp. New York:
Farrar, Straus & Giroux. $18.95.

This book of seven stories is a wonderful surprise. Each one starts with
assurance, opens into a cluster of lives, a precise evocation of place and a
gathering current of action, reaction and reflection. Each story becomes
increasingly charged with feeling and yet increasingly clarified; quick
reflective realizations guide the narrative. A good helmsman, Christopher
Tilghman doesn't oversteer. I read eagerly, with an eye to what comes next, but
two or three times in every story I was surprised by a smooth turn, a
reorientation that left me startled with pleasure.

Mr. Tilghman's stories are set in various places - three on the Eastern Shore of
Maryland; one in Montana; one in Norfolk, Va., and at sea; one in South Dakota;
the last in New Hampshire. They are all more or less contemporary, though all
reach back in time, since the main characters are conscious of the span of their
lives and of the lives of the people they live with.

It is as hard to summarize what happens in these stories as it is to categorize
what they are about. The first, ''On the Rivershore,'' has as its precipitating
event the shooting of a waterman by a farm worker. The story is told from the
point of view of the farm worker's son, who sees the killing. It is, of course,
about the son's horror and loyalty, but the story also involves the vertical
landlord-tenant hierarchy of the Eastern Shore as well as the horizontal ill
will between watermen and farmers. They work out a resolution that avoids the
law in favor of an act that is truer to their community and their sense of the
reach of their lives.

''Loose Reins'' is set in Montana (though one of the things in the story is a
wedding present transported from Shreve, Crump & Low in Boston). The plot has
some of the abrupt complexity of comedy. A widowed mother of two sons, grown and
gone away, announces that she has married an old ranch hand, once a pathetic
drunk, whom she has salvaged. The older son flies out from the East with his
wife to do the right thing and to see what's up. But comedy is squelched early
on, when he and his mother are driving to town:

'' 'There is perhaps one more thing you should know. There's no sex between us.'
'' 'Good God,' said Hal. '' 'Not that you have a right to know or care, but it
seems something worth clearing up.'

'' 'Not that I want to know or care.' He looked out at the fence posts flashing
by like newsreel frames. 'But what is it, then? Can you imagine what it's going
to be like during the winter?' '' 'Of course we talk, most of the time about --'
''Hal interrupted. 'You tell him all about the 1937 Cotillion and he tells you
about squeezing Sterno in Missoula.'

'' 'Is that a joke, dear?' ''

The obvious way for the story to go is mother-son conflict or reconciliation.
But Mr. Tilghman summons other story lines: the family history of the ranch and
the transformation of the mother from a nice young lady from back East into
someone who knows what she's doing in Montana, Hal's old troubles with his
petrified father and quicksilver brother and, most important, Hal's
relationship, before and now, with the man who has married his mother. All these
past hauntings and present circumstances come at a good pace, opening up Hal's
character in a way that would be enough by itself to justify the story. But the
story isn't just Hal's; it's about what all of these people have worked out with
one another, the way the place works them loose from the predestinations of
family and class.

''Norfolk, 1969'' is about much younger people, a new Navy ensign and his bride.
There are several pulls of place - the dismaying heat and sprawl of Norfolk, a
ship at sea, an antiwar demonstration in Washington. The point of view is the
ensign's, conveying his initial dislike of the Navy, his aching for his wife,
his eventual love of being at sea, his attempts to fit into the life his wife
has arranged for herself while he's away for so long. But his point of view
includes a valiant effort to understand his wife. Both of them are decent in
love and sorrow, and vulnerable to each other. There is anguish in their
relationship, but no self-pity. The yes/no of their love is recorded in part
from a calmer time afterward, as is the conflict of the two subcultures they
have grown into. Their differences aren't argued out in ideology (they're both
against the Vietnam War) any more than they are in sexual conflict (they're both
faithful). What they find to comfort themselves with, in each other's absence,
becomes stronger than their young marriage. Each of their new allegiances is
understandable to the other but, in the end, is not reachable.

These plots sound plausible and intelligent, but Mr. Tilghman's stories are much
more than that. I remember Peter Taylor blithely telling a class to write
15-page short stories that ''do the work of novels.'' I know he didn't mean
stuffing a story with larger and longer action. I'm pretty sure he meant
suggesting the slow forces of life through details that are not only immediately
vivid but that also imply a character's accumulated life, presenting family and
society in tuned resonances, like the unplucked but sympathetically sounding
strings of certain Renaissance instruments.

In this, his first book, Mr. Tilghman has written stories, usually between 20
and 30 pages long, that do the work of novels with that sort of detail, with
what Turgenev called ''the life-giving drop.'' I can't pick a favorite, and
there's not one of the seven that doesn't belong with the others. There's a
metaphysical wrinkle in ''A Gracious Rain,'' but it leads to a vision that is
more than worth the jolt. The title story, ''In a Father's Place,'' has the only
on-stage villain of the whole book, and I worried about whether Mr. Tilghman
endorsed the father's view of this villain, who is his son's lover. She and the
father have a wingding fight, and the second time I read the story I began to
root for her, at least a little bit. She says that she disapproves of the
manorial life the family leads on their Maryland estate:

'' 'I think you're all in a fantasy.'

''Dan made a show of looking around at the walls, the cane-and-wicker furniture.
. . . He shrugged. 'People from the outside seem to make a lot more of this than
we do.' ''

Of course, after a remark like that she retaliates, and they're at it hammer and
tongs. The father explodes: ''Oh, cut the crap about his work. You want his
soul, you little Nazi, you want any soul you can get your hands on.'' Then he
cuts off her attempt to talk back and asks her to leave the house. If the
author's view of her is that of the father, the story ends up a little pat,
though it's still riveting in its progress.

''Hole in the Day'' and ''Mary in the Mountains'' are, like all the others but
the title story, elegantly balanced. ''Hole in the Day'' in particular has the
virtue of telling a genuinely sweet story in contrastingly dry and gritty
detail. It and the other six stories, all variations on the theme of the powers
of the family, form a wonderfully satisfying cycle. ''In a Father's Place'' is a
beautiful book, making emotions as vivid and rich in perspective as a loved
landscape.



ROAD MAPS OF HIS LIFE

Christopher Tilghman started writing fiction in 1971 when he left the Navy, but
it wasn't until 1986 that his first story was published. Between those years, he
worked as a carpenter and in a sawmill, he renovated buildings and apartments in
exchange for rent and he wrote copy for corporate reports. Some years, he wrote
no fiction at all.

''If there were anything resembling a career path for fiction writers, there
would be enormous gaps in the resume, like mine,'' he said in a recent telephone
interview from the partly renovated Shaker meetinghouse in Harvard, Mass., where
he lives with his wife and two young sons. But, he added, the tales that make up
his first collection of stories, ''In a Father's Place,'' could not have been
written ''if I hadn't spent all those years doing what I did. I couldn't have
written it at 25. I didn't know it at 25.''

The stories, set in places as diverse as a Montana ranch and an antiques-stuffed
mansion on the Eastern Shore of Maryland, provide a road map of where the
43-year-old Mr. Tilghman has lived and traveled. But they also tell of families
and the intersecting lives of the people in those families.

Mr. Tilghman's fascination with place and family, cornerstones of the Southern
literary tradition, was strongly instilled in him during childhood summers on a
Maryland farm that has been in his family since the 17th century. ''I sit down
to write a story,'' he said, ''and the word 'father' appears in the first
paragraph.'' The family, in Mr. Tilghman's view, ''is the one inescapable fact
of life, the measure of what we accomplish personally and professionally.''

Mr. Tilghman said his own family has been a strong support since he began
writing. But in those long unpublished years, what really kept him going was the
pleasure of weaving tales. ''It's fun to do, to make stories,'' he explained.
''It's been full-time work or a primary hobby, depending on what stage I've been
in. But it has never ceased to be fun.''

JOAN MOTYKA

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Drawing

TYPE: Review

                   Copyright 1990 The New York Times Company


                              126 of 288 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                   May 6, 1990, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

BEST SELLERS: May 6, 1990

SECTION: Section 7; Page 36, Column 2; Book Review Desk

LENGTH: 1477 words




$

          Weeks
This Last    On
Week Week  List Fiction

 1      1   3    SEPTEMBER, by Rosamunde Pilcher. (St.
                 Martin's, $22.95.) Guests from many parts of the
                 world encounter their often unexpected destinies
                 during a get-together in a small Scottish town.

 2      2   8    THE BOURNE ULTIMATUM, by Robert Ludlum.
                 (Random House, $21.95.) Jason Bourne plans to
                 infiltrate the ruthless Medusa Brigade.

 3      3   11   OH, THE PLACES YOU'LL GO! by Dr. Seuss.
                 (Random House, $12.95.) The problems of finding
                 your way through life; in verse and pictures.

 4      4   3    SKINNY LEGS AND ALL, by Tom Robbins.
                 (Bantam, $19.95.) The horror and humor of the
                 upcoming apocalypse are played out at a
                 restaurant near the United Nations.

 5      5   5    MASQUERADE, by Janet Dailey. (Little, Brown,
                 $19.95.) A New Orleans heiress encounters a
                 masked man during a carnival in Nice.

 6      6   4    THE EVENING NEWS, by Arthur Hailey.
                 (Doubleday, $21.95.) Life as lived by two
                 competitive television correspondents.

 7      7   36   CLEAR AND PRESENT DANGER, by Tom
                 Clancy. (Putnam, $21.95.) The C.I.A.'s Jack Ryan
                 fights Colombian drug lords.

 8            1  ''G'' IS FOR GUMSHOE, by Sue Grafton. (Holt,
                 $16.95.) On her 33d birthday, the private eye Kinsey
                 Millhone finds herself on the hit list of a killer she
                 once tracked down.

 9     14   2    THE GOLD COAST, by Nelson DeMille. (Warner,
                 $19.95.) How life changes for an old WASP family
                 when the head of a crime family becomes its
                 neighbor on Long Island's North Shore.

10      9   15   DEVICES AND DESIRES, by P. D. James. (Knopf,
                 $19.95.) A series of killings on the Norfolk coast.

11     11   3    BRIGHT STAR, by Harold Coyle. (Simon &
                 Schuster, $19.95.) An attempted assassination by a
                 Libyan terrorist brings American and Soviet
                 troops into a violent encounter.

12     12   10   BITTER SWEET, by LaVyrle Spencer. (Putnam,
                 $18.95.) A widow's ordeal after meeting her high
                 school flame, now a less than happily married man.

13     10   15   THE BAD PLACE, by Dean R. Koontz. (Putnam,
                 $19.95.) A troubled sleepwalker hires a detective
                 team to investigate his behavior.

14 *    8   9    THE SCIONS OF SHANNARA, by Terry Brooks.
                 (Del Rey/Ballantine, $19.95.) The adventures of
                 two brothers who practice magic in a fantasy land.

15            2  COLLECTED STORIES OF WALLACE
                 STEGNER. (Random House, $21.95.) Thirty-one
                 short works by the Pulitzer Prize and National
                 Book Award winner.

          Weeks
This Last    On
Week Week  List Nonfiction

 1      1   4    MEN AT WORK, by George F. Will. (Macmillan,
                 $19.95.) The political pundit and baseball buff
                 describes the craft of the game as practiced by
                 three players and a manager.

 2      3   15   MEGATRENDS 2000, by John Naisbitt and
                 Patricia Aburdene. (Morrow, $21.95.)
                 Prognostications about political, economic and
                 social developments in the next decade.

 3     14   13   HEAD FIRST, by Norman Cousins. (Dutton,
                 $19.95.) How the brain affects the body's endocrine
                 and immune systems.

 4      4   15   BARBARIANS AT THE GATE, by Bryan
                 Burrough and John Helyar. (Harper & Row,
                 $22.95.) The 1988 battle for control of RJR Nabisco.

 5      2   7    MEANS OF ASCENT, by Robert A. Caro. (Knopf,
                 $24.95.) Lyndon Johnson's seven-year pursuit of a
                 seat in the Senate, won in 1948 by 87 votes.

 6      6   33   IT WAS ON FIRE WHEN I LAY DOWN ON IT, by
                 Robert Fulghum. (Villard, $17.95.) A new collection
                 of inspirational essays.

 7      5   26   LIAR'S POKER, by Michael Lewis. (Norton,
                 $19.95.) Wall Street's tumultuous 1980's, as
                 witnessed and participated in by a young bond
                 trader.

 8     11   2    IN THE ARENA, by Richard Nixon. (Simon &
                 Schuster, $21.95.) The 37th President reflects on his
                 public career and private life.

 9      9   8    PARTING WITH ILLUSIONS, by Vladimir
                 Pozner. (Atlantic Monthly, $19.95.) The
                 autobiography of a man, raised in New York, who
                 became a commentator on Radio Moscow.

10            1  LEGACIES, by Bette Bao Lord. (Knopf, $19.95.)
                 Reflections on the Chinese experience during the
                 past quarter-century by a writer who was born in
                 China, raised in America.

11     10  107   A BRIEF HISTORY OF TIME, by Stephen W.
                 Hawking. (Bantam, $18.95.) A scientist reviews
                 efforts to create a unified theory of the universe.

12     13   14   THE CUCKOO'S EGG, by Clifford Stoll.
                 (Doubleday, $19.95.) An astrophysicist tells how he
                 stalked a computer hacker.

13 *    8   11   WHAT I SAW AT THE REVOLUTION, by Peggy
                 Noonan. (Random House, $19.95.) The memoirs of
                 a former Presidential speechwriter.

14            1  THE BROKEN CORD, by Michael Dorris. (Harper
                 & Row, $18.95.) The struggle of a family to cope
                 with the fetal alcohol syndrome of an adopted son.

15            1  FLASHBACKS, by Morley Safer. (Random House,
                 $18.95.) The observations of a journalist on
                 revisiting Vietnam 25 years later.

          Weeks
This Last    On
Week Week  List Advice, How-to and Miscellaneous

 1      2   64   WEALTH WITHOUT RISK, by Charles J. Givens.
                 (Simon & Schuster, $19.95.) A Florida
                 entrepreneur's financial advice.

 2      1   21   THE GREAT WALDO SEARCH, by Martin
                 Handford. (Little, Brown, $10.95.) A book of
                 illustrations in which the game is to find a
                 ubiquitous chap named Waldo.

 3      3   10   SECRETS ABOUT MEN EVERY WOMAN
                 SHOULD KNOW, by Barbara De Angelis.
                 (Delacorte, $17.95.) Ways by which women can
                 improve their relationships with men.

 4      4   11   BEWARE THE NAKED MAN WHO OFFERS
                 YOU HIS SHIRT, by Harvey Mackay. (Morrow,
                 $19.95.) Advice on how to get ahead in business.

 5            2  THE BETTER HOMES AND GARDENS NEW
                 COOKBOOK. (Meredith, $19.95.) A ring-bound
                 version of the 10th edition.


These listings are based on computer-processed sales figures from 3,000
bookstores and from representative wholesalers with more than 28,000 other
retail outlets, including variety stores and supermarkets. The figures are
statistically adjusted to represent sales in all such outlets across the United
States.

 *An asterisk before a book's title indicates that its sales, weighted to
reflect the book-selling industry nationally, are barely distinguishable from
those of the book above.



AND BEAR IN MIND
 (Editors' choices of other recent books of particular interest)

ALL THE BEST: Letters From a Feisty Mayor, by Edward I. Koch with Leland T.
Jones. (Simon & Schuster, $19.95.) The selected combative correspondence of New
York's three-term Mayor shows why so many people liked him, and why so many
didn't.

ONE, BY ONE, BY ONE: Facing the Holocaust, by Judith Miller. (Simon & Schuster,
$21.95.) A reporter and editor for The Times examines the ways five European
countries and the United States have distorted and manipulated the memory of the
Holocaust.

TITMUSS REGAINED, by John Mortimer. (Viking, $19.95.) Mr. Mortimer's splendid
classical comedy of political manners in an English village paints all
participants as greedy ninnies, most notably the title character, a politically
prominent twerp.
THE BOY WHO WOULD BE A HELICOPTER, by Vivian Gussin Paley. (Harvard University,
$19.95.) An original essay on the practice of teaching young children, using
their own stories as a vehicle of instruction, by a University of Chicago master
teacher.

THE FALL OF PAN AM 103: Inside the Lockerbie Investigation, by Steven Emerson
and Brian Duffy. (Putnam, $21.95.) Two professional journalists have constructed
a surpassing account of the 1988 bombing, rich both in drama and in anecdotal
details.

PLAYING WITH WATER: Passion and Solitude on a Philippine Island, by James
Hamilton-Paterson. (New Amsterdam Books, Cloth, $19.95; Paper, $11.95.) A truly
remarkable lyrical meditation on sea, sunlight and the analysis of
consciousness.

THE WOMAN AT THE WINDOW, by Marian Eldridge. (University of
Queensland/International Specialized Book Services, Paper, $12.95.) Sixteen
short stories, set in Australia with side trips, elegantly shaped and alive with
narrative brilliance.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: LIST

                   Copyright 1990 The New York Times Company


                              127 of 288 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                   May 6, 1990, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

Lessons to Learn From Vietnam

SECTION: Section 12LI; Page 29, Column 1; Long Island Weekly Desk

LENGTH: 222 words


Our involvement in Vietnam must be a subject in every school and college [''What
Should Schools Teach About Vietnam?'' March 25]. However, I would suggest that
the instructor begin and end the course on Vietnam with the fact that our
Government and people were abysmally ignorant of the subject when the decision
was made to get involved.

We pride ourselves on being a free-enterprise, business-oriented society. No
prudent and responsible American businessman would invest in a business venture
he had as little knowledge of, and experience in, as Washington did in Vietnam.

The 15th-century Chinese philosopher Weng Yang Ming once wrote: ''Knowledge is
the beginning of action; action is the completion of knowledge.'' We had no
knowledge of the conditions in Indo-China, its history, culture, the tradition
of the antagonistic relationship between Vietnam and China, when we decided to
give our support to the South Vietnamese government. We allowed ourselves to
believe mistakenly that we would gain the knowledge required for success as we
went along but ended up in deceiving ourselves. This was a recipe for failure.

In teaching our youth about Vietnam, we must impress on them that you do not get
involved in any venture until you have gained full knowledge of the issues.

WALTER A. SHELDON
  Lido Beach

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: letter

                   Copyright 1990 The New York Times Company


                              128 of 288 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                   May 6, 1990, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

LONG ISLAND INTERVIEW: WILLIAM DOWDELL DENSON;
Nuremberg Prosecutor Reflects on History's Judgment of Evil

BYLINE: By JOHN RATHER

SECTION: Section 12LI; Page 2, Column 1; Long Island Weekly Desk

LENGTH: 1527 words


WHEN he was appointed in 1945 to be chief prosecutor and chief of counsel for
the United States Government in war crime trials involving the operators of the
Dachau concentration camp, it fell to William Dowdell Denson to prove to the
court, and to the world, that nearly unimaginable atrocities were committed by
people who called evil their duty.

First, Mr. Denson said in a recent interview, he had to prove to himself the
truth of stories so horrible he could hardly credit them. He knew they were
true, he said, when he heard the same stories over and over from victims who
survived to bear witness.

Then he went on to win convictions against 40 operators of Dachau, and scores
more in trials that followed in 1946 and 1947 for the operators of Mauthausen,
Flossenberg and Buchenwald. As a result of his efforts, 97 were hanged.

Mr. Denson, a graduate of West Point and Harvard Law School, thinks still of
Ilse Koch, the wife of the commandant of Buchenwald, who denied all and was
spared death, he said, because she was pregnant at the trial. What he knew of
what she did, Mr. Denson said, was more than he cared to tell.

Born and raised in Birmingham, Ala., Mr. Denson, 76 years old, moved to Long
Island in 1958 after a postwar tour as chief of litigation for the Atomic Energy
Commission and several years of private law practice in Washington. He is
currently senior litigator for the Mineola law firm of Meltzer, Lippe, Goldstein
& Wolf. He is married with three children and five grandchildren, and resides in
Lawrence.

Q. As you reflect on those days you spent prosecuting some of the worst monsters
in history, what stands out most strongly in your memory?

A. It was incredible. The events that had occurred were so sadistic and so
gruesome that they were almost absolutely unbelievable. And when I first started
questioning potential witnesses, I'll be perfectly candid with you, I thought
here were some people who had been mistreated in the concentration camps and
they were seeking revenge, and that they were really doing a job drawing on
fantasy rather than reality.

Q. You believed they were embellishing?

A. Absolutely. And when I questioned a number of witnesses, and they related
substantially the same things, then I knew the events had occurred. Because
these witnesses didn't have a chance to get together ahead of time and fabricate
their stories. And I began to believe and now would believe anything.

Q. These things were not known to the world then, even in 1945?

A. Of course it was revealed first when the camps were liberated. Until then the
world knew there were concentration camps, and the people in Germany knew that
there were concentration camps as places to be avoided. But what went on was no
more known there that what you know about what goes on in Attica [State Prison],
for example. You don't know what goes on there nor do you know what goes on down
in Pilgrim [State Hospital in Brentwood].

Q. Are you suggesting these kind of things are happening all the time?

A. I don't know. But not on the scale that they happened in Germany.

Q. Did you find that the people running the camps and on the staffs seemed to be
predisposed to act as they did?

A. That's the thing that's disturbing. Some of those people had just as normal a
background as you or I. But once they started being exposed to violence and
mistreatment it was like a snowball rolling down a hill. As long as they stayed
there and were exposed to it the bigger the snowball and the more unconscionable
these people became.

Q. And the guards?

A. Most of the guards were men that had been recruited off the streets, the
unemployed from Berlin, Frankfort, Hamburg, Munich. They were thugs picked up
off the streets. They became the Death's Head units of the SS.

The Jews came after the pogroms started in 1936, 1937. In 1938, when the Nazis
took over Austria, in order to get rid of opposition, they took all the leaders
and carted them off to one of the concentration camps. First there was Dachau,
then Mauthausen.

From 1938 on, they were just working the tails off the prisoners and they didn't
feed them hardly anything. There was starvation and hard work under living
conditions that prevented them from getting the rest at night to do a hard day's
work the next day. All of that was calculated to destroy them physically. Then
there were floggings and wrist hangings and that sort of thing.

Then, as the staff grew, they drew on units of the SS.

Q. When they were tried, did they remain totally inured to what they had done?

A. They had no remorse, none that I saw. There were some that the shock was such
when they were sentenced to death that they fainted. Basically they were tough.
But they died just like dogs. The highest-ranking man that I prosecuted was
August Eigruber, the gauleiter of Lower Danubia, a part of Austria. That
scoundrel, he had a concentration camp that he put people in of his own whim and
caprice. The last thing Eigruber said when the noose was put around his neck was
''Heil Hitler.''

Q. How could it be that the brutal Ilse Koch was not executed when so many
others were?

A. I tried these people for the violation of the rules of land warfare. You get
the foundation for that from the Hague Convention of 1907 and the Geneva
Convention of 1929. What I did was try them for participating, aiding and
abetting a common design to subject allied nationals to beatings, torture,
starvation and killing and for doing the same thing to prisoners of war. I tried
Ilse Koch for aiding and abetting this common design. I did not try her
specifically for making lampshades out of human skin. She was very fond of such
objects.

When prisoners were sent around the commandant's house, if they were Jewish or
Poles or Russians, those who were not supposed to be really human, when those
prisoners were around there, if she saw one looking at her she would take down
his number and report him and he would then be flogged. He would be given 25
lashes. And that sort of flogging to those prisoners, who were almost starved to
death, was a shock the nervous system which often did result in death. And she
would parade herself around in tight-fitting clothing before those poor devils.

Q. What was her demeanor during the trial?

A. That this was a big bunch of lies and that she was not guilty of any
misconduct. I put on enough witnesses to make out a case to justify a sentence
of death. The court sentenced her to life imprisonment because she was pregnant
at the time.

And then General [Lucius D.] Clay reduced her sentence to four years. The reason
given was that there was insufficient credible evidence to justify a sentence of
that severity. Well the whole point was, the very nature of these camps was that
what took place there was incredible.

The biggest job I had was trying to get the court to believe the witnesses that
I put on the stand. She was later tried by the German people for crimes against
Germans and she was again sentenced to life imprisonment and she committed
suicide in prison.

Q. You were trained as a soldier and a lawyer. You tried soldiers for violations
of international law, but they said they were doing their duty as soldiers
trained to follow orders.

A. The point is, when an order is illegal on its face, you don't have to obey
it. This business that they would be shot if they didn't obey was for the birds.
We had evidence of some of the doctors who declined to participate in some of
the activities. They were not taken out and shot, they were just transferred to
another outfit.

Q. Were there orders that American soldiers in Vietnam should have disobeyed ?

A. I don't know what the conditions were in Vietnam. I do know that in the
concentration camp cases these people were seeing assaults and batteries
occurring and every kind of invasion of human rights that you can imagine. And
this went on over the course of a period of time. It was nothing instantaneous,
where it occurred on the spur of the moment and they had to make a decision.
They had a chance for reflection and everything else. So I can't answer your
Vietnam question because I don't know the circumstances.

Q. You saw from close range the depravity of a nation. As that nation moves now
to reunite again, are you fearful?

A. Not at all. Justice demands that there be some sort of separation of those
who voluntarily participated in these wrongful acts and that large group of the
impassive and unorganized that did not participate. You cannot visit the sins of
the fathers upon the sons or the children. The conditions that existed in
Germany that gave rise to Hitler are certainly not present in Germany today.

Q. You are not one who believes that in Germany a propensity remains.

A. Oh no, not at all. This is 45 years later. That's two generations.

Q. What should be remembered first and foremost about the Holocaust?

A. There's got to be a recognition that everybody, everybody has got to have a
concept of the importance of human rights. And if there is a recognition of the
meaning of human rights, then you will never have any more holocausts.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo; William Dowdell Denson, a former war crimes prosecutor, in his
office in Mineola (NYT/Michael Shavel)

                   Copyright 1990 The New York Times Company


                              129 of 288 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                   May 6, 1990, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

IN SHORT;
FICTION

BYLINE: By DAVID MURRAY

SECTION: Section 7; Page 22, Column 1; Book Review Desk

LENGTH: 304 words



THE EVENING NEWS. By Arthur Hailey. (Doubleday, $21.95.) Arthur Hailey's 10th
novel is a literary example of an old boxing adage: if you don't have the fistic
power, dazzle them with footwork. ''The Evening News'' is painstakingly
researched, convolutedly plotted, peopled with poster-paint characters and
written in a relentlessly breathless style. Its central characters are a
television anchorman, Crawford Sloane, and his wife, Jessica, who live an
opulent Ken-and-Barbie life in Larchmont, N.Y., until some nasty Shining Path
terrorists come north to stage a kidnapping. The plot revolves around the
efforts of the network folks to free Sloane's captive family. The settings are
the New York corporate offices and newsrooms of the network and the Peruvian
jungle, with flashbacks to Vietnam thrown in for good measure. There are the
obligatory steamy sex scenes (one between a network correspondent and a flight
attendant on the papal aircraft, no less) and a couple of plugs for Mr. Hailey's
favorite Manhattan restaurants. So far, so good: at first ''The Evening News''
looks like yet another quick-paced novel written with an eye on movie or
mini-series rights. But Mr. Hailey irks as he embellishes the telling of a
reasonably good story that has some reasonably interesting characters. He
manages to condescend to nearly all his women (the head of the network, for
example, makes Medea look like Mary Poppins) and he downshifts into low
stylistic gear with depressing regularity. We learn, whether we want to know it
or not, how Opa Locka, Fla., and White Plains, N.Y., got their names. We also
get, between quotation marks, lectures on the past, present and future of the
television and print news business, including a prediction that The New York
Times will soon be using full-color photographs on page 1.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Review

                   Copyright 1990 The New York Times Company


                              130 of 288 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                   May 6, 1990, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

IN SHORT;
FICTION

BYLINE: By JOHN DOMINI

SECTION: Section 7; Page 22, Column 1; Book Review Desk

LENGTH: 289 words



WILD AT HEART: The Story of Sailor and Lula. By Barry Gifford. (Grove
Weidenfeld, $15.95.) Barry Gifford's fourth novel (which David Lynch, the
director of ''Blue Velvet,'' is bringing to the screen) is made up mostly of
conversations in cars, Southern variety. In ''Wild at Heart,'' Sailor Ripley,
fresh from two years in a North Carolina prison farm, breaks parole and hits the
road for dream-bright California. Along for the ride is his girlfriend, Lula
Pace Fortune. On their tail is a private investigator, Johnnie Farragut, who's
trying to win the affections of Lula's disapproving mother, Marietta. Sailor is
thoughtful but spacey, a sweet boy who nonetheless suffers an amoral lack of
judgment. Lula, barely out of her teens, is the one to reckon with - dreamy,
poetic, persevering, meditative, perspicacious, heartsore and practical to boot.
Her past is disturbing, too. When the others are on stage, Barry Gifford's brief
gab-driven novel offers a tangy low-life farce, spiced by eccentricities but
never quite achieving full novelistic pungency. The lovelorn tracker Farragut, a
bit of a writer himself, seems likable, but he's a desultory detective at best.
The man never figures out enough of what's going on to deserve genuine sympathy.
And Bobby Peru, the bad boy who comes to threaten Sailor and Lula's flight, has
some awfully familiar elements: bigotry, misogyny, bloodlust left over from
Vietnam, even steel-toed boots. Whenever Lula is at the center of events,
however, the drawling sideways talk can hurt like fine fiction should hurt; she
delivers surprises at once artful and humane. Not for nothing does Mr. Gifford
give her the novel's title line: ''The world is really wild at heart and weird
on top.''

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Review

                   Copyright 1990 The New York Times Company


                              131 of 288 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                   May 6, 1990, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

Yale Preserves History Of Kent State Tragedy

BYLINE: By NORA FITZGERALD

SECTION: Section 12CN; Page 6, Column 5; Connecticut Weekly Desk

LENGTH: 800 words


IN Yale University's Sterling Memorial Library, 76 boxes of legal transcripts,
letters, and rally posters recall the deaths of four students 20 years ago at
Kent State University in Ohio.

The Kent State Collection's accumulated details tell a powerful story. Yale
librarians warn potential viewers that one box contains disturbing photographs -
morgue shots of the slain students, Allison Krause, Jeffrey Glenn Miller,
William K. Schroeder and Sandra Lee Scheuer.

Another box holds a videotape documenting 13 seconds on May 4, 1970, when 27
Ohio National Guardsmen dressed in riot gear fired their combat rifles at
students who were protesting President Richard M. Nixon's announcement of an
offensive by American troops in Cambodia.

The massive repository of documents and memorabilia is at Yale because it ''was
the only place that agreed to give anyone access who wanted to see the
collection, and that's what the families wanted,'' said Steven Keller, a
Columbus, Ohio, lawyer. In the 1970's, Mr. Keller helped the victims' families
seek redress, and he donated much of the Kent State material to Yale on the
seventh anniversary of the killings.

The families did not want the collection to remian in Ohio, said Elaine Miller
Holstein, mother of Jeffrey Miller.

Defeats in Court

''Certainly, the State of Ohio had been less than cooperative,'' she said. ''And
the families were very upset at Kent State.''

Katharine Morton, the head of manuscripts and archives at the Sterling Library,
said its holdings include 2,000 such specialized collections of material
preserved for research. Most of the collections are related to Yale's history,
she said. Others include the papers of Edward M. House, an adviser to President
Woodrow Wilson, and Henry L. Stimson, who was Secretary of State under President
Herbert Hoover and Secretary of War under President Franklin D. Roosevelt.

The Kent State Collection documents the decade that the victims' families sought
justice in the court system. A 1974 criminal complaint, in which they contended
that the students' civil rights had been infringed, was dismissed. A civil suit
ended in defeat in 1975. The families appealed, and in 1979, the case finally
ended in a settlement of $675,000, to be shared by the plaintiffs.

The families said they agreed to the out-of-court settlement only because it was
accompanied by an apology from the defendants - Gov. James A. Rhodes of Ohio and
27 National Guardsmen. The apology said, in part, ''Better ways must be found to
deal with these confrontations.''

Deciding on the wording of the apology took several days of negotiation, Mrs.
Holstein said. And even then, she said, the families found it unsatisfactory.
''We had to wrench every word out of them,'' she said. ''And even then, it could
be interpreted several ways.''

Letter to Nixon

There are many vignettes within the larger story of the collection, like that of
Dean Kahler, one of nine students wounded by the guardsmen. Mr. Kahler was shot
in the back and paralyzed from the waist down; today the 38-year-old is the
County Commissioner of Athens County, Ohio.

Mr. Kahler said he will donate his own materials to the Yale collection,
''including the clothes I wore that day.''

Another vignette concerns Peter Davies, a British-born former insurance agent,
who knew none of the victims but was so outraged that he began to work
tirelessly as an investigator of the incident. Eventually, he wrote a book,
''The Truth About Kent State,'' and donated all material from his research to
Yale.

The collection begins with a letter to President Nixon from Mr. Davies, dated
May 8, 1970, protesting the killings.

Less known than the stories of the students are those of the National Guardsmen
involved, who were about the same age as their victims. Box 25, still closed by
court order, is thought to contain sensitive material about the guardsmen,
including medical records and family histories.

Yale's Kent State materials are available to anyone who wants to see them,
weekdays from 8:30 A.M. to 4:45 P.M. Despite its size, the collection is still
not complete. Sanford Rosen, a Yale Law School graduate and the chief counsel in
the civil suit brought by the families, said he has a roomful of materials that
he will soon donate.

''Some files have yet to be disgorged by the Department of Justice,'' Mr. Rosen
said. ''They simply have not complied with the Freedom of Information order.
I'll have to pursue that. The litigation may not be over.''

Each year, the anniversary of the Kent State killings attracts a flurry of
activity. But when commemorative events and coverage subside, there is still the
collection, which makes the students' deaths an enduring part of history. ''I do
get some solace in that,'' Mrs. Holstein said.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1990 The New York Times Company


                              132 of 288 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                   May 7, 1990, Monday, Late Edition - Final

As Armed Forces Cut Back, Some Lose a Way Up in Life

BYLINE: By PETER APPLEBOME, Special to The New York Times

SECTION: Section A; Page 1, Column 5; National Desk

LENGTH: 1252 words

DATELINE: ATLANTA, May 3


Greg Powell agrees with the ads that say the military is ''a great place to
start,'' but for now he is washing dishes at an Atlanta hotel and hoping he will
get the opportunity to start his career in the Army.

Mr. Powell, a high school graduate who has twice failed the test to qualify for
enlistment in the Army, is among thousands of young people caught in the middle
as the military services cut back on personnel and raise standards for
admission, particularly education requirements and scores on Army qualifying
tests.

Because of planned troop cutbacks in Europe, the Army this year reduced its
recruiting class to 92,000 from 120,000, and the other military services are
facing cutbacks as well.

Implications of Selectivity

The Army's increasing selectivity is bringing with it a vexing social question:
What does the nation lose if the military no longer serves as a channel for
upward mobility for those at the bottom of the social ladder, especially members
of minority groups?

''What's happening is not an Army problem but a national one,'' said Lawrence
Korb, former Assistant Secretary of Defense for Manpower, Installations and
Logistics in the Reagan Administration and now with the Brookings Institution, a
Washington-based research center. ''Throughout our history, the military has
furnished upward mobility. Since the early 1970's, blacks have really found a
home there. If that diminishes, then the Army doesn't have a problem, but
society does.''

Blacks, who make up 12.4 percent of the population, now account for about 28
percent of the Army. Hispanic soldiers account for 4 percent.

With the thawing of the Cold War, the military is preparing for major cutbacks
in troop strength. The Army, which employs about 758,000 of the nation's two
million active military personnel, has proposed cutting its active force by
35,000 men and women each year over the next four years.

Potential for More Cutbacks

It could be years before the full extent of the cutbacks is determined. Army
Secretary Michael Stone predicted recently that the Army could cut as many as
250,000 soldiers from its ranks by the mid-1990's.

The severe troop cutbacks are accelerating the trend toward greater selectivity
that has dominated in military recruiting over the past decade.

The percentage of Army recruits who are high school graduates has increased to
about 94 percent this year from 54 percent in 1980, according to Lieut. Col.
Alex Angelle, spokesman at the United States Army Recruiting Command
headquarters near Chicago. At most stations, a high school diploma is now
mandatory. In 1980, only 25 percent of recruits scored in the top half of the
Army's entrance test, he said, but now about 66 percent do. Now, at the height
of the recruiting season, as high school seniors plan their futures, a score in
the top half of the test is almost essential for acceptance.

Recruiters say the time has long passed when the Army could provide a spot to
any youth in need of direction and a fresh start.

''People used to see the Army as the last alternative - there's nothing else I
can do, what can you guys do for me?'' said Staff Sgt. Rickey B. Tarver, a
recruiter at the United States Army Recruiting Station in a largely black
section of Southwest Atlanta.

'They're Crushed'

He continued: ''It's not that way anymore. We have people who take the test
every six months, but the trouble is the requirements keep going up, so they
just get further away. What's sad is when you see the people come in with their
new high school diplomas - the paint's not even dry. They're crushed when they
don't get in. They just don't know how tough the standards are.''

One of those caught in the bind is Mr. Powell, who is 24 years old. Last year,
after spending a few years working, he decided to join the Army. But he twice
failed to pass the entrance exam, and the standards have gone up since the last
time he took it. Mr. Powell said he plans to take it until he passes. Under the
rules, he can do so every six months.

''It's not easy; I didn't know it would be this tough,'' said Mr. Powell, who
earns $5 an hour in his dishwashing job but hopes to make enough money in the
Army to go to college. ''But I don't see it as a setback, but as a stepping
stone. After a few years of working, I know now what I want to do, and I know
what I don't want to do.''

He is not alone in finding the going tough. On a recent morning, one woman
called the recruiting office saying her son, now in the 10th grade, did not want
to go to school and didn't seem to know what he wanted to do with his life. She
was politely told that there was nothing the Army could do for him now, and that
he would have to graduate from high school if he wanted to try to enlist.

Tammy Jones and Jimmy Randolph, both 22-year-old high school graduates with two
years of college, walked in to see what was available. Both failed the test that
is given as an indicator of how well they will do on the Armed Forces Qualifying
Test that is required for admission. They were advised to study before taking
the qualifying test.

Criminal Records Scrutinized

Ms. Jones said she had a minor theft charge pending against her. She described
it as a first offense for taking $20 from a cash register. Recruiters said that
would probably not disqualify her, but that the Army is increasingly rigorous in
turning down applicants with criminal records.

Officials say the Army's job training programs and its college fund, which can
provide as much as $25,000 in college money to each recruit, are the biggest
inducements for enlistment. Those incentives are strong enough that the Army has
been able to fill its recruiting needs despite seeing its advertising budget
shrink to $60 million this year from $63 million in 1989. Only five years ago,
in 1986, the Army spent $76.9 million on advertising.

The rising standards apply across the board, but they seem to be having the
greatest effect in poorer areas. Sgt. Reese J. Stewart, commander of the
recruiting station in suburban Kennesaw, northwest of Atlanta, said his largely
middle-class recruits generally find the opportunities they are seeking.

''I have three buddies who went into the Army, one in the Marines, one in the
Air Force, and I know two going into the Naval Reserve this year,'' said Greg
Moore, an 18-year-old high school senior from Marietta. ''It seems to be the way
to go because of the college and the benefits.''

Some See a Dramatic Drop

But Sgt. Willie Jones, station commander in largely black southwest Atlanta,
said he was seeing a dramatic drop in the number of potential applicants who can
qualify.

He said that five years ago about 65 percent of the applicants he saw qualfied
for the Army. Today he estimated that only about 5 of the 80 people who applied
over the past month will be accepted.

Sergeant Jones said that the Army was far more technologically demanding than it
had ever been and that the military gained by having personnel with better
qualifications. But he acknowledged that there were social implications to the
increasing selectivity.

''I think it's going to become a big issue in the future, because it's tough
now, and I'm looking for the scores to go even higher,'' he said. ''You already
hear the parents say, 'I remember during Vietnam you could go in if you scored a
16 on the test and now you need a 50?' I guess a lot of people forget that
everything changes with time, and the Army is changing, too.''

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: photos: Branches of the military service are cutting down the number in
their recruiting classes, making it much harder for those who want to enlist.
Greg Powell, a high school graduate who washes dishes at the Sheraton Hotel in
Atlanta, has twice failed the qualifying test for Army enlistment.; Staff Sgt.
Rickey B. Tarver, an Army recruiter in a largely black section of Southwest
Atlanta, said people who come in with their new high school diplomas are
''crushed'' when they do not qualify. ''They just don't know how tough the
standards are,'' he said. (Photographs by Alan S. Weiner for The New York Times)
(pg. D12)

                   Copyright 1990 The New York Times Company


                              133 of 288 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                   May 7, 1990, Monday, Late Edition - Final

Ignored: A Path to Peace in Cambodia

SECTION: Section A; Page 14, Column 1; Editorial Desk

LENGTH: 460 words


In the waning days of the Vietnam War, President Nixon ordered American troops
into Cambodia. He said it was necessary lest the United States be seen as ''a
pitiful, helpless giant.'' That invasion 20 years ago helped bring the Khmer
Rouge to power and turn Cambodia into a killing field.

Today, President Bush acts as though the U.S. were a pitiful, helpless giant in
Cambodia - and a confused one at that.

He insists that he wants peace between the Vietnamese-backed Government in Phnom
Penh and anti-Vietnamese guerrillas. Yet he does little but complain about the
failure of Beijing and Prince Sihanouk, the nominal anti-Vietnamese leader, to
heed his requests. The President talks as though he wanted to end the nightmare
inflicted by Khmer Rouge forces. Yet he praises China for supplying their
non-Communist allies. This amounts to more Chinese arms for the Khmer Rouge.

Obstacles to peace are formidable. But the fundamental failure is one of policy,
in Washington: the Administration, its convoluted explanations notwithstanding,
seems more interested in fighting a phantom war with Vietnam than in seeking
peace in Cambodia.

If Mr. Bush really wants to stop the Khmer Rouge, he needn't depend on Beijing
or Prince Sihanouk. There's now a chance to choke the arms pipeline - in
Thailand.

Cambodia's present Government was installed by Vietnamese troops in 1979.
Successive American Administrations have been willing to go to virtually any
lengths to deny Hanoi further triumphs. Now the U.S. refuses to recognize that
Vietnamese forces have withdrawn from Cambodia. Doing so would acknowledge that
the U.S. is helping to sustain a civil war, not a resistance movement.

The Administration professes to favor a political settlement. But the acid test
of its sincerity lies in whether it tries to control the arms conduits that
rebel forces need to sustain the war.

Geography dictates that outside military aid to all Cambodian guerrillas must
pass through Thailand. Chatichai Choonhavan, Thailand's Prime Minister, has
repeatedly signaled his desire to convert Indochina from a war zone to a
marketplace. But so far, the Thai armed forces that control the supply routes
have shown no enthusiasm for their Prime Minister's peace plans. A clear U.S.
position in favor of squeezing the arms flows could change their minds.

Oh, we can't do that, the Administration would say. That would also choke off
arms to the non-Communist guerrillas. That's true, but so what? Peace can only
come to Cambodia through serious diplomacy and there won't be any while the guns
keep flowing to the Khmer Rouge murderers. Only by calling on Thailand to halt
the arms supply can the U.S. begin to exorcise the ghosts of Vietnam for itself,
and for Cambodians.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Editorial

                   Copyright 1990 The New York Times Company


                              134 of 288 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                   May 7, 1990, Monday, Late Edition - Final

Delusions Marked Saigon Pullout to the End

SECTION: Section A; Page 14, Column 4; Editorial Desk

LENGTH: 363 words


To the Editor:

How do you crawl out of a country standing up? That was the riddle facing the
United States Embassy in Saigon following the 1973 cease-fire agreement, which
left more than 120,000 Communist troops inside South Vietnam. Our last
Ambassador there, Graham Martin, and his staff answered the riddle by conjuring
illusions, misleading Washington (and finally themselves) about Saigon's
strength and Hanoi's weaknesses -all to keep Congressional support for the South
Vietnamese intact.

To judge by the April 9 letter from Wolfgang Lehmann, a former Martin aide, the
conjuring habit does not die easily. Mr. Lehmann would have us believe that
Martin's staff was so farsighted that it took all steps to insure destruction of
classified documents and evacuation of the Embassy's Vietnamese charges when the
illusions burst and the Communists marched on Saigon in April 1975.

But most of Martin's senior aides remained deluded to the end. Ignoring
pessimistic intelligence reports that ruled out a last-minute negotiated
''fix,'' they failed to plan adequately, or in time, for an orderly pullout,
thus courting panic among those dependent on us. As a result, the majority of
the Vietnamese, including our employees, who escaped Saigon during the war's
final days, did so only on their own or only with the help of junior Embassy
officers and United States military personnel who circumvented Martin's go-slow
policies to avert the threatened chaos.

And though the Embassy did manage at the last minute to incinerate most of its
own classified archives, no one saw to the destruction of related and often
duplicate intelligence files stored at Saigon's military and police
headquarters. Thus, when Hanoi's legions entered Saigon on April 30, they
captured sufficient intelligence to enable them to track down abandoned
Vietnamese agents who'd made the mistake of trusting in us.

The final obscenity is that 15 years later, Martin's men still remain
unchastened.

FRANK SNEPP
  Marina del Rey, Calif., April 26, 1990

The writer, a strategy analyst for the Central Intelligence Agency in Saigon
1969-70, is author of the Vietnam memoir ''Decent Interval.''

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Letter

                   Copyright 1990 The New York Times Company


                              135 of 288 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                   May 7, 1990, Monday, Late Edition - Final

IN THE NATION;
L.B.J.'s Great Society

BYLINE: By Tom Wicker

SECTION: Section A; Page 15, Column 5; Editorial Desk

LENGTH: 749 words

DATELINE: AUSTIN, Tex.


''This country,'' President Lyndon Johnson once said, ''is rich enough to do
anything it has the guts to do and the vision to do and the will to do.'' You'd
never catch Ronald Reagan or George Bush expressing that kind of confidence in
America, despite the patriotism they so fulsomely extol.

L.B.J. not only believed it, he acted on it - so enthusiastically that his
''Great Society'' program is widely considered today to have been grandiose,
extravagant and a failure.

That's certainly what the Mssrs. Reagan and Bush, plus all too many contemporary
Democrats, would have you believe - mostly in order to avoid domestic spending
that might run up the deficit that dominates their politics. But was the Great
Society really a costly failure?

Not in the predictable but plausible view of Joseph A. Califano, a former
Johnson lieutenant who was a principal architect of the program. At a symposium
observing the 25th anniversary of Mr. Johnson's inauguration in 1965, he
contended that the Great Society was alive and well, ''in Medicare and Medicaid,
in the air we breathe and the water we drink, in the rivers and lakes we swim
in; in the colleges our students attend; in the medical miracles from the
National Institutes of Health; in mass transportation and equal opportunity.''

Sargent Shriver, who directed the Johnson ''war on poverty,'' concurred. Before
an enthusiastic crowd at the L.B.J. Library, he listed a number of Great Society
successes ''all still in existence, all helping millions of Americans today'' -
Head Start, the Job Corps, community action grants, Foster Grandparents (which
Nancy Reagan once proclaimed her favorite program), Upward Bound, community
health centers, legal services for the poor, Vista, college work-study programs.

Mr. Califano and Mr. Shriver, as well as other Johnson Administration veterans -
Bill Moyers, Jack Valenti, Nicholas deB. Katzenbach, Douglass Cater, Lee White,
Charles Haar - pointed out that Mr. Johnson was the first President to take
steps to enhance the environment, and that the Civil Rights Act of 1964
(proposed by President Kennedy) and the Voting Rights Act of 1965 were the high
points of the civil rights movement.

''Did we legislate too much?'' Mr. Califano was willing to ask. Were mistakes
made? ''Plenty of them.'' He cited inefficient payment systems for medical care,
too many narrow categorical grant programs, lack of trust in the states and the
middle class, too much faith in regulation, the failure ''to recognize that
government could not do it all.''

But even the mistakes, he said, ''were . . . fueled by the frustration of seeing
so much poverty, ignorance and illness amidst such wealth.'' Quoting Mr.
Johnson, he said such mistakes were part of asking 'not how much, but how good;
not only how to create wealth, but how to use it.' ''

The economist James K. Galbraith argued that Mr. Johnson had been right that the
U.S. could afford whatever it willed itself to do. For all the cost of the Great
Society, he pointed out, real per capita gross national product is 60 percent
greater today than in 1965; and ''publicly held national debt'' is 41 percent of
G.N.P. now, 39 in 1965, ''essentially the same.'' Thus, ''we are not poor, and
not broke . . . we can attempt the possible, without fear of ruin.''

Nor has experience, Mr. Galbraith insisted, borne out the arguments that
''social and environmental regulation wastes resources'' or that welfare causes
the poor not to work -''to the contrary, welfare clients . . . must supplement
their meager benefits with work . . . in order to survive.'' Even some
conservatives, he said, now acknowledge that the evidence suggests ''better
welfare, not less welfare.''

A conclave of old L.B.J. hands, most stepping gingerly around the war in Vietnam
(''I wasn't involved in that''), is not the place, of course, for a final
judgment on the Great Society, or on Lyndon Johnson. But the gathering here did
restore a useful perspective - a number of great achievements, some lasting,
were registered; many Americans were given hope, help and a chance they would
not otherwise have had; government was made to function powerfully and well
until a divisive war shattered the Johnson ''consensus.''

It's too bad George Bush did not sit in on the Austin symposium. He might have
learned something about vision and aspiration, confidence and compassion, the
capacity of a President to lead, and how constricting ''prudence'' can be if
that's all there is.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: OP-ED

                   Copyright 1990 The New York Times Company


                              136 of 288 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                   May 7, 1990, Monday, Late Edition - Final

Fickle Tastes and Prices Idle Onion Farmers

BYLINE: By LISA W. FODERARO

SECTION: Section B; Page 1, Column 4; Metropolitan Desk

LENGTH: 1253 words

DATELINE: PINE ISLAND, N.Y.


The bright green shoots have poked through the rich black soil of Stanley
Labanowski Jr.'s 100-acre onion farm here, the same farm that his grandfather
began in 1914 and that his father, at 83 years old, still plows and harrows with
care. But this season will be their last.

Almost two thirds of their fields lay fallow. Their giant warehouse, where more
than six million onions were stored in good years, now is used by a number of
publications, including Rolling Stone magazine, to store back issues. The entire
farm is up for sale.

''I love working the land,'' said Mr. Labanowski, who is 49 years old. ''But
this is a dead end.''

Like many farmers in the ''black dirt'' region of southern Orange County, where
the highly organic soil of the Walkill Valley is ideal for onions, the
Labanowskis are bowing out. The pressures are many: growing competition from the
western states and Canada, rising production costs, and the fickle tastes of
Americans, who now seem to prefer a milder onion to the pungent variety
harvested here.

A sense of loss shrouds the valley, a fertile basin straddling the New York-New
Jersey border that was settled by Polish immigrants at the turn of the century.

Onion No Longer King

''The onion is no longer king,'' said John Ruszkiewicz, a 54-year-old farmer.
''You drive by and see land that three years ago was in production, and today
it's sitting idle.''

''From World War I to Vietnam, I never heard of a single farmer folding up,''
said Mr. Labanowski Sr., who started farming 76 years ago at the age of 7. ''And
now that's all you hear. This guy's pulling out. That guy's pulling out.''

And as the farms go, an identity as hearty and long-lived as, well, the onion,
will go with them. Talk at the local bar, for instance, has long centered not on
romance and work exactly, but on maggots and pesticides. Saturday nights are
spent at the Jolly Onion Inn over onion rings and prime rib. And people are
always busy paying off the last Onion Harvest Festival, staged every five years
since 1939, or planning the next.

'For Sale' Signs on Barns

Signs of decline are seen throughout the black-dirt towns, from ''For Sale''
signs on barn sides to overgrown fields. Between 1984 and 1988, the number of
acres used for onions in Orange County dropped to 5,300 from 7,500, according to
the State Department of Agriculture and Markets. A half-dozen farmers have gone
bankrupt in the last five years, while others' farms lie dormant, unable to find
a buyer.

''Ten years ago, you could get $3,000 an acre, but today, you name your price,''
said Walter Chimelowski, a 65-year-old onion farmer who wants to retire and sell
his 120 acres. ''When we were young, every acre of land you owned was seen as an
investment, but now every acre is seen as a burden.''

Struggling farmers elsewhere can often cash in on their land when developers
come knocking. But Orange County's fields of muck soil, as the black dirt is
known in scientific circles, are not conducive to construction. Thousands of
years ago they formed the bottom of glacial lakes, and if they are not
cultivated they will revert to swampland.

''In agriculture, people always think times are hard, but as I see it, these
really are troubled times for the Orange County onion industry,'' said Dr. Roy
A. Ellerbrock, an associate professor of vegetables and crops at the New York
State College of Agriculture and Life Sciences at Cornell.

Costs of Farming Soar

Onions are still the most successful vegetable in New York State, amounting to a
$45-million-a-year industry. While there are pockets of muck soil farther
upstate under cultivation, Orange County produces more than half of the state's
onions. The county has the second-largest concentration of muck soil in the
nation, after the Everglades in Florida, and the largest area of such land used
for onion crops.

What is wrong, then? Farmers say the main problem is that the cost of equipment,
herbicides and pesticides has soared, along with property taxes, and the price
of onions has not kept pace.

''Fifteen or twenty years ago, it cost $300 to produce an acre of onions, and
we'd get $5 or $6 per 100 pounds,'' Mr. Chimelowski said. ''Today, it's $1,400
to produce an acre of onions, and last fall we only got $7 or $8.''

In addition, during the 1970's, many Orange County farmers, to save money on
farmhands, went from having a number of root crops like onions, radishes,
carrots, lettuce and potatoes, to a single crop. Onions are easily harvested by
machine, while the other crops require more manual labor. #10 Years of Bad
Weather The lack of crop diversity, which enriches the soil and cuts down on
pests, has taken its toll on the land. Today those fields produce far fewer
onions than the same fields of 20 years ago.

Orange County farmers have also suffered from 10 years of bad weather, from hail
storms and droughts to excessive moisture and high winds, which can blow away 40
acres of newly planted seed in an afternoon.

But they have mostly been buffeted by market forces. In the 1980's, yellow
onions from Canada, particularly the provinces of Quebec and Ontario, depressed
the market here. Some western states like Colorado, Oregon and Idaho also
increased production. Because of the dry climate, those states can produce
onions at a lower cost, not needing as many pesticides.

The county has also not fared well in the battle for the hearts and palates of
the consumer. With more people eating out in recent years, the demand for the
yellow globe cooking onion, the kind grown here, has waned. Meanwhile, some
western states, as well as Georgia, which produce a larger, sweeter onion, have
successfully promoted their varieties.

''The Georgia onion is so sweet you can eat it raw and it's delicious,'' said
Nicholas Meyer, the cooperative extension agent for vegetable crops in the
Orange County office of the Cornell Cooperative Extension. #30 Percent of Onions
Discarded The image that bigger is better has become so powerful that Mr.
Labanowski this year had to throw out 40,000 pounds of onions that measured
under two inches, about 30 percent of his crop, because the market was no longer
interested. Two years ago, he said, they would have sold easily.

That uncertainty, along with the prospect of 12-hour days under an unrelenting
sun only to lose money in a poor year, has interrupted the cycle of farms being
passed from father to son. ''If I offered Walt Jr. my farm for nothing, he
wouldn't take it,'' Mr. Chimelowski said of his 40-year-old son.

''Years ago, onion farmers did better than the guy carrying the lunch pail, but
now it's just the opposite,'' he said. ''People go to IBM, they get $35,000,
$40,000 a year. On a farm, you'd have to work like heck to make that. The
younger generation doesn't want to take the chances or work the six- or
seven-day weeks.''

Some onion farmers have recently switched to sod, now covering some 3,000 acres
of the total 14,000-acre black dirt region. But demand for sod has slackened
lately because of a weak housing market. Other farmers are retiring their
fields, trying to sell them and leasing the cavernous onion-storage buildings to
magazine and book distributors.

Mr. Labanowsky believes he can make $80,000 to $100,000 a year from the rental
income from his warehouse, as well as from a couple of farmhouses, and the
interest on the proceeds from his 100 acres, assuming they sell. ''Why should I
work,'' he said, ''when I can get more money by not working.''

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: photos: Pressures from growing competition, rising production costs and
the fickle tastes of Americans are causing onion farmers in the ''black dirt''
region of Orange County, N.Y., to bow out. The fields, like this one in Goshen,
N.Y., have highly organic soil ideal for onions.; Recently harvested onions from
a Pine Island, N.Y., farm. (pg. B1); Stanley Labanowski Jr., left, has put his
100-acre onion farm, which his grandfather began in 1914, up for sale. ''This is
a dead end,'' he said. He is shown with his father, Stanley Labanowksi Sr.
(Photographs by Joyce Dopkeen/The New York Times); map of Pine Island, N.Y. (pg.
B8)

                   Copyright 1990 The New York Times Company


                              137 of 288 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                  May 9, 1990, Wednesday, Late Edition - Final

Bush Seems Concerned That Economy May Slip

BYLINE: By ROBERT D. HERSHEY Jr., Special to The New York Times

SECTION: Section B; Page 8, Column 5; Financial Desk

LENGTH: 872 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, May 8


Just when it seemed clear that the economy had once again avoided sliding into
recession, thereby further confounding those who still profess belief in
business cycles, President Bush appears to have decided that the
seven-and-a-half-year expansion is, in fact, at risk.

Within hours after his top economic adviser received word on Thursday of a
surprisingly weak April labor market, the President phoned the Senate majority
leader, George J. Mitchell, to propose a budget summit meeting at which no
subject, not even higher taxes, would be excluded. (The chairman of the
President's Council of Economic Advisers, now Michael J. Boskin, receives job
data and other figures the day before they are released to the public.) To be
sure, one statistical report -albeit probably the most important indicator of
monthly economic performance - is not by itself weighty enough to prompt a major
shift in policy. In this case, moreover, the lack of real job growth last month
resulted perhaps as much from exceptionally warm weather as from the beginnings
of an oft-predicted but elusive business downturn.

But Friday's report came at a particularly inappropriate time, coinciding with
ever-escalating estimates of the cost to the Government of rescuing savings and
loan depositors, the arrival in town of foreign central bankers and finance
ministers for a meeting of the Group of Seven industrial nations and a
disconcerting rise in inflation.

Widespread Pessimism

In addition, there is this week's giant Treasury financing, uncertainty
surrounding the economic restructuring of Eastern Europe, the woes of the real
estate and ''junk bond'' markets and, according to at least one poll taker,
widespread pessimism among consumers.

There are also domestic political stirrings that may have underscored the worst
fears of the Bush White House: that the economy could have a sinking spell, if
not in this election year, then as President Bush is seeking re-election in
1992.

Not all of the economic forces, of course, point in the same direction. If, for
example, the American consumer goes on strike, this would reduce anxiety over
inflation. Then the Federal Reserve would presumably be able to push interest
rates down instead of wondering whether it should push them up further.

Tuesday's meeting of the Fed's chief monetary policy body, however, is expected
to result in neither tightening nor easing of money. This is because the economy
itself is emitting mixed signals.

This, indeed, has been the case throughout much of the recovery that began in
late 1982, an expansion already the longest in peacetime and approaching the
record set in the 1960's, during the Vietnam War.

The lack of a widespread recession recently has prompted some to wonder whether
the traditional business cycle - booms that end in inflation-arresting busts -
has become a relic.

Most economists think not, though they suspect that slumps may now be less
severe and less frequent. Among the reasons cited are improved control of
inventories, increasingly credible monetary policies that reassure business and
investors that inflation will not be allowed to get out of control, greater
world economic integration, the fruits of techology, tax cuts and greater fiscal
restraint, even in the United States.

''We don't see the inevitability of the repetition of past cycles,'' Ernesto
Hernandez-Cata, an economist for the International Monetary Fund, said the other
day.

Economists and some politicians have also concluded that expansions die not of
old age but of bad policy. But it is not quite clear what this might be,
particularly in the present circumstances.

Ordinarily, President Bush's implied acceptance of tax increases, whatever
multi-syllable word is employed to disguise them, is not the medicine to
prescribe if recession seems to loom. The simple antidote would be lower taxes,
not higher.

In this case, President Bush and his advisers may well be calculating that a tax
increase, combined with accompanying spending cuts that the Administration could
presumably exact, would keep interest rates at levels that would sustain
economic growth and not choke it off. Rates assume increasing importance as
Government borrowing swells for the savings and loan rescue. The Treasury is
already in the embarrassing position of having to borrow each year all the money
needed to pay interest on its huge $3 trillion cumulative debt.

Recession Would Be Costly

A recession, the Administration must also figure, cannot be tolerated for this
would reduce revenues - they are already falling somewhat short - while raising
outlays. There would simply be less economic activity to tax and spending would
rise automatically to pay for such cushions as unemployment insurance.

Yet it may well be that the Administration is simply playing it safe, that the
economy is not really at risk and that the decline in private-sector jobs and
the rise in the unemployment rate last month will prove an aberration.

That is still the bet of most independent economists who point to various other
recent figures - on gross national product, factory orders, the Government's
forecasting index and others - to argue that the expansion will continue.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1990 The New York Times Company


                              138 of 288 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                  May 9, 1990, Wednesday, Late Edition - Final

Books of The Times;
The Knowing Stories of Ward Just

BYLINE: By Herbert Mitgang

SECTION: Section C; Page 19, Column 1; Cultural Desk

LENGTH: 819 words



Twenty-One
Selected Stories
By Ward Just
389 pages. Richard Todd/Houghton Mifflin. $22.95.

Ward Just left daily journalism some 20 years ago and, lucky for lovers of
distinguished fiction, turned his talents to novels and short stories. He is one
of the few modern journalists who has leaped the wall between the two crafts
successfully.

The only fault with ''Twenty-One: Selected Stories'' - and what a wonderful
fault it is! - is that many of the observations made by his characters are so
perceptive that they momentarily slow down the reader, demanding to be reread
and pondered.

It's a hallmark of Mr. Just's sympathetic manner that he is as insightful
writing about women as he is about his men, who are obviously rooted in his
experiences as a Washington and Vietnam War correspondent. ''Journalism'' is a
poignant story about a woman in her late 30's who comes to realize that her
successful career as a nomadic foreign correspondent is postponing her dream of
a personal life. By contrast, this is how he describes her oblivious male
colleagues who roll along with the wars and news:

''The older correspondents beguiled her with their European manners and
old-fashioned pride. Like journalists everywhere, they believed they could
easily have been something else: soldiers, diplomats, ministers of the interior,
novelists, innkeepers. They used their profession like a suit of armor. She
thought of them sometimes as crazed medieval warriors, clanking around the
battlefield in cuirass and basinet, invulnerable to the calamities they
witnessed. They were not heartless men, far from it, but they saw themselves as
recorders and nothing more and had contempt for younger colleagues who sought
personal and professional involvement.''

As he proved a few seasons ago in his major political novel, ''Jack Gance,'' Mr.
Just doesn't need a foreign locale to display his storytelling talents. He is
equally at home in Chicago, Boston and Washington. Half the stories in
''Twenty-One,'' including such keen views of power and its diminution as ''The
Congressman Who Loved Flaubert'' and ''A Guide to the Architecture of
Washington, D.C.,'' appeared in two earlier collections. Of course, not all the
stories are equally demanding; some of the recent ones with European settings do
not have as firm a footing as those in which the author's characters are at home
in American cities.

''About Boston,'' one of the strongest stories in the book, concerns a divorce
lawyer, his old flame, snobbery, prejudice and the interior landscape of the
city itself. Mr. Just shows some of the insight of John P. Marquand, the
once-popular author of nearly forgotten novels about proper Bostonians, but he
is more acerbic. Looking at the Hancock tower, a character calls it ''a Mondrian
among Turners,'' with its blue mirrors ''a new physics in the Back Bay,'' adding
that ''its windows popped out like so many ill-fitting contact lenses.'' Mr.
Just doesn't sound like a Boston fan. In the same story, he has his lawyer
narrator say: ''I like collapsing civilizations. I'm a connoisseur of collapse
and systems breakdown and bankruptcy - moral, ethical and financial. So Boston
is perfect.''

Chicago comes off little better in a story titled ''The North Shore, 1958.'' A
couple of adolescents discover the Edward Hoppers in the Art Institute of
Chicago, and the author uses the paintings as a metaphor for youthful yearning
and revelation. A character in the story muses: ''Dazzled, we saw the desolate
soul of the Midwest: empty streets, dark light, and turbulence under the still
skin of things. Also, it seemed to me that Hopper identified the dead hand of
the past: his people were rooted, in place forever, imprisoned by memory. And
memory was an unrequited love. Hopper confirmed all that we thought and felt
about Illinois and its bourgeois Republican values, its conformity and
repression and suspicion and yahoo chauvinism, America First.''

Here, too, the author uses the city only for atmosphere and irony. The
underlying theme that links these short stories is relationships: disappointment
in love, the dissolution of marriage, lost professional opportunities, valor in
adversity, a future that might have been different, if only. . . .

Because of another title - ''The Short War of Mr. and Mrs. Conner'' -Mr. Just's
fine story reminded me of Hemingway's story ''The Short Happy Life of Francis
Macomber.'' Naturally, the backgrounds and times differ: Mr. Just's is Saigon in
the 1960's and Hemingway's the green hills of Africa in the 1930's. But the
Vietnam War and big-game hunting only serve as setting for both authors. In both
stories, the true leitmotif is marital discord.

Ward Just's stories go beyond colorful journalism; they have something vital to
say about our striving, sometimes disappointing style of life. He has emerged as
one of the most astute writers of American fiction.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: photo: Ward Just

TYPE: Review

                   Copyright 1990 The New York Times Company


                              139 of 288 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                  May 9, 1990, Wednesday, Late Edition - Final

Carl Channell, 44, Fund-Raiser For Conservatives, Dies of Injuries

BYLINE: By MICHAEL WINES, Special to The New York Times

SECTION: Section D; Page 31, Column 1; National Desk

LENGTH: 613 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, May 8


Carl R. (Spitz) Channell, a fund-raiser for conservative political causes who
pleaded guilty to criminal charges stemming from the Iran-contra affair, died
Monday of complications from injuries he suffered in a traffic accident two
months ago. He was 44 years old.

Mr. Channell was struck by a car on March 15 as he stood beside his car on a
street in southeast Washington, according to the District of Columbia police.

The District of Columbia medical examiner's office said Mr. Channell died of
complications from lobar pneumonia from the accident, in which he suffered a
fractured skull and a broken right leg. Before the accident, Mr. Channell had
been undergoing chemotherapy for lung cancer, said a former associate who added
that the treatment had apparently succeeded.

Mr. Channell admitted in April 1987 that he had used a tax-exempt organization,
the National Endowment for the Preservation of Liberty, to funnel millions of
dollars in private contributions to a secret network that was financing a war by
the Nicaraguan rebels, or contras.

Overseen by North

The contributions, which Mr. Channell had earlier said were raised to educate
the public about conservative political causes, provided critical support for
the contras' secret arms network, which was overseen by Lieut. Col. Oliver L.
North, then an aide at the National Security Council.

Federal tax law required contributions to the organization to be used for
educational, religious, charitable, scientific, literary or other purposes that
Congress designated as exempt from Federal taxation. People who gave money to
the foundation could write off the contributions on their Federal income tax
forms.

More than $2 million from the foundation was used to buy arms and other supplies
for the contras, according to court records. A Congressional inquiry into the
Iran-contra affair concluded Mr. Channell raised about $10 million for the
contra cause and that some $4 million of that actually went to the rebels, with
the rest going for salaries, fund-raising expenses and other costs.

Under a plea agreement, Mr. Channell admitted to conspiring to defraud the
Treasury of tax revenue, and he cooperated with Federal prosecutors and
testified against Mr. North. In July 1989, after Mr. North's trial concluded,
Mr. Channell was sentenced to two years on probation.

'True to the Small-Town Values'

Born in Elkins, W.Va., Mr. Channell served in the Army in Germany during the
Vietnam War, said Jared S. Cameron, a public relations consultant who was Mr.
Channell's spokesman during the Iran-contra affair.

Mr. Channell attended American University in Washington after his service in the
Army and quickly became devoted to conservative causes after being dismayed by
protests against the Vietnam War, Mr. Cameron said.

''He was the kind of fellow who held true to the small-town values,'' he said.

Mr. Channell was a major fund-raiser for conservative causes beginning in the
late 1970's, but he was largely unknown outside Washington before the
Iran-contra affair. He began his fund-raising work with the National
Conservative Political Action Committee but left it to raise money for his own
groups and for other conservative causes.He continued until this year to raise
money to promote conservative causes through political action committees he
established in Washington, Mr. Cameron said.

Mr. Cameron said that services for Mr. Channell will be held on Saturday in
Elkins. He is survived by an aunt, Eleanor McManus, of Elkins; a nephew, Russell
Hale Channell, also of Elkins, and a sister-in-law, Mary Hale Channell, of
Charleston, W.Va. Burial will be in Huttonsville, W.Va.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo: Carl R. Channell (Associated Press)

TYPE: Obituary

                   Copyright 1990 The New York Times Company


                              140 of 288 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                  May 10, 1990, Thursday, Late Edition - Final

CHRONICLE

BYLINE: By Robert E. Tomasson

SECTION: Section B; Page 14, Column 4; Style Desk

LENGTH: 119 words


MAYA YING LIN, who designed the Vietnam Veterans Memorial in Washington when she
was a student at Yale, has been commissioned to design a sculpture to celebrate
new generations of women on that campus, culminating a yearlong observance of
the 20th anniversary of the admission of women to Yale.

The monument ''is more about the future than commemorating the past,'' Ms. Lin
said yesterday, and will likely include places where ''people can sit and enjoy
themselves.'' In 1981, when she was a senior, her design was chosen from 1,420
entries for the Vietnam memorial, a black granite work inscribed with the names
of 58,000 Americans killed or missing in the war. It is the most visited
monument in Washington.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1990 The New York Times Company


                              141 of 288 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                  May 10, 1990, Thursday, Late Edition - Final

Behind Thai Boom: The Japanese

BYLINE: By DAVID E. SANGER, Special to The New York Times

SECTION: Section D; Page 1, Column 3; Financial Desk

LENGTH: 1699 words

DATELINE: BANGKOK, Thailand


Asia is replete with economic miracle stories, so it is little surprise that
Thailand has joined the list as having one of the world's fastest-growing
economies. As evidence, the number of cars have tripled, choking traffic, and
cement is in short supply as prosperous-looking houses and industrial parks rise
almost at once.

But Thailand's remarkable boom has a twist that in many ways signals the future
of much of Southeast Asia. The money, the technology, the business strategies
and now even the emergency shipments of cement all come from Japan. And with a
mixture of elation and misgivings, Thais themselves sometimes talk about their
country as Japan's newest ''economic colony,'' a country whose prosperity is
partly attributable to its role as a relief valve for Japan's skyrocketing land
prices and acute labor shortage.

The torrent of Japanese investment so apparent in Thailand is also cascading
into Indonesia, Malaysia and Singapore, where the skills of workers are rising
and Japan sees a chance to lock up the booming Southeast Asian market while the
United States and Germany are distracted by the rush into Eastern Europe. The
question increasingly being asked here, though, is whether it is wise for
Southeast Asia to place so much of its economic destiny in Japanese hands.

''It is not in our interest to be too dependent on the Japanese,'' said Snoh
Unakul, chairman of the Thailand Development Research Institute and a former
Government official responsible for drawing in foreign investment. ''But we are
having a difficult time getting the attention of America and Europe. They are
simply not competitive.''

And though there are still conflicts with Japanese investors here, Dr. Snoh
notes, corporate Japan is coming in largely on Thailand's terms -a change that
has dampened the resentments and tensions that go back to Japan's brutal
occupation of Southeast Asia 50 years ago.

''The land and labor problems in Japan have left them with no choice,'' Dr. Snoh
said. ''They are forced by circumstances to be more open with technology and
shared management responsibility. Now, we feel we are being treated more
equally.''

The Thais have also encouraged the transfer of Japanese skills, notably by
trying to enforce stringent local-content laws governing the automobile
industry.

Japan's influence permeates Thailand in a way it did not even four years ago.
The cars and pickup trucks jamming Thailand's city streets and back mountain
roads are almost exclusively Toyotas, Nissans, Isuzus and Hondas - all with no
emission controls. By 1992, Japanese officials predict, 300,000 Thais, or 15
percent of the country's manufacturing workers, will be employed by Japanese
companies. That figure is now a little under 10 percent.

Adopting the Japanese Way

Japanese managers experienced in setting up plants in the United States and
soothing political squabbles have arrived here, hoping to do in Bangkok what
they did in Georgetown, Ky., and Smyrna, Tenn., the American production sites
for Toyota and Nissan, respectively.

And like an uncertain student who decides the safest course is to mimic the
teacher, Thailand's businesses are already adopting Japanese corporate behavior.
At 8:30 one recent morning, employees at a nearby industrial park dominated by
Japanese companies performed stretching exercises at their desks, while
manufacturing workers outside sang a Japanese company song, translated into
Thai. And deals are made by players on new golf courses.

So far, Japan's widening business role in Southeast Asia has had two dramatic
effects, business executives and government officials say. The first is a
significant erosion of American economic influence in the region, where the
United States had been the biggest investor. When talking about money or
technology the countries in the region invariably look to Japan.

The trend is clearest in Thailand: Last year Japan provided nearly half of the
$8.2 billion foreign investment in Thailand. Taiwan, also stepping up its
offshore investments, came in second, though far behind Japan. The United States
invested only $1 in Thailand for every $6 that came from Japan.

A Shift in Strategy

The second effect, which is more subtle, is a fundamental shift in the way Japan
is fitting Southeast Asia into its plans to internationalize its industries and
blunt the political backlash from Japan's huge trade surpluses. Japanese
companies have long had a significant presence in Southeast Asia, but in the
past it was a small market for Japan and a cheap place to make low-cost,
low-technology parts. Now the Southeast Asian market itself is exploding, and
Japanese companies are carving the region into a loosely coordinated
manufacturing bloc.

Under agreements with the major Southeast Asian nations, except Indonesia,
companies like Toyota and Mitsubishi Motors plan to make diesel engines and
electrical equipment in Thailand, then trade them for transmissions built in the
Philippines or steering gears in Malaysia.

The result will be complete cars -most of them for sale in Asia, some for export
to the United States and Europe - that never pass through Japan, and so do not
add to Japan's trade surpluses.

Mitsubishi Motors is already assembling Japanese-designed cars in Thailand, then
shipping them to Canada, where they are sold under an American nameplate -
Chrysler. The car is not a Japanese import, but it is hardly entirely Thai,
either.

'It Is Profitable'

''We are in Southeast Asia because it is profitable, especially now,'' a senior
Japanese auto executive said recently. ''But it also solves a lot of political
problems, not only in Asia but across the Pacific.''

Still, economists and business executives in Thailand say that in two or three
years, Japanese investment may tail off, at least until the country's roads,
dilapidated telephone system and work force catch up to the breathless 11 to 13
percent annual growth over the last two years.

''I can't imagine that the Japanese investment can keep increasing this fast,''
said Isao Kubokawa, a former official of Japan's Ministry of International Trade
and Industry who now runs the Japan External Trade Organization's office here.
''There are very few Japanese companies that are not already here.''

The reach of Japan's investment can be seen throughout Thailand. Industrial
parks are springing up around Bangkok; one recent morning, scores of Thai
employees lined up, Japanese-style, at a new Toshiba plant to salute the
company's first shipment of color television tubes, bound for other Southeast
Asian nations. A few days later the president of Fujitsu Ltd. dedicated a new
factory - owned by Fujitsu itself, a departure from the usual Japanese practice
of taking on a local joint venture partner - that will produce computer parts.

The influence can even been seen in the smaller towns to the north, near the
borders of Myanmar, formerly Burma, and Laos. One recent weekend in the ancient
city of Chiang Rai, Buddhist monks lined up in their saffron robes at a temple,
while next door at a Mitsubishi Motors dealership farmers inspected a pickup
truck.

A Strong Auto Market

For years Japanese companies kept small operations here, even after American
companies left at the end of the Vietnam War. In Tokyo, though, Thailand was
considered something of a poor backwater, a market that would bloom some day in
the distant future.

Now, for the Japanese and the few Americans who stayed, that day has arrived.
The International Business Machines Corporation says that Thailand is now its
fastest-growing Asian market. But American auto makers, who earlier shunned what
they deemed a small and difficult market, are missing an explosion in auto
sales.

In 1987, sales of cars and pickup trucks - Thailand's favorite mode of
transportation - topped 100,000 for the first time. Last year they totaled
208,000, and some say they may approach 300,000 this year. ''I keep wondering
where the Americans are,'' said Takashi Murasawa, a senior official of MMC
Sittipol Company, the Mitsubishi Motors joint venture here.

The beneficiaries are all of Japan's car makers, who control 92 percent of the
market despite stiff local-content laws that have required them to produce half
to three-quarters of their components in Thailand.

Wages Are Low

But if Thailand thought it was about to learn the high-tech secrets of auto
making it was wrong. Factories here look like flashbacks to the 1930's. ''We
don't have any robots here,'' said Suparat Sirisuwanangkura, the manager of
component engineering, ''because the labor is still very cheap.'' An average
auto worker in Thailand earns about $200 a month, about what a skilled Japanese
auto worker would make in a day.

A key element in the Japanese auto makers' regional strategy lies in persuading
Southeast Asian nations to abandon their hopes of building ''national'' cars, in
which every component is produced in their own country.

''The volumes are too low and they are very uneconomical,'' said Ninnart
Chaithirapinyo, associate director of Toyota Motor Thailand. So the auto
companies have assigned subsidiaries in each country to produce certain key
components of each car, and in most cases have persuaded governments to treat
those parts as if they were ''domestic content.''

''The idea is to trade parts roughly equally,'' Mr. Ninnart said. ''In practice,
though, it is difficult to balance.''

Indonesia has refused to participate, apparently fearing that efforts to build
its own cars would be undermined. Malaysia has already mounted its own effort.
For five years, the country has been building the Proton Saga, a national car,
although two years ago Mitsubishi had to step in to rescue the project.

Whether Japan is really willing to share its high-tech knowledge with countries
like Thailand is a matter of considerable debate. The companies all say they
share generously, often bringing Thai or Malaysian engineers to Tokyo for
training. But employees say that Japan is keeping its most sophisticated
manufacturing processes to itself.

''We need to put more emphasis on getting Japan to part with its technology,''
Dr. Snoh said.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: photo: Workers at the Toyota Motor factory in Bangkok. By 1992,
Japanese officials predict, 300,000 Thais, or 15 percent of the country's
manufacturing workers, will be employed by Japanese companies. (David E.
Sanger/The New York Times) (pg. D1); graph: countries investing in Thailand
(Source: Thailand Board of Investment) (pg. D9)

                   Copyright 1990 The New York Times Company


                              142 of 288 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                  May 10, 1990, Thursday, Late Edition - Final

Christian Bay, 69, A Political Scientist Who Studied Peace

BYLINE: By ERIC PACE

SECTION: Section D; Page 25, Column 3; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 357 words


Christian Bay, a retired professor of political science at the University of
Toronto, died Sunday of pneumonia at Toronto Western Hospital, a colleague said
yesterday. Professor Bay was 69 years old and lived in Toronto.

Professor Bay's areas of scholarly interest included peace studies, political
philosophy and the psychology of politics. He was a fellow of the Royal Society
of Canada, a member of the governing council of the American Political Science
Association from 1971 to 1973 and a member of the council of the International
Society of Political Psychology from 1981 to 1983.

In 1969 Professor Bay was defeated in a hotly contested election for the
presidency of the American Political Science Association. Professor Bay, an
outspoken critic of the United States involvement in Vietnam, advocated making
the association more engaged politically.

His best-known book was ''The Structure of Freedom,'' a psychological study of
the quest for freedom, which was published by the Stanford University Press. It
came out in 1958 and was a co-winner of the Woodrow Wilson Foundation's 1959
book award.

The American Political Science Review said the book was ''an important and
useful contribution to analytic political theory because for the first time it
brings to bear the findings of the various behavioral sciences on the problem of
freedom.''

Professor Bay was born in Oslo and became a naturalized Canadian while retaining
Norwegian citizenship.

After studying law at the University of Oslo, he earned his doctorate in
political science in 1959 at the same university, with his book ''The Structure
of Freedom'' serving as his doctoral dissertation. He went on to teach in the
United States at Stanford University and the University of California at
Berkeley before becoming chairman of the political science department at the
University of Alberta in Edmonton in 1966. He joined the University of Toronto
faculty in 1972 and retired two years ago.

He is survived by his wife, Juanita; a sister, Marie Bay of Oslo; two daughters,
Marit Bay of Haliburton, Ontario, and Mia Bay of New Haven, and a son, Helge Bay
of Toronto.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Obituary

                   Copyright 1990 The New York Times Company


                              143 of 288 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                   May 11, 1990, Friday, Late Edition - Final

Luigi Nono, 66, Italian Composer With a Marxist Avant-Garde Tilt

BYLINE: By ALLAN KOZINN

SECTION: Section D; Page 17, Column 5; Cultural Desk

LENGTH: 573 words


Luigi Nono, the most prominent of Italy's postwar avant-garde composers, died at
his home in Venice on Tuesday. He was 66 years old.

A family spokesman said that Mr. Nono had recently been hospitalized for a liver
ailment.

Mr. Nono's earliest works were composed in the 12-tone Serial style pioneered by
Arnold Schoenberg, whose daughter Nuria married Mr. Nono in 1955. But Mr. Nono
also considered his music a vehicle through which social and political issues
could be addressed, and his adherence to Serialism lessened as he searched for
more specific ways to convey his beliefs.

A Carnegie Hall Commission

Mr. Nono had some persuasive adherents among musicians, most notably the pianist
Maurizio Pollini and the conductor Claudio Abbado. Carnegie Hall commissioned
him to write a work for piano and orchestra as part of the hall's centennial
season. The work was to have been performed next February by Mr. Pollini and
Pierre Boulez. Spokesmen for the hall and for Mr. Nono's publisher, Ricordi,
said yesterday that they did not know whether the work had been completed.

Mr. Nono was born in Venice on Jan. 29, 1924. He began his musical studies in
1941 at the Venice Conservatory and studied with the composer and musicologist
Gian Francesco Malipiero from 1943 to 1945 while also studying law at the
University of Padua. In 1946 he began studying with the Italian composer and
conductor Bruno Maderna and with the West German conductor Hermann Scherchen,
both of whom became early champions of his work.

Scherchen brought Mr. Nono's music to the attention of the European avant-garde
by conducting the ''Variazioni Canoniche'' at the prestigious new music festival
in Darmstadt, West Germany, in 1950. Early on, the composer developed a detailed
approach to scoring that included such techniques as splitting the syllables of
single words among several singers, and applying dynamic markings to virtually
every note. He also tended, throughout his career, to write music that made
singers and instrumentalists use the extremes of their range.

In the mid-1950's, Mr. Nono's scores began to attract international attention,
often as much for their ideological elements as for their musical innovations. A
member of the Italian Communist Party, he frequently based his vocal works on
Marxist texts and revolutionary writings.

Castro, Guevera and Hiroshima

One piece, ''Y Entonces Comprendio'' (1970), included a tape recording of Fidel
Castro reading letters of Che Guevara. Other works covered an array of topics
and concerns. His first international success, the cantata ''Il Canto Sospeso''
(1956), was based on letters of World War II resistance fighters. He also wrote
an anti-nuclear piece, ''Sul Ponte del Hiroshima'' (1962); several protests
against the Vietnam war, and several works inspired by his visits to
concentration camps.

Mr. Nono's first opera, ''Intolleranza 1960'' (later revised as ''Intolleranza
1970'') attacks segregation, the atomic bomb and Nazism, and ends with a plea to
listeners to prevent civilization from destroying itself. His second opera, ''Al
Gran Sole Carico d'Amore'' (1975) is about the Paris Commune of 1871.

Mr. Nono's most recent works include a third opera, ''Prometeo,'' and ''La
Nostalgica-Futura,'' a 45-minute work for violin, tape and electronics.

The composer is survived by his wife and by two daughters, Silvia, of Rome, and
Serena, of Venice and London.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Obituary

                   Copyright 1990 The New York Times Company


                              144 of 288 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                   May 13, 1990, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

For Eager Air Cadets, It's the Mild Blue Yonder

BYLINE: By DIRK JOHNSON, Special to The New York Times

SECTION: Section 1; Part 1, Page 18, Column 1; National Desk

LENGTH: 1042 words

DATELINE: COLORADO SPRINGS, May 8


For young Joshua Kotrieb, who dreamed of flying a fighter jet over Europe, the
place to go was the Air Force Academy. And he made it, just in time to find out
that there would probably be fewer fighter jets and fewer officers flying them.

''It's definitely going to limit who goes overseas,'' Mr. Kotrieb said as a
formation of F-16 fighter jets blazed overhead, soaring beyond the Rockies.
''The competition is going to be a lot tougher.''

For him and many of the 4,400 fellow cadets at the academy here, the easing of
international tensions has brought new worries. As excited as the cadets are
about the political reshaping of the world, many said in interviews that they
were also wondering what the military retrenchment would mean for them. Less
travel? A lower profile? Fewer key assignments? A slower path to the top?

Tracy Szczepaniak, 24 years old, among the women who make up 12 1/2 percent of
the cadet corps, said she was worried that women would be singled out for
sacrifices because they would be considered more dispensable than men.

The Military Scales

''History has shown that whenever the military scales back, the women are the
first to be scaled back,'' she said. ''If they have to choose between a man and
a women, they are going to choose the man, since the military can be more
flexible with him. That could mean that some doors could be closed to me.''

Ms. Szczepaniak, of Tacoma, Wash., the daughter of an Air Force master sergeant,
has already come up against one closed door. She cannot be a combat pilot and
that policy, she said, is ''wrong, to put it gently.''

She now plans to become a flight instructor for pilots, most of whom will be
men.

At all three service academies that train young people for duty overseas,
applications are down this year, and admissions officials said this reflected a
a smaller pool of young people rather than apprehension among would-be
applicants.

Applications Down All Over

''But next year, I think we'll see something along those lines,'' said Col.
Thomas C. Wilkinson, the academy's director of admissions. ''Young people might
wonder, 'If I choose the military, will there be a career for me 30 years down
the road, or even 20?' ''

Applications for this year's academy class totaled 12,660, compared with 14,819
last year. At the United States Naval Academy at Annapolis, applications dropped
to about 12,500 from about 15,000. At the United States Military Academy at West
Point, applications were down only slightly, to 12,748 from 12,859.

Class sizes are set by Congress. Spokesmen for both the Senate and House Armed
Services Committees said there were no plans yet to admit fewer students.
''Secretary Cheney hasn't offered us much of a vision of what our future force
structure will look like,'' said a staff member on the House committee.

The Potential Dangers

Some young people here would bear the burden of leading American forces in a
major conflict. The cadets are quick to warn that the United States should not
let down its guard too quickly or too fully. ''A few years ago,'' said Dave
Souza, 22, ''hardly anyone could have predicted the changes that have
occurred.''

Sara Keller, 22 years old, of West Lafayette, Ind., said: ''As long as there are
hungry, upset people in the world, there will be fighting. War is inevitable.''

Few people enter a military academy or join any branch of the service, without
some idea of the danger that could lie ahead. And the history books and popular
culture are filled with depictions of bravery by fighter pilots, from John Wayne
in the 1942 movie ''Flying Tigers'' to Tom Cruise in the 1986 movie ''Top Gun.''


There's a Limit to Gung-Ho

Indeed, applications here surged after ''Top Gun,'' even though it was about a
Navy pilot.

''We got a lot of applications that said, 'I want to come to the Air Force
Academy and learn to fly an F-14,'' said Capt. Rick Sanford, an academy
spokesman. ''The thing is, the Air Force doesn't have F-14's. We have F-15's and
F-16's. But Tom Cruise flew an F-14 in the movie, and so that's what they wanted
to fly.''

One cadet said he had seen ''Top Gun'' 22 times, Captain Sanford said. Many
cadets agree that their pulse quickens at the thought of sitting in the cockpit
of the sleek F-15, a parachute on the back, gripping the computerized controls
stick, peering through the clear shield.

At the same time, many cadets also chuckle over the stereotype of those in a
military academy as gung-ho warriors. They say they would be the first to
welcome an age of peace.

''I've watched all the movies,'' said Joe Crampton, a brawny 21-year-old in a
flat-top haircut. ''I've seen the Rambo stuff. I've daydreamed about being a
hero - charging in to rescue somebody from a burning plane.

''But I'm not anxious to hop out there and grab an M-16. With the thoughts of
heroism there also come the thoughts of dying.''

Visions and Dreams

While the academy's primary goal is preparing officers for battle, officials
here emphasize that heroism takes many forms.

Hoiang Nhu Tran, the valedictorian of the class of 1987, has never fired a
weapon. He came to the United States from Vietnam as a refugee in 1975, unable
to speak English. Now he is an Air Force physician.

Eduardo Monarez, 21, a cadet from El Paso, who speaks Italian, Spanish, German
and a bit of Russian, says he hopes a military career will give him the
opportunity to meet the people and experience the cultures of many nations. His
ultimate dream is to be a diplomat.

''If I never have to fight in a war,'' he said, ''I will consider myself
lucky.''

Mr. Monarez knows that military cutbacks could stand in the way of his ambitions
''to see the whole world.''

''When I joined the military, I knew that the guys in Congress would be making
the decisions,'' he said. ''If my travel is limited, it would be personally
upsetting. But if they make that decision, I'll salute and go on.''

The sacrifices born of peace, he said, pale in comparison to those that would
accompany war. Mr. Monarez's mother was born in Italy and he recalls her telling
him of her childhood during World War II.

''She lost her entire family,'' Mr. Monarez said. ''I don't have any romantic
ideas about war.''

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo: Military retrenchment is ''definitely going to limit who goes
overseas,'' said Joshua Kotrieb, an Air Force Academy cadet who hopes to fly a
fighter over Europe. (Bruce McAllister for The New York Times)

                   Copyright 1990 The New York Times Company


                              145 of 288 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                   May 13, 1990, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

FILM;
China's Shadow Falls Across Hong Kong's Films

BYLINE: By BERENICE REYNAUD; Berenice Reynaud is the New York correspondent for
Cahiers du Cinema.

SECTION: Section 2; Page 17, Column 1; Arts and Leisure Desk

LENGTH: 2161 words

DATELINE: HONG KONG


A few months after public protests here over the violent repression of democracy
in Tiananmen Square, it's business as usual in Hong Kong. After years in New
York, a young Chinese remarked that his native city ''had become a gigantic
shopping mall.'' The so-called Hong Kong dream, a vision of the good life
parallel to the American Dream, however, shouldn't be reduced to pure
mercantilism. For the film scholar Esther Yau, Hong Kong's precarious existence
represents a utopia, the right not to choose between the Communist Party and the
Kuomintang. Nowhere is this utopia better expressed than in the film industry -
where audiences may enjoy a taste of paradise lost long ago in Hollywood. In
Hong Kong, film making is an unpretentious industry, designed for profit,
popular entertainment and export to Japan, Taiwan and Korea.

Paradise, however, is in danger of being lost. The Hong Kong film industry is a
brilliant form of escapism, for there is something to escape from. In 1997, the
99-year British concession will expire, and Hong Kong will come under the
jurisdiction of the Beijing Government. The June 4 crackdown has increased the
residents' anxieties - and the film industry has been especially affected by the
events. Producers, directors and stars, torn between rage, fear and the desire
to keep working, might see their world disappear altogether. Hong Kong's film
industry has its mega-stars (Sylvia Chang, Anita Mui, Cora Miao, Chow Yun-fatt,
Tony Leung) and its kung fu idols Jackie Chang and Samo Hung; its major studios
(Golden Harvest, Cinema City, D and B); its Spielbergian producers (Tsui Hark);
its maverick auteurs (Allen Fong); and a handful of talented women directors
(such as Ann Hui - of ''Boat People'' fame - and Mabel Cheung).

The most popular genres are action thrillers and a hilarious mixture of
slapstick, martial arts and ghost story. Even when parodic, Hong Kong films
still stand for the magic of cinema, its power to tell a story and to create a
better and more exciting world. Gangster films are especially bloody, yet
mythical. The protagonists are elegant, charming, brave, loyal friends,
honorable adversaries, expert marksmen, extraordinary acrobats and, above all,
paragons of manliness. Because they stick to genres and formulas, Hong Kong
products might be described as exploitation films - yet they leave room for
experimentation. Jackie Chang's humor, generosity and comical stunts have
revitalized the action film, as in ''Project A, Police Story.'' Tsui Hark
brilliantly combines traditional martial arts and high-tech special effects, as
in ''Zhu, Warrior of Sacred Mountain.''

Since the 1970's, Hong Kong has become the Hollywood of Asia and one of the
world's most prolific film centers. But a shadow looms over its creative energy
- that of 1997, when Hong Kong is to be reunited with the People's Republic of
China. And since June 4, 1989, the day of the Tiananmen violence, history seems
to have quickened its pace.

''Chinese often use the past to talk about the present,'' says Po Chim Leong.
Born in England to an emigre Cantonese family, he moved to Hong Kong in the
60's. Channel 4 in London produced his film ''Ping Pong,'' exploring the
identity crisis of a young ''B.B.C.'' (British-Born Chinese). In Asia, he is
famous for his 1986 film, ''Hong Kong 1941.'' The British colonials leave, the
Japanese Army arrives, plunging the city into lawlessness and violence. Three
young people struggle to survive. One of them (played by Chow Yun-fatt)
gallantly dies to let his best friend escape with the girl they both love.

Beyond the romance, beyond the memory of the atrocities committed by the
Japanese, ''Hong Kong 1941'' is pregnant with allusions to the present. ''When
the Japanese officer distributes rice, he says, 'Have faith in me.' Those were
the very words used by Deng Xiaoping to the Hong Kong businessmen who were
preparing to do business on the mainland,'' explains Mr. Po.

In her 1984 film ''Love in a Fallen City,'' Ann Hui, a top New Wave director,
also set a love story amid the havoc wrought by the Japanese Army. Tsui Hark's
hits ''Shanghai Blues'' (1984) and ''Peking Opera Blues'' (1986), as well as
Jackie Chan's box-office draw ''Project A, Part II'' (1987), used a similar
strategy: though displaced in time and space, Hong Kong's anxiety concerning its
future at the end of the British Mandate was clearly recognizable. Parallels are
often drawn between Hong Kong in the 1990's and Shanghai in the 1940's, as
exemplified by a recent action film, Teddy Robin's ''Shanghai Shanghai.'' Hong
Kong is afraid of meeting the fate of Shanghai, a thriving urban metropolis (and
film production center) that went into decline after 1949, following the
Communist takeover on the mainland.

''The nightmare,'' says Tsui Hark, ''is that the Chinese Government itself does
not know if it is capable of running Hong Kong . . .'' Born in Vietnam to a
family from the south of China, he moved to Hong Kong in 1966 as a teen-ager,
studied film in the United States, directed a series of successful films and now
runs his own production company, Film Workshop.

''Hong Kong is the last place I would leave,'' he adds, aware that this is also
the only place he could continue making and producing movies. ''But I would hate
living under an outdated Government. The question is not whether to stay or to
leave, but whether or not we will be able to change that Government, and how.''

After producing a series of top-grossing gangster films directed by John Woo and
starring Chow Yun-fatt, ''A Better Tomorrow Part I'' and ''II,'' and ''The
Killer,'' Mr. Tsui went back to directing with ''A Better Tomorrow Part III''
(also known as ''Love and Death in Saigon'').

''Vietnam in 1974, at the end of the American presence,'' he said, ''offered an
interesting background. The protagonists are the products of their times. The
main character is less heroic, he's no Rambo, he doesn't stand a chance against
a whole army. And the bad guys are more elements of the general corruption than
typical gangsters.'' Here again, the spectacle of individuals fighting for their
dignity and happiness in a country torn apart by opposing armies and rival
factions, functions as a metaphor for the colony's worst fears.

Mr. Tsui started filming in Vietnam during the student movement, then went back
to Hong Kong to complete production. ''Then came June 4,'' he says. ''The actors
couldn't concentrate. They were crying, constantly turning the radio on to
listen to the news. They would come to the set with black banners on their
chests. I had to cancel many production days to allow them to participate in
demonstrations.''

As a result, ''Love and Death in Saigon'' is Mr. Tsui's most somber film.
Allusions to political repression, to the senseless violence of armed men, to
student demonstrations, keep creeping in, belying the ''Better Tomorrow'' of the
original title.

Can there really be a ''better tomorrow'' in Hong Kong? It is no longer fun to
watch ''Chinese killing Chinese,'' as many people say, and while the hero still
gets the heroine (Anita Mui), she dies in his arms.

Since the ''open door policy,'' in which the Chinese Government sought to
normalize commercial and cultural relations with both Hong Kong and Taiwan, Hong
Kong film makers have been able to shoot on the Chinese mainland, making use of
its extraordinary landscapes. Between 40 and 50 movies (mostly action films)
were being shot annually in co-production with China. Since June 4, this number
has decreased radically, but the trend seems only temporary. For both the
Chinese Government and the Hong Kong producers, ''business is business,'' and
real locations are more attractive than papier-mache sets.

Last April, Mabel Cheung was shooting ''Eight Taels of Gold'' in a rural area
near Canton. A shy, overweight New York cab driver (Samo Hung, the kung fu star,
creatively cast against type), comes back to the village he fled during the
Cultural Revolution. There he falls in love with his beautiful cousin, already
engaged to another man. A return to life on the mainland is impossible for Hung,
who is left shouting his despair in an empty landscape.

''We were really excited about the democracy movement,'' says Miss Cheung. ''We
would go to Beijing to give food and supplies to the students. On June 4, during
a night shoot, we picked up the news on a Hong Kong radio. We couldn't believe
it! So we went to Canton and called Beijing to confirm what we heard. And we
wondered: What's the point of making movies? We should be lawyers, doctors,
farmers, or go to Beijing to help the students.''

The production was halted - a highly emotional moment described by Sylvia Chang,
who stars in the film as Samo Hung's cousin: ''When I came back to Hong Kong,
people were utterly destroyed. They were asking: 'How can something like that
happen? We are Chinese, and we are killing Chinese. What's the meaning of life
if we cannot do anything to help our own people?' ''

When production finally resumed, mainland Chinese bureaucrats tried to censor
the script. ''We threatened to publicize their attempt at censoring us,'' said
Miss Cheung. ''They must have thought that they don't yet have control over a
Hong Kong production - and they let us shoot the way we wanted.''

The immediate impact of June 4 on the film industry seems to be an increased
commercialism. ''Everyone wants to make as much money as possible,'' says Po
Chim Leong. ''They're afraid to think of anything else. It's like there's no
tomorrow. Film makers seem to have lost confidence. They keep turning out old
formula films.''

For the first time in years, the box office is down. Yet people still invest in
building and refurbishing movie theaters - knowing that the younger audience
will keep going to the movies until the Communists take over in 1997 - and
probably after. And there is no shortage of interesting projects. Po Chim Leong
wants to shoot a contemporary version of ''Hong Kong 1941.'' Mabel Cheung plans
to direct a two-part film about what she describes as ''the Hong Kong
countdown,'' one from a female, the other from a male point of view. Allen Fong
hopes to make ''as many movies as possible before 1997, to document the last
years of Hong Kong,'' then emigrate and give up film making.

Hong Kong's censorship law makes it difficult to produce and exhibit what the
text calls ''political'' movies. Films ''which may seriously endanger the
relationship between Hong Kong and its neighboring countries'' are banned. Last
December, a Taiwanese video documentary titled ''They're Writing History'' could
not be shown at the Hong Kong Art Center because it included interviews with
Chinese dissidents and student leaders. Paradoxically, television, radio and
newspapers are not submitted to censorship and vent, often violently, negative
feelings toward China.

Last spring, ''the television networks were competing to report the student
movement with as much detail as possible,'' recalls Shu Kei, a film maker and
public relations representative. ''From April 15 till Tiananmen Square, the
students almost became our friends, our family.''''

When a Japanese television station approached Shu Kei last year to produce a
documentary, he first intended to make a film on the legendary Taiwanese
composer-singer Hou Dejian, who, in 1983,defected to China. Tiananmen Square
thwarted the project. (Mr. Hou, on a hunger strike at the end of the student
movement, disappeared during the violence and resurfaced in Beijing only two
months later.) Instead, Mr. Shu made ''Sunless Days,'' a ''personal
documentary'' about Hong Kong's reactions to the crackdown. Interviewing
families and friends, he took his camera throughout the Chinese diaspora, from
London to Australia and Toronto and back to Hong Kong - trying to find answers
to the harrowing question: What does it mean to be Chinese in the post-Tiananmen
world?

The film is composed of vignettes depicting various reactions to the events:
from the radicalization of a couple of fun-loving artists to the self-analysis
of writers in exile; from a mainland film maker's decision to go back, ''because
there is work to do at home,'' to the middle-class strategy for a comfortable
emigration; from demonstrations of Hong Kong students to images of his mother
going about her daily chores.

''No one can conceptualize Hong Kong in the hands of mainland China,'' adds Shu
Kei. ''This is why people are so nervous.'' Initially he thought that his
documentary would be banned in Hong Kong. But the theatrical version of the film
won a prize given by the Roman Catholic press at the 1990 Berlin Film Festival.
So, invited by the Hong Kong Film Festival, ''Sunless Days'' was finally passed
by the censorship committee at the last minute and shown on April 15, the
anniversary of the death of the ousted Communist leader Hu Yaobang, which had
set in motion the democracy movement.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo: A scene from Tsui Hark's ''Love and Death in Saigon''-a metaphor
for the colony's worst fears (pg. 17); With his cinematographer Bill Wong, Shu
Kei, at left, directs ''Sunless Days.'' (pg. 24)

                   Copyright 1990 The New York Times Company


                              146 of 288 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                   May 13, 1990, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

On Language;
Keep Your Shirt On

BYLINE: BY WILLIAM SAFIRE

SECTION: Section 6; Page 18, Column 1; Magazine Desk

LENGTH: 1138 words


MILD IN PUBLIC , but when the talk turned serious,'' reported NBC's John
Cochran, ''Mexico's President Salinas gave Vice President Quayle what one U.S.
official called 'unshirted hell.' ''

The subject was the abduction, or capture, of a Mexican doctor who is thought to
be involved in the murder of a United States narcotics agent. ''President
Salinas expressed to me his strong displeasure,'' was the way Vice President
Quayle put it; translated from the diplomatese, that is fair to characterize as
unshirted hell.

Just what is this form of hell, and where does it come from?

In slang, a shirt - especially one in the process of being taken off - is a
garment that signifies vexation or hot temper. In Hotten's 1859 slang
dictionary, shirty is defined as ''ill tempered or cross,'' with this
explanation: ''When one person makes another in an ill humour he is said to have
'got his shirt out.' '' The earliest 19th-century uses are British, and P. G.
Wodehouse in a 1934 Jeeves novel had a character say, ''But don't tell me that
when he saw how shirty she was about it, the chump didn't back down?''
Shirtiness is close to testiness, far from godliness.

Somewhere - I cannot find it in my vast library of slang - there must be a link
between shirty and unshirted. The first appearance of unshirted comes in
modification of hell; The Baltimore Sun is cited by the O.E.D. Supplement as the
source, in 1932, of ''When he proposed certain policies on prohibition . . . he
was given what is known in rural districts hereabouts as 'unshirted hell.' ''

The picture comes to mind of a person tearing his shirt off to castigate
another; a second possibility is to berate someone whose shirt has been taken
off, as if to receive a whipping. The first picture is more likely the source;
the unshirted one is angry and ready to give hell to the clothed recipient.

The phrase has more zing than to give someone a hard time, or to give him what
for, and has a populist connotation that tongue-lashing lacks. The rural
American roots make it especially useful to political figures; one predecessor
to the unidentified source on the Quayle staff quoted by the NBC reporter is
Henry A. Kissinger, who wrote in Volume II of his memoirs: ''I've been catching
unshirted hell every half-hour from the President who says we're not tough
enough.'' (I'm looking forward to Henry's writing the first unauthorized
autobiography.) In post-Civil War politics, the bloody shirt was a symbol of
service in the armed forces, or an evocation of old sectional hatred; to wave
the bloody shirt was to ask for a vote on the basis of wartime alliances or
emotions. The origin may be in the account of the abolitionist James Baird
Weaver in the 1850's, about how he acquired the stained and shredded linen of a
preacher who had been flogged for inflaming slaves: ''I waved it before the
crowds and bellowed: 'Under this bloody shirt we propose to march to victory.'
''

A shirt, then, is a kind of flag: that is why, in keeping calm, you keep your
shirt on.

Tar Baby

NOBODY JOINED REP. Charles E. Schumer, a Brooklyn Democrat, when he charged that
internal bickering within the Government had contributed to the savings and loan
scandal.

''It's regarded as a tar baby,'' said the legislator about the scandal. ''Nobody
wants to get ensnarled in it.''

Jon von Zelowitz of San Francisco clipped the Congressman's quoted comment and
wondered: ''I thought tar baby was a dated, racist term - did he mean tar pit?''

Tar baby is defined in Merriam-Webster's Ninth as ''something from which it is
nearly impossible to extricate onself'' and adds no racist caveat; to most
minds, the phrase is innocent of slur. Mark Twain, an early anti-racist, used
the phrase in his 1910 autobiography: ''For two years the Courant had been
making a 'tar baby' out of Mr. Blaine, and adding tar every day - and now it was
called upon to praise him.''

The origin is in an 1881 Uncle Remus story by Joel Chandler Harris: a doll is
covered in sticky tar to entrap Brer Rabbit. (No apostrophes in Brer; the
contraction of brother is the character's first name.) The common colloquial
sense today of tar baby is ''a sticky problem, one better left untouched.''
However, the O.E.D. Supplement adds a second definition: ''a derogatory term for
a Black (U.S.) or a Maori (New Zealand).'' The lexicographer, Robert Burchfield,
is a New Zealander, and should know. Also, the novelist Toni Morrison, who is
black, titled a 1981 novel ''Tar Baby,'' probably a play on both senses.

Although most people do not use it with a slur in mind, apparently some think
the tar baby is not a doll covered in pitch, but a black child. What do you do
in a case like that? Insist on the author's original intent and refuse to be
waved off by a perhaps-mistaken sensitivity - or recognize that the phrase has
gained a racist connotation in some minds?

Prof. Richard Spears, author of the 1981 Slang and Euphemism, believes ''there
are many contexts in which tar baby may be used that have no racist sense at
all.'' He's right - but if I were a politician, I wouldn't touch it.

Cache in the Wry

''YOU HAVE TO DO SOMETHING about this right away,'' said R. W. Apple Jr., my
colleague at the Washington bureau of The New York Times. He brandished a
clipping: ''It's spreading.'' The offending usage was in a Wall Street Journal
story about Robert Iger, a bold television producer: ''Even if 'Twin Peaks'
caves in, it has already won ABC new cache in Hollywood as the hands-off
network, eager for ideas that are daring and different.''

The daring and different usage was cache. That word, pronounced cash, is rooted
in the French cachet, ''to conceal''; a cache is ''a hiding place, a place where
stores are kept or left; anything kept in such a hidden place.''

The word probably meant by the writer is cachet, pronounced ca-SHAY, from the
same French root, but with a quite different modern meaning: ''distinction,
eminence, prestige.'' Henry Fowler disdained the French term as ''mainly a
literary critics' word (bears the c. of genius etc.) and should not be allowed
to extrude native words; stamp, seal, sign manual, are usually good enough for
English readers.'' Sixty-four years later, most usagists would disagree about
the lifted-pinky quality that bothered Fowler; the word that had its origin as a
seal on an official document - lettre de cachet - has a nice panache that
distinguishes it from distinction.

The other word, cache, is still useful in its proper hiding place. In 1970,
criticism was directed against American military officials in Vietnam for not
finding the much-heralded hidden stock of weapons called Cosvn during the
Parrot's Beak incursion. The President's counsel, Len Garment, poked his head in
my speechwriting office to ask, ''Can you check a cache?''

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Drawing

                   Copyright 1990 The New York Times Company


                              147 of 288 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                   May 13, 1990, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

BEST SELLERS: May 20, 1990

SECTION: Section 7; Page 36, Column 2; Book Review Desk

LENGTH: 1440 words




$

          Weeks
This Last    On
Week Week  List Fiction

 1          1    THE STAND, by Stephen King. (Doubleday,
                 $24.95.) Doomsday brings horrors to America; the
                 uncut version of a novel first published in 1978.

 2      1   4    SEPTEMBER, by Rosamunde Pilcher. (Dunne/St.
                 Martin's, $22.95.) Guests from many parts of the
                 world encounter their often unexpected destinies
                 during a get-together in a small Scottish town.

 3      3   12   OH, THE PLACES YOU'LL GO! by Dr. Seuss.
                 (Random House, $12.95.) The problems of finding
                 your way through life; in verse and pictures.

 4      2   9    THE BOURNE ULTIMATUM, by Robert Ludlum.
                 (Random House, $21.95.) Jason Bourne plans to
                 infiltrate the ruthless Medusa Brigade.

 5      4   4    SKINNY LEGS AND ALL, by Tom Robbins.
                 (Bantam, $19.95.) The horror and humor of the
                 upcoming apocalypse are played out at a
                 restaurant near the United Nations.

 6      6   5    THE EVENING NEWS, by Arthur Hailey.
                 (Doubleday, $21.95.) Life as lived by two
                 competitive television correspondents.

 7      5   6    MASQUERADE, by Janet Dailey. (Little, Brown,
                 $19.95.) A New Orleans heiress encounters a
                 masked man during a carnival in Nice.

 8*         1    CLEAR AND PRESENT DANGER, by Tom
                 Clancy. (Putnam, $21.95.) The C.I.A.'s Jack Ryan
                 fights Colombian drug lords. 1

 9     11   4    BRIGHT STAR, by Harold Coyle. (Simon &
                 Schuster, $19.95.) An attempted assassination by a
                 Libyan terrorist brings American and Soviet
                 troops into a violent encounter.

10*           1  DRAGON, by Clive Cussler. (Simon & Schuster,
                 $21.95.) In 1993, Dirk Pitt moves fast to save
                 America from a Japanese extremist.

11      8   2    ''G'' IS FOR GUMSHOE, by Sue Grafton. (Holt,
                 $16.95.) On her 33d birthday, the private eye
                 Kinsey Milhorne finds herself on a killer's
                 hit list.

12*     9   3    THE GOLD COAST, by Nelson DeMille. (Warner,
                 $19.95.) How life changes for an old WASP family
                 when the head of a crime family becomes its
                 neighbor on Long Island's North Shore.

13          1    AN INCONVENIENT WOMAN, by Dominick
                 Dunne. (Crown, $19.95.) Manners, morals and
                 murder in Los Angeles's high society.

14     10   10   DEVICES AND DESIRES, BY P.D. James. (Knopf,
                 $19.95.) A seies of killngs on the Norfolk
                 coast.

 9 *   15   2    FAMILY PICTURES, by Sue Miller. (Harper &
                 Row, $19.95.) The good and bad times of a large
                 Chicago clan during the past 40 years.

14

          Weeks
This Last    On
Week Week  List Nonfiction

 1      1   5    MEN AT WORK, by George F. Will. (Macmillan,
                 $19.95.) The political pundit and baseball buff
                 describes the craft of the game.

 2      2   16   MEGATRENDS 2000, by John Naisbitt and
                 Patricia Aburdene. (Morrow, $21.95.)
                 Prognostications for the next decade.

 3     43   16   BARBARIANS AT THE GATE, by Bryan
                 Burrough and John Helyar. (Harper & Row,
                 $22.95.) The 1988 battle for control of RJR Nabisco.

 4      5   8    MEANS OF ASCENT, by Robert A. Caro. (Knopf,
                 $24.95.) Lyndon Johnson's seven-year pursuit of a
                 seat in the Senate, won in 1948 by 87 votes.

 5*     3   14   HEAD FIRST, by Norman Cousins. (Dutton,
                 $19.95.) How the brain affects the body's endocrine
                 and immune systems.

 6      8   3    IN THE ARENA, by Richard Nixon. (Simon &
                 Schuster, $21.95.) The 37th President reflects on his
                 public career and private life.

 7      6   34   IT WAS ON FIRE WHEN I LAY DOWN ON IT, by
                 Robert Fulghum. (Villard, $17.95.) A new collection
                 of inspirational essays.

 8      7   27   LIAR'S POKER, by Michael Lewis. (Norton,
                 $19.95.) Wall Street's tumultuous 1980's, as
                 witnessed by a young bond trader.

 9    11J  A
      108 BRIEF
          HISTO
          RY OF
          TIME,
          by
          Steph
          en W.
                 Hawking. (Bantam, $18.95.) A scientist reviews
                 efforts to create a unified theory of the universe.

10      9   9    PARTING WITH ILLUSIONS, By Vladimir
                 Pozner. (Atlantic Monthly, $19.95.) The
                 autobiography of a man, raised in New York, who
                 became a commenator on Radio Moscow.

11 *   10   2    LEGACIES, by Bette Bao Lord. (Knopf, $19.95.)
                 Reflections on the Chinese experience during the
                 past quarter-century by a writer who was born in
                 China, raised in America.

12     12   15   THE CUCKOO'S EGG, by Clifford Stoll.
                 (Doubleday, $19.95.) An astrophysicist tells how he
                 stalked a computer hacker.

13     13   12   WHAT I SAW AT THE REVOLUTION, by Peggy
                 Noonan. (Random House, $19.95.) The memoirs of
                 a former Presidential speechwriter.

13          79   ALL I REALLY NEED TO KNOW I LEARNED IN
                 KINDERGARTEN, by Robert Fulghum. (Villard,
                 $17.95.) Inspirational essays.

 9     15   3    FLASHBACKS, by Morley Safer. (Random House,
                 $18.95.) The observations of a journalist on
                 revisiting Vietnam 25 years later.

          Weeks
This Last    On
Week Week  List Advice, How-to and Miscellaneous

 1      1   65   WEALTH WITHOUT RISK, by Charles J. Givens.
                 (Simon & Schuster, $19.95.) A Florida
                 entrepreneur's financial advice.

 2      2   22   THE GREAT WALDO SEARCH, by Martin
                 Handford. (Little, Brown, $10.95.) A book of
                 illustrations in which the game is to find a
                 ubiquitous chap named Waldo.

 3      3   11   SECRETS ABOUT MEN EVERY WOMAN
                 SHOULD KNOW, by Barbara De Angelis.
                 (Delacorte, $17.95.) Ways by which women can
                 improve their relationships with men.

 4      4   12   BEWARE THE NAKED MAN WHO OFFERS
                 YOU HIS SHIRT, by Harvey Mackay. (Morrow,
                 $19.95.) Advice on how to get ahead in business.

 5      5   3    THE BETTER HOMES AND GARDENS NEW
                 COOKBOOK. (Meredith, $19.95.) A ring-bound
                 version of the 10th edition.


These listings are based on computer-processed sales figures from 3,000
bookstores and from representative wholesalers with more than 28,000 other
retail outlets, including variety stores and supermarkets. The figures are
statistically adjusted to represent sales in all such outlets across the United
States.

 *An asterisk before a book's title indicates that its sales, weighted to
reflect the book-selling industry nationally, are barely distinguishable from
those of the book above.

And Bear in Mind
(Editors' choices of other recent books of particular interest)

RANDALL JARRELL: A Literary Life, By William H. Pritchard. (Michael di
Capua/Farrar, Straus & Giroux, $25.) One of the most literary lives ever lived,
Jarrell's was short on events but plentiful in wit, pathos and brilliance, as
this careful biography shows.

SATURDAY NIGHT, By Susan Orlean. (Knopf, $19.95.) Eight hours in the hebdomadal
cycle of American culture, sharlpy observed by a journalist with a gift for
hanging while paying attention.

THE MUSIC ROOM, by Dennis McFarland. (Houghton Mifflin, $18.95.) The themes
struck in Mr. McFarland's generous, hopeful and stylistically bold first novel
include history and continuity, independence and separtion, as its 29-year-old
hero searches past and present for secrets of indentity.

IN A FATHER'S PLACE, By Christopher Tilghman. (Farrar, Straus & Giroux, $18.95.)
The author's first book contains seven short stories, clear and charged with
feeling, set in various places, rich enough in significant detail to do the work
of novels.

THE WILD COLONIAL BOY, by James Hynes. (Atheneum, $18.95.) Brian Donovan, the
American protagonist of Mr. Hyne's sharp-eyed and convincing first novel, finds
himself swiftly involved with an I.R.A. dispute and a young American woman
backpacker.

HOMEBOY, BY Seth Morgan. (Random House, $19.95.) Savagely comic and often
brilliant, Mr. Morgan's first novel conveys a relentless, hellish vision of a
San Francisco nether world of drugs and hustlers, thieves and exotic pimps.

PLAYING WIHT WATER: Passion and Solitude on a Philippine Island, By James
Hamilton-Paterson.(New Amsterdam Books, Cloth, $19.95; Paper, $11.95.) A truly
remarkable lyrical meditation on sea, sunlight and the analysis of consciusness.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: LIST

                   Copyright 1990 The New York Times Company


                              148 of 288 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                   May 13, 1990, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

CONNECTICUT GUIDE

SECTION: Section 12CN; Page 22, Column 5; Connecticut Weekly Desk

LENGTH: 1068 words




JUNIOR LEAGUE EXHIBIT

For 70 years, the Junior League of Eastern Fairfield County, headquartered in
Bridgeport, has provided services and dollars to projects in the surrounding
area. The projects include a workshop for handicapped children, assistance to
immigrants, a cancer detection clinic, a dropout prevention project and a
substance abuse program.

These and other programs will the subject of an exhibition, ''A Sentimental
Journey,'' from 6 to 9 P.M. Saturday at the Discovery Museum in Bridgeport,
formerly the Museum of Art, Science and Industry.

The evening event, organized in celebration of the league's 70th birthday, will
also include cocktails and hors d'oeuvres, music by a flute-and-guitar duo as
well as the silent auction in which participants may bid for a week at a country
house in East Dennis, Mass., tilling of a 60- by 80-foot garden and a
Southwestern-style dinner for 10 people served at home, among other choices.

The exhibit contains period vignettes with costumed mannequins, a photographic
history of the league and memorabilia from area historical societies. The museum
is at 4450 Park Avenue. Tickets cost $35 and may be reserved by calling
259-9995.

CARTOONS AND HISTORY

The work of the cartoonist Edmund S. Valtman, who came to the United States from
Estonia in 1949 and won a Pulitzer Prize in 1962 for his Hartford Times
cartoons, may be seen at the Museum of American Political Life on the University
of Hartford campus until June 8.

''Comments in Black and White: The Editorial Cartoons of Edmund S. Valtman''
focuses on 1950 to 1970, when the subject matter included the Vietnam War,
Watergate, the gasoline shortage, hippies, school busing and five Presidents.

Mr. Valtman worked for The Hartford Times from 1951 to 1975. Examples of his
work have been reproduced in The New York Times, The Washington Post and other
newspapers and acquired for private collections and libraries. Exhibitions of
his cartoons have been shown in London, Tokyo and Washington and distributed in
book form around the world.

Another exhibition, ''America's Presidents,: Public and Private Lives,
Selections from the Forbes Magazine Collection,'' will be on view at the museum
until June 11. It contains documents, correspondence, broadsides and posters,
some of which date back to George Washington's time.

The display was arranged in honor of Malcolm Forbes, who was to receive an
honorary degree at the university's commencement on May 20. It will be given
posthumously and accepted by his son Christopher.  The museum is open without
charge from 11 A.M. to 4 P.M. Tuesday to Saturday. Call 243-4090 for more
information.

AQUATIC ECOLOGY

Garden clubs from Greenwich, Hartford, New Haven, Old Saybrook and other
communities will participate in the Tides of Spring flower show at the Thames
Science Center in New London. The show, co-sponsored by the center and the New
London Garden Club, has a theme emphasizing the role of water in the ecology,
carried out in table settings and other forms,in conjunction with the center's
exhibition on the Thames River tidal basin.

Exhibitors were charged with creating settings that reflect the aquatic theme
not only in the flower arrangements but also in the china, crystal, cutlery and
tablecloths. Horticultural exhibits will stand on dock pilings instead of
pedestals, and there will be water-oriented arrangements of small flowers,
miniature settings of woodsy plants and streams, as well as house plants,
topiary and flowering branches.

The show, featuring more than 30 exhibitors, will be open from 11 A.M. to 6 P.M.
Friday, and admission is free. The center is on Gallows Lane. Call 442-0391 for
directions or more information.

LANDMARK HOUSES

Tuesday marks the season's opening of Connecticut's historic houses maintained
by the Antiquarian and Landmarks Society. Tour guides will lead visitors through
the houses, providing a glimpse of the state's history through architectural and
decorative styles and stories about the families who occupied them.

Hatheway House in Suffield - the only house that will open a day late, on
Wednesday - was built in 1761 and still contains the original French wallpaper.
Visiting hours are from 1 to 4 P.M. Wednesdays.

The Butler-McCook Homestead in Hartford, where the society is headquartered, was
built in 1782 and is filled with furnishings and possessions that served four
generations of occupants. It is open from noon to 4 P.M. Tuesday, Thursday and
Sunday.

A third Hartford house, built in 1854 is the Italianate Isham-Terry House, open
on Sundays from noon to 4 P.M.

In Wethersfield, the Buttolph-Williams House, which has small casement windows,
hewn overhang and other features indicative of early New England, will be open
from noon to 4 P.M. Tuesday to Sunday.

Nathan Hale's Homestead in Coventry may be seen daily from 1 to 5 P.M., and two
New London sites, the Joshua Hempstead and Nathaniel Hempstead houses, are open
from 1 to 5 P.M. Tuesday to Sunday.

Admission is $2, children up to 17 years of age $1. Admission to the two New
London sites is $3. Hours for the 1816 Amanda Day House in Moodus, addresses,
travel directions and other information may be obtained by calling 247-8996.

POSTER COMMUNICATION

A striking collection of posters by three Connecticut-based artists will be on
view at the Aetna Gallery in Hartford through June 24. ''Signs of Public
Interest,'' featuring the work of Robert Appleton, Peter Good and William
Wondriska, highlights the concept that posters, artistic as they may be, must
still command the attention of passersby and convey the message at a glance.

While other forms of advertising have swept the poster into a less significant
position than it once had, its popularity as a cultural art form is
undiminished, said Paul Selwyn, curator of the exhibit. The more than 70 posters
in this exhibition focus primarily on the arts, ranging from a depiction of Mark
Twain in connection with a theatrical performance at Bushnell Memorial Hall, to
a ''Nutcracker'' poster for the Hartford Ballet and a surrealist design for the
Institute of Graphic Arts.

Appleton Design is a Hartford firm, Peter Good Graphics is in Chester, and
Wondriska Associates is in Farmington.

Hours at the Aetna Gallery, 205 Farmington Avenue, are from noon to 4 P.M.
Saturday and Sunday, or by appointment. Call 727-4286.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1990 The New York Times Company


                              149 of 288 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                   May 13, 1990, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

THE FELIX BLOCH AFFAIR

BYLINE: By David Wise: David Wise is the author of ''The Spy Who Got Away'' and
other books about intelligence and espionage.

SECTION: Section 6; Page 28, Column 1; Magazine Desk

LENGTH: 6220 words


PARIS IN THE SPRING. IT IS EARLY EVENING ON MAY 14, 1989 , and Felix Bloch is
strolling down the Rue Faubourg St.-Honore, one of the world's most expensive
shopping streets, carrying a black airline-type bag with a shoulder strap. He
pauses to look in the shop windows. He is being watched, and the watchers think
he is studying the reflections in the glass to see if he is being followed.

He is not aware of it, but the busy street is swarming with agents of the
Direction de la Surveillance du Territoire (D.S.T.), the French
counterintelligence agency. Bloch continues walking to the Hotel Meurice, on the
Rue de Rivoli. He goes through the lobby, across an immense chandeliered gallery
to a small, cozy bar in the rear.

The man he says he knew as ''Pierre Bart'' is waiting for him there, a bear of a
man, close to six feet, heavyset, with dark hair, a beard, a mustache and a
passing resemblance to the actor Peter Ustinov. Bloch and Pierre Bart have
whiskies in the bar, and the French counterintelligence agents manage to take
their pictures with cameras concealed in cigarette lighters, or whatever gadgets
the D.S.T. uses. From the bar, the two men walk downstairs to the Restaurant Le
Meurice, a place of dark-paneled wood, red walls and hovering waiters.

The D.S.T. is in the restaurant too, its agents dining at tables nearby, taking
more clandestine photos.

Bloch places the bag under the table. The two men order wine, and they talk over
dinner. Bloch, the high-ranking United States diplomat. Bart, the Soviet agent
who posed as a Frenchman in Paris but lived in Vienna as Reino Gikman, a Finn.

Bloch leaves the restaurant first. A short time later, Bart/Gikman leaves,
carrying the black bag. Soon after, the D.S.T. videotapes him entering his
budget-priced hotel, the Saphir, near the Gare de Lyon.

It was an expensive dinner. The Meurice always is. But the K.G.B. picked up the
check.

BLOCH RECALLS THAT NIGHT VERY DIFFERENTLY. WE ARE sitting in his spacious
apartment in the Kalorama section of Washington. He is impeccably dressed, as
usual, in shirt sleeves this morning, bright suspenders and charcoal slacks.
Mephisto, his little white terrier, is trying to jump on my lap.

The dinner in Paris, Bloch insists, was an innocent meeting of two stamp
collectors. ''I brought the bag to the dinner,'' Bloch said. He pauses, then
adds: ''Stamps were in the bag.'' ''How many?'' ''I don't know. Albums and pages
of stamps.'' ''And you left the bag behind?'' ''Yes, I left the bag behind. I
left it for him.''

He did not know that ''Pierre Bart'' lived in Vienna as Reino Gikman, he claims.
Or that Gikman was a spy. ''I never asked his business,'' Bloch says. ''He was
always vague.''

THE CASE HAS EVERYTHING: A media and F.B.I. circus; an elusive K.G.B. agent with
at least three identities who has vanished; his mistress, an attractive widow
who lives behind barbed wire in Vienna, guarded by a pit bull; a blond Viennese
prostitute specializing in whips and leather; and rumors of a spy ring operating
from the Soviet Unesco mission in Paris.

And of course Felix Bloch himself, a reserved, seemingly austere workaholic,
with a secret sex life right out of a Victorian memoir. He was born into a
Jewish family in Vienna that fled Hitler, but raised as a Presbyterian on the
East Side of Manhattan, a graduate, among other good schools, of P.S. 6. A
cultivated, urbane lover of opera, an admirer of the Jugendstil style of
Viennese turn-of-the-century art, a collector of the works of Gustav Klimt - and
of the stamps of Mitteleuropa. He may, of course, be an innocent victim, trapped
in an improbable web of circumstantial evidence. He is also the highest-ranking
official of the Department of State to be suspected of espionage since Alger
Hiss.

In almost 14 hours of conversations with me - the only in-depth interviews that
Bloch has given since he became the nation's most publicized spy suspect last
July - Bloch ranged over a wide spectrum of subjects, from his views on the
Federal Bureau of Investigation to the relative merits of Mahler and Mozart. He
talked in detail about his meetings in three cities in Europe with Pierre
Bart/Reino Gikman, who undoubtedly was an agent of the K.G.B., but whom Bloch
insists he knew only as a fellow stamp collector; about his reaction to the
ordeal of trial by publicity; about his family, his life, his past, and his
future.

Beneath the remote, Teutonic persona that millions of Americans saw on the
evening news night after night last summer, I found a highly intelligent, even
likable, but haunted man whose dark and nihilistic view of life had shadowed his
existence long before he burst onto the nation's television screens as its
premier spy suspect.

Felix Bloch's case is extraordinary. Never before has a high-ranking official of
the Government been publicly branded as a suspected spy for the Soviet Union,
followed around for months by the F.B.I., the television networks, and the
press, yet not formally accused, indicted, or brought to trial.

For now, Felix Bloch remains in limbo. Three months ago, the State Department
moved to dismiss him. The F.B.I., convinced he is guilty, hopes to put him in
prison for life. President Bush has publicly called the case ''very serious.''
The Government's counterintelligence agents believe that Bloch passed classified
documents, not postage stamps, to Reino Gikman. Last summer, a Federal grand
jury opened an investigation, but so far the Government has been unable to make
its case.

As deputy chief of mission in Vienna, Bloch had access to a broad range of
classified secrets, including encoded cable traffic, C.I.A. and State Department
intelligence reports, the identities of C.I.A. officers in the embassy and,
possibly, of some of their sources. Bloch, a senior State Department official
noted, was a Foreign Service officer for 31 years. ''You may ask what he knew,''
the official said, ''but a better question is what didn't he know?''

Bloch was not branded a spy suspect solely by reporters. Minutes after John
McWethy, a resourceful and diligent correspondent for ABC News, broke the story
last July 21, the State Department confirmed that Bloch had been placed on
leave, his building pass revoked, and that a security breach ''has occurred'' -
astonishing language that virtually convicted Bloch without a trial.

IT BEGAN, ACCORDING TO BLOCH, WITH A PHONE CALL. Pierre Bart, he says, ''had
contacted me some months earlier at the behest of a mutual friend in Vienna.''

We are in the back room at I Ricchi, an upscale Washington restaurant not far
from Bloch's condominium. We started with the garlic bread and now he is working
on his swordfish. He has joined me in a glass of pinot grigio, although Bloch
drinks very little and doesn't smoke.

I ask the name of the man in Vienna. ''I can tell you the name,'' Bloch replies.
''But he's dead.'' Bloch smiles. ''He's been dead for four, five years. Willy
Loman.''

I look at him incredulously. An Arthur Miller character has wandered into the
Bloch case? ''Lomax,'' he corrects himself. ''It was Lomax. An expatriate Brit
who worked for the U.S. Embassy.''

How did he know that the dead Englishman gave Bart his name? ''That's what
Pierre told me.'' Later, in Vienna, I tried to find out more about ''Willy
Lomax.'' I discovered that no one named Lomax had ever worked for the United
States Embassy. But several former Embassy employees remember a colleague named
Richard Lomas, an Englishman and former British army officer who worked in the
economic section. A tall man, about six feet, with a mustache and gray hair,
Lomas had arrived in Vienna with the British occupation troops in 1945, married
an Austrian woman who hoped for a career as an opera(Continued on Page 38)
singer, and stayed. He shared Bloch's love of music and, like Bloch, was often
seen at the opera. He had retired in 1978, the embassy press officer said.

Although accounts of the Bloch case have focused on the meeting in Paris, Bloch
told me he had met with Bart/Gikman three times last year, in three cities in
Europe. I asked Bloch how the first contact came: by phone? He nodded. They met,
Bloch said, not in Vienna but ''in another European city,'' in the early part of
1989. Bloch would not discuss any more details of what he said was his first
meeting with Bart, but when I asked if he had given him stamps at this meeting,
he replied: ''Yes.''

By then, Bloch had returned from Vienna, where he served from 1980 to 1987, and
was back in the State Department as director of the office of regional economic
and political affairs in the European bureau. His long-sought ambassadorship now
seemed out of reach. He was only 1 of 11 office directors in the bureau and, at
age 53, his career in the Foreign Service no longer looked promising.

On May 11, Reino Gikman - the man Bloch refers to as ''Pierre Bart'' - left
Vienna on a trip, accompanied by Helga Hobart, a dark-haired, handsome widow in
her late 40's. Gikman, who told friends he was a Finn, carried a Finnish
passport that gave his age as 59. For the past five years he and Helga had lived
in her little cottage at 169 Rosenhugelstrasse, in Hietzing, in Vienna's 13th
district.

They flew to Paris and checked into the Saphir. Two days later, Gikman, now
metamorphosed into Pierre Bart, telephoned Bloch at his apartment in Washington.
The F.B.I. was listening. Sometime that spring, by undisclosed means, Western
intelligence agents had picked up Gikman's trail. Their task was complicated,
officials say, by the fact that there really is a stamp collector called Pierre
Bart, whose identity Gikman at times adopted as cover.

As it happened, Bloch was about to leave for France on official business. That
afternoon, he flew to Paris, arriving early on Sunday, May 14, and checked into
the Hotel Pullman St.-Honore, a small Right Bank hotel.

After delivering the bag to Gikman at the Meurice, Bloch attended a meeting of
economic officers the next day, then flew to Madrid on May 16 for a European
Community conference and returned to Washington.

The meeting in Paris, however, was not his last with Reino Gikman. Their next
encounter was to cause considerable problems for the F.B.I. and the C.I.A.

PRESIDENT BUSH ARRIVED in Brussels on Sunday, May 28, for a two-day meeting of
the North Atlantic Treaty Organization and a courtesy call on Jacques Delors,
the president of the European Community. Felix Bloch, who had helped to prepare
the Bush-Delors meeting, decided he should be in Brussels in case he was needed.
At least that is what he told Michael E. Ely. Ely, a balding, bespectacled
career Foreign Service officer, is currently the United States deputy chief of
mission (D.C.M.) to the European Community in Brussels. There is no hint of
suspicion surrounding Ely's unwitting role in what happened next. Over the
course of a year, Bloch had stayed four times in Ely's large, pleasant suburban
house in Woluwe-St.-Pierre. There is an informal tradition within the clubby
Foreign Service that a deputy chief of mission offers hospitality to visitors of
high rank. Ely had a swimming pool and three servants.

Bloch stayed with Ely for two nights. On one of those evenings, he had supper
out. ''Don't worry about me,'' Bloch told his colleague, ''I'm having dinner in
town with an old friend.'' Ely, a polite Princeton man, insisted on dropping
Bloch off at the Hilton. He remained in his car and did not see whom Bloch met.

Bloch walked through the lobby, up a long, curved, carpeted stairway and pushed
open the glass doors of La Maison du Boeuf, a dining room of soft banquettes and
bright chandeliers. There a familiar, bearded companion joined him for dinner.
Once again, Bloch told me, he handed materials to Pierre Bart. Stamps? He
nodded, yes. The Brussels meeting created a predicament for the F.B.I. and its
intelligence division in Washington. From the tap on Bloch's phone, it knew he
was going to Brussels. It could not afford to let another meeting with Gikman,
the Soviet agent, take place unobserved. Only two weeks earlier, French agents
had provided surveillance for the Paris meeting. Logically, the Belgian Surete
de L'Etat would be asked by the F.B.I. to do the same in Brussels, but that
request was never made.

''We've felt the Belgian service has been penetrated by the Soviets for a long
time,'' said one United States intelligence officer close to the Bloch case.
There may be other explanations as well. Albert Raes, the prickly chief of the
Surete, does not enjoy good relations with the other Western security services.

The F.B.I. asked the C.I.A. to provide surveillance of the meeting between Bloch
and Gikman, and it did, albeit reluctantly. It was a very risky business. ''The
fact that the agency covered was very sensitive,'' an intelligence source said.
''The C.I.A. was running a covert operation without telling the host country. It
was very dicey. The whole station could have gotten kicked out.'' But the
C.I.A.'s surveillance in Brussels may have been discreet to a fault; there was
confusion about whether Bloch brought a bag to the meeting, and whether he left
it with Gikman. Weeks later, when investigators questioned Ely, they went over
and over the same point: had Bloch thrown a bag in the car when he left Ely's
house? Try as he would to recall, Ely could not be sure. And he did not know if
Bloch carried anything when he returned to the house after dinner. The Elys had
retired early and Bloch, who had his own key, let himself in. Ely realized from
what he was asked that the meeting had been observed, and he must have wondered
at the questions. Didn't they know? But the C.I.A., reluctant to reveal its
hand, may have hoped that the agency's surveillance would remain hidden if Ely
could provide the needed evidence firsthand. He could not.

President Bush called on Jacques Delors on May 30, and his plane left Brussels
at 3:10 P.M. Immediately afterward, Bloch left by train for Paris. He attended
another economic conference, spent the weekend in Paris, and flew home.

JUST AFTER 6 A.M. ON Thursday, June 22, Reino Gikman called Bloch at his home in
Washington. To the listening F.B.I. wiretappers, the call was clearly a warning.
''He did not use the word virus, it's garbled in the press accounts,'' Bloch
said. ''But he said he wasn't feeling well and hoped I didn't catch the same
thing. I said to him, 'I hope it's not serious.' 'No, it's not,' he said. I
wished him well and hung up.''

By even the most charitable interpretation it seemed unlikely that Gikman, after
three weeks, was really worried that his friend would catch the flu. James H.
Geer, then the F.B.I. counterintelligence chief, realized with dismay that the
Soviets had somehow learned that Bloch and Gikman were under surveillance. How
is not clear. The most ominous explanation - the tipoff came from a mole inside
United States intelligence - is not necessarily the only one. Soviet agents
watching Bloch's apartment in Kalorama, for example, might have detected the
F.B.I. surveillance.

When Bloch arrived at his office on the sixth floor of the State Department
later that day, he was summoned by Ambassador Robert E. Lamb, the assistant
secretary for diplomatic security. Three F.B.I. agents were waiting for him.
They questioned Bloch for two and a half hours.

The agents confronted Bloch with full-face surveillance photographs of him taken
in the restaurant of the Hotel Meurice. They showed him pictures of Gikman in
the restaurant, taken from a side angle. The F.B.I. asked Bloch whether he had
passed secrets to the Soviets. Bloch denied it. Had he received any money from
the Soviets? None, Bloch said.

The F.B.I. agents pressed him. Had he ever met Gikman in Vienna, where they both
lived at the same time for seven years? No.

According to Bloch, ''After a while they said, 'Tell us the truth.' 'You can
accept it or not,' I said. One of them pointed to a pile of papers on the desk,
about five, six inches high - this was in an office in Lamb's suite - and said
these are the papers.' 'No they're not,' I said.''

In the course of the interrogation, the F.B.I. agents asked for Bloch's black
diplomatic passport and his regular blue passport. Bloch voluntarily turned in
both. As of our last meeting, he had not received them back.

The F.B.I. agents followed Bloch home. For the next six months, he was never to
be (Continued on Page 42) without surveillance by the bureau's agents, working
in three shifts round the clock.

He was questioned for several hours the next day, and turned over the key to his
apartment to the F.B.I., which he says removed boxes of bank records, address
books and other personal belongings.

So far, no word of these events had leaked out. The press and the public were
unaware that a major espionage investigation was under way at the State
Department. But that was about to change.

JOHN F. MCWETHY, 43 years old, is a correspondent for ABC News who has covered
the State Department for five years. According to McWethy, in mid-July, an
anonymous caller telephoned the ABC bureau in Washington to say ''a major
espionage case was brewing.''

Within days, McWethy was able to confirm the story from his sources at the State
Department. ''On the afternoon of July 21, I called him for the first time.''
Bloch would not comment. McWethy said: ''I said, 'A story like this on network
television will change your life.' He said, 'I can't talk about it.' ''

McWethy got ready to tape his stand-up in the State Department lobby, the flags
of the world's nations behind him. At the ABC bureau on DeSales Street, the
Washington producers of ''World News Tonight'' lacked visuals to accompany the
story. They had a photographer take a picture of two ABC producers on the
street, a briefcase between them. The picture was put in a ''paint box,'' a
device that allows a photograph to be retouched at will. The man on the left was
made to look bald, so that he resembled Felix Bloch. Next, a grainy
black-and-white street scene of Vienna was found in the files, and cross hairs
and a digital clock were superimposed to click off seconds as in a surveillance
film. The film was labeled ''Simulation'' but the still photo of the two men
with the briefcase was not, an oversight the network says was accidental. ABC
News was severely criticized, and Peter Jennings apologized on the air. The
error tended to overshadow McWethy's clean scoop. For Felix Bloch, the broadcast
was the end of anonymity.

FELIX STEPHEN BLOCH , now 54, was born in Vienna on July 19, 1935. His father
and mother, Frederick and Hetty Stein Bloch, got out with Felix and his twin
sister, Susi, in the spring of 1939, a year after the Nazis marched into
Austria. The family settled in Manhattan, where Bloch's aged parents still live
in the East 90's. Frederick Bloch had a successful paper export business.

''As a boy I hated the name Felix,'' Bloch said. ''Who wanted to be different?''

He suffered the usual indignities of childhood; other kids sometimes taunted him
as ''Felix the Cat'' or ''Blochhead.''

Bloch and his sister were raised as Presbyterians. Bloch attended Brick
Presbyterian Church, at Park Avenue and 91st Street, near their home. ''My
parents were both Jews. My mother became Presbyterian and my father did not. I
really don't know anything about Judaism. I didn't even know Yiddish
expressions. I never heard them as a child.

''What I enjoyed about Brick Presbyterian Church and even today is the ritual.
Until fairly recently, Brick Presbyterian Church had kneeling cushions. I liked
the great choir, great organists, the processional and the recessional, the
ritual. The ushers wore tails on Sunday. It was the church of Foster Dulles and
Laurence Rockefeller. It was a class establishment.''

After P.S. 6, Bloch went to the High School of Commerce, graduated from the
University of Pennsylvania in 1957 and spent a year in Bologna, Italy, at the
Johns Hopkins School of Advanced International Studies. He flunked his orals but
met Lucille (Lu) Stephenson, a vivacious, blue-eyed fellow student from Saluda,
N.C., the daughter of a state senator. They were married in September 1959.

By then, Bloch had joined the State Department as an intelligence specialist. In
1960 he and Lu were posted to Dusseldorf, where their oldest daughter, Kathleen,
was born. Their second child, Andrea, was born two years later, and the Blochs
were sent to Caracas for two years. He returned to the United States and got his
master's degree at Berkeley. He was posted to West Berlin in 1970, and four
years later to East Berlin. They moved to Pankow, a suburb, and Bloch traveled
frequently to Leipzig. It is a period that the F.B.I. has studied with especial
care. In 1975, Bloch was transferred to Singapore for two years. Then, in 1980,
he was sent to Vienna.

TO BLOCH, VIENNA was more than his first assignment to a major capital in
Western Europe, it was also a homecoming. Although he had not lived in Vienna
for 45 years, he was fluent in German. He and his wife moved into a comfortable
house in Oberdobling, one of Vienna's best neighborhoods.

Vienna is a lovely and civilized city, and for Bloch, the embassy's economic
counselor, there were not only the usual round of diplomatic receptions, but
also the opera, the Art Nouveau he admired, skiing in winter, trips to Alpine
lakes in the summer, and best of all, the Mocks, Alois and Edith. Mock,
Austria's foreign minister, was one of Felix Bloch's closest and oldest friends.
Felix, Lu, and Alois had all met as students in Bologna more than 20 years
before.

By 1982, two American ambassadors had come and gone. In October, Bloch was back
in the United States on leave and met Helene A. von Damm, Ronald Reagan's
longtime personal secretary, at a dinner party at Jimmy's restaurant in Los
Angeles. The hostess took Bloch aside and told him that von Damm, who was born
in Linz, would be named the new Ambassador to Austria.

In May 1983, von Damm, looking for a new deputy chief of mission, took Bloch to
lunch at the Intrigue, a Washington restaurant. Bloch recalls the moment. ''She
said, 'I want you to be D.C.M.' ''

At first, they got along well. ''I was very satisfied with him at the
beginning,'' von Damm said. ''He worked very hard, he knew no hours. He did
enjoy the limelight. He would have liked to be the Ambassador.''

That September, Vice President George Bush visited Vienna. Bloch, the official
in charge of Bush's visit, met him at the airport. In Lu's scrapbook, there are
numerous photos of Bloch and Bush during the visit. There is also a snapshot of
C.I.A. Director William H. Webster, then director of the F.B.I., in tennis
whites and a powder-blue sweater, holding a racquet and posing with the Blochs
on a visit to Vienna.

By her second year in Vienna, von Damm, although married to her third husband,
was carrying on a not-very-secret affair with Peter Gurtler, the owner of the
Sacher Hotel. This did not sit well with the White House. According to von Damm,
''Nancy Reagan, who had opposed my appointment, insisted I resign.''

In May 1986, Ronald S. Lauder, the billionaire heir to the cosmetics fortune
that bears the name of his mother, Estee Lauder, arrived in Vienna as Reagan's
new Ambassador. At Lauder's request, Bloch agreed to stay on as the No. 2 man in
the embassy. Again, relations were harmonious at first. But Lauder says he soon
became disturbed by Bloch's close relationship with Alois Mock and other
Austrian ministers. Lauder became convinced that confidential embassy
discussions were going straight to the Austrian Government, especially to Mock.
Before long, Lauder and Bloch were squabbling almost continuously.

Bloch regaled friends with stories of Lauder's worries about his personal
security; once Estee Lauder called on Bloch at the embassy to voice her concerns
about her son's safety. Lauder walked in on the meeting and asked, ''Mother,
what are you doing here?'' Bloch also derided Lauder for hiring armed Austrian
bodyguards.

Last summer, in the midst of Lauder's unsuccessful campaign for the Republican
nomination for mayor of New York, and a few days after Bloch was named as a spy
suspect, Bloch was quoted as saying Lauder had been the ''laughingstock of
Vienna.'' Bloch, Lauder snapped back, was a ''Benedict Arnold.'' The two are not
fond of each other.

In the summer of 1987, Lauder said, he finally dismissed Bloch. George S. Vest,
then director general of the Foreign Service, insists that Bloch was withdrawn
''because of conflicts with the Ambassador, but he was not fired.'' Whatever the
truth of the matter, by the fall of 1987, Bloch was back in Washington.

PETER KERN HAS RUN his modest gasthaus at Wallnerstrasse 3 for 16 years. The
menu at Kern's is heavy on pork schnitzels, beef and potatoes. There is good
draft beer. Many of the people who eat lunch there work in government offices
nearby.

Kern remembers the big man with the beard coming in for the first time in 1983.
''For a year and a half he came here to eat, and one day the regulars at the
Hofrate-Stammtisch'' - roughly, the bureaucrats' table - ''asked if he wanted to
join them.''

Reino Gikman did. A quiet, friendly patron, he told the regulars he was a Finn
who worked in computers for I.B.M.

When investigators in Finland later dug into his background, they discovered
that the man who called himself Reino Gikman had written to the Finnish Orthodox
Church in Hameenlinna, Finland, from Bremen, West Germany, in the spring of
1966. ''Gikman'' enclosed a copy of a purported birth certificate showing he was
born on March 27, 1930, in Ino, Karelia, a portion of Finland that is now Soviet
territory.

Records from that village had been moved to Kuopio, in central Finland, but in
1952 four registry books had been stolen there, probably by the K.G.B. As a
result, it was impossible to verify the information on ''Gikman's'' birth
certificate, but since the copy looked real, the church issued him an original.

Once he had that, Gikman was able to obtain a valid Finnish passport. Later in
1966 he moved to Finland, where two years afterward he married a woman named
Martta Nieminen. The following year they moved to Dusseldorf, where a son was
born in 1969.

Martta and the son disappeared into the woodwork in the 1970's. Gikman arrived
alone in Vienna in 1979, one year before Felix Bloch. He lived at the Hotel Post
for about five years, then moved in with Helga Hobart.

Was Gikman serving as Bloch's K.G.B. ''control'' in Vienna? To the F.B.I. it
seemed an obvious possibility, but the bureau was unable to establish that Bloch
and Gikman ever met in Vienna. And Bloch denied it to me. ''If Gikman was in
Vienna, it was unknown to me. I did not know or meet him there.''

When I interviewed Robert (Continued on Page 55) Danzinger, chief of the
Austrian federal police, in Vienna, he said the Staatspolizei, the security
service, could not determine whether Bloch ''had contacts with Gikman'' in
Vienna. ''It was never established they met in Austria,'' he said.

Danzinger said he knew Bloch, had met and talked with him several times at
receptions. It was puzzling, he recalled. ''I am also a stamp collector, and I
didn't know he was a stamp collector.''

TINA JIROUSEK IS 34 , and very attractive. Her hair is blonde, feather cut. She
has clear green eyes, a pug nose, and is wearing an expensive and tasteful brown
silk dress. We are having lunch at a restaurant overlooking Vienna's Stadtpark.

She is no longer a prostitute. I found her working as a waitress at a
coffeehouse in Vienna. Only her three-inch gold spiked heels suggest her former
profession.

For seven years, Tina said, Felix Bloch visited her almost every Saturday
morning. Dressed in leather costume and boots, armed with a whip, Tina
specialized in sadomasochistic sex. For her services, Tina said, Bloch paid her
about $250 a week, or perhaps $10,000 a year for seven years.

She was born Anna Christina Stritzl in Vienna, and worked as a prostitute for
about 10 years, until she was 30. One of the first customers to answer the
advertisement she placed in Kurier, a Vienna newspaper, on Jan. 1, 1980, was
Felix Bloch. She gave up her trade about five years ago, she said, but kept
Bloch as a special client. She speaks of him with affection and a certain
compassion. ''He's complicated, and it's hard to get to know him,'' she said.
''He has a contact problem with people.''

Felix Bloch's preference for kinky sex would be of no relevance but for the fact
that Tina Jirousek was brought to Washington last August to tell her story to
the Federal grand jury hearing evidence in the Bloch case. Under constant F.B.I.
guard, she was put up at a Ramada Inn in northern Virginia. She testified twice
to the grand jury, once for seven hours, once for three, and spent a day being
interviewed by the F.B.I.

Bloch has never commented on Tina's account. But the F.B.I. was apparently
pursuing two theories. One, that Bloch's sexual habits had become known to the
Soviets, who blackmailed him. Since he visited a prostitute in Vienna, perhaps
he had done so in Berlin 15 years earlier. If he was a spy, did his spying go
back that far? A second theory was that Bloch sold secrets to pay for sex. But
he did not appear to need outside sources of income. Financial disclosure forms
filed by Bloch over the past three years placed his assets in the $300,000 to
$1,000,000 range.

The F.B.I. went over Bloch's finances last summer and could not pinpoint any
unexplained sources of income. ''The money analysis doesn't work,'' one official
said. ''We've taken a hard look at that. He comes from money. His father has
money. So analysis of his bank accounts does not prove anything.''

WHEN THE MEDIA CIRCUS began last July, both the press and the F.B.I. agents
found it hard to keep up with Felix Bloch. A tall man with an athletic frame, he
is in excellent physical shape, has always liked to walk, and led the reporters
and the counterspies on some memorable treks in the heat, including a 22-mile
walk in early August that left one agent with bleeding feet.

One morning, Bloch was sitting on a park bench in Dupont Circle when three young
children began chanting, ''Bye, Mr. Spy!'' Then a man who said he was a Vietnam
veteran started harassing Bloch. ''Did you betray your country, man?'' Suddenly,
he smacked Bloch on the side of the head. An F.B.I. agent eventually persuaded
the man to leave.

At Thanksgiving, Bloch went to visit his daughter Kathie in Chappaqua, N.Y., for
the birth of his first grandson. On Dec. 6, he was in Macy's with his F.B.I.
escort. He went uptown for lunch at the Waldorf grill, then to his parents'
apartment. His mother was the first to notice. She checked the street. ''There's
no one there,'' she told Bloch. And it was true; that afternoon the F.B.I.
surveillance suddenly ended. The agents were gone, and they haven't been back.

ESPIONAGE IS AN ALMOST invisible crime. Unless the spy confesses or is caught in
the act, leaving documents at a ''dead drop'' or handing them to a foreign
agent, it is often impossible to prove.

Why didn't the French D.S.T. move in and arrest Bloch and Gikman if they
suspected that documents were being passed? ''They probably had no reason to
think he had violated French laws,'' said Phillip A. Parker, former deputy chief
of F.B.I. counterintelligence.

Neither the the F.B.I. nor the French know what was in the bag. That is the crux
of the matter. And Felix Bloch says it was stamps.

According to one news report, Bloch told his wife, in a conversation in their
car, that he had received money from the Soviets. The F.B.I. did indeed bug
Bloch's silver Mercedes, but Bloch said he merely ''told her that I'd been
accused of taking money.''

So in the end, the agents were pulled off Felix Bloch because the F.B.I., the
Justice Department and the grand jury were unable to prove that he had committed
espionage. ''The case is still open,'' an F.B.I. spokesman said. But in the
absence of new evidence, it will remain that way, open and unresolved.

Although the F.B.I. was widely criticized for its massive surveillance of Bloch
last summer, the bureau could hardly afford another Edward Lee Howard case. In
1985, Howard, a C.I.A. officer, sold secrets to the Soviets, eluded the F.B.I.,
and surfaced in Moscow. In some ways, the Bloch case has been even more
demoralizing to the F.B.I. Bloch lives in Washington, a free man against whom
nothing has been proven despite the bureau's intensive efforts.

James Geer, who ran the Bloch case for the F.B.I., bristles at suggestions that
the bureau leaked the story to put pressure on Bloch. Counterintelligence
investigations, Geer pointed out, ''don't lend themselves to publicity.'' He
revealed that the F.B.I. had conducted an extensive investigation of the leak to
ABC, polygraphing ''all the people who had detailed knowledge of the case'' -
beginning with Geer. ''It involved a lot of agencies,'' he said.

Geer would not discuss the findings of the leak investigation. But other sources
said the F.B.I. investigation pointed to a ''surrogate'' acting for Secretary of
State James A. Baker 3d. The State Department declined to comment on any aspect
of the leak inquiry.

On Feb. 7 the State Department took Bloch off the payroll and moved to dismiss
him from his $81,400-a-year job under a little-used statute allowing the
Government to dismiss employees for reasons of ''national security.''

Bloch asked the State Department for a closed hearing, and in a motion filed in
March, he moved to suppress the tapes of the Government's electronic
surveillance. If Bloch is dismissed, as is expected, the State Department could
also seek to bar his pension under a separate law. In the meantime, Bloch is
already looking for a job; he showed me his resume.

United States officials credit the C.I.A. for coming up with the initial clues
in the Bloch affair. In French intelligence circles, however, there are rumors
of a Soviet spy ring linked to Gikman operating out of the Soviet mission to
Unesco on the Rue Miollis, and of a Soviet embassy staff member found dead,
floating down the Seine, last spring. There were reports last summer that
Gikman, as Pierre Bart, worked for Unesco. But officials of the agency in Paris
said no one fitting his name or description had ever been employed there.

If Felix Bloch is a spy, what were his motives? None of his friends ever heard
him express the slightest sympathy for the Soviet Union or for Communism, and
Bloch told me he regards the Soviet system as ''abhorrent.'' While it is true
that Bloch chafed under a series of political ambassadors in Vienna, that is not
normally a motive for treason. Several friends mentioned the possibility of
blackmail.

It was at lunch at I Ricchi on the second long day of our interviews that I
asked Bloch why he had never declared his innocence. ''There's no way to prove
you are innocent,'' Bloch replied. ''The Government, the leaks, assert that I'm
guilty. Apparently they can't prove it. . . . There's a presumption of innocence
in this country. Someone should not be put in the position of saying 'I'm
innocent.' '' I looked at Bloch. ''So, did you pass secrets to the Soviets?'' He
smiled. ''I'm not going to answer that for the same reason I haven't declared my
innocence.''

Although it does not prove his story is true, there is little doubt that Bloch
is a stamp collector. In his apartment he showed me album after album of stamps
and correspondence and postmarked first-day issues going back to his youth. He
spoke both knowledgeably and enthusiastically of his hobby.

Bloch may indeed, as the F.B.I. suspects, have had contacts with the Soviets for
15 years. Or his contacts may have been confined to the three meetings in 1989.
It is even possible that Bloch, as he claimed to the F.B.I., received no money.
Bloch told the F.B.I. that he gave the ''stamps'' to Pierre Bart on approval, a
common practice in the stamp trade. And Bart, Bloch told the agents who
questioned him, never paid and never returned them. It is a story that raises
the possibility that Bloch was an unsuccessful spy. But only Bloch knows - and
Reino Gikman, who left Vienna on June 11, and vanished.

Last July, Bloch's daughter, Andrea, an aspiring actress in New York, visited
her father in Washington. She needed to know. The conversation took place in the
street, the only place where they felt the F.B.I. would not hear them. ''I asked
him. I call him Babbo, it means Daddy in Italian. 'Babbo, please tell me what is
going on? Can't you tell me what is happening?' He said: 'I can't tell you
anything. I'm doing it to protect you and in the long run to protect myself.' ''

Whatever Felix Bloch had done, he couldn't tell his own daughter about it.

apartment Bloch confided his gloomy personal philosophy. ''We all die
separately,'' he said. ''Very few grieve for us and even those who grieve soon
forget us. And those who don't are gone fairly soon anyway.''

Later that day, we were walking near my office when Bloch suddenly said: ''As
they say, life is a bitch, and then you die. So you live, and you die. Then
oblivion. I think that's what I'll get when I die. Oblivion.''

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Cover photo: Felix Bloch; Photos: Under Investigation, Left: For six
months, the F.B.I. was shadowed around the clock by the F.B.I. Agents escorted
him as he left his father's New York apartment. (Steve Allen/Gamma-Liaison) (pg.
28); Top: Austrian police officers outside a house in Vienna where Bloch
lived.(Reuters/Bettmann Newsphotos) (pg. 29); Above: Reino Gikman, a K.G.B.
officer who met with Bloch as Pierre Bart, and his Finnish passport. (ABC News)
(pg. 29); A Diplomat's Life, Top: Felix Bloch, a former boss says, ''did enjoy
the limelight'' of the Foreign Service, like this Fourth of July garden party at
the United States Embassy in Vienna in 1988. (Gudrun
Beinhauer/Contrast/Gamma-Liaison) (pg. 30); Above: Tina Jirousek, the onetime
prostitute who says Bloch visited her nearly e

                   Copyright 1990 The New York Times Company


                              150 of 288 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                   May 14, 1990, Monday, Late Edition - Final

Books of The Times;
Oh, How Malicious That Man Could Be!

BYLINE: By CHRISTOPHER LEHMANN-HAUPT

SECTION: Section C; Page 15, Column 1; Cultural Desk

LENGTH: 878 words



Walter Winchell: A Novel
By Michael Herr
158 pages. Alfred A. Knopf $18.95.

You open the pages of Michael Herr's ''Walter Winchell: A Novel,'' and the
characters jump up like figures in a pop-up book. It's 1943, New York City, and
there they are, sitting at Table 50 in the Cub Room of the Stork Club, ''as good
a name as there will ever be for the glamour space par excellence,'' as Mr. Herr
writes.

There's Sherman Billingsley, the owner of the Stork Club and ''an ex-gangster.''
There's Damon Runyon: ''The complete cynic. He seems really to care for no one,
although something warm flickers along the bond connecting him to Winchell.''
There's Ernest Hemingway: ''Already far gone in believing his public image;
self-conscious, vain, extremely sensitive, half-crazy.''

There's Walter Winchell himself, ''the wizard of the American vicarious: gossip
columnist, failed vaudevillian, power broker, and journalistic demagogue, one of
the most powerful and famous men of his time.''

And the words come out of their mouths like comic-strip balloons, getting bigger
and more graphic until they explode. ''Too many Jews in here as it is,'' says
Billingsley, turning down a reservation for ''a Mr. Feinstein.'' ''Mr. Feinstein
is who?'' Billingsley asks. ''No one,'' says the reservations captain. ''Just
Plain Feinstein.''

Wondering what could have happened to a middle-aged woman seated across the
room, Winchell says, ''She'll never live to be as old as she looks.''

Runyon says, ''Walter doesn't know who Kipling is.'' Winchell responds, ''I
never kippled.''

Actually, ''Walter Winchell: A Novel'' is ''Walter Winchell: A Sort of
Screenplay.'' ''You could call it a screenplay that's typed like a novel, that
reads like a novel but plays like a movie,'' writes Mr. Herr, the author of
''Dispatches,'' the highly praised book on Vietnam, and a co-author of the
screenplay for Stanley Kubrick's film ''Full Metal Jacket.''

''Maybe it's a completely new form,'' Mr. Herr continues in his preface, ''or a
wrinkle on an old form, or a mongrel. Maybe it's just a novel with a camera in
it. Personally, my most ambitious claims for it are as an entertainment in the
tradition of the Hollywood biopic, with the undertones of history spreading
beneath the jokes in various bitter shades of dark.''

Whatever ''Walter Winchell'' is intended to be, it's as quick and catchy as a
jazz melody, and its flair is all the more impressive for capturing the varied
moods of its times and the absolute awfulness of its protagonist, who was
completely shameless in his egotism and ambition. He was as bad coming down as
he was on the way up, for which you have to like him in a way. He never diluted
his poison.

''Say what you want,'' says a member of the chorus of press agents who used to
follow Winchell around, ''the town isn't the same without him. The whole game's
changed. It's worse.''

The trouble is, for all its energy, there are too many places in ''Walter
Winchell'' where you stumble over its language. ''We see an incredibly sexy
woman dancing, time passing, Walter talking'' goes one passage. ''Hemingway
looks on with incredible sadness'' reads another.

''Autumn in New York 1947,'' begins still another. ''We hear this played almost
like an anthem, a tone too lush, over shots of the city at its most beautiful.
The glamour and glory of Walter Winchell's epoch have reached full ripeness, and
can only become overripe.''

This is a lazy sort of writing, telling instead of showing, and not very precise
telling at that. It's a form of pre-cinematic gesturing, not quite visualized,
but not conceptual either.

Mr. Herr anticipates this objection in his preface. Having admitted that the
novel ''began life as a screenplay'' and that ''its producers thought of it as
something less than a screenplay,'' he adds: ''It's pretty obvious to me now
that even from the beginning, when I thought I was thinking in pictures, I was
really thinking in prose.

''Instead of subordinating language to picture, I only sublimated it, and
halfheartedly at that.'' Considering the book's unfocused passages, such
statements make the project sound like a rationalization.

Still, what was Mr. Herr to do? Had he pushed his project closer to a legitimate
screenplay, he might well have foundered on what he calls the ''problem of
running time in historical movies,'' where ''you need the clumsy apparatus of
player identification, 'Lenin, meet Trotsky,' and characters telling each other
things that we know they already know.'' As he rightly concludes: ''The Word can
take you back with much less effort.''

On the other hand, had he written ''Walter Winchell'' as a conventional novel,
he would have risked telling more about his protagonist than a reader wants to
know.

In the end, its shortcomings aside, the hybrid form of ''Walter Winchell'' seems
just about right for its subject. As the author notes, ''None of these people is
Hamlet (except maybe the character called Ernest Hemingway), but they're tragic
nonetheless.''

So here's two and a half cheers for Mr. Herr's screenplay novel, or scrovel. It
presents its people as monumental caricatures. But that, frighteningly enough,
is what they killed themselves to be. Advance Publicationsd(Alfred A. Knopf)

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo: Michael Herr (Don McCullin)

TYPE: Review

                   Copyright 1990 The New York Times Company


                              151 of 288 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 May 16, 1990, Wednesday, Late Edition - Final

Foreign Passports Tell of a Desperate Hong Kong

BYLINE: By NICHOLAS D. KRISTOF, Special to The New York Times

SECTION: Section A; Page 12, Column 1; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 1211 words

DATELINE: HONG KONG


The term ''pregnancy leave'' is taking on a new meaning here, as shown by a
successful Hong Kong Chinese banker who is negotiating an unusual sweetener
before he takes a new job. He wants his employer to pay to send his pregnant
wife to Canada to give birth, insuring that their child will be born a Canadian
citizen.

In the latest triumph of Hong Kong ingenuity, and the latest sign of Hong Kong's
desperation, hundreds and possibly thousands of pregnant women are traveling to
Western countries to give their babies what is regarded here as one of the most
important things in the world: a foreign passport.

''In Hong Kong, when people ask you where you are going to have your baby, they
don't mean which hospital,'' said Frank Ching, a writer and local newspaper
columnist. ''They mean which country.''

It used to be thought that the moment of truth for Hong Kong would come in 1997,
when the British colony will revert to China, but now many people feel that the
crisis is already here.

Mounting Frenzy Expected

Pessimists are drawing parallels with the surrender to Communism of Shanghai in
1949 and Saigon in 1975. They expect a mounting frenzy to leave, a surge in
corruption as people try to buy a new future, and a social breakdown as the
civil service abandons its loyalty to the lame-duck British administration.

''Hong Kong will all be destroyed before 1997,'' said George Hicks, an
Australian businessman and writer who seats himself firmly in the pessimist
camp. ''The upheaval and disintegration will come way before 1997, as everybody
tries to beat their neighbor out. This is like a game of musical chairs in which
everybody knows when the music is going to stop.''

Of course, there are also optimists who believe that Hong Kong's economy is well
positioned to continue to prosper, and that ballooning bank accounts will help
salve anxieties about the future. Hong Kong has faced bouts of pessimism in the
past, and few places in the world have displayed such a remarkable resiliency in
overcoming wars, strikes, riots and trade embargoes.

In 150 years, Hong Kong has transformed itself from a pirates' lair to the
world's largest container port, from an impoverished colony abounding in opium
and skeletal rickshaw boys to an international financial center where impeccably
dressed young men and women race along the streets, their Rolex watches peeking
from under their sleeves as they chatter into portable telephones. Hong Kong
today is richer and healthier than much of Europe, and it has more Rolls-Royces
per capita than anywhere else in the world.

Despair Over Basic Law

Yet Hong Kong's fate seemed to be sealed in early April, when China's
legislature approved the Basic Law that will govern the territory after 1997.
The passage by China's National People's Congress was a formality, but it had
the ring of finality for many Hong Kong residents who had hoped for a more
democratic document.

Ever since the rise of China's hard-liners and the killings in Beijing last
June, the mood in Hong Kong has been bleak and angry. Survey Research Hong Kong,
a polling business that has measured confidence in the future since 1985, says
its latest survey recorded a new low in public confidence. ''People in Hong Kong
are very discouraged at this time,'' said Louis Tong, director of the company.
#1,000 Leaving Each Week Residents are emigrating at the rate of more than 1,000
a week, more than twice the rate in 1986. The obsession with emigration has
spawned a new magazine, The Emigrant, as well as books and counseling services
to help Hong Kong Chinese obtain foreign passports.

In one of the most unusual cases, a few people even paid about $5,000 each as a
down payment on a passport from Corterra, which a brochure and advertisement
identified as a South Pacific nation. They discovered too late that there is no
such country.

Hong Kong does not officially report figures for capital flows, but John G.
Greenwood, chief economist of G. T. Management (Asia) Ltd., an investment
company, has derived estimates that suggest that Hong Kong began to shift
capital abroad in 1984, the year that Britain agreed to return Hong Kong to
China. By his method of calculation, the capital outflow soared in 1989 to
nearly $5 billion, or almost $1,000 per inhabitant.

The apprehensions have been compounded by Hong Kong's unaccustomed encounter
with economic difficulties. Economic growth tumbled to just 2.5 percent last
year, about one-third of the usual level, and hotel occupancy rates dropped to
74 percent, compared with 92 percent in 1988. Over the last decade, Hong Kong's
economy became integrated with southern China's, and so China's woes spill
across the border into the British territory.

U.S. and China Imports Fall

The cause of the economic downturn is fairly straightforward: slowdowns in Hong
Kong's biggest export markets: China and the United States. Thus the optimists,
like George Baeder, director of the Pacific Rim Consulting Group in Hong Kong,
argue that those are cyclical slowdowns and that when economic growth returns,
the problems of Hong Kong will seem much more manageable.

''Think what happens when the U.S. economy picks up, when China rebounds from
its cyclical downturn,'' he said. Then, he continued, if the leaders in Beijing
ease out some prominent hard-liners and turn toward more pragmatic officials,
Hong Kong will again be on the move.

Another source of optimism in some quarters is the belief that hard-line rule in
Beijing is unsustainable. Albert W. Y. Chan, a local politician in the New
Territories part of Hong Kong, is guardedly optimistic for the long term.

''With the democratization of Communist societies around the world, I don't
think that the Chinese Communist Party can keep control indefinitely,'' he said.
''Sooner or later, probably before 1997, there'll be major changes that will
benefit Hong Kong.''

The Pessimism Deepens

The conventional wisdom in the business sector used to be that China would
pursue its own self-interest in insuring Hong Kong's continued prosperity
-because Hong Kong is China's biggest outside investor and trade partner, and
because successful reunification might encourage Taiwan to return to the
mainland as well. Arguments about China's self-interest are heard much less
often today, for today's China seems to measure its self-interest more in
control than in prosperity.

The multinational companies that have regional offices in Hong Kong are weighing
the arguments, and more than half of them are considering moving elsewhere, one
recent survey shows. Singapore is the most likely beneficiary, particularly for
companies that focus on Southeast Asia, but many companies say they intend to
remain in Hong Kong.

One source of concern for the private and public sectors has been the growing
assertiveness of labor groups, and the threats of strikes by firefighters, taxi
drivers, nurses and other groups.

''Everybody's scrambling for more money,'' said a longtime civil servant.
''Nobody wants to wait. I don't see how the society can operate that way.''

The official, a Briton who regards Hong Kong as his home, added glumly: ''And I
don't think that the real panic has set in yet. That's still ahead of us.''

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1990 The New York Times Company


                              152 of 288 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 May 16, 1990, Wednesday, Late Edition - Final

At the Nation's Table

BYLINE: By ELAINE LOUIE

SECTION: Section C; Page 3, Column 4; Living Desk

LENGTH: 380 words

DATELINE: Seattle


JUST as thin-crusted pizzas were a hot snack of the '80s, satays - the grilled
meat, fish or vegetables so common in Asia - may be a snack of the '90s. At
least Rick and Ann Yoder, owners of the Wild Ginger, an Asian restaurant that
opened here last July, hope so.

The restaurant offers a full menu and 10 satays, including grilled local
oysters, plump sea scallops and Chinese eggplant, along with the more familiar
beef and chicken. The Yoders sell more than 500 satays, for $1.50 to $3.50 each,
daily. Four or five satays can make a complete meal.

''Satay is the Malaysian word for skewered and grilled,'' said Mr. Yoder, who
with his wife lived in Southeast Asia for seven months in the mid-80's. Satays
are found, he said, throughout Thailand, Malaysia, Indonesia and Vietnam.

The Yoders, each of whom graduated from the University of Washington with a
major in fisheries, long hoped to open a restaurant in Seattle. By the end of
their Asian trip, they knew what they were going to serve.

The Yoders developed their recipes for the 10 satays and four dipping sauces
from a collection of more than 400 books on Asian cuisine. The chicken satay is
made of boneless chicken breast marinated in curry, coconut, shallots, cumin and
coriander, and is accompanied by a sauce of peanuts, coconut milk, chili,
shallots and lemon grass.

Pork is skewered raw, dipped into coconut milk, and basted with macerated golden
raisins, plum jam, chili, garlic, white vinegar, tomatoes and pineapple juice.
Local oysters are wrapped in thinly sliced bacon, grilled and served with a
sauce made from soy sauce, black vinegar, rice wine, coriander and ginger. The
satays are served with a rice and pickled cucumber.

At the Wild Ginger's satay bar, which wraps around the open gas-fired grill and
seats 20, people can watch the tiger prawns turn pink and the edges of the
bacon-wrapped oysters curl. Beer is the most popular beverage with satays, and
the Wild Ginger features beer from Asia and from local microbreweries.

The Wild Ginger, 1400 Western Avenue, 206-623-4450, is open for lunch, Monday to
Saturday, 11:15 A.M. to 3 P.M.; for dinner, Sunday through Thursday, 5 to 11
P.M., and Friday and Saturday, 5 P.M. to midnight. The satay bar is open Monday
through Saturday 11:15

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo: After living in Southeast Asia, Ann and Rick Yoder decided that
their menu would feature satays. (Doug Wilson for The New York Times)

                   Copyright 1990 The New York Times Company


                              153 of 288 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 May 16, 1990, Wednesday, Late Edition - Final

Food Notes

BYLINE: By Florence Fabricant

SECTION: Section C; Page 7, Column 1; Living Desk

LENGTH: 851 words



An Asian Winner

For the second year in a row, a book about Asian cooking has been named best of
the year by the International Association of Cooking Professionals and Joseph E.
Seagram & Sons, which sponsor annual awards for food and beverage books.

''The Foods of Vietnam,'' by Nicole Routhier (Stewart, Tabori & Chang, $35) won
the grand prize and was the winner among books published in 1989 in the
international category. Last year's grand award was won by ''The Art of Indian
Vegetarian Cooking'' by Yamuna Devi (E. P. Dutton, $29.95).

Winners chosen by a jury of food writers and food professionals in other
categories included ''La Varenne Pratique'' by Anne Willan (Crown Publishers,
$60) for general and basic; ''Cooking From Quilt Country'' by Marcia Adams
(Clarkson N. Potter, $24.95) for American regional; ''Bistro Cooking'' by
Patricia Wells (Workman, $22.95)for European; ''Crabtree & Evelyn Cookbook'' by
Crabtree & Evelyn, Ltd. (Stewart, Tabori and Chang, $29.95) for entertaining;
''Seafood'' by Alan Davidson (Simon and Schuster, $29.95) for single subject,
and ''Cooking With Herbs'' by Emelie Tolley and Chris Mead (Clarkson N. Potter,
$40) for fruits, vegetables, herbs and spices.

Also named as winners last week were ''A Passion For Chocolate'' by Maurice and
Jean-Jacques Bernachon, translated by Rose Levy Berenbaum (William Morrow &
Company, $22.95) for baking and desserts; ''Microwave Gourmet Health Style
Cookbook'' by Barbara Kafka (William Morrow and Company, $22.95) for special
methods; ''The Gourmet Gazelle Cookbook'' by Ellen Brown (Bantam Books, $19.95)
for healthy and light cooking; ''The American Heart Association Low Fat Low
Cholesterol Cookbook'' by Scott Grundy (Times Books, $18.95) for special diets;
''The Essential Cook'' by Charles Delmar (Hill House, $24.95) for writings and
''Vintage: The Story of Wine'' by Hugh Johnson (Simon & Schuster, $39.95) for
wine.

Hispanic Cooking

It looks like a typical neighborhood convenience store, but Stop One Market, 210
West 94th Street, is actually a great convenience to cooks trying to find dried
chilies, epazote and other Hispanic ingredients.

Bags of chilies, including guajillo, four ounces for $1.79; pasilla, six ounces
for $2.79; arbol, three ounces for $1.99; ancho, six ounces for $1.79, and
mulato, five ounces for $2.49, are piled in boxes on one aisle in the back of
the store.

Seasonings like dried epazote, $1.49 an ounce, or dried mango, $1.59 for five
ounces, and an assortment of prepared sauces like mole, pipian and adobo are
also in stock.

Tamarind paste is $1.08 for eight ounces and unsweetened coconut milk is $1.09
for 14 ounces. Tamale husks come dried, $1.69 for seven ounces, or frozen, $5.49
for 1 1/2 pounds. Frozen chorizos are $2.88 a pound. And there are dozens of
other ingredients like assorted pickled and preserved jalapenos cramming the
shelves.

A prepared Mexican specialty is always ready to take out. A tamale stuffed with
pork and spicy enough to make your mouth glow is $1.25. Fresh tacos are prepared
every afternoon. The store is open daily, 8 A.M. to midnight.

Crepes (and More)

In the front window of their new storefront restaurant and shop, Crepe and
Company, 30 Carmine Street, near Bleecker Street in Greenwich Village. Ariane
Figueiredo and Claudia Zagarodne spoon crepe batter onto a traditional black
French griddle, then fill crepes to order with assorted ingredients.

Ratatouille, creamed spinach, cheese and beef stroganoff are some of the savory
possibilities, priced from $4 to $7. Sweet crepes can be made with sugar and
cinnamon, chocolate sauce, apples and walnuts, hazlenut or chestnut spreads,
fresh fruit or homemade jams for $2.50 to $5.

The shop also has other prepared dishes, including some Brazilian specialties.
On Saturdays feijoada, black bean stew with dried meats, is served for $9. Other
days the Brazilian dish might be a kind of fried chicken with garlic, or
Bahia-style shrimp with yucca.

The partners are both from Brazil, but Ms. Figueiredo had lived in Paris, which
is why they decided to feature crepes. Last summer they sold crepes from a stand
that they took to food fairs all over the city; three months ago, they moved
into the more permanent store.

Crepe and Company is open Wednesday to Saturday noon to 10 P.M., Sunday to
Tuesday, noon to 8 P.M. Orders of $7 or more are delivered free in the West
Village and SoHo. Call 212-627-6659.

Feasting Afoot on Ninth Ave.

IT'S fortunate that the Ninth Avenue Food Festival runs for two days. Sampling
everything that looks appealing at one of the city's most lavish movable feasts
isn't possible in just one day.

This year's festival, the 17th, will be held Saturday and Sunday, 11 A.M. to 7
P.M., rain or shine. Food from 29 countries, including Thailand, Burma, Turkey,
Argentina, Peru, Sweden and Canada, as well as the old standbys, China and
Italy, will be sold at hundreds of stands lining the avenue from 37th to 57th
Streets.

The police estimated last year's attendance at more than one million. More
people are expected this year.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Drawings

                   Copyright 1990 The New York Times Company


                              154 of 288 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                  May 17, 1990, Thursday, Late Edition - Final

Metro Matters;
Moving Beyond The Melting Pot, 25 Years Later

BYLINE: By SAM ROBERTS

SECTION: Section B; Page 1, Column 1; Metropolitan Desk

LENGTH: 760 words


The 25th anniversary of the publication of ''Beyond the Melting Pot'' was
officially marked this week, 30 years after the seminal study of race and
ethnicity in New York City was completed, 27 years after it was published and 20
years since it was revised. The timing could not have been better. For whichever
the anniversary, the book's underlying theme seems even more evident today:
That, particularly where race is concerned, the melting pot metaphor didn't hold
water.

The co-authors, Nathan Glazer, a professor of education and sociology at
Harvard, and Daniel P. Moynihan, now a United States Senator from New York,
reflected with other members of a panel at the New York Public Library Monday
night on whether their premise had withstood the test of time, however many
years have elapsed since they advanced it. Mr. Glazer and Mr. Moynihan
maintained that their goal had not been to celebrate ethnic and racial
identities, but rather to come to grips with the resulting divisions.

Their book, Mr. Glazer acknowledged, had not anticipated two phenomena: the
subsequent surge in immigration to New York from the Caribbean, Latin America,
Korea, China, Vietnam and the Soviet Union; and the general failure of
American-born blacks, in particular, to be swept before the floodtide of new
immigrants into the city's economic and social mainstream.

''You've got the Mayor and the police chief and you've got the city,'' Mr.
Moynihan said, suggesting that blacks had, even if belatedly, demonstrated the
endurance of ethnic succession in New York City politics, at least.

Mr. Glazer, because he is not a politician, was less circumspect. A measure of
hope might be detected, he said, in the recent political success of blacks, most
notably the election last year of David N. Dinkins.

But, Mr. Glazer said, the pattern of new immigrants propelling their immediate
predecessors forward had not been duplicated among the two groups that had
dominated immigration to New York during the two decades before ''Beyond the
Melting Pot'' was written: blacks from the South and Puerto Ricans. Instead, he
said, many have become part of a ''great dependent class.''

Mr. Glazer, who wrote the section on American blacks, began this week's
retrospective not in the 1960's, but three decades earlier. He quoted from a
report that called the Harlem riots of 1935 that community's ''inarticulate
response'' to job discrimination, lack of affordable housing and health care,
prejudice and insensitivity by municipal government.

Not only do most of those complaints persist today, but Ruth W. Messinger, who
succeeded Mr. Dinkins as Manhattan Borough President and who participated in the
retrospective, said that improving those very same conditions was her recipe for
racial harmony.

That is not to say conditions for many blacks have not gotten better since 1935,
Mr. Glazer said. But what has not changed looms larger. His assumption that
blacks would be as politically and economically mobile as earlier newcomers to
New York, he said, now seems naive. One consequence of their immobility has been
a lingering resentment in predominantly black neighborhoods that so many local
businesses are owned by outsiders.

''Blacks were boycotting the Jews in Harlem in the 1930's,'' Mr. Glazer said,
''and blacks are boycotting the Koreans 55 years later.''

As evidence of New York's enduring ethnic divisions, Mr. Moynihan recalled
touring the city with Jimmy Carter during the 1976 presidential campaign. At the
perennial garment center rally in Manhattan, a traditional Jewish and later
Hispanic stronghold, most of the campaign placards were in Chinese. As his
motorcade proceeded along Atlantic Avenue in Brooklyn toward a longshoremen's
gathering, Mr. Carter asked whether he was in the borough's Italian district.

''No,'' Mr. Moynihan replied. ''The Arab section.''

On a more cosmic scale, Mr. Moynihan said, the potency of ethnicity has
disproved the Marxian premise that industrialization would produce a uniform
proletariat. ''What Karl Marx proposed in the British Museum, Nat Glazer
disproved in the New York Public Library,'' Mr. Moynihan said.

What Mr. Glazer wrote about race in 1960 proved prescient, if understated.
Introducing their revised edition 10 years later, the authors concluded: ''Race
has exploded to swallow up all other distinctions, or so it would appear at the
moment.''

Twenty years later, as a divided city awaits the verdict on two white teen-agers
accused in the racially-motivated killing of a 16-year-old black, it still does.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1990 The New York Times Company


                              155 of 288 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                   May 18, 1990, Friday, Late Edition - Final

In Central Brooklyn, a Branch of 3d World

BYLINE: By JOHN KIFNER

SECTION: Section B; Page 1, Column 3; Metropolitan Desk

LENGTH: 1434 words


Just down the block from the shouting boycotters, the police barricade and the
embattled Korean grocery store that have become fixtures on Church Avenue in
Flatbush, a man in the everyday garb of Pakistan and Afghanistan - long, baggy,
pajama-like shalwar kamiz and sandals - looked over the merchandise in the Home
Boy's Discount Store the other day.

A youth walked by carrying a radio, not much smaller than a steamer trunk,
blasting Caribbean reggae. A bearded, turbaned Sikh walked home with his
groceries. A man burst into a store shouting in Creole, the Haitian patois of
French spiced by Africa. He was told tartly, ''We don't speak that here.'' Then
the clerk berated him to her co-workers, speaking in Spanish.

Across the street, Frank Parinango, from Ecuador, has a regular spot on the
sidewalk by a parking meter, where he sells beaded bracelets, embroidered
T-shirts and other vaguely ethnic objects.

'No Speak English'

How long had he been in America, Mr. Parinango was asked. He smiled broadly.
''No speak English,'' he replied.

The Third World has opened a branch in this piece of central Brooklyn. And the
waves of immigrants arriving here from Central America, Asia and the Caribbean,
among other places, with the traditional dream of a better life, are making
Flatbush once again what it used to be in this city of immigrants: a stepping
stone on the way up, a working people's neighborhood where the cuisine ranges
from cow-foot soup to tandoori. ''The Haitian people are trying to make a good
living; they're trying very hard,'' said Adeline Amboise, a secretary in the
shipping office of Etranex Courier.

''They're hard-working people like all people who come to America to have a good
life,'' she said. ''Whether you come from Russia or Haiti, it's all the same
reason, even if people don't want to admit it.'' Come they have. Postal ZIP Code
11226, the Federal census district which roughly encompasses Flatbush, took in
17,706 immigrants from 1983 to 1987, the latest figures available, according to
Frank Vardi, a demographer with the New York City Planning Commission.

The largest number of these, 6,027, were Haitians, making up 34 percent of the
total immigration. Flatbush was the most popular destination in the city for
Haitians, Mr. Vardi said, followed by the neighboring East Flatbush and Crown
Heights sections.

The second-largest group, the figures showed came from Jamaica, 3,620 (20.4 per
cent of the total), followed by: Guyana, 2,222 (12.5); Trinidad and Tobago, 841
(4.7); Grenada, 558 (3.2); Panama, 493 (2.8); China, 437 (2.5); Barbados, 389
(2.2); Dominican Republic, 311 (1.8); Vietnam, 244 (1.8); West Indian blacks of
British citizenship, 203 (1.1); St. Vincent and the Grenadines, 198 (1.1);
Cambodia, 168 (0.9); El Salvador, 141 (0.8); Belize, 114 (0.6); Colombia, 109
(0.6); Ghana, 99 (0.6); Pakistan, 95 (0.5); Hong Kong, 93 (0.5); Korea, 93
(0.5); Honduras, 78 (0.4); St. Lucia, 76 (0.4); Antigua-Barbados, 50 (0.3);
North Yemen, 47 (0.3); Liberia, 45 (0.3); the Soviet Union, 43 (0.2), and
Nigeria, 43 (0.2).

Following Relatives

''The immigration follows a pattern, because people come into an area because
relatives have already settled there,'' Mr. Vardi said. ''It's typical of
immigrants before. These patterns emerge over and over again in the resettlement
of these neighborhoods by the new groups.''

As in the past, the interaction between the immigrant groups is not always
smooth.

The current boycott started with a dispute between Haitians and the Korean
grocery store owners, and some people who have studied both cultures say it may
have roots in differing cultural mores.

Haitians, for example, come from a bargaining culture similar to that of the
Middle East in which the customer tries to knock down the merchant's price. It
is an alien concept to the more formal Koreans, who may have to face it across a
gulf of differing languages.

For their part, Koreans have a cultural taboo against women touching other
people. With women usually the cashiers in the Korean stores, their practice of
not putting change in a customer's hand seems to many Haitians and other blacks
as if the women are contemptuously throwing the money at them.

The boycott on Church Avenue seemed far away at places like Best Meats, around
the corner on Flatbush Avenue, the main shopping street. Once a row of stores
that sold kosher foods, it is now a supplier of goat's heads, cow's feet and pig
snouts.

'The Melting Pot, for Sure'

''We have Southern blacks, Jamaicans, Mexicans, Panamanians,'' said the owner,
Sam Biscardi, who is white. ''This is the melting pot for sure. Whatever you can
think of, they're here. This neighborhood was always good.''

A few doors down, Ansell Palmer, a Jamaican, stood behind a counter filled with
coconut drops, gizzardas and other confections of his island and voiced the
universal New York shopkeeper's lament: ''The stores, they are getting so
expensive. Every year the rents go sky high.''

Like nearly every shop, his was decorated with a memento of home: a Jamaican
travel poster.

''Flatbush is one of Brooklyn's most desirable residential neighborhoods,'' the
Works Progress Administration guide to New York said in 1939. Then, it was a
largely Jewish neighborhood, a step from the Williamsburg and Lower East Side
neighborhoods where the first immigrants settled.

Now, the brick walls of the Beth Rivka school are plastered with posters
advertising an appearance by the Mighty Sparrow, the calypso legend; an Easter
celebration party sponsored by the Sons of Guyana and posters for a Haitian
''Grand Soiree Patriotique.''

Some of the synagogues remain; others have been made into churches. There is a
new Pakistani mosque on Coney Island Avenue - and a Pakistani bank under
construction nearby - and another for Moslems from Bangladesh on Church Avenue.
The newest immigrants, Vietnamese and Cambodians, are clustered in what appears
to be the poorest area, grafitti-marred apartments near the park called the
Parade Grounds. Already there is a Cambodian Buddhist temple with saffron-robed
monks nearby.

Parochial School Uniforms

Much of Flatbush is made up of block upon block of well-maintained single-family
houses, many owned by Jamaicans and other immigrants on the way up. In Roman
Catholic churches like Our Lady of Refuge, which once served a mainly Irish
working-class parish, the largest single group is made up of Haitians and a Mass
is said in Creole on Sunday.

It is not a neighborhood without problems. Crack is one. Places like the corner
of East 21st Street and Newkirk Avenue are known to the police of the 70th
Precinct as a major drug location. Very young Vietnamese and Cambodians are said
to have formed vicious criminal gangs dealing in drugs and prostitution.

''The neighborhood has been infested with drug dealers and people coming in to
the neighborhood to buy drugs,'' said the Rev. Andrew L. Struzzieri, the pastor
of our Lady of Refuge. He has been helping organize the community to fight
drugs.

'Neighborhood of Hope'

''This is also a neighborhood of hope,'' he said. ''It's changed radically over
the last 12 years. People are trying to unite against drugs. This is a beautiful
neighborhood. The ethnic makeup - we're a real United Nations here. Whites,
blacks, Hispanics, Pakistanis, some Koreans. Every single West Indian and
Caribbean island. Christians, Jews, Moslems. It's quite a neighborhood.''

On Coney Island Avenue, where Jamaican, Hispanic and Italian mechanics in a row
of auto repair shops were working on buses from the nearby private schools of
Hasidic and Orthodox Jews, Mohammed Akbar Nati, a Pakistani, served up
traditional dishes like Buryani zapped under a microwave in his restaurant named
for his home in Punjab.

''We are a very young country here; we did not get our immigration until after
John F. Kennedy,'' he said, referring to changes in the immigration law that
opened the country to many new immigrants. ''But already we have doctors who
live in Long Island, in Staten Island.''

But the last 19 years in New York have been good for Lalta, an Indian merchant
who carries only one name in the tradition of his peasant village. His small
store was stocked with curry and chili pepper and racks of videotapes of Indian
movies. He owns four houses on Marlborough Street and has sent his six children
through college.

''They all graduated with high degrees, too; not just ordinary degrees,'' he
said proudly, adding: ''I have done well as far as I am concerned. I came from
40,000 miles away from here.''

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photos: ''You have a better opportunity here,'' said Christabell King,
who came from Guyana three years ago and is a supervisor at Sybil's Restaurant
and Bakery in Flatbush.; Flatbush in Brooklyn attracts a range of immigrants.
Working at Best Meats on Flatbush Avenue were, from left, Oscar Alcazar, from
Mexico, Albeto Ortiz, from Panama, Ronald Stankey, of Irish and German descent,
and Eddie Grasales, from Puerto Rico. (Vic DeLucia/The New York Times) (pg. B1);
Ethnic businesses in the Flatbush section of Brooklyn include Ansell Palmer's
Premium Jamaican Bakery. (Vic DeLucia/The New York Times); map of Flatbush (The
New York Times) (pg. B2)

                   Copyright 1990 The New York Times Company


                              156 of 288 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                  May 19, 1990, Saturday, Late Edition - Final

Books of The Times;
Time's Turning Points, In This Era and Others

BYLINE: By Herbert Mitgang

SECTION: Section 1; Page 14, Column 1; Cultural Desk

LENGTH: 921 words



1919
America's Loss of Innocence
By Eliot Asinof
Illustrated. 365 pages. Donald I. Fine.
$21.95.
Century's End
A Cultural History of the Fin de Siecle from the 990's Through the 1990's
By Hillel Schwartz
Illustrated. 397 pages. Doubleday. $22.95.

In ''1919: America's Loss of Innocence,'' Eliot Asinof takes an original path to
illuminate some of the dark corners in the history of the United States. In four
readable and opinionated sections, he describes the behavior of the idealists
and the rascals who in that year set the pattern for much that followed in the
20th century. Mr. Asinof - a novelist (''Man on Spikes'') and popular historian
(''Eight Men Out,'' the basis for the 1988 film about the Chicago Black Sox
scandal of 1919) - is in fact treading in the fictional footsteps of John Dos
Passos. One of the books in the Dos Passos ''U.S.A.'' trilogy is titled
''1919.''

Mr. Asinof writes: ''1919 was the year of the jellyfish, the rat, the mad dog -
a year of cowardice, of gross political opportunism, of furies unleashed. In
1919, America gave way to false values and impossible hopes. The essence of our
failures can be illustrated best in four major events that were spawned in that
year, as vital for their symbolic impact as for their reality: (1) Woodrow
Wilson's defeats at the Paris Peace Conference and the subsequent rejection of
the League of Nations by the United States Senate; (2) the Red scare and the
start of what would eventually become known as the cold war with the Soviet
Union; (3) the enactment of the 18th Amendment and the advent of Prohibition;
(4) the fixing of the World Series, which became known as the Black Sox
scandal.''

The author says these four events deserve to be linked. He argues that to
understand the failure of the peace conference after World War I is to know the
roots of the cold war and the Red scare; that the social forces that fanned
these flames were at the religious and political center of Prohibition, and that
the Black Sox scandal grew out of the post-World War I cynicism that made the
Roaring Twenties roar.

In each section of his book, an individual comes to the forefront. Mr. Asinof's
judgments can be harsh and debatable. He describes President Wilson at the Paris
Peace Conference simply as ''a Christian capitalist who saw only God at the end
of the tunnel.'' He is on firmer ground in discussing how Calvin Coolidge, as
Governor of Massachusetts, broke the Boston police strike, which brought him
fame and eventually carried him to the White House. Al Capone, the bootlegger
and gangster, is used as the symbol of how Prohibition did not stop drinking but
encouraged and enriched lawbreakers. Of Shoeless Joe Jackson and the Black Sox,
he writes: ''There is no more telling incident in America's loss of innocence
than the fixing of the 1919 World Series.''

The author brings his anecdotal story of the effects of the year 1919 up to the
present. He supports some of his own strong views by citing those of I. F.
Stone, to whom his lively book is dedicated.

In ''Century's End,'' Hillel Schwartz, a cultural historian who teaches at the
University of California at San Diego, takes bold and breathtaking leaps across
time -from Dec. 31, 999, almost to the year 2000 - to interpret how mankind has
fared as each century came to a close in the last 1,000 years. The author
connects spiritual, cultural, religious and sociological events, often
anachronistically. He delivers a number of interesting facts and factoids,
jumping from one century to another dropping citations and wisecracks along the
way.

The turn of a decade or of a century can serve as a benchmark for the popular
historian - a convenient if artificial way to label the times. Different
countries have had different names for these turning points in the life of a
state and a people. It was somewhat easier to pin labels on generations when
kings and queens ruled; in Britain, for example, the personal styles of monarchs
lent names to the Victorian or Edwardian Age. To the literary rather than the
royal-minded reader, it would be equally accurate to call the latter half of the
19th century the Dickensian Age because more people lived like the author's
fictional characters than like the aristocracy.

Major wars are even more accurate measuring-points of behavior because they have
affected the lives of so many more millions of people. In the United States, the
Civil War has been properly called the Second American Revolution; its
participants became the Civil War generation. The same can be said for the World
War I, World War II and Vietnam generations. The postwar children who followed
these war generations often labeled themselves, like the 50's or 60's Generation
- handy signals to describe how they thought and behaved.

Mr. Schwartz emphasizes not generations but millennia. He permits himself to
Think Big about the future: ''1492, 1942, 1992, new worlds all? . . . but will
signals come from Mars, or Soviet astronauts make it to the Red Planet, or a few
of the surviving Martians, dwarfish, with leathery gray skins and bald heads, be
on display in a World's Fair satellite 50,000 miles above the Columbian
Exposition?''

In ''Century's End,'' the author doesn't alarm the reader by predicting that the
world will end with either a bang or a whimper in the Nuclear Age. The only
thing he seems sure of in his rather playful history is that ''What we are
practicing for is the globalism of the year 2000.'' Bertelsmannd(Doubleday)

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photos: Eliot Asinof (Donald I. Fine, Inc.); Hillel Schwartz
(Doubleday)

TYPE: Review

                   Copyright 1990 The New York Times Company


                              157 of 288 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                  May 19, 1990, Saturday, Late Edition - Final

Veterans of Vietnam With a Rare Cancer Are Eligible for Aid

BYLINE: AP

SECTION: Section 1; Page 10, Column 6; National Desk

LENGTH: 397 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, May 18


Vietnam War veterans with soft-tissue sarcoma, a rare form of cancer linked to
exposure to Agent Orange, will become eligible for disability payments, the
Secretary of Veterans Affairs, Edward J. Derwinski, said today.

The decision is the second this year by the Department of Veterans Affairs to
award compensation for cancers linked to exposure to Agent Orange, a defoliant
sprayed in undiluted form by American forces during the Vietnam War in an effort
to deny sanctuary to guerrillas. On March 29, Mr. Derwinski announced payment of
compensation to veterans suffering from non-Hodgkin's lymphoma.

The decision today was based on recommendations made Thursday by the
department's Veterans Advisory Committee on Environmental Hazards. The panel,
made up of outside scientists and lay people, found that there was ''at least as
likely as not'' a significant statistical association between soft-tissue
sarcoma and exposure to the herbicide.

The ruling in March was based on a study of selected cancers by the Centers for
Disease Control. Researchers there found a 50 percent increased risk of
non-Hodgkin's lymphoma among Vietnam veterans, but the study looked only
indirectly at whether Agent Orange was the cause. The department said then,
however, that any Vietnam veteran was presumed to have been exposed to Agent
Orange.

An Emotional Issue

The study at the centers found no such increased risk for soft-tissue sarcoma.
But the advisory committee's examination of other scientific literature relating
to herbicide and dioxin exposure tilted the balance in favor of compensation.

''I believe this is another step forward in resolving a most difficult and
emotional issue,'' Mr. Derwinski said. ''We intend to proceed as quickly as
possible to award compensation to these veterans who are so deserving of our
care and concern.''

Veterans have been fighting for years to receive compensation for diseases they
say were caused by Agent Orange, a combination of two phenoxy herbicides, one of
which was contaminated with the byproduct dioxin. About 1,100 veterans or their
survivors are expected to receive compensation for soft-tissue sarcomas at
first. An additional 50 claims a year are expected afterward, given the long
latency period for cancer.

Soft-tissue sarcomas are a group of malignant tumors found on muscles and
connective tissue or in body fat.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1990 The New York Times Company


                              158 of 288 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                  May 19, 1990, Saturday, Late Edition - Final

News Summary

SECTION: Section 1; Page 2, Column 5; Metropolitan Desk

LENGTH: 1280 words



International    2-6

The Lithuanian Prime Minister was urged by Secretary of State Baker to consider
suspending her republic's declaration of independence as a way of opening a
dialogue with Moscow, Lithuanian officials said.    Page 1

The logjam in the arms control talks was not broken, despite five hours of
discussions between Secretary of State Baker and President Gorbachev in the
Kremlin, American officials said.    5

For Russians in Latvia, hostility feeds anxiety    5

A spacewalk by Soviet astronauts is being planned to aid their safe return to
Earth, according to published reports. The aim is to repair their damaged
transport ship.    6

The Germanys signed a state treaty to merge their economies and make the West
German mark the sole legal tender in both nations by July 2. Chancellor Kohl of
West Germany called the agreement ''a first decisive step on the path to
unity.''    6

A Chinese official may want refuge in the U.S., American officials said. Xu
Jiatun, who disagreed with the military crackdown on pro-democracy demonstrators
last spring, arrived in Los Angeles about May 1.    3

Protesters hail 1980 uprising in Korea    3

U.S. and Philippines recess talks on bases    3

President Samuel K. Doe of Liberia called on the entire population to take up
arms and join the fight against rebels who are trying to overthrow his
Government.    6

Dominican foes agree to recount    2

Citing unrest, contras cancel plan to disarm    6

London journal: A Scottish barony was sold to a London restaurateur for
$112,000. That a hereditary title can be bought at all in Britain may come as a
surprise; Scottish baronies are the exception.    4

National    7-10, 24, 48

A new Iran-contra inquiry has begun. A Federal grand jury is expected to focus
on the activities of middle-level Reagan Administration officials who
participated in the weapons sales to Iran and efforts to aid the Nicaraguan
rebels.    1

News analysis: The deficit limit of $64 billion set by the Gramm-Rudman-Hollings
law for the next fiscal year simply cannot be reached, negotiators from the
White House and Congress seem to agree.    10

Study criticizes proposed election spending limits    24

Rearing drug-exposed babies is hard. Couples who become adoptive and foster
parents of such babies often find that raising them is vastly more difficult
than they had imagined or experts had predicted.    1

Mills College will not admit men. Bowing to pressure from a student strike
supported by faculty and alumnae, the Board of Trustees voted to rescind its
decision to admit men to the 138-year-old women's college.    7

The winner of a sex bias lawsuit said she would gladly return to work at Price
Waterhouse, the large accounting firm, despite the comments that formed the
basis of her complaint.    7

A woman cannot be barred from jobs harmful to fetus    9

A Texas candidate has hit a lull. Clayton Williams, who won the Republican
nomination for governor in a landslide just two months ago, has curtailed his
public appearances and now finds himself in a somewhat bewildering period of
reappraisal.    7

Drug-smuggling tunnel found under Mexican border    7

Louisiana executes man who killed at age 17    9

U.S. wins in reservoir fight    10

A plan to give drugs to AIDS patients will be formally outlined by the
Department of Health and Human Services. The proposal would make experimental
drugs available to people with AIDS who have exhausted all conventional
treatments.    8

A prison inmate infected with AIDS was sentenced to 25 years in prison by a
Superior Court judge in Camden, N.J., for trying to murder a prison guard by
biting him.    25

Waiter with AIDS wins $60,000 in a job bias case    8

Veterans of Vietnam with a rare cancer are eligible for aid    10

Regional    25-29

Keith Mondello was acquitted of killing Yusuf K. Hawkins in the Bensonhurst
section of Brooklyn last summer. He was convicted of a series of lesser charges
that could mean a prison sentence of 8 to 24 years.    1

News analysis: Two separate juries, in two days, presented New York with two
very different verdicts in the Bensonhurst trial. Those results can be
attributed to the unique character of each jury and to the legal issues that
separated the two cases.    1

Crowd grows unruly after Mondello verdict    27

Questions raised on conduct of Fama case    27

Woman sues boycotted grocery in Flatbush    26

Two weeks' news: sizzle over substance    26

A good Samaritan was shot and killed on a Manhattan subway. The 53-year-old
Harlem man saw another rider being robbed at gunpoint and said ''Leave that man
alone!'' The gunman shot him and then vanished.    1

DNA analysis fails to provide a match in park rape case    26

A top union official was arrested in Manhattan on racketeering charges one day
after his predecessor in the painters' union was killed in a Mafia-style
execution.    25

New York State has a budget pact. Legislative leaders in Albany agreed on a new
financial plan that would raise spending only slightly while increasing taxes by
$1.4 billion.    1

News analysis: Who loses in yearly budget brawls    28

Mayor Dinkins has been tightfisted with jobs. Almost all the people he has
appointed so far have been friends, campaign aides or out-of-towners with a
particular expertise, and Democratic leaders are beginning to grumble.    25

House for the homeless provokes dispute    25

Island Park votes to pay officials' legal costs    26

Cardinal urges Jews to reduce anger at Pope    26

Business Digest    31

Arts/Entertainment

A Japanese Executive was the buyer of the two most expensive paintings ever sold
at auction. The purchases are likely to deepen an already serious controversy in
Japan over the acquisition of Western art.    1

Auctions' big spenders    12

Havel? No. Think Hungarian    11

Music: Brendel plays Brahms    11

Dance: 'Elegy' at Ballet Theater    11

Book: Turning points in time    14

Suit against James Baldwin estate dropped    14

Obituaries    30

Jill Ireland, actress

Friends mourn as Sammy Davis is eulogized as ''only of a kind''

Consumer's World    50

A ''miracle'' fiber dead-ended by liability fears

Couples ponder flexible benefits

Coping with car stereos

Protecting young eyes in the sun

Guidepost

Sports

Baseball: Padres defeat Mets    45

Royals top Yankees    46

No tampering by Yanks, union says    46

Boxing: Whitaker and Nelson seek more notice    47

Column: Berkow on Steinbrenner    45

Hockey: Oilers beat Bruins    45

Horse Racing: Summer Squall bleeds    45

Editorials/Letters/Op-Ed

Editorials    22

Incomplete justice

Phase out the Philippine bases

H.U.D. scandal: widening?

Topics: Midnight TV drama

Letters    22

Flora Lewis: Menem confounds    23

Russell Baker: Racket and reality    23

Ji H. Min: As a Korean, I'm no longer ''neutral''    23

George Sternlieb: Times Square could save New York    23

Donald K. Petterson: Democracy could take hold in Africa    23

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Summary

                   Copyright 1990 The New York Times Company


                              159 of 288 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                  May 19, 1990, Saturday, Late Edition - Final

News Analysis;
Who Loses in Yearly Budget Brawls

BYLINE: By ELIZABETH KOLBERT, Special to The New York Times

SECTION: Section 1; Page 28, Column 1; Metropolitan Desk

LENGTH: 992 words

DATELINE: ALBANY, May 18


Ever since Gov. Mario M. Cuomo presented his budget plan in January, he and the
legislative leaders have been engaged in a high-stakes game of hot-potato,
devoting at least as much energy to minimizing political losses as to devising a
spending plan.

There are no clear victors. But the big loser has been the state itself.

Communities around the state, which were forced to borrow to compensate for
missed state-aid payments, lost millions of dollars in interest costs because of
the delay. School districts suffered similarly.

While its leaders haggled, New York's credit rating dropped to its lowest level
ever, a development that is likely to raise the cost of borrowing for years.

As is often the case with political jockeying, in the end, none of the
politicians seem to have come out ahead.

'Really Nobody Wins'

Mr. Cuomo, who has sought a national reputation as a governor able to balance
social concern with fiscal responsibility, has been badly damaged by the yawning
deficit, the $1.4 billion in new taxes to close it and the perception that he
cannot control the state government.

The State Senate majority leader, Ralph J. Marino, Republican of Oyster Bay, has
gained a reputation for being unable to bring his members into line. Assembly
Speaker Mel Miller, Democrat of Brooklyn, who earned high marks in the
negotiatiions, is unlikely to be remembered for his efforts, given the length of
the entire process.

''Really nobody wins,'' Gerald Benjamin, a professor of political science at the
State University at New Paltz, said. ''What people conclude is that government
doesn't work in New York. It just reinforces the cynicism.''

Array of Problems

Looking over the months of fumbling and procrastination that finally yielded up
a budget agreement today, political and financial analysts have in recent days
identified several long-term problems that contributed to the delay. These are
some of the factors:

* Mr. Cuomo's failure, three years in a row, to present a strategy that would
provide an enduring solution for the fiscal problems.

* The continuing efforts of the Republican-controlled Senate to minimize the
seriousness of the problems.

* A breakdown in party discipline, which has made it increasingly difficult for
the legislative leaders to gain support for unpopular decisions.

Slide in Tax Collections

''You see the legislative leaders' not being able to make agreements stick,''
Professor Benjamin said. ''That's a real change in the process. The party as
glue is just not there anymore.''

Most political analysts, and even many politicians, agree that the stage for the
budget debacle this year was set two years ago, when tax collections began what
turned out to be a long and unrelenting slide.

The administration was surprisingly slow to respond to the decline and, indeed,
still appears to be struggling to comprehend the magnitude of the problem. Every
few months, the adminstration announces that the revenue collections have, once
again, fallen short of expectations. The news has become so predictable that it
barely makes lunchtime conversation in the Capitol.

''It's like Vietnam,'' the director of the Urban Research Center at New York
University, Mitchell Moss, said. ''Every few months they would announce they
were sending over a few thousand more troops. Every few months the Governor
finds another $300 million shortfall. You lose credibility that way.''

Matter of Weeks

Just weeks after the Governor presented his proposed budget to the Legislature
in January, he announced that revenues would be $1.5 billion lower than
originally projected. That made the executive budget, which is traditionally a
blueprint for negotiations, obsolete.

Instead of presenting a plan to bring his proposal up to date, Mr. Cuomo said he
would work with legislative leaders to close the gap, cooperatively.

Mr. Cuomo insisted that he was trying to hasten the process. But in Albany
cooperation is something that politicians indulge in just as a last resort. Even
the Governor's supporters concede that the administration's failure to produce a
plan to deal with the $1.5 billion gap, which eventually grew to almost $2
billion, reflected a reluctance to take responsibility for new taxes.

''They didn't want to have their fingerprints on anything,'' said one Democratic
politicians who is friendly with the Governor.

Jockeying by Republicans

From the beginning of the negotiations, the stance of the Republican-controlled
Senate did not bode well for cooperative efforts. For weeks, Republican senators
insisted that the Governor was exaggerating the economic problems and maintained
that the state should not delay the income-tax cut planned for this year.

The Republicans' insistence on the cut seemed intended to score political points
for November, when the Governor and all 211 legislators are up for re-election.

Even after giving in and agreeing to delay the cut, Republican senators
continued to insist on extracting some political benefit from the budget. They
first refused to agree to new taxes, then pressed to add school aid for the
suburban districts that are their core constituencies and finally insisted on a
spending cap intended to shore up their image as fiscal conservatives.

This evening, some Republican lawmakers were still insisting on a spending cap
as a condition of voting on the budget. Even though their threat to hold up the
budget was never carried out, it contradicted the expressed wishes of Mr.
Marino, who scheduled a vote on the budget bills for tonight.

Such a conflict between legislators and and a leader was once unthinkable here.
But such conflicts have become commonplace in recent years, making the decision
making increasingly diffuse and time consuming.

''We cannot fail to recognize that the State Senate is out of control,'' Mr.
Moss said. ''What we have here is a collective failure of political
leadership.''

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: NEWS ANALYSIS

                   Copyright 1990 The New York Times Company


                              160 of 288 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                   May 20, 1990, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

GLOBAL CHANGE AND BUDGET CUTS TEST PENTAGON

BYLINE: By MICHAEL R. GORDON with ERIK ECKHOLM, Special to The New York Times

SECTION: Section 1; Part 1, Page 1, Column 3; National Desk

LENGTH: 2618 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, May 19


Beyond disputes over dollars and weapons, the battle of the military budget
reflects a debate over the shape of the American military in a transformed
world.

The Bush Administration has, without apology, taken a cautious approach to the
end of the cold war and proposed a modest decline in the military budget. In
plans developed so far, the armed forces would be scaled back significantly but
without changing their basic structure or missions.

This is ''the worst possible time to contemplate changes in defense strategy,''
Defense Secretary Dick Cheney said earlier this year.

'Analyze What Is Right'

''What we need to do is to analyze what is right with that strategy and make
adjustments,'' the Defense Secretary added.

But in interviews a broad variety of experts, including three former Defense
Secretaries, former top officers and private experts on the military, called for
major, even radical, shifts in America's military posture that would permit
deeper cuts in the budget.

Many leading experts say the Pentagon has been timid in reshaping American
military forces for a changing world. They have put forth more far-reaching
ideas, like withdrawing virtually all combat ground forces from Europe, relying
far more on reserve units, spending much less on new long-range nuclear weapons,
which the Administration plans to buy even as it cuts the nuclear arsenal under
a new arms agreement, and perhaps reallocating missions among the services.

These and other measures would permit the annual military budget, now around
$300 billion, to be reduced by 25 percent over five years, yielding a far
greater annual ''peace dividend'' than would the annual decline of roughly 10
percent proposed by the Administration for the same period.

''The threats are likely to be very different in thefuture,'' said Harold Brown,
Defense Secretary in the Carter Administration, who favors a 25 percent budget
cut. ''That requires a more fundamental restructuring of the forces and
missions.''

Even conservatives have castigated the Pentagon as engaging in old thinking.
Fred C. Ikle, Ronald Reagan's Under Secretary of Defense for Policy, has written
that Mr. Cheney's Pentagon is dominated by an ''obsolete mindset.''

''Despite the prudently chosen cuts that Defense Secretary Cheney proposed to
Congress for the 1991 budget, about half our defense effort is essentially still
devoted to fighting a massive conventional war in Europe,'' Mr. Ikle wrote in
The National Interest, a conservative journal. ''Stalin has been buried twice in
Moscow, but his ghost lives on in the Pentagon.''

As the extent of the change in the Soviet Union sinks in, the debate over the
military budget is building into a full-fledged political war, cutting across
party lines and ideologies. And it often pits service against service in an
escalating contest for ever scarcer military dollars.

Behind the heated oratory is a deeper debate about the structure of the nation's
military forces.

The Pentagon leadership, defending a traditional approach to military planning,
sees itself as taking the prudent course.

''In Europe, we want to show the Soviet Union the same picture they have seen
all along - a group of nations that are willing to make a real investment in
their security,'' Gen. Colin L. Powell, Chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff,
said in an interview. ''And a real investment is combat forces, not
quartermaster clerks.''

Responding to the call by critics for more radical restructuring, he said:
''It's not at all clear to me that a balanced downsizing is not the right
answer. I've seen no particular Soviet capability disappear; I've seen no part
of the world where we have an interest go off the map.''

But where the Pentagon leadership sees prudence, others see an unimaginative
failure to grasp a rare opportunity to create a new military structure.

''The Defense Department calculations still focus on the Soviet Union, reducing
as the changes in the Warsaw Pact allow,'' said Les Aspin, a Pentagon analyst
during the 1960's who now heads the House Armed Services committee. ''We need to
do some really fundamental new thinking about where does it all go beyond this
and what the threat is out there to which we gear our forces.''

The Goals
Readiness Vs. Risk

Much of the debate involves differing calculations of the risk to national
security posed by cutbacks in the armed forces. How likely is it that the Soviet
military threat to Europe would or could be rebuilt? How likely is it that the
United States will want to intervene in upheavals in the third world, how often
and with what kinds of force?

While there are no absolute answers to these questions, the economic and
diplomatic stakes are enormous. At its foundation, the budget debate reflects
visions of how best to secure America's place in the world.

A 25 percent cut in the military budget would mean $50 billion a year less by
1995 than projected by the Bush Administration. This would be a tidy sum for
reducing the deficit, aiding valued allies or fighting domestic ills. Some
experts even believe that if Moscow's military retreat and preoccupation with
overwhelming domestic problems continue, the American military should shrink
still more in the closing years of the decade, to an annual budget level that is
only 50 percent of today's $300 billion.

Secretary Cheney has charged that cutting the military budget in half ''would
give us the defense budget for a second-class power, the budget of an America in
decline,'' and the weight of opinion among leading military experts appears to
be that cuts of this magnitude may go too far. General Powell said he worried
about ''a drawdown so precipitous that we are seen to be leaving the world stage
as the leader of the Atlantic and Pacific alliances.''

Concerns About Cutbacks

''The fundamental question is the level of risk that the American public is
willing to live with,'' said James Schlesinger, Defense Secretary in the Nixon
Administration. I've witnessed two major cuts since World War II and both times
we lived to regret it,'' he cautioned, referring to the late 1940's and the
1970's, after the Vietnam War. Still, with a carefully planned reduction of 25
percent, he said, ''I think we can continue to play the role of global
superpower that we're accustomed to.''

But William W. Kaufmann, a former Defense Department official who is a leading
proponent of the 50 percent cut, replied, ''I don't regard the size of the
defense budget or armed forces as the only index of U.S. power.''

''If we don't get our economy and society in order,'' he added, ''we may have a
great military facade but we won't be a very great power.''

Mr. Ikle, who favors somewhat deeper budget cuts over five years than Mr. Cheney
has proposed, said United States security would be served by redirecting a
portion of the military dollars to security assistance to allies around the
world and aid to the emerging democracies of Eastern Europe.

Mr. Ikle said economic aid to Eastern Europe might now be the front-line weapon.
''One-third of a percent of the defense budget would make a whale of a
difference there,'' he said.

The Critics' Views
Leaner Forces, Narrower Roles

Several major policy changes were proposed by many leading experts, although not
every critic of current Pentagon plans endorsed each one.

One proposal calls for radically revising NATO's time-honored sharing of labor.
The United States Army would no longer keep more than a symbolic number of
ground combat forces in Europe, instead leaving logistical units there prepared
to receive reinforcements. While a strong Air Force contingent would remain,
only about one-third as many troops as the 225,000 envisioned by President Bush
would stay in Europe.

Proponents including Mr. Schlesinger and Senator Sam Nunn, chairman of the
Senate Armed Services committee, say that these smaller forces might show more
realism, given rising West German resentment over the large American military
presence.

Under another proposed policy change, the services would cut active forces
deeply and rely far more on the Reserves. In particular, the Army would keep
fewer heavy, armored forces on active duty, and would assign to Reserves the
task of defending Europe in a crisis. Proponents say the approach is justified
by the remote chances of a Soviet attack and the months or years it would take
the Soviet Union to rebuild an offensive threat once its forces have pulled
back.

Some critics also believe the Navy should shift more of its vessels into reserve
status, reduce the number of aircraft carriers and cut back their patrolling of
far-flung waters.

All these experts would preserve a capacity to mount small-scale attacks, like
the recent invasion of Panama, and to make lightning strikes against foes who,
for example, sponsor terrorists or threaten oil traffic.

Many experts say costly new long-range nuclear weapons the Administration says
it needs to match advances in the Soviet arsenal should be bought over a much
longer period than now planned. They also think that drastic cuts in nuclear
arms should be sought in new negotiations that would follow the strategic arms
treaty now nearing completion. That treaty would reduce American and Soviet
arsenals by roughly 30 percent and would permit the deployment of new weapons.

Some critics also believe that the Pentagon should review the assignment of
missions to the services, largely set four decades ago, with an eye to meeting
goals more efficiently. Some say the Air Force might, for example, be given
additional responsibilities for attacking enemy ships at sea, a task now
entrusted largely to the Navy, while the mission of providing close air support
to Army troops should be taken over by the Army from the Air Force.

The Pentagon's Stand
Big Threat Eases; Others Emerge

General Powell, reflecting the Bush Administration's cautious approach to the
Soviet transformation, reacted coolly to many of the proposals that would bring
about a steep drop in forces.

Nonetheless, he said that he and Defense Secretary Cheney were seeking to define
the ''base line'' forces needed to protect American interests and that deeper
budget reductions than they have proposed might prove feasible.

Another senior Pentagon official, speaking on condition that he not be
identified, acknowledged that some basic planning choices had yet to be made.
''If Europe needs heavy reinforcement, do we still have the capability to send
heavy forces to the Middle East?'' he mused. ''We haven't decided if we want
that simultaneous capability.''

The Army, Navy and Air Force offered to Pentagon leaders their plans for meeting
the Administration's budget guidelines through 1997. The services projected a
significant cutback in forces: active Army divisions would fall to 14 from 18,
aircraft carriers to 12 from 14, tactical airwings to 28 from 36. But there
would be no changes in basic strategy.

But these were only early salvoes in what is already a contentious review, often
pitting service against service and military against civilian leadership, that
will last through the year.

''We are planning on the basis of a radical change in the Soviet threat,'' the
senior Pentagon official insisted. The changes many critics are proposing ''are
not so different from what we're thinking about,'' said the official, who
indicated that Pentagon leaders were already considering much deeper cuts in the
Army than revealed so far.

The Next War
Super Conflict? Or Intervention?

At least four-fifths of the $300 billion the country will spend this year on the
military is devoted to conventional forces: tank battalions, infantry and
paratroop units, jet fighters, aircraft carriers and attack submarines that are
intended to fight war without a nuclear conflagration. Most of these forces were
designed to fight the Soviet Union.

With the Soviet threat receding and the budget shrinking, all the military
services are competing for the lead role in future assaults in the third world.

Still, a fight with well-armed countries like Iraq and Syria would require some
of the same heavy forces and advanced weaponry needed to fight the Soviets. How
well-prepared the country should be for large-scale conflict depends, in the
end, on a judgment of the likelihood that it will enter such a war, or that it
might at least want to threaten a fight during a showdown.

Former Defense Secretary Brown, who said he would like to see an annual budget
''in the $200 to $250 billion range,'' acknowledged that the smaller active-duty
military he advocates would be unable to fight a prolonged war. What this
military could do in a crisis, he said, ''is get us there early, put the U.S. on
the line.''

He asked: ''Are we prepared, for example, to fight the Iraqis, the Panamanians,
the Vietnamese or the North Koreans with more than an early show of air and
naval power, and a modest ground force very early to show we're committed? No.
We are prepared to play a peripheral role, as we did recently in the Persian
Gulf.'' There, the Navy provided escorts for commercial oil tankers in the midst
of the Iran-Iraq war.

While a significant mobilization would be required to sustain a major conflict,
he said, such a confrontation now appears to be so unlikely that the risk of
relying on Reserves is worth running.

More sweeping proposals for reductions have come from Mr. Kaufmann, Robert S.
McNamara, a former Defense Secretary, and the Defense Budget Task Force, a
private group of 11 former Government officials headed by Lawrence J. Korb, an
Assistant Secretary of Defense in the Reagan Administration.

More Radical Cuts

These critics say the budget should be halved by the year 2000, to about $150
billion in today's dollars. Such a reduction would require, in addition to the
changes envisioned by other experts, the cancellation of many more new weapons
and, later in the decade, deeper cuts in active forces, like shrinking the
Navy's fleet of aircraft carriers to six or nine, in various plans, instead of
the 10 or 12 proposed by many other experts.

Under this approach, the country would still be prepared for minor interventions
but not for prolonged heavy fighting. Patrolling of the seas by aircraft
carriers would be curbed significantly, with the Navy becoming more of a
reactive force. This option also presumes a giant cut in superpower nuclear
arsenals and an end to buying new long-range nuclear weapons.

''It's very hard to imagine something that would require more than the eight
divisions we had in Korea,'' said Mr. Kaufmann, a Defense Department consultant
in the 1960's and 1970's who now teaches at Harvard University. ''It's also hard
to imagine more than one contingency of that size, or two lesser contingencies
that would happen simultaneously.''

He added, ''And I reject the argument that the Navy performs some pacifying
function by floating around the South China Sea or something.''

At least for now, cutting the budget in half appears to go beyond what is
regarded as prudent by a majority of the country's leading military strategists,
including many critics of the Pentagon.

The huge reductions in Army and Navy forces proposed by some ''amount to saying
we are going to defend ourselves and let others defend themselves,'' Mr. Brown
asserted.

General Powell warned, ''It's hard to see what's wrong with all of this going
down until you have a crisis - until you suddenly have to mass forces to deal
with a situation and discover you have to strip from just about everywhere else
in the world.''


NEXT: The Army and the Air Force redefine their missions.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

SERIES: Shrinking the Military - First of four articles: Making Cuts and
Changing Missions

GRAPHIC: Graph: proposals for military spending, Bush plan, 25% and %0% cuts,
1990-2000 (pg. 1); Photos: Dick Cheney, Defense Secretary: This is ''the worst
possible time to contemplate changes in defense strategy.'' (The New York
Times); William W. Kaufmann, Former Defense Department official: ''I don't
regard the size of the defense budget or armed forces as the only index of U.S.
power.''; James Schlesinger, Former Defense Secretary: ''I've witnessed two
major cuts since World War II and both times we lived to regret it.''
(Associated Press); graph of defense expenditures, 1946-1990; chart: Bush's
proposed defense budget compared with a 25% and a 50% cut (Source: Defense
Budget Task Force; William W. Kaufman in Brookings Review, forthcoming) (pg. 28)

TYPE: SERIES

                   Copyright 1990 The New York Times Company


                              161 of 288 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                   May 20, 1990, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

L. Gordon Hill Dies; Retired General, 67

SECTION: Section 1; Part 1, Page 38, Column 2; National Desk

LENGTH: 232 words


Maj. Gen. L. Gordon Hill, retired, a former chief of public information for the
Army and its main press spokesman in Saigon in the late 1960's, died of cardiac
arrest on Friday at Fairfax (Va.) Hospital. He was 67 years old and lived in
Burke, Va.

General Hill retired in 1980 after serving for three years as commandant of the
Armed Forces Staff College in Norfolk, Va., having spent 38 years in the
military. His tour of duty in South Vietnam began in 1968, when the American
troop buildup there was reaching its peak.

A native of South Carolina, he was attending the University of South Carolina
when he enlisted in 1942. He spent World War II with the artillery in the United
States but served as executive officer of an artillery battalion in Korea in
1954.

His later assignments included those of battalion commander in West Germany and
chief of public affairs for the Army in Europe. He became press spokesman for
the Department of the Army and the Department of Defense after his return from
Vietnam.

General Hill is survived by his wife, Helen; a son, L. Gordon 3d of Charlotte,
N.C.; two daughters, Donna Lee Hill of Fairfax Station, Va., and Mary Ellen
Ridgewell of Tyro, Va.; his mother, Theo T. Hill of Florence, S.C.; two
brothers, William R. of Columbia, S.C., and Robert G. of Aiken, S.C.; a sister,
Tyler T. Hamrick of Winston-Salem, N.C., and seven grandchildren.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: OBITUARY

                   Copyright 1990 The New York Times Company


                              162 of 288 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                   May 20, 1990, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

MUSIC;
Waking Up to the 80's in the 90's

BYLINE: B MARK TUCKER; Mark Tucker, a music historian who teaches at Columbia
University, is the author of ''Ellington: The Early Years,'' to be published in
the fall by the University of Illinois Press.

SECTION: Section 2; Page 25, Column 1; Arts and Leisure Desk

LENGTH: 2173 words


''I have a feeling that the whole country slept through the 80's. We were all
nodding off in front of the TV.'' On a recent morning in his home in New York
City's East Village, the composer Philip Glass seemed anything but sleepy.
Speaking briskly, he was describing the climate of ''do-nothing conservatism''
that, he said, caused him to create ''Hydrogen Jukebox,'' his new chamber opera
based on poems by Allen Ginsberg.

''One of the frustrating things during the last Presidential election was that
the real issues we've been living with were never discussed,'' said Mr. Glass.
''I got the idea of doing a portrait of America in which all the things that
weren't talked about were talked about: the antiwar movement, the ecology
movement, the sexual revolution, free expression - all of which are really
mainstream issues now. Of course it's obvious Allen has always been at the
center of that. He's been the best spokesman of those things from the days when
the establishment considered him some kind of incoherent beatnik.''

''Hydrogen Jukebox,'' heard earlier this month in a concert version at
Philadelphia's American Music Theater Festival, receives its staged world
premiere Saturday night at the Spoleto Festival U.S.A. in Charleston, S.C.
Another music-theater piece will make its debut that evening at Spoleto:
''Pioneer,'' a collaborative work by the San Francisco-based Paul Dresher
Ensemble. Both offer stark visions of an America burdened by the past and headed
toward an uncertain future. Yet both also exemplify a reawakening of social
responsibility as more and more artists respond to problems of the 1990's -
AIDS, destruction of the environment, homelessness, censorship - with vigor and
commitment.

In some ways ''Hydrogen Jukebox'' may look and sound familiar to those who know
Mr. Glass's previous work. Like the trilogy of portrait operas (''Einstein on
the Beach,'' ''Satyagraha,'' ''Akhnaten'') it is a non-narrative, multimedia
production rooted in the experimental theater of the 1960's. Like ''1,000
Airplanes on the Roof,'' Mr. Glass's 1988 collaboration with David Henry Hwang,
it features arresting visual elements - slide and film projections on
three-dimensional screens - designed by Jerome Sirlin. And like nearly all of
Mr. Glass's music since the late 60's, the score resonates with the trademark
rippling chords, pulsating bass lines and repetitive rhythms that numb some
listeners and exhilarate so many others.

''Hydrogen Jukebox'' is scored for six singers and six musicians (two electronic
keyboards, two winds, two percussion), who at Spoleto will be conducted by
Martin Goldray, a longtime associate of Mr. Glass. The singers' stage movements
are directed by Ann Carlson. But while earlier theater works by Mr. Glass have
presented abstract, even quasimythical treatments of such themes as science,
history, politics, religion and nature, ''Hydrogen Jukebox'' confronts
contemporary America head on. Mr. Ginsberg's texts chronicle and comment on the
national scene over the last four decades, from angry rebellion in the 1950's
(''Howl'') to antiwar protest in the 1960's (''Wichita Vortex Sutra'') and
political corruption in the 1980's (''CIA Dope Calypso''). Mr. Glass himself
sees ''Hydrogen Jukebox'' more as new terrain than as a continuation of old
projects: ''It's experimental in the sense that we don't have models to compare
it to, even in my own work. Of course, people who don't like me think it's all
the same.''

This isn't the first time the two artists have joined forces. In 1988 Mr. Glass
made a setting of Mr. Ginsberg's ''Wichita Vortex Sutra'' for the Vietnam
Veterans Ensemble Theater Company in which the poet read the text and the
composer accompanied at the piano. Since then the two have performed the work on
many occasions, and their rendition (played on tape) forms the centerpiece of
''Hydrogen Jukebox.''

The partnership has been a fruitful one, as Mr. Ginsberg said recently: ''Our
temperaments are complementary. You know, I'm an old dog at reading, and
Philip's very seasoned and mature - and disciplined as a musician. We're both
practicing Buddhist meditators familiar with sitting practice. We've both had a
lot of experience with Tibetan Buddhists, and the idea of community - or sangha
- means working together.''

In discussing possibilities for a large-scale collaboration, Mr. Glass and Mr.
Ginsberg began meeting regularly with Mr. Sirlin, selecting themes around which
the work might be built and plotting a possible dramatic progression. ''We
wanted a whole spectrum of delicacies,'' Mr. Ginsberg said, ''from the most
intimate and private to the most public and oratorical.''

Accordingly, some sections of ''Hydrogen Jukebox'' bear directly on Mr.
Ginsberg's personal experience, from a trip to India with the poet Peter
Orlovsky to childhood memories of his Aunt Rose in Newark. Others feature Mr.
Ginsberg in the role of public poet, addressing long-term political and
religious conflicts in ''Jaweh and Allah Battle'' and capturing the tense
atmosphere of 1968 in ''Violence'' (''Angry Democrats gather in Chicago/
fantasizing armies running/ through Sewers sprayed with Mace'').

''At first,'' Mr. Glass explained, ''the work was going to be called 'Planet
News,' but that was too neutral. My second suggestion was to call it 'The Fall
of America,' but Allen's response was, 'That's O.K., but hasn't it already
fallen?' '' Eventually the title was selected from a line in Mr. Ginsberg's poem
''Howl'': ''listening to the crack of doom on the hydrogen jukebox.''

After the three primary collaborators arrived at a general plan, Mr. Glass began
composing: ''I didn't really know how I was going to set the poems - I didn't
even know if they were settable. So I went to Brazil for a month, taking along
the poems and 300 blank music pages.

''I began by reading the poem and thinking of the general ambiance,'' Mr. Glass
recalled. ''When I thought I had the musical setting, I made a sketch and began
seeing how the words would work with it. Then I wrote out the complete
orchestration. I started at the beginning and went to the end. I know it's
rather prosaic, but that's how I work. There's something so sensible about it.''

Many of Mr. Glass's settings feature musical devices that spring directly from
Mr. Ginsberg's text. In ''Hiway Poesy,'' an ominous, motoric bass line suggests
various interlocking images - drug-smuggling across the Mexian border, a
marauding band of Hell's Angels, and bombers flying over the Mekong Delta.
Pounding percussion and martial rhythms pervade ''Jaweh and Allah Battle,''
while wisps of melody and dreamy, wordless vocals evoke drug-induced reverie in
''Consulting I Ching Smoking Pot Listening to the Fugs Sing Blake.''

How did the poet, who has sung and chanted his own versions of these poems for
years, react to the new settings? ''I was surprised,'' Mr. Ginsberg recalled.
''I knew Philip's music, but I couldn't figure out how he'd do it. I love the
setting he gave for 'Wichita Vortex Sutra.' I like many of the melodies,
arrangements and choruses he has in the opera, particularly that section, 'War
after war, who's the enemy?' His setting of 'Father Death Blues' is very
beautiful, I think, using my own melody but in six-part harmony. I'm still
puzzling over the 'Moloch' section, and we're working on getting more idiomatic
tones and accents in the texts to match his music.''

While ''Hydrogen Jukebox'' takes a look at America's recent past, the Paul
Dresher Ensemble's ''Pioneer'' digs back further, linking older historical
themes to the present day. The third work in what the Ensemble's composer, Mr.
Dresher, calls ''our American trilogy'' - preceded by ''Slow Fire'' (1985) and
''Power Failure'' (1989) - ''Pioneer'' has emerged out of a close-knit
collaboration involving Mr. Dresher, the singer John Duykers, the writers Terry
and Jo Harvey Allen, and the singer-actor-writer Rinde Eckert, who was the
central performer in the Ensemble's two earlier works.

Mr. Dresher's music - like Mr. Glass's - relies heavily on insistent, throbbing
rhythmic patterns and owes much to both non-Western and contemporary popular
styles. To evoke a rural American flavor, Mr. Dresher has added the violinist
Craig Fry to his regular ensemble, which includes the percussionist Gene
Reffkin, the pianist Phil Aaberg and Mr. Dresher on electric keyboards, bass and
guitar.

A primary theme of ''Pioneer'' is the process of territorial expansion, a
concern treated earlier in ''Slow Fire.'' ''We did quite a bit of historical
research,'' Mr. Dresher said, ''exploring what it means to come to a new place,
and what happens to that place and the people who lived there. It's a pretty
dark picture. Columbus, Cortez and many of our cultural heroes would be
considered extremely ruthless by today's standards. We think we're different
today or have changed, but we haven't.''

For Mr. Dresher, reviewing the past helps bring the present into clearer focus:
''Reading about the history of Latin America and then looking at what's
happening in Panama or Nicaragua, it's hard not to see strong parallels. The
idea of 'manifest destiny,' which no President would even mention today, is
still part of our thinking. In 'Pioneer' we don't bring up Panama, Grenada or
Nicaragua, but there's lots of issues drawn in the work that can be transposed
to the present.''

In the work itself the themes of expansion and settlement are treated
metaphorically and with humor. The central characters are Jim and Darla, a
''normal'' post-modern couple who collect stamps, eat chicken pot pies and make
food sculptures of animals. The main props on the set are living-room couches
which are rearranged to suggest Jim and Darla's exploration of their
environment. Mr. Dresher has woven many ordinary sounds - digitally sampled -
into the music.

''To me,'' Mr. Dresher said, ''pioneering has to do with building something and
tearing it down. A lot of the sounds come from house destruction and demolition.
Also, we were starting to work on this piece during the earthquake last fall.
Our studio in Oakland is right next to the freeway that collapsed. A sound
engineer and I went out and recorded the sounds of demolition. After a while you
cease to deal with it as sound that comes from a specific place; it's just pure
sound in a musical context.''

Although aware that ''Pioneer'' can be taken on one level as a satirical,
unsparing critique of American society, Mr. Dresher does not believe that the
work attempts to change the way poeple act: ''I wouldn't put myself in the
position of prescribing behavior,'' he said. ''Some art does this, but it often
fails or becomes too didactic. Art is making people aware of things to allow
them to make choices and assume responsibility.''

Inspiring awareness, too, seems to be the prime force behind ''Hydrogen
Jukebox.'' When Mr. Ginsberg was asked what difference this work will make,
given his belief that the world is moving inexorably toward self-destruction, he
responded this way: ''Why are we doing this? Partly to prolong the wind-down and
the breakdown so people have enough time to be aware of what is happening to
them, and what the reason was, and how we ourselves have caused it. As Blake
says in 'Tiger, Tiger,' 'Did he who made the lamb make thee?' The answer is yes:
the human imagination made both.''

Listening to ''the crack of doom on the hydrogen jukebox,'' these artists seem
to be saying, may not ultimately save the planet. But it's better than not
listening at all.



MUSIC AS USUAL

Despite the damage caused by Hurricane Hugo last September, Charleston, S.C.,
has been rebuilding steadily. And the 14th Spoleto Festival U.S.A. will go on as
usual this year, from May 25 to June 10, beginning Friday night with a
performance of Beethoven's Seventh Symphony conducted by Leonard Bernstein.

''Hydrogen Jukebox'' has its premiere May 26, and thereafter runs May 27-29 and
May 31-June 2. Performances are at 8 P.M. at the Sottile Theater, George and
King Streets.

Previews of ''Pioneer'' are May 24 and 25; the world premiere is May 26,
followed by performances May 27 (matinee and evening) and May 28 (matinee at
3:30 P.M., evenings at 9 P.M.), at the Garden Theater, 371 King Street.

Other festival highlights include Wagner's ''Parsifal,'' directed by Gian Carlo
Menotti, the festival's founder and artistic director (June 2 and June 4);
Mozart's ''Nozze di Figaro'' (May 26, 28 and 30 and June 1, 3, 5, 7 and 9); the
Boston Camerata's version of ''Tristan and Iseult'' (May 30-June 4); the Gate
Theater's staging of Oscar Wilde's ''Salome'' (May 27-June 10); performances by
Chick Corea, Chet Atkins, Mose Allison, Gary Burton, the Martha Graham Dance
Company and the Joffrey Ballet, and ''Against All Odds,'' an exhibition of work
by black artists.

Schedules and information are available through Spoleto Festival U.S.A., Box
157, Charleston, S.C. 29402; telephone (803) 722-2764. For tickets, call (800)
868-7228.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo: The composer Philip Glass, at the piano, joins forces with the
poet Allen Ginsberg in ''Hydrogen Jukebox,'' which confronts contemporary
America head-on. (Edward Hausner for The New York Times)

                   Copyright 1990 The New York Times Company


                              163 of 288 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                   May 20, 1990, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

HOME ENTERTAINMENT/VIDEO: AND KEEP IN MIND

SECTION: Section 2; Page 32, Column 1; Arts and Leisure Desk

LENGTH: 634 words


Here are some notable releases of the last few months.

BLACK RAIN - Ridley Scott's police melodrama starring Michael Douglas is ''easy
to sit through'' mostly because of how it captures ''the singular look of
contemporary urban Japan.'' (Vincent Canby) 1989. Paramount. No price listed.
2:05. Closed captioned. R. CASUALTIES OF WAR - Sean Penn is ''extremely fine''
as a ''comradely foul-mouthed naif'' in Brian De Palma's ''earnest, troubling''
film about rape and murder in Vietnam. (Canby) 1989. RCA/Columbia. $89.95. Laser
disk, $34.95. 1:53. CC. R. A DRY WHITE SEASON - Euzhan Palcy's film about
apartheid works best ''when it avoids flourishes and concentrates simply and
forcefully on the painful story at hand.'' (Janet Maslin) 1989. CBS/Fox. $89.98.
1:33. CC. R. DRUGSTORE COWBOY - In Gus Van Sant Jr.'s absorbing film about young
heroine adicts, we ''feel the scary thrills and bleak, fatalistic uncertainty.''
(Stephen Holden) 1989. I.V.E. $89.95. LD: $39.95. 1:44.

FAT MAN AND LITTLE BOY - Intended as an appraisal of the morality behind the Los
Alamos atomic bomb project, Roland Joffe's film ''doesn't make much of
anything.'' (Canby) 1989. Paramount. No price listed. LD, $34.95. 2:07. CC.
PG-13.

HARVEY - In a performance ''beguiling and disarming of all annoyance,'' James
Stewart befriends an invisible rabbit. 1950. MCA/Universal. $19.95. LD, $34.98.
1:44. No rating. IMMEDIATE FAMILY - Jonathan Kaplan's film about a childless
couple (Glenn Close and James Woods) who adopt the baby of a teen-age couple
(Mary Stuart Masterson and Kevin Dillon) is ''thoroughly compelling, at least as
far as it goes.'' (Maslin) 1989. RCA/Columbia. $89.95. LD: $34.95. 1:39. CC.
PG-13.

JOHNNY HANDSOME - Walter Hill's film about a thief who tries to get even with
the moll (Ellen Barkin) and others who have betrayed him is ''played by a
furiously vibrant cast.'' (Maslin) 1989. I.V.E. $89.95. LD, $39.95. 1:36. CC. R.
LIBELED LADY - Jean Harlow, Myrna Loy, William Powell and Spencer Tracy make
about as ''perfect a light-comedy foursome as you will encounter anywhere.''
1936. MGM/UA. $29.95. 1:38. No rating.

LOOK WHO'S TALKING - ''Cute is the operative word'' as a baby with the voice of
Bruce Willis looks for a suitable father. (Canby) 1989. RCA/Columbia. No price
listed. LD, $34.95. 1:36. CC. PG-13.

THE PAJAMA GAME - Doris Day, John Rait, ''Hey There,'' Hernando's hideaway and
boy meets union girl in an Iowa shirt factory. ''The whole thing is splendid,''
said the Times reviewer. ''Fresh, funny, lively and tuneful.'' 1957. Warner.
$59.95. 1:41. CC. No rating.

PRINCESS TAM TAM - Josephine Baker storms Paris as a reconstructed Indian
princess in a film that ''preserves something of the star's singular grace,
energy and frequently self-mocking humor.'' 1935. Kino. $59.95. 1:17. No rating.

ROCCO AND HIS BROTHERS - Luchino Visconti's film about a rural family's struggle
to survive in Milan is a ''vast tangle of cold fact and hot feeling.'' 1960.
Connoisseur. $79.95. 2:24. Italian with English subtitles. No rating.

SEA OF LOVE - As a New York cop after a killer, Al Pacino gets involved with
Ellen Barkin, the prime suspect, in a film that ''finds itself in a corner from
which it can't be plausibly extricated.'' (Canby) 1989. MCA/Universal. No price
listed. LD: $34.98. 1:53. CC. R. SEX, LIES AND VIDEOTAPE - Steven Soderbergh's
astonishing first film is a ''Liaisons Dangereuses'' of the video age, a ''rich,
absorbing tale of sexual greed and fear, love and betrayal.'' (James) 1989.
RCA/Columbia. $89.95. LD: $34.95. 1:40. CC. R. A TAXING WOMAN'S RETURN - Juzo
Itami's sequel is ''another major film from a man who is possibly the only true
social satirist at work in movies today.'' (Canby) 1988. New Yorker. $79.95.
2:07. Japanese with English subtitles. No rating.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Review

                   Copyright 1990 The New York Times Company


                              164 of 288 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                   May 20, 1990, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

FORUM;
Poland's 'Big Bang': Too Much Too Fast?

BYLINE: By JEFF MADRICK; Jeff Madrick, a correspondent for NBC Television,
recently returned from Poland.

SECTION: Section 3; Page 13, Column 2; Financial Desk

LENGTH: 2610 words


I have just returned from Poland where I met with many of its leading economists
and politicians. From the vantage point of the United States, it may look like
that country's commitment to a quick transition to a market economy, which some
call the ''big bang,'' is universal. But my discussion with economists and
politicans in Warsaw, revealed that some Polish leaders think the pendulum has
swung too far too fast.

While there are sharp divisions among the economic and political leadership of
Poland, their backgrounds and training are remarkably similar.

Poland has a long tradition of academic dissent and Warsaw University professors
have long provided the impetus behind the partial reforms that began in Poland
as far back as 1956. This tradition still holds. Virtually every high-level
official in the Government holds a doctoral degree in economics from either
Warsaw University's economics department or its School of Planning and
Statistics. The latter was the academic home of one of Europe's most prominent
economists, Michael Kalecki, Eastern Europe's equivalent of John Maynard Keynes:
an ardent critic of capitalism and a supporter of government planning.

There are few precedents for making the transition from a planned economy to a
market economy. But some economists say the course which the Government of Prime
Minister Tadeusz Mazowiecki and Leszek Balcerowicz, the Minister of Finance,
have been pursuing is too harsh.

As a result of the program put into place by Mr. Balcerowicz in the first three
months of this year, Poland's industrial production sank a stunning 30 percent
from the previous year's levels. Incomes after inflation are down even more and
unemployment, once unheard of, is rising rapidly.

''This kind of shock therapy has typically only worked under authoritarian
governments,'' said Andras Blaho, a United Nations specialist on Poland.''

The pain, members of the new Government told me, is the price that must be paid
for transforming Poland's economy into a market economy.

In the face of a tenfold increase in prices, the 43-year-old Mr. Balcerowicz,
who is also Deputy Prime Minister, slashed the budget deficit, clamped down on
money and credit, set prices almost completely free to float to market levels,
restricted wages and sharply devalued the Polish currency, the zloty. Why the
abrupt policy? ''I know of no example of any country in the world that stopped
hyperinflation gradually,'' he said.

Because of these harsh measures, the leadership in Warsaw and the Polish people
are asking two questions: Will sweeping free-market reforms work? And more
important, how long will they take?

Mr. Balcerowicz long ago departed from the Kalecki tradition of economics at
Warsaw University. As an academic, he was able to speak out in favor of a market
economy even when the Communists ruled in Warsaw.

''Professors like Balcerowicz could talk about a free market in the classroom,
in discussion groups, at conferences, quite openly, as long as it was all
hypothetical,'' said Andrzej Wroblewski, a Balcerowicz supporter and editor of
Gazeta Bankowa, a leading financial publication in Warsaw.

Academic dissent remains as strong as ever, however, and Mr. Balcerowicz has
many vocal critics inside Poland, even among supporters of free markets.
Grzegorz Kolodko is the head of the Finance Institute, a Polish think tank, and
he says Mr. Balcerowicz's claim that the new measures were necessary to combat
hyperinflation were an exaggeration. ''What hyperinflation? We only had
hyperinflation for a few months,'' he says. ''Israel and Vietnam had it for
years.''

Zdzislaw Sadowski, president of the Polish Economic Society, an influential
professional association, and Ryszard Bugaj, a member of Solidarity, the Polish
trade union movement, and head of the budget committee in Parliament, worry that
the severity of the economic program will only make matters worse later on.
''The Government promised too much,'' said Mr. Bugaj. ''Inflation could come
back even stronger,'' said Mr. Sadowski.

Mr. Balcerowicz's critics trace his conversion to the big-bang to the influence
of the Harvard University economist Jeffrey Sachs, who advised the Bolivian
Government to apply a similar all-or-nothing solution and later became a key
adviser to Solidarity.

Mr. Sachs predicted that if the Polish experiment fails, free markets are in
danger throughout Eastern Europe.

''Some Government economists have fallen too much under the influence of Western
economists,'' said Mr. Sadowski, who was once a deputy prime minister and is now
the leader of the older economic guard.

Mr. Balcerowicz's critics see in him the dangers of a romantic ideologue, and in
the program merely a highly fashionable equal-and-opposite reaction to what
preceded it.

Many of the economists I talked with believe the greatest gift the Government
could have given the Polish people would have been to learn patience. It is
necessary, they say, for the Polish people to understand that economic reform
will take time.

The following people are Poland's leading economic thinkers.

Leszek Balcerowicz
Deputy Prime Minister and Finance Minister

Mr. Balcerowicz, 43, received his doctorate from the Central School of Planning
and Statistics in Warsaw and an M.B.A. from St. John's University in Queens, New
York. Long a proponent of free markets as a Warsaw University professor, Mr.
Balcerowicz is the chief architect of Poland's stringent new economic program.
He is considered by many an extremist whose main priority is the control of
inflation, and whose economic heroes include the monetarist economist Milton
Friedman and British Prime Minister Margaret Thatcher. Some of his critics think
this is a sign of his naivete. But Mr. Balcerowicz insists his is the only
practical way to move towards serious reforms. His current concern is that the
Polish Government will make concessions too quickly, end the restrictions on
wages and Government spending and create another round of hyperinflation. He
says there are signs this spring that the Polish economy is stabilizing, and he
believes the level of pain is exaggerated. In a society that once had shortages,
a fall in real income is not a fair measure of consumer welfare, he says.

Mr. Balcerowicz's current posts are his first formal positions in government; he
has been active in past reform movements. He maintains his philosophy is
self-taught, but he is a close associate of Jeffrey Sachs of Harvard. Although
he was not the first choice of Mr. Mazowiecki, he now enjoys the Prime
Minister's support. Most believe Mr. Balcerowicz has no more than an additional
six months to turn the economy back toward growth. He has made one concession to
critics, adopting what Westerners call an industrial policy. He has recently set
up two agencies to help corporations ''with good prospects'' avoid bankruptcy
caused by current tight credit policies. Some think this will inevitably pave
the path towards considerable government intervention. For Mr. Balcerowicz, the
next big step is to manage the privatization of industry.

Wladyslaw Baka
President of the National Bank of Poland

The National Bank of Poland is the country's central bank, and Mr. Baka, 53, is
its president. He is a former member of the Politburo with a doctorate from
Warsaw University in economics. A participant in economic reforms throughout the
1980's who once lost a Government post for his outspokenness, Mr. Baka is a
strong proponent of the new reforms, though not as extreme as Mr. Balcerowicz.
''I have passed from the middle,'' he said about his position on reform, ''to
somewhere between the middle and the extreme.'' He said the German Bundesbank's
strong anti-inflationary policies are now the model for Poland's central bank.

Mr. Baka says his principal objective is to defend the currency. It is a goal
with which Mr. Balcerowicz agrees. Mr. Baka also insists it is important to
maintain ''real positive interest rates,'' another key part of Mr. Balcerowicz's
reforms.

Mr. Baka is working to develop a banking infrastructure suitable for foreign
investors. The lack of such a structure at the present time is a frequent
complaint among foreign investors otherwise interested in Poland. He believes
strongly in Government support for companies on the verge of bankruptcy. He does
not believe the Polish economic reforms can succeed without compromise on
repaying Poland's onerous foreign debt. He notes that West Germany is the
principal creditor, which adds a political dimension to the issue of debt
reduction.

Zdzislaw Sadowski
President of the Polish Economic Society

Mr. Sadowski, 65, is head of the Polish Economic Society, a leading professional
association where Mr. Balcerowicz once held a high post. Mr. Sadowski is a
former deputy prime minister with a doctorate from the Central School of
Planning and Statistics, where he worked with the economist Michael Kalecki.

Mr. Sadowski is a leader of the older guard who supports free markets but favors
a far more gradual pace of reform. He thinks the Government will eventually
compromise on wages and credit policies, and proposes that they do it sooner
than later.

But Mr. Sadowski worries that the current measures are so punishing that
inflation will come back stronger once these measures are lifted. His principal
theoretical argument is that Poland has no free enterprise structure to fall
back on and no experienced level of business management that knows how to adjust
to market forces. Just because the currency is stabilized and the costs of
business are reduced, he says, does not mean that business will be restored.
''We don't know what the floor is for the Polish economy,'' he said. ''Paul
Volcker came here with a group, and he said of course you must go through a
recession. That is very naive about our economy. We won't just bounce right
back.'' Mr. Sadowski added: ''The economy cannot fall by 30 percent for the
entire year; there will have to be changes.''

Ryszard Bugaj
Chairman of the Budget Committee of Parliament

A member of Solidarity, Mr. Bugaj, 45, is the head of the finance and budget
committee in Parliament. He holds a doctorate from Warsaw University's economics
department. Mr. Bugaj is the leading Parliamentary critic of the new economic
reforms and favors a more gradual appoach to change.

He said the Government's promise that economic pain will be short-lived is too
optimistic. He is concerned with the ultimate reaction of the Polish people to
change if the reforms are not successful. However, he acknowledges that the
reforms have produced two successes: the currency is now stable and people work
harder.

''Worker productivity was a big problem in Poland,'' he said. He says he is not
impressed by the cuts in interest rates and inflation so far, and contends they
are still too high. He is an important figure in the debate on privatizing the
economy. He says he believes the Polish people can learn to become
entrepreneurs, but says the principal problem with privatization is the scarcity
of capital. ''Who is going to buy the businesses?'' he asked. He is among
Poland's most popular politicians, more for his intelligence and sincerity than
for his oratory. His political speeches are generally considered dull.

Grzegorz Kolodko
Polish Finance Institute

At 40, Mr. Kolodko is Poland's young Turk. He is head of the Finance Institute,
Poland's economic think tank. He has a doctorate from the Central School of
Planning and Statistics in Warsaw.

Mr. Kolodko largely believes in the same free-market objectives as Mr.
Balcerowicz. However, he says the program is moving too quickly and mistakes are
being made. ''They raised interest rates for borrowers,'' he said angrily, ''but
they did not raise rates nearly as much for savers.''

Mr. Kolodko does not subscribe to Mr. Balcerowicz's view that hyperinflation can
only be stopped abruptly. He has visited Vietnam and Israel, where he says
progress against soaring inflation has been made more gradually. He is also
concerned that the Government's implicit promises have been too optimistic.

''Privatization will take years, not months,'' he said. He points out that
similar reforms in Chile took nine years of strong measures, unequal
distribution of income and the force of an autocratic government.

Mr. Kolodko is a critic of Harvard's Jeffrey Sachs, saying his success in
Bolivia does not apply to Poland. ''In Bolivia the industrial sector is far less
important than it is in Poland,'' he said. Mr. Sachs response is that he
proposes different solutions for different economies, and he does not think
Vietnam's reforms have been all that gradual.

Jerzy Osiatynski
Minister of the Central Office of Planning

A disciple of Michael Kalecki, Mr. Osiatynski, 46, is Minister of the Central
Office of Planning. He worked toward a doctorate in economics at the Central
School of Planning and Statistics but was deprived of his Ph.D. in a 1968
''revisionist'' purge that some claim was also anti-Semitic.

Mr. Osiatynski is a proponent of the new economic principles of free markets and
entrepreneurialism, but he believes the state's role will remain important; he
is a stronger proponent of government intervention than Mr. Balcerowicz and is
considered among the more traditional of the cabinet ministers concerning the
role of government planning.

Mr Osiatynski is editor of the collected works of Michael Kalecki, to be
published by Oxford University Press later this year.

''Kalecki's ideas about central planning were very progressive for his times,''
he said, ''but we no longer believe this. Now, entrepreneurs are the key.''

But Mr. Osiatynski does not think free markets are the complete answer. ''Labor
was not regulated by completely free markets in Japan and it worked very well,''
he said. He favors privatization but also notes that private capital to purchase
companies will be scarce ''Ninety percent of employment is still in the
Government,'' he pointed out. He said some industries should remain in
Government hands: ''the infrastructure, railway transportation, electric power
and maybe some part of telecommunications should be controlled by Government.''
Unlike Mr. Bugaj, he believes changing the attitude of the people towards doing
business will be difficult and is the key to success.

Marcin Swiecicki
Minister of Foreign Economic Relations

Another graduate of Warsaw University, with a Ph.D. in economics, Mr. Swiecicki,
42, is Minister of Foreign Economic Relations. He was a Fulbright scholar at
Harvard where he studied market deregulation. He strongly believes in free
markets.

Mr. Swiecicki is almost as strong a proponent of economic reforms as Mr.
Balcerowicz, who also studied in the United States. He says he was strongly
influenced by his studies here.

As the minister in charge of attracting foreign investment, he believes
privatization is going too slowly. He contends American companies are waiting
too long to invest in Poland, pointing out that there have been 1,200 joint
ventures since 1988 - 500 with Germany and only 80 with the United States. Mr.
Swiecicki also says foreign debt must be reduced and wants to see new debt
reduction schemes.

''The debt was not wisely taken,'' he acknowledged. ''But nor was it wisely
given.''

Mr. Swiecicki said even under Balcerowicz reform will not be as pure as
Westerners hope: ''We have inherited a deeply rooted respect for social
responsibility which we will not abandon.'' He would like to relax credit
policies for Poland's companies more than the Government has.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photos: of various officals of Polish government and economic
institutions

                   Copyright 1990 The New York Times Company


                              165 of 288 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                   May 20, 1990, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

HOLOCAUST MUSEUM: A TROUBLED START

SECTION: Section 6; Page 16, Column 5; Magazine Desk

LENGTH: 66 words


As a former concentration-camp inmate, I agree with Lucy S. Dawidowicz that the
memorial should be one of ''compelling austerity.'' I would urge those in charge
to show their respect to those who perished by using as examples such memorials
as Yad Vashem in Israel, the Memorial of the Unknown Jewish Martyr in Paris and
the Vietnam Memorial in Washington.

MARGA COHEN
  Brooklyn

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Letters

                   Copyright 1990 The New York Times Company


                              166 of 288 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                   May 20, 1990, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

WATERING HOLES;
CORAL REEF ON THE SAIGON RIVER

BYLINE: By Steven Erlanger; Bangkok bureau.

SECTION: Section 6; Part 2, Page 8, Column 3; Sophisticated Traveler Magazine

LENGTH: 254 words


For those Americans of a certain generation, and for anyone who's decided that
travel, let alone life, isn't quite as exotic as it used to be, Saigon (now Ho
Chi Minh City) can still exert a powerful tug.

At one time or another, most Americans in Vietnam relived, reinvented or drowned
their war on the terrace of the Continental Hotel, a spot hallowed by Graham
Greene's ''Quiet American'' and countless lesser novels. The life of the street
washed up onto the hotel's open terrace, habituated by hacks, grunts and spies,
leaving behind the usual residue of beggars, prostitutes and pickpockets.

Late last year, the Continental reopened, refurbished for the businessman - the
terrace enclosed, air-conditioned, tarted up with chandeliers and Greek columns.

But for some time now, the lobby bar of the Cuu Long Hotel, the old Majestic,
down by the magnificent Saigon River, has replaced the Continental as the
gathering spot of choice. The bar is a sort of coral reef for visiting
diplomats, journalists and a few intrepid businessmen, and for those Vietnamese
they attract, and who seek to attract them.

The decor is unprepossessing - a small wooden bar with stools, some glass-topped
tables surrounded by chairs and uncomfortable vinyl-covered couches. The lobby
is open to the outside, and on the Cuu Long's modest terrace are a few more
tables, hugged by some shrubbery, through which the touts and butterflies of the
night often emerge, beckoning to those with more nostalgia than sense in this
era of AIDS.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Drawing

                   Copyright 1990 The New York Times Company


This document could not be formatted for delivery. If your delivery request
included other documents, they completed successfully.

                              168 of 288 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                   May 20, 1990, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

crime

BYLINE: By MARILYN STASIO

SECTION: Section 7; Page 53, Column 1; Book Review Desk

LENGTH: 1125 words


The Appalachian town of Hamelin, Tenn. (population 900), doesn't know whether
it's coming or going, in Sharyn McCrumb's IF EVER I RETURN, PRETTY PEGGY-O
(Scribners, $17.95), what with the murder of a local teen-ager and the high
school reunion of the class of 1966 both happening in the same week. In truth,
the identity confusion and general anxiety stirred by the reunion seem to have
the more disorienting effect on the generation of Hamelin that lost its
innocence during the Vietnam War years.

''They had lived on the cusp of an era, when Beaver Cleaver went out and
Eldridge Cleaver came in,'' observes the reunion chairwoman, ''and nobody quite
knew what to do about it.''

Ms. McCrumb's strongly individualized characters give serious and intelligent
thought to the ghosts raised by the reunion - including the tangible specter of
a murderer. As the tightly plotted mystery twists through its loops, even the
level-headed sheriff comes to suspect a long-dead Vietnam soldier of the ugly
threats directed at a once-popular folk singer who has just moved into town.

The author threads the theme of self-awareness throughout her suspenseful
narrative. Unhinged by the violence that has crept into town, one woman admits
her need for love; another, her capacity to hate; both the sheriff and his
deputy think back to Vietnam. One by one, the class of 1966 allows itself to
disinter and confront the buried traumas of its generation.

*  *  *

Is that Amos Walker a cynical guy, or what? In Loren D. Estleman's SWEET WOMEN
LIE (Houghton Mifflin, $18.95), the Detroit private eye gets hit with this
challenge from his former wife: ''You used to protect people. Women
especially.'' To which he spits back: ''I thought they needed it then.''

Someone must have hurt Amos's feelings bad, because the hard-bitten gumshoe, who
is really a sweet lug at heart, bends himself all out of shape trying to toughen
up - about women, especially. He's wary when his client, an over-the-dune star
of 60's beach-blanket movies, hires him to deliver a farewell gift to her dying
Mafia lover. He plays it cool when a rogue C.I.A. operative asks his help to
bolt the Company. But he breaks down and sings the blues when he discovers that
his former wife, Catherine, is married to one of the shady characters in this
murky business and is having an affair with another.

''I gave away your china pugs,'' Amos snarls at Catherine when she pays him a
visit at home. ''They reminded me of the carved lions in front of a whorehouse
in Saigon.''

Mr. Estleman is one of the few hard-boiled writers in the trade who can talk out
of the side of his mouth without sounding like a jerk. Slinging metaphors and
cracking wise in the best of the Chandler-Hammett tradition, he has perfected a
whiplash style that supports his romantic sensibility and makes us believe, for
a while, in the old heroes.

*  *  *

Leave it to Inspector Morse to solve the trickiest case of his career lying flat
on his back.

Hospitalized for a bleeding ulcer in THE WENCH IS DEAD (St. Martin's, $15.95),
Colin Dexter's brilliant and bloody-minded Oxford detective chances on a
manuscript that recounts a century-old crime of lust and greed. What starts as a
casual mind game, ''a happy little problem to amuse himself with,'' becomes an
obsession once Morse notices certain discrepancies in the public accounts of the
rape-murder case of a woman traveling by barge down the Oxford Canal. In
describing his suspicions about the jury trial and subsequent hanging of two
bargemen, the classically trained detective hits on the Greek term parakrousis:
''the striking of a slightly wrong note in an otherwise tuneful harmony.''

That's nicely put, as is just about everything else in this stylish intellectual
puzzle, which won Britain's Gold Dagger Award as the best crime novel of 1989.
Mr. Dexter has fashioned a taxing brainteaser for Morse, whose superior wits and
famously foul temper tug the reader into the detective's hospital bed to share
his single-minded pursuit of the truth.

*  *  *

W. Edward Blain reverentially works events and themes from ''Othello'' into
PASSION PLAY (Putnam, $19.95), a clever if not wholly credible academic mystery
set in a private prep school in Virginia. Jealousy, lust, racial prejudice, the
betrayal of friends - and yes, even a handkerchief - figure in the plot, which
involves both faculty and students in a school production of Shakespeare's
tragedy that proceeds apace despite a series of horrid campus killings.

Once past its prologue (which inadvertently tips the reader to scratch two prime
candidates off the murder-suspect list), this first novel tells an easy-reading
yarn about the tensions that arise when someone starts going around wringing
students' necks. Setting the atmosphere with considerably more ease than he
advances his schematic plot, Mr. Blain creates a rich, claustrophobic world
where reputations and even lives might be lost at a student mixer or faculty
tea.

The author, chairman of the English department at a private school in Virginia,
is perhaps too fond of his fictional counterpart, a poet-teacher dubiously
likened to Shakespeare's noble Moor. Mr. Blain redeems himself, though, with the
endearing character of Thomas Boatwright, a sensitive 15-year-old student who
struggles honorably with his conscience (and, at one point, with the killer) to
arrive at an understanding of the moral points of Shakespeare's play.

*  *  *

William X. Kienzle's mysteries are always instructive on matters of religious
faith and morals, featuring as they do that estimable Roman Catholic priest, the
Rev. Robert Koesler, as resident sleuth. In MASQUERADE (Andrews & McMeel,
$15.95) we learn, for instance, the prevailing church disposition toward liquor.
''There was nothing wrong with drinking,'' says a bibulous Trappist monk, ''as
long as one did not become theologically drunk, which happened when one's face
hit the floor.''

This worldly monk is one of five celebrity panelists - the others being an
Episcopal minister, a rabbi, a nun and a television evangelist - gathered at a
convent school in Detroit for a mystery authors' seminar. Given the loathing
stirred up in this ecumenical group by the vulgarian television preacher, it is
a genuine surprise when a murder is committed and he is not the victim.

Unfortunately, the plot device also snuffs out the novel's most interesting
character, just as we are warming to his argument on sex and violence in the
religious mystery story. Deprived of this lively mind, the other characters
slump into the kind of private rumination that kills real conversation. On
balance, the whodunit is quite O.K. But can't we reconvene the seminar?

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Drawing

TYPE: Review

                   Copyright 1990 The New York Times Company

                              169 of 288 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                   May 20, 1990, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

AMERICAN GOSSIP

BYLINE: By JUDITH RASCOE; Judith Rascoe's screen credits include the scripts for
''Endless Love,'' ''Eat a Bowl of Tea'' and ''Havana,'' now in production.

SECTION: Section 7; Page 12, Column 1; Book Review Desk

LENGTH: 997 words



WALTER WINCHELLA Novel.
By Michael Herr.
158 pp. New York:
Alfred A. Knopf. $18.95.

For those who don't remember Walter Winchell, Michael Herr's new novel tells why
some of us remember him so well. Winchell was, as Mr. Herr writes in his
preface, ''the wizard of the American vicarious: gossip columnist, failed
vaudevillian, power broker, and journalistic demagogue, one of the most powerful
and famous men of his time.'' Fifty million people - one out of three of us then
- used to read Winchell's daily column, syndicated in more than a thousand
newspapers; even more of us listened to his radio broadcast every Sunday night.

Winchell's fame peaked in the 1940's and declined in the late 50's, his
reputation for fearlessness soured by his red-baiting. When he died in 1972, he
didn't die poor, but he didn't die famous. ''Walter Winchell'' - a biography in
the form of a screenplay that calls itself a novel - may be the final farewell
to the man Mr. Herr calls ''a forgotten ancestor'' of our contemporary hype
artists and media superstars.

It's not hard to understand why Mr. Herr, once a war correspondent himself and
the author of the Vietnam memoir ''Dispatches,'' chose to write about Walter
Winchell. He was a Faust of American journalism, a reporter more powerful than
the papers he wrote for, a bigger celebrity than most of the people he wrote
about. Many journalists wrestle with this tempting fantasy; Winchell luxuriated
in it. The price he paid was high - an alcoholic wife, a troubled son, a world
of enemies - and his fall might be called admonitory. Mr. Herr groups Winchell
with Hemingway and Damon Runyon, calling them ''tragic'' - but the word, if it
applies at all, applies best to Winchell. Hemingway's and Runyon's works outlive
them; Winchell outlived himself.

What's less easy to understand - at first - is why Mr. Herr, a writer of supple
prose, tells his story as a screenplay, a form whose limitations for a novelist
are severe. It's a genre that encourages curt description, verbless sentences
and endless repetition of the phrase ''we see.'' Though the book began as a real
film script, Mr. Herr admits the producers didn't agree that's what it was, and
he says that from the beginning he was ''thinking in prose,'' not in pictures.
But the result is a hyper-screenplay - wildly impractical and pushed to parody,
packed with cinematic cliches: flashbacks, flashed headlines, miles of montage.
(The best screenplay - as screenplay - about Winchell is still the enraged
''Sweet Smell of Success,'' which Clifford Odets and Ernest Lehman wrote back in
the late 50's, when people were still scared of the Prince of Pep.) What Mr.
Herr must have realized was that the trite devices, jazzy rhythms and copious
dialogue of an old-fashioned film script were perfect for Winchell's story. His
was a milieu that we mostly know through old movies anyway. Mr. Herr's
screenplay-novel in the style of the 40's not only captures what we've come to
think of as the flavor of that era; it also evokes the same ghostly feelings we
get while watching a 40's movie today - of actors vigorously alive in an
immortal present tense, yet more inaccessible than creatures in a fairy tale.
But the movie connection is not just atmospheric. Mr. Herr understands Walter
Winchell as a character made for the screen - where ''character'' might best be
defined as a vivid attitude in search of a situation. Winchell was his attitude:
stupendous energy and the gods' own gift for indignation were combined with
ruthlessness, wit and mawkish sentimentality. Winchell wrote his own script
every day. He was the leading man, movie stars and Presidents were his
supporting players, and the set was a gallant, gorgeous, naughty New York that
he and his friends had largely invented.

What serves Winchell best is just what Mr. Herr has finally produced: a movie
for the mind. In the age of print and radio, the imagination of the audience
reached out and created gods and demons from words alone. Cafe society was the
more glamorous for being unseen by most of us, and demagogues were larger than
life for the same reason; Hitler and Mussolini were the creatures of radio as
much as Winchell was. Television was one of the things that ended his career
(the other was a lawsuit brought by The New York Post). We had imagined
Winchell, with his reporter's hat, press card and telegraph key, as a brassy
American demigod, ageless and omniscient; when television revealed him to the
American public, what we saw was, as Mr. Herr puts it, ''an angry, middle-aged
man yelling at the camera.''

I try to imagine what my 13-year-old godson, a bright boy who has grown up with
radio as a quaint and minor medium, would make of Walter Winchell: to him,
Winchell would be a grotesque, an obnoxious stand-up comedian playing to an
audience of chumps. Mr. Herr's imaginary screenplay for an imaginary movie - at
once nostalgic and brutal, comic and terrible - can only work its magic as long
as the cameras aren't turned on.



 WITH HEMINGWAY AND RUNYON AT THE STORK CLUB

''A good reporter is the noblest work of God,'' Hemingway says.

''Why, thank you, Ernest,'' Walter says.

''Kipling said that,'' Hemingway says.

''Walter doesn't know who Kipling is,'' Damon says.

''He: Do you like Kipling? She: I don't know. I never kippled,'' Walter says. .
. .

''Ever read my stuff?'' Hemingway asks.

''Every book. Every word. I love it. Short sentences. Like my stuff,'' Walter
says. . . .

''No one can teach me any tricks about keepin' 'er short,'' Damon says.

''How come you never use the past tense in your stories?'' Hemingway asks.

''I don't know,'' Damon says, ''Saves time, I reckon.''

''Me, I use three dots,'' Walter says. ''Dot dot dot. Fast dots . . . Lean.''

''I still say Walter never read a book in his life,'' Runyon says.

''He's absolutely right,'' Hemingway says. ''Books are for saps.''

From ''Walter Winchell.''

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Drawing

TYPE: Review

                   Copyright 1990 The New York Times Company

                              170 of 288 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                   May 20, 1990, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

Victoriana Befits a Cottage Industrialist

BYLINE: By ROBIN POGREBIN

SECTION: Section 12CN; Page 35, Column 1; Connecticut Weekly Desk

LENGTH: 1137 words


AS a college student in Philadelphia, she spent hours at a splattered easel,
painting canvases with bold strokes of abstract design or delicate lines of
portraiture. As a married mother of three in Kentucky, she sketched patterns at
the kitchen table in the evening and sold down comforters out of an old bakery
during the day.

Today, as a divorced, self-described ''young grandmother'' in Westport, Lillian
August is the proprietor of the Lillian August Collection, a Main Street shop
that sells a variety of home fashion products, most of which are designed by Ms.
August.

The cedar-shingled shop looks very much like the front of a house. A glance
through the store's display windows suggests peeking into someone's home. A
dining table is set with Limoges china, and a French reproduction sleigh bed
tempts shoppers to collapse into its paisley pillows. The shop's interior
suggests an era when women wore wide-brimmed straw hats and nibbled cucumber tea
sandwiches. The store is overflowing with frills, flowers and fragrances.

Linens and Lace

Ms. August's patterns are splashed throughout the store - on wallpaper,
hatboxes, sundresses, photograph albums, umbrellas and picture frames. Racks are
hung with French and Scottish lace. Shelves are lined with liquid soaps,
topiaries, linens and scarves. Opera and potpourri mingle in the air.

The atmosphere is no accident; Ms. August has studied the psychology of design,
and she wants her customers to feel as if they have been transported to another
world, as if they have been to the theater.

Backstage is one flight up, above the store, where the designs and business
decisions are made. Ms. August's studio, which overlooks the Saugatuck River,
much resembles a costume shop; it is cluttered with rolls of fabric, cups of
paint and spools of ribbon.

A Fascination With Victoria

''This is a little like costume research,'' Ms. August said. ''You get
fascinated with a period and you want to make sure you have a certain amount of
authenticity.''

Ms. August's current fascination is with the Victorian era, which, with the
success of Victoria Magazine, ''is hot right now,'' Ms. August said. Her
Victorian motif includes bolster pillows with thick tassels, marcasite jewelry
and embroidered footstools. For her first line of sheets, recently introduced by
the Dan River domestics mill, Ms. August has used some of the Victorian hues of
red, teal and mustard.

Ms. August shares her second floor offices with her colleagues and children,
John and Daniel Weiss.

John, 27 years old, oversees the daily management of the company as the director
of operations. He started working for his mother as a high school student in
Louisville, where he packed boxes and ended up running Ms. August's first
wholesale business. Daniel, 29, is the company's executive vice president, in
charge of licensing, retail ventures and public relations. Ms. August describes
Daniel as ''the more outgoing person on the frontlines.'' It was he who
convinced his mother to leave her small manufacturing business in Kentucky and
come East to make a go of her own design enterprise. ''Dan encouraged me to be
more businesslike,'' Ms. August said. ''He saw a strong product and saw the
timing for specialty stores.''

For his senior thesis at Hampshire College, Daniel wrote a case study on
expanding his mother's business as a cottage manufacturer. After graduation, he
took a job on Wall Street as an investment manager but spent his lunch breaks
showing his mother's portfolio to potential licensees. Eventually, this double
life became too taxing; Daniel called his mother saying: ''Mom, I'm going to
lose my job. I can't do both.'' So in the summer of 1987, Ms. August came to New
York and Daniel left his job to become her partner.

Plans for Outlets

From the day she moved into a loft apartment - ''with wonderful light'' - in
Manhattan's meat-packing district, Ms. August had more work than she could
handle. In December, with the support of investors and her sons, Ms. August made
the move to her store at 17 Main Street in Westport.

In addition to the Westport store, the Lillian August Collection now includes a
store in Ridgewood, N.J., a growing licensing division and plans to open about
20 outlets around the country over the next five years.

Ms. August and her sons agree that working in a family business can be
stressful, particularly when it is growing so rapidly. But they have made a
concerted effort to be a team. ''It wasn't easy - there was a lot of heartache -
but I don't think any of us ever thought we were going to give up,'' Ms. August
said. ''My sons have wives and a lot of talent. They didn't necessarily have to
tough it out the way they have and I'm very amazed at their tenacity.''

Ms. August, a native of Philadelphia, studied environmental design in the fine
arts department at the University of Pennsylvania. At 20, she married a medical
student from Kentucky and followed him to Louisville.

By age 24, she had three children (her youngest son, Michael, 25, lives in San
Francisco). ''I was a typical housewife,'' Ms. August said.

When Ms. August's husband was drafted during the Vietnam War, the family moved
to Williamsburg, Va., and Ms. August completed her liberal arts degree at
William and Mary College there - packing two years of school into 11 months. She
wrote her thesis on physics and art, more specifically, ''The Evolution of the
Mass Space Theory in Physics and Art and Principles of Perpendicularity.''

Her husband was never sent to Vietnam and they moved back to Kentucky, where Ms.
August pursued a master's degree in philosophy at the University of Kentucky.
Her primary focus was women and art, particularly quilt makers. ''Why did they
have that drive to make these beautiful quilts?'' Ms. August said. ''They had to
keep the bed warm, but why did they have a compulsion to make them so
beautiful?''

In 1977, disappointed in her graduate program and facing the prospect of
divorce, Ms. August left school to start a wholesale company, Victoria Designs,
that sold down comforters, duvet covers and decorative pillows. When she
switched from Victorian to country products like toys and patchwork quilts, her
designs were picked up by catalogues like Horchow, Spiegel and Nieman-Marcus.

Since then, her business has exploded. An article in Travel and Leisure last
December called Ms. August's stores ''an environmental blockbuster in the
making,'' and compared her quality with Ralph Lauren and Pierre Deux.

Ms. August does not seem threatened by the competition; rather she seems proud
to be in such company. ''I believe in the Picasso theory that each artist has
his own niche and his own look,'' she said. ''I've always felt very strongly
that cream rises to the top. You do the best you can.''

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo; Lillian August at her shop in Westport, above, and a design from
her collection. Ms. August's sons, John, right, and Dan Weiss (NYT/Judith
Pszenica)

                   Copyright 1990 The New York Times Company

                              171 of 288 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                   May 20, 1990, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

DINING OUT;
Korean Flavors Arrive in New Haven

BYLINE: By PATRICIA BROOKS

SECTION: Section 12CN; Page 33, Column 1; Connecticut Weekly Desk

LENGTH: 783 words


THE latest Asian cuisine to find a welcome in downtown New Haven is Korean, and
judging by the crowds flowing in and out of the large dining room of Seoul, this
was overdue.

A cliche (with a kernel of truth) is that you can judge the authenticity of an
ethnic restaurant by the number of indigenous people dining there. With that as
a benchmark, Seoul's authenticity seems guaranteed.

Despite Korea's location between China and Japan, Korean food is a world unto
itself. Neither as sophisticated and varied as Chinese, nor as subtle and
delicate as Japanese, the Korean cuisine has a strong, independent character.
The uninitiated may be surprised at its innate spiciness, which is peppier than
any Chinese, with the possible exception of Sichuan and Hunan. And the Koreans
use much more beef in their traditional dishes than either of their neighbors.

A Korean classic, and one of the most popular dishes both in and outside the
country, is bulgogi, sometimes called Korean barbecue. It consists of
sukiyaki-thin slices of beef deeply marinated in sesame seeds and oil, soy
sauce, garlic, onions, a pinch of sugar and black pepper, and then grilled. At
Seoul, more than a pinch of sugar is used, but the dish is delicious
nonetheless, although the beef would be easier to handle with chopsticks if it
were cut into smaller segments.

Another Korean mainstay is kim chi - pickled celery cabbage or other vegetables
with a sour-sharp flavor derived from a mix of ginger root, garlic, red pepper
and onions. At Seoul, a small dish of kim chi is served with dishes of pickled
radish and bean sprouts and individual covered bowls of Korean sticky rice as
accompaniment to the entrees.

At Seoul, you have a choice of a Korean and a Japanese menu at dinner; at lunch,
dishes are labeled Bangkok, Saigon, Taipei, Narita, Tokyo and Osaka, in addition
to various Korean specialties. While we sampled the tempura (very crisp and
tasty), we gave most of our attention to the Korean specialties.

There is only one appetizer on the menu, but it is a delight: man doo or Korean
fried dumpling. Shaped like an elongated jao tze but with a thinner skin, the
dumpling is filled with a mixture of minced pork, water chestnuts and scallions,
served with a soy-ginger dipping sauce.

There are six soups, which are really main courses, though most entree portions
are on the small side (like the prices). Thus a group of four might want to
order five or six entrees to share. Two delicious and spicy soups were yuk gae
jang (beef with vegetables) and dae gu maeun tang (codfish and vegetables).

Squid and vegetables (carrots, scallions and sesame seeds) sauteed in a
red-pepper hot sauce was a superlative dish; but keep in mind that when Seoul
lists a dish as hot or spicy it is fiery. No pulling the punches here - at least
not yet.

Shrimp in hot sauce was another incendiary sparkler, and the sauce was
completely different, as were the vegetables served with the shrimp - red and
green pepper, baby corn, hot pepper pods.

Two dishes that take getting used to (but can become addictive) are beef or
skate with buckwheat noodles. Served cold in a large metal bowl, along with
hard-boiled eggs, pickled zucchini strips and a hot red-pepper paste, the
predominating vermicelli-thin noodles are mixed and tossed with the other
ingredients. A bowl of misu soup is served with the dish.

A satisfying meal for two - one appetizer, three entrees and unlimited cups of
delicious corn tea - came to $33. Tax and tip were extra. Seoul does not have a
liquor license, but you are welcome to bring your own. No desserts are offered,
but with your check comes gratis slices of fresh orange - a perfect ending for a
highly charged meal. A simple Oriental-accented setting and a staff that is
uniformly friendly and eager to please add to the delightful experience.

SEOUL
Good

343 Crown Street, New Haven (between York and Park Streets). 497-9634.

Atmosphere: A large room with brick walls, divided into several dining areas,
decorated with paper globe lanterns, shoji screens, scrolls, photographs and
prints.

Service: Cheerful and quick.

Recommended dishes: Man doo dumplings; yuk gae jang soup; dae gu maeun tang
soup; bulgogi; fried squid in hot sauce; fried shrimp in spicy sauce; skate with
buckwheat noodles; beef with buckwheat noodles; tempura.

Price range: Lunch entrees $4.99 to $6.99; dinner entrees $7.95 to $12.95.

Credit cards: Mastercard and Visa.

Hours: 11:30 A.M. to 3 P.M. daily; 4:30 to 9 P.M. Monday through Thursday; 4:30
to 10 P.M. Friday and Saturday. Closed Sunday.

 Reservations: Accepted.

Wheelchair accessibility: Ground-level access.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: review

                   Copyright 1990 The New York Times Company

                              172 of 288 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                   May 20, 1990, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

11 Vie for Florio and Courter House Seats

BYLINE: By JOSEPH F. SULLIVAN

SECTION: Section 12NJ; Page 1, Column 1; New Jersey Weekly Desk

LENGTH: 1439 words


NOTHING hates a vacuum as much as politics, and the Congressional vacancies
created by last year's gubernatorial election are attracting much of the
attention in this year's elections.

Jim Florio had served his First Congressional District, in Burlington, Camden
and Gloucester Counties, for nearly 16 years when he resigned shortly before
taking his oath as Governor in January.

His Republican gubernatorial opponent last November, Representative Jim Courter
of Hackettstown, is a 12-year veteran and ranking minority member of the House
Armed Services Committee. After initially indicating he would seek re-election
to his 12th District seat, Mr. Courter announced that he wanted to spend more
time with his family and would leave Congress at the end of this term in
January.

Because of the political complexions of the two districts, the winners of the
Democratic primary in the First District and the Republican primary in the 12th
District on June 5 will be the favorites going into the fall campaign. Each race
has attracted four candidates.

Those running in the First District, in the southern part of the state, are
Robert E. Andrews, 32 years old, of Bellmawr, the director of the Camden County
Board of Chosen Freeholders: Linda Bowker, 41, of Barrington, the president of
the New Jersey chapter of the National Organization for Women; John A. Dramesi,
51, of Blackwood, a Vietnam veteran who served seven years as deputy director of
the Office of Veterans' Affairs, until last September, and Joel S. Farley, 35, a
Collingswood lawyer.

Mr. Andrews began his political activity by stuffing envelopes in some of Mr.
Florio's previous elections. Although Mr. Florio will not endorse anyone in the
Democratic primary, his aides say, he might show up for some photo opportunities
in his role as Governor and Mr. Andrews's as Freeholder.

'The Forgotten Middle Class'

Mr. Andrews said he was running on issues important to ''the forgotten middle
class,'' pocketbook issues, crime and the death penalty. He also supports a
woman's right to choose to have an abortion. He supports a ban on assault rifles
and said the public was being frustrated by New Jersey Supreme Court decisions
that have thrown out the first 16 death penalties voted by juries.

He said the district was in need of strategies to create jobs after the recent
decision by the Campbell Soup Company to shut down its Camden plant and General
Electric's decision to reduce its operations. ''This might sound strange for a
Democrat, but I would support President Bush's call for a cut in the capital
gains tax on the condition that there be legal assurances that the proceeds of
the tax break would be reinvested in the domestic economy,'' he said.

In her bid to win the nomination, Ms. Bowker said she would emphasize her
support for abortion rights, for an environmental position that calls for
greater recycling efforts and for a national health care program.

She said the nation had a long way to go with its recycling efforts to match the
programs in Japan and Europe. ''The Federal Government must develop new markets
for recycled material and encourage producers not to package their products with
excess material that adds to our disposal problems,'' she said. Ms. Bowker said
she was also presenting herself as a change from ''politics as usual.''

Mr. Dramesi ran against Mr. Florio as the Republican Congressional candidate in
1982, but last year came to Mr. Florio's aid when the Democrat's patriotism was
attacked during the campaign by Mr. Courter. Mr. Dramesi, who is running this
time as a Democrat, said support for veterans' programs was waning both in the
state and in Washington. For this reason, he said, groups of veterans circulated
nominating petitions for his candidacy without asking him.

Trying 'to Be Their Voice'

''I feel a responsibility to them to follow through and try to be their voice in
Congress,'' he said.

Mr. Farley is banking on his experience as a staff aide on Capitol Hill, and his
experience in winning Democratic committee posts when he was still a teen-ager,
to help him win the nomination. He is a former intern in the office of Senator
Stuart Symington, Democrat of Missouri, who died in 1988, and was a staff
investigator for the House Subcommittee on Employment and Housing.

The Republican nominee will be Daniel J. Mangini, 56, of Turnersville, a
Gloucester County Freeholder, who is running unopposed.

The Republican candidates in the 12th District are Dick Zimmer, 45, of
Flemington, a member of the State Senate; Rodney P. Frelinghuysen, 44, of
Morristown, a State Assemblyman; Phil McConkey, 33, of Flemington, a
professional football player, and Joseph F. Shanahan, 76, of Lambertville, the
president of the Hunterdon County Citizens and Taxpayers Association.

Mr. Frelinghuysen, whose family has produced four United States Senators and a
Representative, is hoping that the family name and his record of service as a
Morris County Freeholder and a three-term Assemblyman will help him win the
nomination. His chief problem is geographical since his Morris County base makes
up only a small part of the Congressional district, which also includes all of
Hunterdon County and parts of Somerset, Sussex, Mercer, Middlesex and Warren.

But Mr. Frelinghuysen said the support he was receiving from the Somerset County
Republican Party chairman, Jack Penn, former State Senator Raymond H. Bateman
and former Representative Millicent Fenwick has broadened his base of support.

''I also have a fairly strong presence in Princeton, which was represented for
several years in Congress by my father and where several family members live,''
he said. The economy and the environment, ''especially the disappearance of open
space,'' are the chief issues in the campaign, he said.

Advisers on Issues Enlisted

Mr. Zimmer, whose Senate district includes parts of four counties in the
Congressional district, has been endorsed by the party organizations of
Hunterdon, Mercer and Middlesex Counties. He also has enlisted some prominent
Republicans, including former State Attorney General Cary Edwards and Senator
John Bennett of Monmouth County, as advisers on drugs, the environment and other
issues.

Both state legislators are members of the State Joint Appropriations Committee
and oppose Governor Florio's proposed tax increases to balance the budget. Mr.
Zimmer said he also voted against the last three state budgets ''because I knew
we couldn't continue to increase spending at a breakneck pace without hitting a
brick wall.'' He was the sponsor of the Farmland Preservation Act, which he said
has saved 40,000 acres of farmland from development.

Mr. Courter has not endorsed anyone in the race, although he has agreed to
become an adviser for Mr. Zimmer and Mr. McConkey on foreign affairs and
defense. Both men supported his gubernatorial campaign last year. Mr.
Frelinghuysen backed former Assembly Speaker Chuck Hardwick of Westfield in the
gubernatorial primary, and in 1982 opposed Mr. Courter in the Congressional
primary.

Former Gov. Thomas H. Kean, who is now the president of Drew University, has
appeared in campaign videos made for both Mr. Zimmer and Mr. Frelinghuysen. The
candidates will mail copies to potential Republican voters in the district.

Mr. McConkey, the former punt returner and receiver for the New York Giants, now
plays for the San Diego Chargers. He does not have the name recognition problem
of most first-time candidates and has been waging an active campaign tied to top
foreign news developments. He recently criticized the White House for what he
called ''abandoning the Lithuanian people in their hour of need,'' and for
granting the Soviet Union favored nation'' trade status at a time when it was
using embargoes against Lithuania to force the Baltic state to abandon its
independence movement.

Mr. Shanahan, a former Lambertville Councilman, describes himself as a
''semiretired'' lawyer and an ''independent-minded Republican.'' He argues that
he will make the best fiscal watchdog in the race ''because both political
parties are committed to spending.''

On the abortion issue, Mr. Frelinghuysen and Mr. Zimmer have long supported a
woman's right to choose abortion, while Mr. McConkey and Mr. Shanahan are
opposed to abortion.

There is also a contest for the Democratic nomination, between Marguerite
Chandler, 46, of Somerville, a businesswoman, and James F. Cleary of Bound
Brook, a supporter of Lyndon H. LaRouche, the political extremist who was
sentenced last year to 15 years in prison on charges that included mail fraud.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo; Democratic candidates in 1st Congressional district Robet E.
Andrews (Carol Sweeney), Joel S. Farley (AP), Linda Bowker (AP) and John A.
Dramesi (Guy Wiener); Republican candidates in the 12th Congressional district
Phil McConkey (Greg Pitts), Dick Zimmer (Bachrach), Rodney P. Frelinghuysen
(AP), and Joseph F. Shanahan (Shanahan)

                   Copyright 1990 The New York Times Company

                              173 of 288 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                   May 20, 1990, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

Campus Life: Wisconsin;
Chief of Security Recalls Old Days, Good and Bad

SECTION: Section 1; Part 2, Page 44, Column 6; Style Desk

LENGTH: 690 words

DATELINE: MADISON, Wis.


''We had no model; we were unrehearsed and unprepared for what followed, not
only here, but at Columbia, Berkeley and other places,'' said Ralph Hanson, the
director of the University of Wisconsin police and security.

''Here'' was the University of Wisconsin in February 1967, and ''what followed''
was two days of confrontation between students and the police on campus that
resulted in 70 arrests as well as injuries to 13 campus police officers and 19
students.

Several thousand students protested the presence on the campus of a recruiter
for Dow Chemical, a manufacturer of napalm, used in the Vietnam War.

''The Dow protest was our granddaddy - whatever mistakes there are, you'll find
there,'' Mr. Hanson, 61 years old, said in an interview, after announcing last
month that he was retiring after 25 years. ''If we were going to go through that
again, I would have got the Dow recruiter out of there and let the protesters
have the building.''

Protesters had blocked the entrances to the building, where the company was
conducting interviews, and then tried to occupy it.

''Demonstrators and protesters often will react in direct proportion to what the
police do or do not do,'' Mr. Hanson recalled, ''and they could see they had
5,000 kids with all the cameras and newsreels. I had at best 40 officers, a
woefully small force, and unrehearsed for what struck us.''

'Violence Might Break Out'

Mr. Hanson was born in Houlton, Me., where he was a state trooper for a decade
before moving to Madison.

''I planned to stay just four or five years, but then the escalation of our war
in Southeast Asia reverberated on campus,'' he said. ''Within a year, we were
getting indications that violence might break out and eventually it reached the
point of one protest or demonstration after another.''

''What we soon learned was that 40 or 50 willful and determined young people
could bring a university down by consistently disrupting its functions. By
tactics like this you forced the administration to use force, and in this
instance force means the police officers.''

It was a job that he now admits he was not prepared for, but even at the time he
realized important changes were taking place.

He Did Not Sympathize

''You had a great deal of hostility. We became a surrogate for the Pentagon, the
Government and all the other agencies of social control. They couldn't go to the
Pentagon or Washington, but by God, they could strike out right here at the
university.''

The culmination of on-campus tensions was the bombing of the Army Math Research
Center in Sterling Hall, killing a graduate student in physics, Robert
Fassnacht, 33.

But the lowest point in his career, Mr. Hanson said, did not come until May
1968, when Christine Rothschild, 18, of Chicago, was found stabbed to death in
front of Sterling Hall. The case remains unsolved.

The end of the 60's came none too soon for him. Now, he said, the campus is
politically more sedate.

''It is not that our young people are not politically involved,'' he added. ''If
we did something misdirected in Central America or the Middle East I'm sure the
young people today would react.''

Rather than the us-against-them attitude of the Vietnam War era, Mr. Hanson
said, the police department today works hand-in-hand with students.

The issues of the day are property theft and sexual and racial harassment,
forcing the police to increase security in the dormitories and undertake
orientation programs for new students.

By the end of the year, Mr. Hanson expects to bid farewell to his staff and the
$2.5 million campus police station that he calls the crowning achievement of his
career. He will carry with him considerable good will from students, past and
present.

''My perspective was that he was in touch with students and that he enjoyed his
job,'' said Margaret McCormick, a former student body co-president and a senior
in biochemistry.

David Newman, a Wisconsin alumnus who was a student newspaper editor in 1973 and
1974 and an opponent of the Vietnam War, said: ''He, more than the city police,
cared about the students and wanted to be liked.''

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo: Ralph Hanson, who will retire as the director of the University
of Wisconsin police, on the campus in Madison. (Tom Capp for The New York Times)

                   Copyright 1990 The New York Times Company

                              174 of 288 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                   May 20, 1990, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

Pastimes;
Coins

BYLINE: By Jed Stevenson

SECTION: Section 1; Part 2, Page 61, Column 1; Style Desk

LENGTH: 622 words


As prices rise for examples of the rarest United States coins - an Augustus
Humbert $20-gold piece sold for $1.35 million last year - a United States silver
dollar with a strange story is among the stars of high-priced coins.

The United States began striking silver dollars in earnest in 1795 when it
turned out 160,295 of them. But the dollars rarely circulated in the United
States throughout the 1790's and the early years of the 19th century.

The new dollars were shipped to the West Indies and traded for heavier but older
Spanish 8 reales minted in the Spanish colonies. These coins were shipped to the
Philadelphia mint and sold as bullion for the restriking of newer United States
silver dollars. By 1804 the situation had become ludicrous and Mint officials
stopped making silver dollars. Ten-dollar gold eagles were discontinued at the
same time.

Curiously, silver dollars with a date 1804 had not been struck. Instead, because
of the shortage of high-quality steel, dies for the 1803 dollars had been used
during the first months of 1804. No dies with an 1804 date were engraved. But
19,570 silver dollars with an 1803 date were minted in 1804.

Silver dollars were not minted again for general circulation until 1836 when a
new design came along. But in 1834 American diplomats decided that coins would
make an ideal gift for the heads of state of several kingdoms in the lesser
developed parts of the world.

The State Department requested that the Mint make up presentation sets
containing Proof specimens of each type of United States coin in circulation.
The Mint Director, Samuel Moore, realized that the last silver dollars and
eagles minted were in 1804 so he ordered new dies made with the 1804 date and
struck several silver dollars for the Proof sets.

These sets with two 1804 coins amid the other coins dated 1834 were sent to
Japan, Thailand, Vietnam and Oman. But the Mint retained four other silver
dollars and when the existence of those four became known collectors were
ravenous with desire. The Mint sold the four.

In the years preceding the Civil War the coins were obviously one of the great
rarities in American numismatics and the Mint sought to take advantage of the
situation by offering restrikes for sale to collectors. Having lost the reverse
die of the 1834 strike, the Mint had a new one made.

But before any of these restrikes could be struck, the son of the chief coiner
at the Mint started striking the coins himself. Theodore Eckfeldt had been
working as a night watchman at the Mint and the long, undisturbed hours gave him
plenty of time to put both dies on the presses and turn out several coins that
he sold to Philadelphia collectors. Because young Eckfeldt was not a very good
engraver, he left the edges of the coins unlettered and these plain-edged second
restrikes were soon detected and reported to the Mint. The Mint eagerly bought
back all the plain-edged dollars and reported that they had been melted. In
fact, the Mint relettered the edges and kept the coins in a vault.

Twenty years later, all but one of these second restrikes sold for at least
$1,000 apiece. The remaining coin was one that had been struck over an 1857
silver shooting taler from Switzerland. That coin was never relettered and
remains as the only true survivor of the second restrikes.

Today eight of the original 1804 silver dollars are known to exist. But, perhaps
appropriately, copies of the original and the second restrikes have appeared
since the 1870's. Anyone who thinks they may possess an 1804 silver dollar
should exercise caution before declaring it ''real.'' For the 1804 silver dollar
was never a real coin, just a curiosity meant for the eyes of emperors, kings
and sultans.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo: Silver dollar was given as a gift

                   Copyright 1990 The New York Times Company

                              175 of 288 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                   May 20, 1990, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

THE WORLD;
Questions From the Paymasters In Afghanistan's No-Win War

BYLINE: By JOHN F. BURNS

SECTION: Section 4; Page 2, Column 1; Week in Review Desk

LENGTH: 926 words

DATELINE: ISLAMABAD, Pakistan


THE senior Pakistani official looked warily about the room at a diplomatic
gathering here last week. ''In a practical sense, it's all over,'' he said,
referring to the issue he has been wrestling with as a member of Prime Minister
Benazir Bhutto's inner circle.

The issue is the war in Afghanistan, and the official was expressing what has
become a common perception, if only guardedly acknowledged, among many of
Pakistan's top civilian leaders and American advisers: There is no longer a
realistic hope of achieving the goal espoused by Islamabad and Washington since
the Soviet troop withdrawal 15 months ago. That goal was establishing a new
Afghan government by the guerrilla fighters arrayed against the Soviet-backed
leadership in Kabul.

Pakistan's powerful military intelligence agency, the Inter-Services
Intelligence directorate, continues to fight a rearguard action against any
initiative that would endanger its preference for a Kabul government led by
Gulbuddin Hekmatyar, a fundamentalist Muslim widely feared among fellow
guerrilla leaders and Afghans as a whole. But among others charged with
overseeing Pakistani and American interests, the conviction that the guerrillas
cannot win the war, and the reluctance of the guerrillas' Pakistan-based
political leaders to settle the issue in elections, has led to the conclusion
that now seems to be guiding policy.

This is that no significant purpose is served by continuing military backing for
the guerrillas, and that the greater wisdom might be for outside powers to
reduce, and finally to eliminate, the flow of money and weapons. The result
would be to return the conflict to what it was before Soviet troops intervened
in December 1979, a civil war rooted in Afghanistan's complex political culture
and ethnology.

For the United States, helping the guerrillas oust Soviet troops was a signal
triumph of the cold war. But as relations with Moscow become conciliatory, the
American interest has been reduced. Many American experts here now say the goal
should be the promotion of a stable, non-fundamentalist government committed to
modernizing one of Asia's most backward societies, andestablishing friendly ties
with neighboring powers, including the Soviet Union. This seems unlikely to be
forthcoming from the guerrilla parties, however, and most experts doubt it could
be accomplished by any other Afghan group.

Salvage Efforts

When it withdrew its forces, the Soviet Union seemed poised to write off its
enterprise in Afghanistan, much as America did with Vietnam. But unlike Vietnam
for Washington, Afghanistan is not a distant country for Moscow, and the Kremlin
appears to have concluded that it can rescue something if the United States will
join in arrangements that establish a popularly chosen government that shuns
Muslim fundamentalism. The Soviets have been encouraged in their hopes by the
debility of the guerrillas since their defeat last year at Jalalabad. Most field
commanders have done little or no fighting, and have turned to consolidating
local fiefdoms. In provinces like Badakhshan, Nangahar and Helmand, attention
has concentrated on the poppy growing that has turned rebel-held regions into
the world's second largest source of heroin, after Burma. Everywhere, there has
been a thriving commerce in the resale of American-supplied weapons.

At its headquarters in

Peshawar, the seven-party guerrilla alliance envisaged as the nucleus of a new
Kabul government has become a focus of barely concealed contempt, even among
American officials who spent last year trying to coach it into political
coherence. The man who has received the largest share of billions of dollars in
American-supplied weapons, Gulbuddin Hekmatyar, showed his colors by entering a
secret alliance in March with the Kabul Defense Minister, Shahnawaz Tanai,
hitherto condemned by Mr. Hekmatyar as a Communist infidel. When General Tanai
failed in a coup attempt against President Najibullah, the Kabul leader, Mr.
Hekamatyar invited fellow guerrilla leaders to join his ''revolutionary
council'' with General Tanai. They refused, creating new bitterness between them
and Mr. Hekmatyar.

Resisting a Vote

Now, unable to topple the Kabul Government from within or without, the guerrilla
leaders are resisting a Soviet and American plan that would have them compete
against Mr. Najibullah for Afghans' votes. Mr. Hekmatyar has declared that
competing with the Kabul ruler would betray Muslim principles. In reality, his
brand of Islamic rigidity and violence would likely be rejected in a fair
election. For most other Pakistan-based leaders, retaining American-financed
luxuries in Peshawar may be more attractive than fighting an election that none
would be likely to win.

Contemplating the complexities has convinced some American officials that, as
one put it, ''it's time for us to get out and leave Afghanistan to the
Afghans.'' While this would disappoint those who have hoped for a pro-American
government in Kabul, an agreed weapons cutoff might have more serious
consequences for the Kremlin. As Moscow sees it, anything that weakens the
Najibullah Government threatens the survival of central authority in
Afghanistan, opening the way for disintegration into unrestrained tribal
warlordism. The Soviets worry that this would lead to heightened unrest among
the Uzbek, Tadzhik and other peoples who straddle the Soviet-Afghan border,
fostering yet another headache for Mikhail S. Gorbachev as he battles to prevent
the fracturing of the Kremlin's realm.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo: A mother at a clinic in Kabul keeping a vigil for her two sons,
who were wounded in a rocket attack in a coup attempt in March (Associated
Press)

                   Copyright 1990 The New York Times Company

                              176 of 288 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                   May 21, 1990, Monday, Late Edition - Final

Army and Air Force Fix Sights On the Changing Face of War

BYLINE: By MICHAEL R. GORDON, Special to The New York Times

SECTION: Section A; Page 1, Column 1; National Desk

LENGTH: 2337 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, May 20


Faced with a receding Soviet threat, the Air Force is focusing on potential new
trouble spots in the third world and planning a force that can fight two
moderate-sized wars at once.

At the same time, the Army is trying to redefine itself into a fast-reaction
force based primarily in the United States but capable of deploying anywhere in
the world.

Officials from the two services say they are responding to the easing of
tensions with the Soviet Union while making prudent preparations to contend with
conflicts in the third world. But critics assert that the military is trying to
justify retaining many forces that are no longer needed in Europe, where its
main effort has long been concentrated but where the dangers of war have
suddenly been reduced.

''The services are doing what they have always done historically - devising
scenarios that justify their long-range programs,'' said Dov S. Zakheim, a
military planner in the Reagan Administration.

A Worldwide Strategy

''Global power, global reach'' is the credo of Air Force Secretary Donald F.
Rice, who is aggressively seeking the leading role in carrying out the quick,
unexpected missions that the service contends will be the most likely combat
situations in the years ahead. The Air Force often points to the 1986 bombing of
Libya by the Air Force and Navy both as an example of the type of conflict
experts foresee and as a model for future Air Force action in the third world.

''The Army is assuming increasing prominence in U.S. national security
strategy,'' said Gen. Carl E. Vuono, the Army Chief of Staff, in a paper that
advertises the ''versatility'' of the Army for conflicts around the world, and
he points with pride to the Army's dominant role in the December invasion of
Panama.

But even if the military services are correct in putting new emphasis on the
Middle East, Asia, Latin America and Africa as potential arenas of conflict,
their budget proposals have raised a number of questions. The answers will
determine not only the shape of the military over the next decade, but how
deeply the Pentagon budget can be cut.

For the Army and Air Force, these are the immediate questions:

* How many units should be retained to prepare for third world conflicts, and
how should they be reshaped?

* Which active forces should be retained in Europe and in a reinforcing role in
the United States in order to preserve American influence across the Atlantic
and guard against a resurgence of the Soviet threat?

* Are the services' budget decisions consistent with their plans for redefining
their emphases? And is the Pentagon leadership developing an overarching plan
that combinees the services effectively, or are the services' spending plans
being prepared in isolation?? The Army's Plans New Focus: Fast Reaction
Overwhelmingly dedicated to the defense of Europe, the Army and Air Force
account for more than half of the Pentagon's annual budget, currently about $300
billion. The Army is spending $77.6 billion in the 1990 fiscal year, while the
Air Force is authorized to spend $92.9 billion.

In response to budget guidelines from Defense Secretary Dick Cheney, the Army is
planning to reduce its active divisions to 14 from 18 through 1997. Army reserve
divisions are to be cut to 8 from 10.

Under the plan, the brunt of the cuts will be taken by the heavy, or, mechanized
and armored combat units, whose primary mission has been to defend Europe. But
units that can be deployed rapidly, like the paratroopers of the 82nd Airborne
division, and some heavy armored units will be preserved.

Maj. Gen. Jerome H. Granrud, an Assistant Deputy Chief of Staff of the Army,
says the Army needs 14 divisions to maintain a credible combat presence in
Europe, to guard against a resurgence of the Soviet threat, and to be ready to
dispatch forces quickly for possible conflicts with heavily armed adversaries
like North Korea and in the Middle East and other regions.

Deeper Cuts Supported

But several leading experts, including Harold Brown, the Defense Secretary in
the Carter Administration, say the number of active divisions could be cut to as
few as 10 or 12, essentially by shifting more missions to the reserves for the
reinforcement of Europe. A senior Pentagon official, who asked not be
identified, agreed that reductions of that magnitude would probably be feasible
if the Soviet Union were to withdraw all of its forces from Eastern Europe.

The Army's plans have also drawn fire from the Marine Corps and the Air Force,
which are competing for the lead role in third world missions. An Air Force
official asserted, ''We have trouble finding places where the enemy forces and
our political objectives are such that we are likely to be committing more than
one or two Army divisions.'' The official questioned whether the public would
support a major ground action in the third world that involved a large number of
American casualties.

Experts noted that 27,000 troops, a relatively small force, were deployed during
the invasion of Panama in the largest conflict involving the United States
military since the Vietnam War.

But Army officials point to instabilities in the Middle East and on the Korean
peninsula, arguing that an Army with 14 active divisions, including ample heavy
forces, would be needed to deter aggression there.

Fred C. Ikle, Under Secretary of Defense for Policy in the Reagan
Administration, argued in an interview that less than one-third of the Pentagon
budget can be justified by the need for all of the services to prepare for
future hostilities in the third world. The European Issue Of Cuts And Missions
Despite the Army's efforts toward a new focus, its budget needs in coming years
will be largely influenced by decisions relating to its traditional role in the
defense of Europe. At issue are the number and kinds of troops it should keep in
Europe after an East-West agreement on conventional forces, and the sizes and
kinds of units that should be kept in the United States for reinforcement should
it be necessary.

Among those who advocate a new approach to the defense of Europe are James
Schlesinger, the Defense Secretary in the Nixon Administration, Senator Sam Nunn
of Georgia, a Democrat and chairman of the Senate Armed Services Committee, and
Gen. Edward C. Meyer, a former head of the Army, who would seek much larger
reductions in the Army's presence in Europe and a further reduction in the
overall size of the Army.

These experts say Army forces there can be stripped down largely to logistical
''receiving'' units, which in a brewing crisis would help support operations by
combat reinforcements sent from home. Under this approach American troops in
Europe could be cut to perhaps 70,000 to 100,000, far below the number contained
in the Bush Administration's proposal in East-West arms talks under way in
Vienna. The Administration has proposed that 195,000 American Army and Air Force
troops be based in central Europe and that 153,000 of these be Army troops.

Calls to Share Duties

Such cuts would depend, experts stressed, on a renegotiation of responsibilities
within the NATO alliance, where combat risks have traditionally been shared by
members. Under such an approach, West European troops would guard the front
lines, while the United States would assume more responsibility for deploying
and operating combat planes in Europe.

The Army would still plan to send combat troops to Europe if war broke out,
according to General Meyer. But reinforcements ''would predominantly be
reserves,'' which would be made more effective, possibly through the assignment
of commanders from active forces to the reserve units.

According to calculations from the Congressional Budget Office, the transfer of
Army missions to the reserves could save large sums. It costs $4 billion a year
to maintain a heavy Army division, including about 17,000 troops and 21,000
support personnel, in Europe. Supporting a heavy reserve division in the United
States costs $700 million, according to the C.B.O.

Effect on U.S. Commitment

But senior Pentagon officials have so far rejected the removal of virtually all
Army combat troops from Europe and the proposal to greatly increase dependence
on the reserves.

Gen. Colin L. Powell, chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff, argued that the
deployment of Army combat units in Europe is the best way to demonstrate the
depth of America's commitment to the Atlantic alliance and the Soviets.

''It's a lot different to have a guy on the ground with a rifle who can't fly
away, can't sail away,'' General Powell said. ''He is the surest embodiment of
the will of the American people.''

More generally, military leaders said there are limits on how strongly the
nation can rely on reserves. ''You can't give the President a major regional
conflict requiring heavy forces and require him to call up the National Guard to
deal with it,'' General Powell said.

Some contend that some of the proposals involving the Guard are not realistic.
General Granrud said the politically powerful National Guards would fight a
proposal that active duty officers command reserve units. He also argued that
such a move would deprive National Guard and reserve personnel of valuable
command experience.

But some former military leaders with long experience, like retired Gen. John
Vessey, a former Chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff, Administrations, in the
Reagan Administration, said the Army should think of ways to mix active and
reserve troops in the same units. Taking note of the political obstacles,
General Vessey cautioned that restructuring the reserves ''is a lot harder than
deciding which weapons to buy.'' The Air Force's Task In Search Of Global Role
For more than four decades, a Pentagon official said, the Air Force has been a
service that was ''fine tuned to the big war in Europe.''

Air Force officials devised plans to send F-16 and F-11 fighter bombers into
Warsaw Pact territory to knock out attacking Soviet units, while F-4G ''Wild
Weasel'' planes would attack enemy radars, and F-15 jets would take on Soviet
fighter jets for dominance of the skies.

Under instructions to cut its budget and anticipating a new agreement cutting
conventional forces in Europe, the Air Force is planning to reduce its tactical
fighter air wings to 28 from the current 36, a far cry from the goal of 44 wings
adopted during the military buildup of the Reagan Administration. Of the 28 air
wings, seventeen and a half would be in the active force, and ten and a half
would be in the reserves. An air wing usually consists of about 72 warplanes.

Reduced Presence

The Air Force would maintain a reduced presence in Europe, with about five wings
instead of approximately eight deployed there today. But much of the service's
future is tied to its effort to carve out a larger role worldwide. And the Air
Force is casting itself as a rival to the Navy's aircraft carrier battle groups
and to the Army for many missions in the third world.

Under the ''Air Option,'' hailed by Mr. Rice, the Air Force Secretary,
sophisticated strike aircraft would play the main role in the United States
attack, delivering punishing blows until an adversary agreed to terms. Only if
the war dragged on for weeks would Army forces be used.

Mr. Rice asserted in a speech in March that eight B-2 bombers or one squadron of
F-15E's ''can match the daily ordnance capability of a carrier.'' Navy officials
reply that only carriers can provide the visible American presence that is
needed in distant regions.

''Sharp, short-duration operations where we punch hard and terminate quickly
will characterize our use of power. The American people are rightly intolerant
of conflicts that last longer than warranted and cause unnecessary suffering and
loss,'' Mr. Rice said, alluding to large ground combat operations in the third
world.

Army officials, for their part, maintain that the ''Air Option'' has it limits.

''You can fly over it. You can bomb it. But until you occupy it - put American
soldiers on the ground -you have really not carried out the national strategy,''
said Army General Granrud.

Air Force officials further argue that in addition to its force of bombers, a
minimum of 16 active tactical fighter wings are needed to maintain the
capability to fight in two moderate-sized wars against adversaries in unstable
areas of the Middle East, Asia and other regions.

''It is a simple matter of conservative planning,'' said one Air Force official,
defending what some Pentagon officials dub the ''two half-war'' strategy. ''If
we are involved in a war in one part of the world, there is always the
possibility that some bad actor elsewhere may conclude that this is the time to
make his move.''

But some civilian Pentagon officials assert that even the ''Air Option'' does
not necessarily justify the Air Force's planned force structure, arguing that
the active Air Force should be cut further while more planes are transferred to
the highly proficient reserves. The Air Force, they say, does not have
sufficient cargo capacity to move the munitions, spare parts and fuel for even a
fraction of its active force to airfields in many parts of the third world
without depriving other services of needed transport capability.

Some experts outside government, like Jeffrey Record, an expert at the Hudson
Institute who is preparing a study on the future of American air power, also
complain that the Air Force has long exaggerated the effectiveness of bombing
campaigns. In a recent article in Policy Review, published by the Heritage
Foundation, a conservative research center, he wrote that the shrinking of the
Air Force's network of overseas bases, the resistance of nationalistic third
world countries to American airfields and the potential vulnerability of
airbases to attack ''cast a significant shadow of uncertainty over the future of
the Air Force as we know it.''

NEXT: The debate over the future of the Navy.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

SERIES: SHRINKING THE MILITARY: SECOND OF FOUR ARTICLES - A NEW ARMY AND AIR
FORCE

GRAPHIC: photos: American soldiers in Panama City in January. (Associated Press)
(pg. A1); Because of a perceived reduction in the threat from the Soviet Union,
the brunt of Army budget cuts will be taken by mechanized and armored units
whose primary mission has been to defend Europe. An M-1 tank took part in a 1987
exercise in West Germany. (United States Army); The Army is trying to redefine
itself as a fast-reaction force based primarily in the United States but able to
deploy anywhere from the Korean peninsula to Latin America or the Middle East.
Marines from the Delta Force took part in the invasion of Panama last December.
(Department of Defense pool photograph) (pg. B12)

TYPE: Series

                   Copyright 1990 The New York Times Company

                              177 of 288 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                   May 21, 1990, Monday, Late Edition - Final

Ex-General's Spit-and-Polish Way to Build New Schools

BYLINE: By JOSEPH BERGER

SECTION: Section B; Page 1, Column 5; Metropolitan Desk

LENGTH: 1483 words


Almost a year ago, Charles E. Williams traded a two-star Army general's hat for
a gray hard hat, and now he spends much of his days at school construction
sites, surrounded not only by dust and rubble but also by an air of hope.

The general, as his associates call him, has been assigned the imposing job of
building 50 new schools and 30 annexes and remodeling 70 other schools for a New
York City system that is badly overcrowded and decaying. He has been given $4.3
billion, but only five years to do this.

School construction has historically suffered huge delays and cost overruns, and
the workmanship has generally been shoddy. But the general has quickly
established a reputation for a kind of spit-and-polish discipline and for
wresting command of construction from the bureaucrats and private contractors.
Not a single job is behind schedule, he says, and several are ahead of schedule.


'How to Work, How Fast'

''We just don't have behind schedule in our vocabulary,'' the Alabama-born Mr.
Williams says, with characteristic self-confidence. ''I'm going to tell you when
to work, how to work, how fast to go. If you want my contract, this is the way
you have to go.''

Officials at the Board of Education, from Joseph A. Fernandez, the chancellor,
to Robert F. Wagner Jr., the president, said they have been impressed. In his
nine months as head of the New York City School Construction Authority, Mr.
Williams has started construction or renovation of more than 20 schools. In the
last decade, the Board of Education, striving to recover from the city's fiscal
crisis, opened only 14 new schools and 15 ''mini-schools'' or annexes.

Mr. Williams's crisp approach was evident on a recent tour of three sites in
Manhattan and the Bronx. At each, he cajoled or charmed his project managers,
pushing them to shave weeks off the deadline.

''I want the pupils to have the school as a Christmas present,'' he told Al
Sergany, who was supervising an addition to Public School 152 at 93 Nagle Avenue
in Washington Heights. The annex, which will allow the overcrowded school to
take 300 extra students, is scheduled to open in January.

Felicita Villodas, the principal of P.S. 152, thanked Mr. Williams for canceling
work on a day students needed quiet to take their citywide reading tests. Later,
at a renovation at DeWitt Clinton High School, William Dougherty, the assistant
principal, complimented Mr. Williams's managers for consistently giving the
school enough notice to juggle classroom schedules.

'Complete Turnaround'

''I have been through a modernization before and all the horror stories you've
heard about are true,'' Mr. Dougherty told Mr. Williams, referring to Clinton's
renovation 22 years ago. ''So I appreciate the complete turnaround that has
taken place.''

If the general has been criticized, it was for the salaries he has been paying.
The general is paid $145,000 and three vice presidents are paid $110,000. But
Mr. Williams said he must pay salaries comparable to private industry to get
people ''who understand design, construction, who are credible.''

''If I want a Chevrolet, I'm going to get it,'' he said in a recent interview.
''If I want a Cadillac, I've got to pay the price. And I feel the kids in this
town deserve the best. I'm determined to have people on board as talented as
those who work for Trump or Tishman or any of the other long-ball hitters in
town.''

The authority was created by the State Legislature in December 1988 as an
independent agency that would take over from the Board of Education the job of
designing and building public schools. Its financing was patched together from
New York City general obligation bonds and from Municipal Assistance Corporation
funds.

Exempted From Wicks Law

It typically takes 8 to 10 years to select and to obtain approval for a site
and, then, to design and to build a school. To cut that time in half, the
Legislature permitted the authority to forgo land-use reviews and a host of
other preconstruction steps, and it let the authority eliminate undesirable
contractors from the bidding pool.

Most significantly, it exempted the authority for five years from the Wicks Law,
which requires municipal agencies to hire separate contractors for plumbing,
electricity and heating instead of having a general contractor in charge of the
work. The Wicks Law has been criticized for crippling construction by failing to
place anyone in charge. There are stories of painters and plasterers completing
their work, and electricians then coming in to make holes for the wiring.

In a report last month, the City Bar Association in New York suggested that the
Legislature did not go far enough, and that loopholes still limited the
authority of the prime contractor.

Nevertheless, Mr. Williams believes he has been given enough power to do the job
on time. He feels he will be able to get around cumbersome union work rules.
''You have to demand performance,'' he said. He has been firm with contractors,
who he says, have occasionally tested his ''spine.''

He will not tolerate too many change orders - authorized changes, for
renegotiated amounts, to the original job specifications - that can allow
low-bidding contractors to reap windfalls. And he will not let work get bogged
down in disputes over change orders.

He will, he says, pay his contractors on time, instead of following what he
suggests has been the board's laggard record. And he will not, he says, be drawn
into the corruption that has marred the industry.

No Acceptance of Gouging

''I don't accept the old myth that you have to accept a little dirt,'' he said.
''I'm a steward of the public dollars and I will not accept any gouge on those
dollars. Once you accept it, you're hooked.''

His secret, he says repeatedly, is to have his lieutenants stay on top of each
job and not relinquish authority to the contractors. Designating one manager for
each site, he said, allows him to lay the blame correctly when things go wrong.

''I'm not sure there was enough vigilance,'' he said of the board's building
program. ''Industry does not control the job, we do.''

The 51-year-old Mr. Williams, born in the rural town of Wedgeworth, Ala.,
learned construction from his father, a subcontractor whose assignment it was to
clear the timber and earth before the excavators came. At age 10, Mr. Williams
started working for his father, but he went on to graduate from Tuskegee
Institute, and in the middle of his military career, received a master's in
business administration from Atlanta University.

A Pilot in Vietnam

He spent 29 years in the Army Corps of Engineers, at first as a helicopter pilot
in Vietnam ferrying engineers under enemy fire to repair roads or install wells.
Later he directed huge projects in Europe and the United States, including the
construction in the mid-1980's of a $1.3 billion, 3,000-acre addition to Fort
Drum in New Watertown, N.Y.

None of his current projects, taken alone, are that big, but many are as
complicated. Clinton, in the north Bronx, is undergoing a $30 million
modernization that requires the building of 17 temporary classrooms to
accommodate students shifted out of sections being revamped.

''The construction authority seems to be in tune with the way private
construction works,'' said Michael Manniello, the supervisor for HRH
Construction, Clinton's prime contractor. With other municipal agencies, he
said, ''you send a letter and it sits on 14 desks and no one makes a decision.''

In an industry that has been short on black, Hispanic, and Asian workers, Mr.
Williams, who is black, has his own way of bolstering the number of minority
contractors and employees.

''Percentages, goals and targets are a phony,'' he said. Instead, he believes in
personally talking to contractors and letting them know how important he sees
the employment of minority builders for a largely minority school system. He
also gives them a list of minority contractors with proven records.

''When you flash a quota at me, you're not forcing me to change my behavior,''
he said. ''I want you to go inside yourself and fix the problem.''

Of the $200 million in contracts awarded to date, 10 percent have gone to
minority contractors. At most sites, his office said, more than 30 percent of
the work force is made up of minority workers.

Mr. Williams has taken a strong stand in negotiations over the 150 designers,
engineers and other employees who the authority will be absorbing from the Board
of Education. Mr. Williams is demanding a thirty-seven-and-a-half hour workweek
from any transferred employees, rather than the 35 hours to which their union
contract now binds them.

''The people must understand they will play by my rules,'' he said. And then
conscious of the firmness of his tone, he said, ''This is a tough town and, I
can tell you, a wimp won't make it.''

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: photo: Charles E. Williams, left, a former Army general who has been
assigned the job of building 50 new schools and 30 annexes and remodeling 70
others in New York City, at a construction site in the Bronx with Shelly
Slifstein, the project manager. (John Sotomayor/The New York Times)

                   Copyright 1990 The New York Times Company

                              178 of 288 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                   May 21, 1990, Monday, Late Edition - Final

Overcoming Violence Is the Call at St. John's

SECTION: Section B; Page 6, Column 1; National Desk

LENGTH: 2261 words


Overcoming violence in New York City - from serial killings of taxi drivers to a
shooting of a priest to a sexual assault on a student - was the theme of the
Rev. Donald J. Harrington's commencement speech at St. John's University
yesterday.

At the 120th Commencement, Father Harrington, the university's president, chose
not to ignore recent accusations that had hurt the image of the largest Catholic
university in the country.

Last month, six students, several of them members of the lacrosse team, were
indicted on charges of sexually assaulting another student at an off-campus
house.

As he spoke to the 1,432 graduates and more than 6,000 spectators who filled
Alumni Hall, Father Harrington said the charges ''brought home to us very
forcefully how fragile and vulnerable we are as individuals and as a
community.''

Father Harrington, the only commencement speaker, talked about the shooting of a
priest outside a rectory in the Bedford-Stuyvesant section of Brooklyn and the
spate of shootings of taxi drivers in the Bronx and suggested to the graduates
that perhaps they could be ''the answer which this city needs at this time.''

Yesterday was the second of two undergraduate commencement exercises at the
Queens campus. On Saturday, 897 degrees were conferred.The two ceremonies were
needed for the large number of graduates.

Honorary degrees were awarded to Estee Lauder, chairman of the Estee Lauder
Cosmetics Company; Sister Veronica Greeley, Prioress of the congregation of the
Holy Cross, and the Rev. Raymond Brown, a biblical scholar and a professor.

The St. John's University President's medal, which is awarded for outstanding
loyalty and devotion to the alma mater, was awarded to two St. John's
professors, Dr. John M. Sledz of the College of Business Administration, and Dr.
Frank Kunkel of the Graduate School of Arts and Sciences.

Adelphi University

Robert H. Bork, the former Federal appeals judge who is now a scholar at the
American Enterprise Institute in Washington, addressed the 2,983 members of
Adelphi University's Class of 1990 yesterday. Mr. Bork was also one of nine
writers, scholars and government figures to be awarded honorary degrees during
the ceremonies in Garden City, L.I. The other honorees were: Betty Allen, the
executive director of the Harlem School of Arts in New York City; Creighton Eddy
Gilbert, an author and professor of art history at Yale University; Dudley
Robert Herschbach, a Nobel Prize-winning chemist at Harvard University; Donald
Kagan, the dean of Yale College; Fredrick Morgan, the founder of The Hudson
Review; Richard D. Parsons, the president and chief operating officer of the
Dime Savings Bank of New York; Simon Schama, an author and professor of history
at Harvard, and Claire Shulman, a 1946 Adelphi alumna who is the Queens Borough
President.

Bryn Mawr College

Cokie Roberts, a journalist for National Public Radio and ABC's ''This Week with
David Brinkley,'' urged graduates of Bryn Mawr College not to abandon women's
traditional role as nurturers.

''When women graduated 20 years ago, they didn't think about careers,'' Ms.
Roberts told the graduates yesterday. ''When women graduated 10 years ago, they
only thought about careers. All of us learned we have to combine careers and
family.''

''You can do it all,'' she said. ''You just don't sleep very much.''

The commencement was the 105th at the college in Bryn Mawr, Penn. During the
ceremonies, the college awarded 446 degrees, including 119 master's degrees and
29 doctorates.

Fairfield University

John J. Phelan Jr., the chairman and chief executive officer of the New York
Stock Exchange, told 1,114 graduates at Fairfield University's 40th Commencement
yesterday that ''materialism alone cannot feed the body and cannot feed the
mind.'' Before receiving an honorary doctor of laws degree, Mr. Phelan addressed
an audience of more than 9,000 and spoke of a ''contagion of democracy''
sweeping Eastern Europe. He also predicted, ''Europe will build a new and
different civilization that we can all be proud of in 15 to 20 years.'' He
likened the task to the resurrection of Hiroshima from the devastation of the
atomic bomb, and said: ''The will of people will surmount all odds. The human
spirit will overcome all obstacles.'' Other recipients of an honorary degree
were Fortune R. Pope, former publisher of the newspaper Il Progresso and
director and officer of the Pope Foundation, and Willie H. Ruff Jr., a member of
the Mitchell-Ruff Duo that took jazz to Russia in 1959 and to China in 1981.

University of Hartford

Nearly three months after his death, Malcolm Forbes, the editor of Forbes
magazine, was awarded an honorary doctor of laws degree by the University of
Hartford for the ''imaginative zeal with which he pursued his life and his
generosity in supporting philanthropic causes.'' His son, Christopher Forbes,
accepted the honor during the school's 33d commencement yesterday, as 1,440
students received undergraduate and graduate degrees. Eleanor Holmes Norton, a
civil rights lawyer who headed the Federal Equal Employment Opportunity
Commission, addressed the recent spate of racist incidents on American campuses,
saying, ''The new bigotry must be chased from campus not with rules that mock
free expression by denying it, but with outspoken oral and written retorts from
every section of the university community.'' Also receiving honorary degrees
were: Stillman B. Brown, chairman of the school's Board of Regents from 1983 to
1988; Mark Lamos, artistic director of the Hartford Stage Company, and George
McNeil, who teaches at the university's Hartford Art School.

Haverford College

Haverford College awarded four honorary degrees at its 157th commencement
yesterday and, instead of having a keynote speaker, each recipient was allowed
to address the nearly 260 graduates briefly.

Receiving the degrees were Ernest L. Boyer, former United States Commissioner of
Education and Chancellor of the State University of New York; Gustavo Gutierrez,
a Peruvian priest, theologian and author; Katherine Dunham, the dancer and
choreographer who helped form Ballet Negre, the first African-American dance
company in Chicago; and Felicia Nahoma Kentridge, a South African lawyer who has
helped bring legal aid to the country's poor.

Hofstra University

During two days of ceremonies that conclude today, Hofstra University will have
awarded degrees to 1,673 men and women in undergraduate and graduate programs.
In his message to the graduates yesterday, the school's president, James M.
Stuart, challenged them to ''always have a questioning mind.'' Honorary degrees
were awarded to four alumni and to Rand V. Araskog, chairman of the ITT
Corporation, who was praised as ''something of a management miracle.'' The
following alumni were honored: Senator Wyche Fowler Jr., a Democrat from
Georgia; George Vecsey, a sports columnist of The New York Times and the author
of several books; Patricia Reilly Giff, the author of more than 40 children's
books, and Dr. Harold J. Raveche, president of the Stevens Institute of
Technology in Hoboken, N.J.

Morehouse College

Randall Robinson, founder of the human rights organization TransAfrica, and the
Rev. Dr. Fred Lofton, president of the Progressive Baptist Convention, spoke at
Morehouse College's 106th commencement ceremonies in Atlanta.

Mr. Robinson addressed the 300 graduates of the all-male institution at
yesterday's commencement on the campus lawn. He received an honorary doctor of
laws degree. Dr. Lofton spoke at the baccalaureate ceremony on Saturday
afternoon and received an honorary doctor of divinity degree.

University of Notre Dame

Bill Cosby, perhaps best known for his television series ''The Cosby Show''
addressed 1,800 who received bachelor's degrees and 600 who received advanced
degrees at the University of Notre Dame's 145th commencement.

Mr. Cosby, who was the recipient of an honorary degree yesterday, has been a
major benefactor of traditionally black colleges and universities.

Other honorary degrees were awarded to Rutherford Aris, a professor of chemical
engineering at the University of Minnesota; the Rev. George H. Clements, a civil
rights advocate; Jill Ker Conway, the former president of Smith College; Ernst
L. Eliel, an author; the dancer Suzanne Farrell, and Emil T. Hofman, retiring
dean for freshman studies and professor emeritus of chemistry at Notre Dame.

Others were receiving honorary degrees were Ignacio E. Lozano,Jr., editor of the
newspaer ''La Opinion'' in Los Angeles; J. Richard Munro, former excutive of
Time-Warner Inc.; Javier Perez de Cuellar, Secretary General of the United
Nations; A. Kenneth Pye, president of Southern Methodist University; and Martha
R. Seger, a member of the Federal Reserve Board.

A special honorary award was given to the late Sister Thea Bowman, a poet,
evangelist and singer.

SUNY

Gov. Mario M. Cuomo called for unity, tolerance and the defeat of negativism
during Commencement exercises at the State University of New York at Stony Brook
yesterday.

Mr. Cuomo told the 2,600 degree candidates and their guests, ''Imagine what we
could be if we could realize the full potential of all our people, if we could
reaffirm the notion of family and reject - as we always have at our best - the
proposition that we can exist and thrive as a house divided or a world divided,
fractionalized by sex or nationality, by race or color or religion.''

After discussing the recent rise in racial and ethnic conflict in New York, he
suggested that the diversity of the Stony Brook campus held a lesson for all.
''This is a community that draws students not just from Long Island, but from
France, Poland, China, Italy, Israel, Peru and Vietnam,'' he said. ''You're
showing all of us how we can live together better by learning more about one
another.''

Honorary degrees were presented to an economist, Gary S. Becker, and two
scientists, Paul C. Lauterbur and John S. Toll, who also was president of Stony
Brook from 1965 to 1978.

SUNY campuses in Buffalo, Albany and New Paltz also held graduation ceremonies
yesterday.

In Buffalo, Frederic V. Salerno, the new chairman of SUNY's board of trustees,
told 1,000 graduating students that ''as Cadillacs are the top of the line of
the U.S. auto industry, you graduates are the jewels of the American educational
showroom.''

But Mr. Salerno said that ''one of the biggest obstacles to continued economic
growth in New York - and throughout the United States - is the lack of basic
skills among those seeking to enter the work force.''

Honorary degrees were awarded to Wynton Marsalis, who was called ''one of the
country's most talented musicians''; Alonzo Church, a mathematician and
philosopher, and Ira Michael Heyman, the chancellor of the University of
California at Berkeley.

Smith College

Helen Caldicott, a leader of the anti-nuclear movement, told the 722 graduates
of Smith College's 112th commencement yesterday she was pleased to be speaking
at a women's college because ''the future lies in the hands of women.''

Ms. Caldicott, the former head of Physicians for Social Responsibility, said
women make up 53 percent of the world's population and do two-thirds of the
world's work, and yet only receive 10 percent of the income and 1 percent of the
property in return. ''We have all the babies, and we have no power,'' she said.
''This must change.''

''You, this generation of women, were born for one reason - to save the world.
That is your task in life, and that is why you graduated from Smith,'' Ms.
Caldicott told the graduates. ''You are the intellectual elite in this country.
I hand the torch to you.''

Some students tried to make a change yesterday. During commencement, about
one-fourth of the seniors wore green and black ribbons attached to their
graduation gowns, to show their opposition to Smith's recent decision to stop
admitting students without regard to their ability to pay.

In addition to Ms. Caldicott, who received an honorary doctor of laws degree,
other honorary degrees were awarded to Mary Frances Berry, a civil rights
advocate, Senator Nancy Landon Kassebaum of Kansas; Anna Marie Petrioli Tosani,
an art historian and director of the Uffizi Gallery in Florence, and Sheila
Evans Widnall, an aeronautics engineer and educator.

Tufts University

Dr. Robert Coles, a Harvard research psychiatrist, urged more than 2,100 Tufts
University graduates yesterday to exercise ''some trust and love and respect so
that skin color and origin and class and neighborhood no longer divide us.''

Dr. Coles, who is best known for his studies on the impact of segregation and
integration on black schoolchildren, was the featured speaker at the
university's 134th commencement ceremonies and received an honorary doctor of
humane letters degree.

The president of the Medford, Mass., college, Jean Mayer, praised Dr. Coles for
his devotion to the poor and disenfranchised.

Tufts also presented honorary degrees to Yevgeny P. Velikhov, the vice president
of the Soviet Academy of Sciences; H. Dudley Wright, the president of Orbisphere
Corporation of Switzerland; Robert D. Ballard, an oceanographer who discovered
the wreckage of the Titanic; Shelby Cullom Davis, the former United States
Ambassador to Switzerland; Thomas R. Pickering, the United States Ambassador to
the United Nations; Elma Lewis, the founder of the National Center of
Afro-American Artists, and Weston Howland Jr., a trustee emeritus of the
university.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: photos: The Rev. Donald J. Harrington, St. John's president, who spoke
in his commencement address of recent accusations of a sexual assault in an
off-campus house.; Students attending the 120th commencement ceremonies at
Alumni Hall during graduation day yesterday at St. John's University in Queens.
(Photographs by Lee Romero for The New York Times)

                   Copyright 1990 The New York Times Company

                              179 of 288 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                   May 21, 1990, Monday, Late Edition - Final

L. Gordon Hill Dies; Retired General, 67

SECTION: Section B; Page 15, Column 2; National Desk

LENGTH: 232 words


Maj. Gen. L. Gordon Hill, retired, a former chief of public information for the
Army and its main press spokesman in Saigon in the late 1960's, died of cardiac
arrest on Friday at Fairfax (Va.) Hospital. He was 67 years old and lived in
Burke, Va.

General Hill retired in 1980 after serving for three years as commandant of the
Armed Forces Staff College in Norfolk, Va., having spent 38 years in the
military. His tour of duty in South Vietnam began in 1968, when the American
troop buildup there was reaching its peak.

A native of South Carolina, he was attending the University of South Carolina
when he enlisted in 1942. He spent World War II with the artillery in the United
States but served as executive officer of an artillery battalion in Korea in
1954.

His later assignments included those of battalion commander in West Germany and
chief of public affairs for the Army in Europe. He became press spokesman for
the Department of the Army and the Department of Defense after his return from
Vietnam.

General Hill is survived by his wife, Helen; a son, L. Gordon 3d of Charlotte,
N.C.; two daughters, Donna Lee Hill of Fairfax Station, Va., and Mary Ellen
Ridgewell of Tyro, Va.; his mother, Theo T. Hill of Florence, S.C.; two
brothers, William R. of Columbia, S.C., and Robert G. of Aiken, S.C.; a sister,
Tyler T. Hamrick of Winston-Salem, N.C., and seven grandchildren.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Obituary

                   Copyright 1990 The New York Times Company

                              180 of 288 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                   May 21, 1990, Monday, Late Edition - Final

Trinh Van Can Dies; Hanoi Archbishop, 69

BYLINE: AP

SECTION: Section B; Page 15, Column 2; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 174 words

DATELINE: BANGKOK, Thailand, May 20


Joseph Marie Cardinal Trinh Van Can, the Roman Catholic Archbishop of Hanoi,
died of a heart attack on Friday, the official Vietnam News Agency reported
today. He was 69 years old.

The Cardinal died at his office in the Vietnamese capital, said the report,
monitored here. A funeral will be held in Hanoi on Wednesday. The report said he
was the founding president of the Vietnam Episcopal Council and the apostolic
administrator of Hue Province, in central Vietnam, and of the dioceses of Hung
Hoa, Thai Binh and Thanh Hoa provinces, in the north.

The Vatican said Pope John Paul II sent a telegram of sympathy to Vietnam's
Auxiliary Bishop, Francois Xavier Nguyen Van Sang. Cardinal Can was born on
March 13, 1921, in Ha Nam Ninh Province, southeast of Hanoi. He entered the
priesthood in 1949, was made co-adjutor to the Archbishop of Hanoi in February
1963 and elevated to Cardinal in June 1979.

The authorities have eased restrictions on Catholics and other believers since
Nguyen Van Linh became Communist Party chief in late 1986.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Obituary

                   Copyright 1990 The New York Times Company

                              181 of 288 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                   May 21, 1990, Monday, Late Edition - Final

Memoirs From the I.B.M. Dynasty

BYLINE: By BARNABY J. FEDER

SECTION: Section D; Page 1, Column 3; Financial Desk

LENGTH: 1456 words


As a small boy in knee breeches, he tossed confetti made from keypunch cards,
was dragged along to sales conventions, and played on the Oriental rugs in the
Fifth Avenue office where his father ran the tabulating machine business that in
1924 became the International Business Machines Corporation. As an adult, Thomas
J. Watson Jr. led the company to such a sweeping dominance of the computer
industry that it became recognized around the world as a symbol of American
technological and marketing prowess.

Today, two decades after a heart attack prompted him to leave I.B.M., Mr. Watson
is busy reliving those days and the years that followed as he prepares for the
release on Wednesday of his memoirs.

Mr. Watson, who is 76 years old, is recalling the glory and the fame, the sales
calls, personnel policies, hirings and dismissals, new-product developments,
strategic battles and, perhaps more than anything, the lessons of the heart. The
years when Mr. Watson's executive skills were celebrated in the press were also
filled with behind-the-scenes rivalry with his father, sibling tensions and
other personal conflicts that he now relates to his own insecurities.

Example for Young Executives

''It may relieve young executives to know that someone who had everything going
their way was pretty scared, too,'' said Mr. Watson, a tall and trim man whose
relaxed, almost bemused manner during a recent visit to Manhattan from his
Connecticut home gave no hint of past travails.

There is more to Mr. Watson's resume than stunning business success. A lifelong
Democrat, he was a close friend and confidant of the Kennedys, one of the few
prominent American executives who opposed the nation's involvement in Vietnam
and an early advocate of arms negotiations with the Soviet Union to reduce the
threat of nuclear war. He was Ambassador to the Soviet Union at the end of the
Carter Administration, when the Soviets invaded Afghanistan.

But Mr. Watson's tale is largely the story of a man whose gifts took a long time
to emerge. He scraped through secondary school, suffering periodic bouts of deep
depression. He was admitted to Brown University as a favor to his father and
then barely managed to graduate. He received a monthly allowance that dwarfed
most families' incomes during those Depresssion years and he devoted the money
to partying and his first great passion, flying.

Coming to Grips With Father

Throughout these experiences, his World War II service in the Air Force and his
climb through I.B.M.'s ranks, Mr. Watson was burdened by fears that he could not
live up to or even come close to his domineering father's standards and
reputation. The potent mix of love and fear in their relationship, fed by the
temperamental disposition the two men shared, was rarely made public but was
frequently explosive.

In the memoirs, written with a Fortune magazine writer, Peter Petre, and titled
''Father, Son & Co.: My Life at I.B.M. and Beyond,'' Mr. Watson describes their
verbal battles during the years after World War II, when his father groomed him
to rise through I.B.M.'s executive ranks, as ''savage, primal and unstoppable.''

Driven to come to grips with his father by the memoir-writing process, Mr.
Watson also confronted his tensions with his younger brother, Arthur, whom he
initially perceived as a rival for corporate power. Later, as chief executive,
Mr. Watson forced his brother into a ''horse race'' with other executives to
succeed him, a decision he now views as ''the worst business and family mistake
I ever made.'' His brother was poorly equipped for the manufacturing assignment
he was given, which derailed his career and undermined their relationship.

Therapeutic Results

Mr. Watson had even poorer relations with his sister Jane. They stopped speaking
after she sold a million I.B.M. shares when he became chief executive in 1956.
They reconciled when he learned she had cancer.

Mr. Watson's memoir also looks at the impact of his behavior on other I.B.M.
executives, as well as on his wife and six children.

''I didn't have a therapeutic intent in mind when I started, but it turned out
that way,'' he said.

Had Mr. Watson foreseen such benefits, he might not have been so skeptical when
Andrew Heiskell, a longtime friend and former chief executive of Time Inc.,
began urging him to undertake the project. Mr. Heiskell first suggested the idea
when Mr. Watson returned in 1981 from 18-months of serving as Ambassador to the
Soviet Union. But Mr. Watson could not be persuaded to tackle the project until
1987.

''I had written a book about some sailing adventures with my daughter but
couldn't find a publisher,'' Mr. Watson said. ''I ended up having it printed
myself and resolved not to get involved in any more books.''

No Problem Finding a Publisher

Finding a publisher was no problem this time. Bantam Books expects the book to
be a smash hit. The publisher had an enormous pre-publication press run of
210,000 copies and says bookstores have already ordered more than 200,000 of
them.

Of course, I.B.M. itself, with more than 380,000 employees, tens of thousands of
former employees and 833,000 shareholders, should provide an important
foundation for sales. To Mr. Watson's embarrassment, some aggressive vendors
have been using mailing lists to solicit orders from the company's current and
former employees.

''I had to put an item in Think, the company magazine, stressing that this was
an entirely independent project,'' Mr. Watson said. Although he retains the
title chairman emeritus and a place on the company's advisory board, Mr. Watson
said that both posts were largely ceremonial. His major connection to the
company is an office in an education building three miles from its headquarters
in Armonk, N.Y. He occasionally is asked to give talks to new management
recruits.

'Never Felt Indispensable'

''I never felt indispensable at I.B.M.,'' Mr. Watson said, which might surprise
some executives who served under him. ''The company's progress since I left is
one of the things I'm proudest of.'' When asked about the company's recent
troubles as small computers and foreign competition erode its traditional
markets, he had nothing but praise for John F. Akers, the current chairman and
chief executive. ''He is operating in much tougher conditions than I did, or
anyone else who came after me.''

Like so much else in his life, such attitudes can be traced back to Mr. Watson's
father, whose flair for thinking big, selling creatively and cultivating respect
lifted him from youthful poverty to wealth and prominence far out of proportion
to I.B.M.'s actual size. By the middle of the Depression, the profit-sharing
management contract he had negotiated when he assumed control of the nearly
bankrupt company in 1914 was earning him $1,000 a day, making him the highest
paid executive in the United States. ''But Father never took the attitude that
no one else could have done what he did,'' Mr. Watson said.

The senior Watson became a devoted supporter of Franklin D. Roosevelt, a
political bent that has also been passed on. ''Money is a good measurement of
success, but it's not the only one,'' Mr. Watson said. ''I'm terribly disturbed
about the basic things you might measure our society by: the lack of medicine
for everyone at reasonable cost, inadequate care for the aged, and the poor
spread of income.''

Critique for Executives

If ''Father, Son & Co.'' becomes popular enough to create a new wave of interest
in Mr. Watson's views, some executives may not like what they will hear. ''Pay
differentials are an area of great potential abuse,'' he said. ''A lot of bonus
systems aren't fair, including the one I worked on that was derived from my
father's contract. And the proxies don't make it easy to see what people are
getting.''

Although he is reluctant to criticize individual companies' actions - like the
General Motors Corporation's recent move to increase the retirement compensation
of its chairman, Roger B. Smith, and other executives at a time when business is
weak - his blunt comment on executive salaries in general is: ''It's getting out
of hand. I would like to see some strong interbusiness group set some
standards.''

In general, though, Mr. Watson does not appear to be looking for any new
campaigns. He is anticipating more sailing adventures, like his trips to the
Antarctic and the Arctic with his grandson Willy. And he seems to be treasuring
the greatest discovery of his effort to relive the many good fortunes handed him
and what he did with them: ''I don't think I could have said this 10 years ago,
but I now believe I could have done reasonably well even with just average
breaks.''

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo: Thomas J. Watson Jr. (Don Hogan Charles/The New York Times)

                   Copyright 1990 The New York Times Company

                              182 of 288 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                  May 22, 1990, Tuesday, Late Edition - Final

Ohioan Gets High Navy Post

BYLINE: AP

SECTION: Section A; Page 18, Column 5; National Desk

LENGTH: 60 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, May 21


The Pentagon today announced the appointment of Ben Rose, a lawyer in Lima,
Ohio, and former leader of the Republican minority in the Ohio House of
Representatives, as Deputy Assistant Secretary of the Navy for installations and
the environment. Mr. Rose was a Navy officer from 1961 to 1966, serving on an
Atlantic fleet destroyer and later in Vietnam.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1990 The New York Times Company

                              183 of 288 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 May 23, 1990, Wednesday, Late Edition - Final

BUSINESS DIGEST

SECTION: Section D; Page 1, Column 1; Financial Desk

LENGTH: 596 words





The Economy


The assets of the fund that insures bank deposits fell last year to their lowest
levels, as a percentage of insured deposits, since the fund was established in
the early 1930's. [Page A1.]

Legislation barring discrimination against the disabled in the workplace was
passed overwhelmingly by the House. [A1.]

Administration officials told Congressional budget negotiators that aid to
failing savings and loans could add $61 billion to the Federal deficit in the
next fiscal year. Also, the Treasury plans to acknowledge that the cost of the
bailout has risen sharply. [A27.]

Neil Bush failed to file a required form in 1986 when he approved Silverado
loans to a business partner, regulators said. [D1.]

The trustees of the Financial Accounting Standards Board agreed to make it
harder for the board to create new rules, responding to criticism from the
business community. [D1.]

Ivan F. Boesky testified in public for the first time, providing details of the
crimes he said he committed. [D1.]



Companies


A bill allowing the seven Bell regionals to design, manufacture and sell home
telephones was approved by a Senate panel. [D1.]

About 30 personal computer makers said they would include Microsoft's new
Windows 3.0 with computers they sell. [D2.]

Exxon said an out-of-court settlement with Transnor had been reached in a
dispute over the pricing of crude oil. [D4.]

A former Wall Street Journal editor sued Dow Jones, saying his reputation was
injured when the paper dismissed him. [C18.]

At the convention of the cable television inustry, there is relief that
Government regulation may not be so bad. [D19.]

International


Brazil's radical new economic plan means frozen prices in supermarkets, a
welcome respite after recent price jumps. [A1.] Midland Bank is setting up a
$1.5 billion fund of Brazilian bank debt to trade for shares in state-owned
companies. [D1.]

President Bush has decided to renew China's trade benefits for another year,
concluding that the potential harm to American companies and to reform-minded
Chinese outweighed a desire to register disapproval of Beijing, officials said.
[A1.]

The U.S. has found ''possible irregularities,'' which may include kickbacks, in
the Iraqi Government's purchases of American agricultural commodities. [D2.]

Business Technology


Detectors capable of sniffing out even the best-concealed explosive are being
developed by a dozen companies in several countries, pushed by growing fears of
terrorist attacks. [D7.]

Sony has recently developed a computer circuitry for its top-of-the-line set
that it says markedly improves screen clarity. [D7.]



Markets


Stocks fluctuated broadly before ending with a modest gain, and another record.
The Dow closed at 2,852.23, up 7.55. [D8.] Prices of Treasury securities rose in
active trading. [D16.]

The dollar gained ground against most currencies, mainly the mark, but dropped
against the yen. [D17.] Cocoa futures prices rose to 14-month highs. [D17.]



Today's Columns


World War II veterans did better financially than Vietnam veterans. Two
economists have a theory on untangling this puzzle. Peter Passell: Economic
Scene. [D2.]

Cable TV stocks have taken off, rising roughly 10 percent in the last three
trading days. Market Place. [D8.]

A study of the communications media in Eastern Europe and the Soviet Union was
released by D'Arcy Masius Benton & Bowles. Randall Rothenberg: Advertising.
[D19.]

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Summary

                   Copyright 1990 The New York Times Company

                              184 of 288 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 May 23, 1990, Wednesday, Late Edition - Final

Economic Scene;
War Is No Way To Start a Career

BYLINE: By Peter Passell

SECTION: Section D; Page 2, Column 1; Financial Desk

LENGTH: 758 words


WAR, as everyone knows, is not good for children and other living things. What
is more debatable, however, is war's long-term effect on adults who make it back
to civilian life.

Studies after World War II showed that soldiers had served themselves by serving
Uncle Sam: on average, male veterans have outearned non-veterans by 10 to 20
percent. But soldiers of the Vietnam years have earned 10 to 20 percent less in
the civilian job market.

One often-cited explanation for the contrast is job discrimination. Employers,
goes the argument, want nothing to do with those who were exposed to the
demoralizing effects of drugs and defeat. Others think the difference in
veterans' work experience says more about recruitment than about life in the
military. World War II veterans, they argue, were the best and the brightest; in
Vietnam the Army was forced to draw disproportionately from the poor and
untrained.

Now, two economists, Joshua Angrist of Harvard and Alan Krueger of Princeton,
have hit upon an ingenious way to untangle the puzzle. In both wars, they
discovered, draft procedures created an arbitrary link between birth dates and
the probability of serving in the armed forces. And in both, men with no
distinguishing characteristic other than being born on the wrong date earned
substantially less in civilian life than men who lucked out.

The Angrist-Krueger analysis of World War II veterans, published as a working
paper by the National Bureau of Economic Research, makes use of the fact that
draft boards drew on the pool of men in simple chronological order of their
birth. Roughly 75 percent of the men born in the first six months of 1926 ended
up in the military. Thereafter, the probability declined quarter by quarter:
Just 22 percent of those born near the end of 1928 ever served.

It seems unlikely that youth alone was, in itself, a key to success in the
postwar labor market. But strikingly, younger workers earned more, strongly
suggesting that military service was a handicap. The authors calculate that
adjusted for other factors, World War II veterans have earned about 5 percent
less over the decades.

Mr. Angrist's study of Vietnam experience, to be published in June in the
American Economic Review, exploits an even sharper statistical distinction.
During the Vietnam War, birth-date lotteries were used to set draft priorities
within each group coming of draft age. In 1971, for example, 20-year-olds born
on the first 125 dates chosen like the numbers in Lotto were eligible; the rest
were exempt.

Most draft-eligibles never served. Still, draft status made a big difference:
Two eligibles in seven ended up in uniform, compared with just one exempt in
seven. By matching birth dates with earnings data, Mr. Angrist figures that
military service during Vietnam reduced average earnings for white males by
about 15 percent. The earnings of non-whites did not seem to be affected.

The enduring psychological damage from combat may play a role for the relatively
small percentage of veterans who were ever under fire. But Mr. Angrist's
interpretation of the earnings deficit is more straightforward: Skills acquired
in the military do not make up for the lost years of civilian experience. Nor,
apparently, does that modest privilege of veteran status, G.I. Bill education
subsidies.

The trade-off is closer for non-whites, Mr. Angrist speculates, because they
entered the Army with fewer skills and left fewer opportunities behind.

The numbers offer a new perspective on an old issue. Americans have long
rationalized tight limits on assistance to war veterans on the ground that the
time spent in uniform was an advantage in later life. In fact, it appears to be
quite costly, at least for men who were not already victims of poverty or
discrimination.

The results might also lead to second thoughts about the use of national service
as a means of giving the underclass a second chance to gain the discipline
needed to succeed in a middle-class world.

Mr. Angrist's numbers suggest no net benefits for recruits who met the Army's
minimum standards. Nor does a recently published analysis of the post-military
earnings of low-aptitude recruits, admitted to the Army under a special
dispensation during the 1960's and 1970's. Indeed, according to the Human
Resources Research Organization in Alexandria, Va., veterans of ''Project
100,000'' did less well in the civilian job market than comparably skilled
non-veterans.

War may make men out of boys. It does not seem to make them better breadwinners.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Drawing

                   Copyright 1990 The New York Times Company

                              185 of 288 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                  May 24, 1990, Thursday, Late Edition - Final

Thai Reports Accord on Cambodian Truce

BYLINE: AP

SECTION: Section A; Page 15, Column 5; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 180 words

DATELINE: BANGKOK, Thailand, May 23


The four warring factions in Cambodia have agreed to sign a cease-fire pact
soon, Thailand's Prime Minister, Chatichai Choonhavan, was quoted as saying
today.

''It is certain that the four Cambodian factions have agreed to sign a
cease-fire agreement soon,'' the official Thai radio quoted Mr. Chatichai as
telling reporters after he conferred in Bangkok on Tuesday with Foreign Minister
Nguyen Co Thach of Vietnam. The Vietnamese back the Phnom Penh Government in its
battle against the three guerrilla groups.

If a pact is signed, it would be the first significant agreement reached in the
11 years since Vietnam invaded Cambodia. In the past, however, all sides to the
conflict have gone back on promises of agreements.

Talks on the Cambodian conflict are scheduled to be held in Tokyo June 4 and 5,
and Mr. Chatichai is a key mediator.

All of the Cambadian factions except the Khmer Rouge have suggested that they
would attend the Tokyo talks. Vietnam invaded Cambodia in late 1978, ending
nearly four years of brutal Khmer Rouge rule, and then installed Mr. Hun Sen.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1990 The New York Times Company

                              186 of 288 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                  May 24, 1990, Thursday, Late Edition - Final

Death Among the Disturbed: Were Police Inattentive?

BYLINE: By SELWYN RAAB

SECTION: Section B; Page 1, Column 2; Metropolitan Desk

LENGTH: 1541 words


Alice Richman died last July after she was found on the floor of an elevator
bleeding from severe head and body wounds. Two months later the decomposed and
battered body of Gladys Landau was discovered in a padlocked closet.

Both women died under mysterious circumstances and both had suffered broken ribs
and head injuries, but their deaths at a Queens home for the mentally ill were
not classified or investigated as murders by New York City authorities until
April, eight months after the first homicide.

State mental health officials say the cases at the Queens residence, the Leben
Home for Adults in Elmhurst, raise questions about how diligently local
authorities investigate suspicious deaths of psychiatric patients in New York
State. Some law-enforcement officials, who spoke on condition of anonymity, said
the police apparently give such deaths a low investigative priority because it
is often hard for them to find trustworthy witnesses in psychiatric
institutions.

That view is shared by Clarence J. Sundram, the chairman of the state Commission
on the Quality of Care for the Mentally Disabled. ''Sometimes there is a
tendency by law enforcement to pay less attention to deaths of people in these
homes than deaths in the general community,'' he said.

The day after Ms. Richman died, detectives closed out her case as an apparent
accident, attributing the 49-year-old woman's death to self-inflicted injuries.
And although an autopsy showed that the 72-year-old Mrs. Landau had suffered
five broken ribs and a head wound before her body was found in a closet,
detectives originally said they were uncertain if she had been a homicide
victim.

A grandson of Mrs. Landau said a detective told him that her case would be
difficult to solve as a murder because the police were ''dealing with a crazy
population.''

In the aftermath of both deaths, now reclassified as murders, there were these
developments:

* Mr. Sundram described the initial Police Department investigations ''as
appearing to be cursory'' in the Richman case and as ''failing to follow up
leads aggressively'' in the Landau case.

* The commander of the detective squad that investigated the deaths, Lieut.
Edward Wellinghoff, said the inquiries were hampered when city pathologists
waited until April to designate both deaths murders. The city's Chief Medical
Examiner, Dr. Charles S. Hirsch, acknowledged that pathologists in Queens were
tardy in determining that the women were homicide victims. The delays, he
asserted, were partly due to a lack of information from the police.

* Mrs. Landau's roommate, Virginia Tooker, was arrested in April and charged
with murdering the woman. The authorities said Ms. Tooker had confessed to
pushing Mrs. Landau into a closet. But Ms. Tooker's lawyer said the woman was
innocent and was being made into a scapegoat to deflect charges of police
incompetence. The killing of Mrs. Richman remains unsolved.

With 361 beds, the Leben Home, at 88-08 45th Avenue in Elmhurst, is the largest
privately run residence in the city for people who have been discharged from
mental hospitals. Last year it received more than $3 million in Federal and
state Supplemental Social Security benefits, or $8,832 for each resident. It has
been licensed as a propietary, or profit-making, residence since 1979.

The principal owner, Alex Edelman, and the home's administrator, Israel Gombo,
refused to discuss either the killings or a report by the Quality of Care
commission in which living conditions at the home were described as generally
''deplorable.'' Terrance McGrath, a spokesman for the state Social Services
Department, which licensed the home, said Leben is being reinspected to
determine if its operating certificate should be renewed.

A Lifetime in Institutions

Ms. Richman, who grew up in the Bronx, had been in and out of mental
institutions all her life. She moved into Leben in May 1974 after being
discharged from a state mental hospital.

Last July 12, about 11 P.M., Ms. Richman was found semiconscious and covered
with blood in an elevator. She died two hours later, having never revived enough
to be questioned.

On July 13 an autopsy by Dr. Ernest Jean, an associate medical examiner in
Queens, found that Ms. Richman had multiple contusions and abrasions of the face
and neck, multiple rib fractures and injuries to the liver that caused internal
bleeding.

Dr. Jean's report listed the cause of death as ''undetermined,'' stating: ''The
deceased was stuck in an elevator and banged herself against the wall of the
elevator and guard rail, according to police report.''

The case was assigned to the 110th Precinct in Elmhurst. Lieutenant Wellinghoff,
commander of its detective squad, said in an interview that he was unfamiliar
with early details of the investigation because he had been at another precinct
until April 16. But after reviewing the records, he said, he concluded that
detectives ''felt it was an accident.''

'She Might Have Panicked'

''They felt she might have panicked when the elevator got stuck and her injuries
possibly were self-inflicted,'' the lieutenant added.

Police reports said there was no blood on the metal walls of the elevator when
Ms. Richman was found. Robert D. Alexander, an assistant district attorney in
Queens who is in charge of the office's homicide bureau, said in an interview
that the absence of blood suggested that Ms. Richman had not flung herself
against the walls.

Mrs. Landau had lived at Leben since 1976. Born in Poland, she emmigrated to the
United States with her husband, Charles, a cantor, and made her home in the
Bronx and Manhattan. She began having severe emotional problems after her
youngest son, Morton, a rabbi and Army chaplain, was killed in 1968 in the
Vietnam War.

Last Sept. 20, the police found Mrs. Laundau's body in a locked closet in a
basement bedroom that she shared with Ms. Tooker. The next day, Dr. Nadia
Savitsky, an associate medical examiner in Queens, noted in an autopsy report
under cause of death: ''Fractures of ribs, contusion of scalp. Pending Police
Investigation.'' A grandson of Mrs. Landau, Jeffrey C. Singer, 28, said that in
early October he went to the 110th Precinct headquarters and met with the
detective in charge of the investigation, Manuel Gomez.

''Gomez was distressing,'' Mr. Singer recalled in an interview. ''He seemed to
advocate that my grandmother went voluntarily into the closet.''

Mr. Singer said Detective Gomez told him that Ms. Tooker had been questioned
about Mrs. Landau's death but that she appeared to be incoherent. ''He implied
that the case was not really a homicide because you're dealing with a crazy
population,'' Mr. Singer said, quoting the detective.

Detective Gomez refused to be interviewed about remarks attributed to him by Mr.
Singer.

In late September the Commission on the Quality of Care began an inquiry led by
Raymond R. Barron, a senior commission investigator. Afterward, the commission
said Mr. Barron had uncovered witnesses - professional staff members and a
resident - who contradicted the police conclusion that Ms. Richman had probably
panicked and deliberately injured herself.

Mr. Barron also reported that detectives assigned to the Landau case had
insisted that there was ''no evidence of a homicide'' despite circumstantial and
forensic evidence that she had been assaulted, the commission said.

Dr. Hirsch, the Chief Medical Examiner, said that he learned of Mr. Barron's
findings in February or March and that he then personally reviewed both autopsy
reports. On April 20, he said, he reclassified Ms. Richman's death as a
homicide; on the same day, Dr. Savitsky reclassified Mrs. Landau's death as a
homicide.

The Queens District Attorney, John J. Santucci, said he had been unaware of the
deaths until early April, when he received a letter from Mrs. Landau's son,
Rabbi Norman E. Singer. Mr. Santucci said he then ordered ''reinvestigations by
the police'' into both cases.

Asked if the police had given the cases low priorities because they concerned
psychiatric patients, Mr. Santucci, said: ''They may have been treated too
routinely. I'm not sure.''

Tests for Mental Competence

Ms. Tooker, 47 years old, was arrested in the Laundau case on April 18 ,
Lieutenant Wellinghoff said. She was indicted by a state grand jury in Queens on
charges of manslaughter, reckless endangerment and unlawful imprisonment and is
undergoing a court-ordered examination to determine if she is mentally fit to
stand trial.

''She denies any knowledge of the killing and denies making a confession,'' Ms.
Tooker's lawyer, Scott Brettschneider, said. He maintained that Ms. Tooker, who
is 5 feet 2 inches tall and weighs 130 pounds, was too frail to have assaulted
Mrs. Landau, who was an inch taller and 25 pounds heavier than Ms. Tooker.

More than 150 of Mrs. Landau's relatives and friends attended her funeral and
burial last September in Williamsport, Pa., where Rabbi Singer lives.

Except for the hearse driver and two gravediggers, the only person at Ms.
Richman's funeral in July was her psychotherapist, Vivian Corso. ''I made a
heart-shaped wreath and put it on her grave,'' Ms. Corso said. ''It was a sad
finish to her life.''

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1990 The New York Times Company

                              187 of 288 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                  May 24, 1990, Thursday, Late Edition - Final

Book Accusing U.S. of P.O.W. Coverup Stirs a Dispute

BYLINE: By EDWIN McDOWELL

SECTION: Section C; Page 21, Column 1; Cultural Desk

LENGTH: 911 words


A book accusing the United States Government of covering up the existence of
American prisoners of war still being held in Southeast Asia has become the
center of a bitter legal and publishing dispute. The authors charge that Bantam
Books turned down the book because of pressure from Government officials, while
Bantam officials insist they turned it down because it was editorially flawed
and vulnerable to lawsuits from Government officials named in the manuscript.

The book is ''Kiss the Boys Goodbye: How the United States Betrayed Its Own
P.O.W.'s in Vietnam,'' by William Stevenson and Monika Jensen, who are husband
and wife and live in Canada. After Bantam rejected their book last January, a
Canadian publisher bought world rights and sold the American rights to E. P.
Dutton. Dutton plans to publish it this fall with a first printing of 100,000
copies, several times the average first printing.

In June 1989, the authors filed a lawsuit in Federal District Court in Manhattan
charging Bantam with breach of contract and not acting in good faith. Bantam
countersued, seeking to recover $166,666 -that portion of the $300,000 advance
that it had already paid the authors. It also moved unsuccessfully for a summary
judgment dismissing the case. Publishing industry executives say the
controversy, which was first reported in the May 18 issue of Publishers Weekly,
appears to be a harbinger of many more such disputes -especially where big-money
contracts are involved and where manuscripts are controversial and thus likely
to invite lawsuits.

''People in publishing are terrified of libel suits; they really are having a
chilling effect,'' said Martin Garbus, who is the lawyer for Penguin U.S.A.,
which owns Dutton.

Criticism by Authors

Authors, in turn, are critical of what they say is the growing tendency of some
publishers to cancel contracts on legal or editorial grounds, rather than take
time to make them libel-proof and editorially acceptable.

Some literary agents and even editors say privately that some houses find it
more cost-effective simply to cancel a contract, rather than spend a lot of time
rewriting and reshaping manuscripts. And they contend that a growing number of
manuscripts are being rejected because market conditions may have changed
between the time the book was signed up and the manuscript delivered, or because
the editor who signed up the book has since departed and other editors do not
want to inherit a manuscript they regard as a step-child.

''Kiss the Boys Goodbye'' contends that a number of American servicemen are
still being held against their will by Vietnam or its allies. Further, it
contends that a number of public officials have sought to suppress the
information.

''I suppose the most obvious reason for the suppression given in the book is
political,'' said Eugene R. Scheiman, the lawyer for the authors. ''It says some
of the P.O.W.'s were captured in the secret wars our Government engaged in, in
Laos, for example.''

Paul Gitlin, the literary agent for the authors, said that in the summer of 1988
he had received a letter from a lawyer for Richard Armitage, an Assistant
Secretary of Defense. The letter, he said, criticized articles that Mr.
Stevenson had written for Canadian newspapers about American servicemen missing
in Southeast Asia. Mr. Gitlin said he had passed along the letter to Ms. Jensen,
who considered it an implied threat against the book, and he said she had then
informed her editor at Bantam of the letter.

'Took Their Suggestions'

Ms. Jensen, formerly a producer for ''60 Minutes,'' contends that Bantam looked
for reasons to reject their book after she had told them of the letter. ''We had
worked on the book for two years with their encouragement, and we took their
suggestions,'' she said. ''Then after they changed the whole tenor of the book,
they rejected it.'' Mr. Stevenson has written many books, including ''A Man
Called Intrepid'' and ''90 Minutes at Entebbe.''

But Bantam officials have a different version. ''We have never to this date seen
that letter,'' said Harriette K. Dorsen, the general counsel for Bantam
Doubleday Dell. ''The authors told us about it long after we rejected the
manuscript. And well before they even got the letter they were accusing this
company of bowing to pressure from the C.I.A. and the National Security Agency.
There is no way this company would bow to pressure from the outside.''

The book was rejected, Ms. Dorsen said, because it was legally and editorially
unacceptable. It was sent to outside counsel for additional examination, she
said, and he, too, concluded that the manuscript posed legal problems. Moreover,
Bantam oficials said the authors were not able to identify any American
prisoners being held in Southeast Asia.

Mr. Gitlin said the authors were willing to address Bantam's concerns. ''We
offered to make all necessary changes,'' he said. ''We offered to give names of
sources.'' Mr. Gitlin then sold world rights to McClelland & Stewart in Toronto,
a leading Canadian publisher, which sold American hard-cover and paperback
rights to Dutton.

Douglas Gibson, the publisher of McClelland & Stewart, said he had found the
book persuasive. ''One or two names the authors would have liked to use had to
be deleted, but others will be in the book,'' he said. ''We've gone to great
lengths to make sure the book is watertight legally.'' Bertelsmannd(Bantam
Books)Pearsond(E. P. Dutton)

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1990 The New York Times Company

                              188 of 288 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                   May 25, 1990, Friday, Late Edition - Final

Dang Viet Chau; Vietnamese Official

BYLINE: AP

SECTION: Section D; Page 18, Column 2; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 86 words

DATELINE: BANGKOK, Thailand, May 24


Dang Viet Chau, a former Deputy Prime Minister of Vietnam, died of a brain
hemorrhage on Monday in Hanoi, the official Hanoi radio said. No age was given.

Mr. Chau died at the Vietnam-U.S.S.R. Friendship Hospital, said the broadcast, a
text of which was seen in Bangkok today.

The radio said he held the post of Deputy Prime Minister in Republic of Vietnam,
which was established after North Vietnam defeated South Vietnam in April 1975.
He was Finance Minister of North Vietnam in the waning years of the war.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Obituary

                   Copyright 1990 The New York Times Company

                              189 of 288 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                   May 27, 1990, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

Amid Doubts, Cambodian Factions Agree to Truce

BYLINE: AP

SECTION: Section 1; Part 1, Page 5, Column 1; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 411 words

DATELINE: ANYAPRATHET, Thailand, May 26


Cambodia's four warring factions have signed a cease-fire that is to take effect
next month, but one guerrilla official today called the agreement a mere ''play
on words.''

Senior guerrilla officials said the parties agreed to a cease-fire and the
formation of a Supreme National Council that would include representatives from
each faction and oversee the truce.

The truce will go into effect when it is announced officially at Cambodian peace
talks scheduled in Tokyo on June 4 and June 5, said the officials, who spoke on
condition of anonymity. The parties will also announce that peace talks will be
resumed in Paris in July, they said.

The 11-year-old Cambodian war pits the Vietnam-backed Government in Phnom Penh
against a three-party guerrilla coalition that includes the Communist Khmer
Rouge, the non-Communist Khmer People's National Liberation Front and a faction
loyal to Prince Norodom Sihanouk, the coalition's nominal leader.

Guerrillas and diplomats said they expected renewed fighting before the Tokyo
meeting as the guerrillas try to gain ground and strengthen their bargaining
positions. A guerrilla spokesman, Ok Serei Sopheak of the National Liberation
Front, said a truce would not end the fighting.

''It is only a document,'' he said. ''It is a play on words. There will be no
cease-fire on the ground.''

The National Liberation Front began major attacks on Friday against the
Government-held town, Svay Chek, in northwestern Cambodia. Guerrillas said that
4,000 fighters were involved.

''We believe that an effective cease-fire must be controlled by the United
Nations,'' Mr. Ok Serei Sopheak said. ''Otherwise, the fighting will continue.
We see a cease-fire as an element of a larger solution.'' Prime Minister
Chatichai Choonhavan of Thailand, a major mediator in the conflict, said last
week that the pact would be signed. The guerrilla sources said the agreement had
been initialed by Gen. Chavalit Yongchaiyudh, Thailand's powerful Defense
Minister.

Khmer Rouge's Dark Past

The Khmer Rouge, which ruled from April 1975 to December 1978, is responsible
for a brutal restructuring of Cambodian society that left at least a million
people dead.

The Vietnamese drove the Khmer Rouge from power in January 1979 and installed
another government.

The current Government objects to any participation in a future government by
the Khmer Rouge, but China, the guerrillas' main supplier, says the Khmer Rouge
must be included.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1990 The New York Times Company

                              190 of 288 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                   May 27, 1990, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

Review/Music;
Fatuousness of Politic In Cycle at La Mama

BYLINE: By JOHN ROCKWELL

SECTION: Section 1; Part 2, Page 58, Column 5; Cultural Desk

LENGTH: 450 words


Conrad Cummings, a composer who teaches at Oberlin Conservatory in Ohio but who
regularly appears with his ensemble in lower Manhattan, offered two works of
musical quasi-theater Monday night at the Club La Mama. The evening was part of
La Mama's New Music 1990 series at its space at 74A East Fourth Street.

The two works were a 22-minute cycle called ''Insertions.'' and an ''unstaged''
53-minute song cycle, ''Photo Op'' - unstaged meaning, presumably, that it was
intended for concert performance. Why this should be so remained unclear.

''Photo Op,'' to words by James Siena, clearly was of a piece, an eminently
stageable morality revue about the fatuousness of American politics,
Presidential campaigns in particular. ''Insertions'' was more a traditional song
cycle, with words by Mr. Siena, Hanon Reznikov, Michael Blumenthal and Vikram
Seth. It, too, had a political edge, but also opened out to more general themes
of love and death.

The most immediate influence on Mr. Cummings's style is Philip Glass. Mr. Glass
was thanked in the program, and the singer in his ensemble, Dora Ohrenstein, was
Mr. Cummings's soprano on Monday.

But Mr. Cummings is his own man; what was perhaps most impressive about his
music was his ability to change styles depending on the provider of the texts,
yet to retain a compositional image. Most of the texts were by Mr. Siena, and
they received a Glassian treatment, full of fleet, incantatory repetition and
sweeping kinetic energy, with Mr. Cummings at an electronic keyboard dominating
the texture.

But in the non-Siena ''Insertions'' poems, Mr. Cummings showed a deft ability to
expand and deepen his idiom. Here, more reliance was placed on the other
instrumentalists in his ensemble - Gregory Fulkerson, violinist and violist;
Daryl Goldberg, cellist, and Andrew Sterman, winds (Eric Santaniello received a
credit for ''sound mix,'' another habit picked up from the Glass Ensemble). Mr.
Cummings showed a nice lyrical gift as well as real ingenuity in eliciting
unusual coloristic combinations from his limited sonic palette.

Miss Ohrenstein and the other singer, Larry Adams, a baritone, handled their
often difficult tasks with flair, and ample timbral appeal as well. Those tasks
included rapid-fire reiterations of textual fragments and often complex
chromatic lines.

The evening as a whole proved appealing without reaching very deep into
profundity. Mr. Cummings is working now on a three-act opera about the war in
Vietnam. Perhaps when it is staged and he allows himself time to dig into his
characters and ideas, his talents will not only sustain the energy and charm of
''Photo Op,'' but also fulfill the promise of ''Insertions.''

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Review

                   Copyright 1990 The New York Times Company

                              191 of 288 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                   May 27, 1990, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

FILM;
Man and Boy Confront the Images of War

BYLINE: By THOMAS BIRD; Thomas Bird, the artistic director of the Vietnam
Veterans Ensemble Theater Company in New York, produced the play ''Tracers'' and
co-produced ''Dear America: Letters Home From Vietnam'' for HBO, which received
Emmy and Peabody awards.

SECTION: Section 2; Page 11, Column 1; Arts and Leisure Desk

LENGTH: 2343 words


In February 1966, after an all-day fight with a North Vietnamese unit in the
Bong Son plains, my company was flown to an airstrip near the beautiful South
China Sea. We had taken some casualties, we were angry and frustrated and we
needed a rest.

We bivouacked in a cemetery where all the gravestones had swastikas on them.
Looking again, I realized they were inverted and were Buddhist symbols. Three
hours later, after we'd stripped off our gear, set up our pup tents and were
beginning to unwind, we were told, ''Saddle up and move across the road to the
other airstrip.'' We were going out into the plains to chase after the enemy
again. We were so angry we couldn't speak.

We moved onto a muddy road flanked by drainage ditches filled with water. I lost
my footing and slipped into the ditch, went under the muddy water and came up
and out, screaming, ''This ain't a war movie! This ain't a John Wayne movie!'' I
started to laugh, and all the guys in the column started laughing, too, because
they also got it. Vietnam wasn't a war movie.

It took me six months in Vietnam to wake up and turn all the World War II movies
off in my mind. They could no longer help me deflect reality, black out the pain
and anger or justify me as the good American who had come to rescue Vietnamese
by killing Vietnamese. Why? Because they were really propaganda films. After
seeing the movie ''Born on the Fourth of July'' I realized once again that I was
made for the Vietnam War. I grew up on the same parade grounds of Long Island at
the same time as Ron Kovic, the author of the book on which the movie is based.

Like him, as a child I loved to go to the Memorial Day parade. My father was a
decorated World War II hero. I used to love to look at his medals and hear his
stories about running a field hospital for General Patton as the Third Army
crossed Europe, especially how they liberated the Mauthausen concentration camp
in Austria. I wanted to be like my father, like the soldiers of World War II.

As a kid I used to watch all the World War II movies I could. I didn't know they
were propaganda films meant to inspire the public to support and help win the
war. I didn't know that in 1942 the newly created Office of War Information
exerted censorship pressure on Hollywood to make propaganda films. O.W.I. made
Hollywood film makers answer several questions before making a movie, the first
of which was, ''Will this picture help win the war?'' It also asked them to
avoid false escapist films, to contribute something new to the country's
understanding of the conflict, to avoid using the war as a basis for profit and
to tell the truth so young people could not say they were misled by propaganda.
As necessary as the propaganda was at the time, when I was a kid soaking up
those movies years later, their purpose had already been served.

From ''Bataan'' and ''Wake Island,'' two films that told of American losses to
the brutal Japanese, to ''Guadalcanal Diary'' and ''Gung Ho,'' which were about
American victories over faceless Japanese hordes, the aim was to portray
Americans positively. In all these movies the Americans were the stars and our
mission was crystal clear. I grew up believing that was the way life was
supposed to be. I embraced those movies because I thought they were based on
real life.

My favorite World War II movie was ''A Walk in the Sun,'' with Dana Andrews,
about an American unit searching for German soldiers who are found hiding in a
farmhouse in Italy. I loved its close-ups of the perfectly balanced,
all-American platoon and the depiction of American bravery, especially the men
who crossed the farm field and flushed out the faceless Germans. This movie,
more than any other, would rerun in my mind years later as I crossed rice paddy
dikes in Vietnam moving toward a local farmer's house or tree line. It stopped
once and for all the first time the tree line opened up in a blaze of fire and
mortars were popped in our rear, trapping us in the open. We were lucky; we had
things the enemy didn't: gunships, artillery, fighter jets, napalm.

I wonder about the war movies today's children see. Are the movies about Vietnam
offering up a new agenda or are they serving old agendas?

As children, when my friends and I played war, we imitated the movies. My Dad
would buy me the guns and gear I asked for so I'd look the best in my part. I'd
kill the imaginary Japanese and Nazis over and over, and I loved it. If I got
wounded, I'd take it stoically and fight on. If I got killed, I'd always have
time for one last cigarette, time to tell a buddy to say goodbye to my Mom and
Dad.

Then my Mom would call me to dinner, and war would be over until the next day,
when I would kill more hated Japanese and Nazis. This was my first basic
training course.

My second was catechism class. The nuns taught us that godless Communism -
sounded like Nazism to me - was the biggest enemy of America and of the church.
The most evil were the Chinese Communists.

The nuns asked, ''What would you do if the Communists attacked Long Island?''
I'd yell, ''I'll attack and kill 'em!'' I fantasized about fighting Communists
at Jones Beach.

At 18, I went into the Army to grow up and become a man. After real basic
training, I volunteered for Vietnam. I was told, ''Don't worry, you're all
going.'' It was spring 1965. I wasn't sure where Vietnam was, but I was sure of
our mission, fighting Communism.

I was in the First Cavalry Division. President Johnson deployed us on national
television on July 28, 1965, to help the South Vietnamese defend themselves
against an invasion from the Chinese-backed North Vietnamese and from an
insurgency in the south. It felt great. A noble mission in my life. I was going
to do what my Dad and the other men of World War II had done, save the world. We
were 20,000 men and 500 helicopters, and we were going to end the war in six
months.

Our landing in South Vietnam was like World War II: front-page news worldwide.
When I landed, I climbed off the aircraft carrier down wet net ladders, exactly
like my father did when he landed off the coast of Normandy. From the ladders, I
got into a World War II landing craft. My memories and fantasies of the films of
World War II seemed to merge and project on what I was seeing.

After being welcomed ashore by Gen. William Westmoreland, I noticed hordes of
happy children, friendly, hard-working women, extreme poverty, paradiselike
beauty - and the abandoned garrisons and airstrips of the French. But nothing
had prepared me for the experience soon to come.

The fishnet full of dead Vietcong suspended from the hook of a giant helicopter
that looked like a praying mantis. The rows and rows of dead Americans covered
in ponchos. The grenading and collapsing of an underground field hospital that
suffocated its screaming inhabitants to death.

The disemboweled chopper crew hung upside down. Learning to patrol from a
Montagnard who could read the jungle perfectly because it was his home, not
mine. Giving piggyback rides to laughing children. Sex for $4. Eating charcoal
with lepers.

A year later I was home. I was no hero. I was numb. I did a stint as a drill
sergeant at Fort Dix, N.J. I taught the bayonet, the spirit of which is ''to
kill.'' I used to stand on my platform and whip my 200 trainees into a frenzy
about killing. But unlike my counterpart in Stanley Kubrick's 1987 film, ''Full
Metal Jacket,'' deep down I knew I should be teaching classes in how to deal
with death. I didn't know anyone in Vietnam who was prepared to handle death.
But it was 1966, we were winning and I didn't have the guts to buck the system.

At night I needed a pint of whisky to help me sleep. I was guilty. I could walk.
I wasn't a big hero. I hadn't done enough. I'd been afraid. I was alive.  My Dad
said to put the war behind me and get on with my life. I sprinted with that:
college, football, dating and bumper stickers on my new car - ''America: Love It
or Leave It.'' In the fall of 1967, I asked antiwar demonstrators protesting two
Marines recruiting on campus to leave them alone. One demonstrator called me a
war criminal. I broke his jaw, got arrested and was thrown out of school. I told
the judge I was only defending my honor. The judge said I was guilty. A
court-appointed doctor decided the tranquilizer Thorazine was to be my
treatment. I don't remember seeing that in any World War II movie.

Toward the end of World War II, John Huston made a documentary about
shell-shocked veterans, ''Let There Be Light.'' It follows a group of veterans
in a Government-run clinic from day to day, week to week, and shows how they
slowly break out of the darkness of their war memories and recover their
confidence and humor. They are eventually reunited with their families and leave
for a new life. The Pentagon impounded the film, and it was not released until
after the Vietnam War. No reason for withholding it was ever given. Was it too
powerful, too truthful? If a man suffers shell shock in combat, there is still a
sense that he's a coward. A lot of World War II veterans initially reacted to
Vietnam veterans that way. If ''Let There Be Light'' had been released, would
Americans be a bit less naive about how war can break a man's spirit and his
mind, just as it can his body?

In 1969 I was declared safe, stopped Thorazine and went back to college. The war
was still going on. I had shoulder-length hair, wore an earring and read Sartre.
I got involved in the theater because the drama students were the only people on
campus who would talk to me. They were also the people who had demonstrated
against the Marines two years before. I made peace with the guy whose jaw I
broke. I spoke out against the war but asked people not to blame the soldiers.
They blamed them anyway.

I studied acting with Lee Strasberg at his school and at the Actors' Studio and
got work in commercials and films. I started to imagine I'd never been in the
war. But once in a while I'd slip and mention having been in Vietnam and people
would drift away. Then, in 1978, I saw my first movie about the war: ''Coming
Home.'' I cried during the hospital scenes because the actors were all veterans
who were paralyzed, missing legs, arms, larynxes. I'd last seen them on my
nightmarish medevac flight out of Vietnam.

There was a kid in the movie on Thorazine. I cheered him on. He committed
suicide. Why couldn't the film makers solve his problem? I was furious. But then
thousands ofVietnam veterans have committed suicide since coming home, according
to the Veterans Administration.

Since ''Coming Home,'' there have been at least 15 feature films about Vietnam;
most have helped Americans remember the war and acted as a kind of therapy for
many veterans. As a nation, we are, in many ways, still obsessed with the war. I
believe this is because of intense moral pain caused by our lost innocence , and
all the death and destruction. The best of the Vietnam films act on us this way:
they awaken our memories, forcing us to deal with our remorse for things we did.
But we have not yet had the moral courage as a nation to face up to what has
happened to the Vietnamese from their perspective.

Of all the movies, ''Platoon'' is to me the best so far because of the director
Oliver Stone's attention to detail. The horrific sequence from the patrol's
discovery of the enemy's tunnel to the murder-rape-and-burn-the-village scene
angered me but helped me finally piece together a similar series of events in my
mind that culminated in the wasting of an innocent village.

''Hamburger Hill,'' ''Full Metal Jacket'' and ''84 Charlie Mopic'' all followed
''Platoon.'' In each film a Vietnam veteran wrote the script, directed, or both.
Unlike the films before ''Platoon,'' these depict Vietnam realistically.
Paradoxically they all use the World War II formula with a new twist: Americans
in the forefront courageously fighting against an evil, faceless enemy in a now
horribly futile war.

Two other movies, while not good at detail, have dealt with the war in ways the
others did not. Barry Levinson's ''Good Morning, Vietnam'' in 1987 showed a
Vietnamese expressing his anger at America's patronization, while Brian
DePalma's ''Casualties of War'' in 1989 chronicled one soldier's outrage at the
rape and murder of an innocent Vietnamese. Mr. Stone took the next step in
''Born on the Fourth of July,'' when he portrayed Ron Kovic participating in the
political system by the film's end, even though he doesn't agree with the way
the system works.

In 1981 I was one of the first four Vietnam veterans to go back to Vietnam. We
went in the hope of facilitating discussions on the resolution of the 2,500
American soldiers listed as missing in action, and we learned that there are
more than 300,000 Vietnamese missing from the war with the United States. We
learned that some two million North and South Vietnamese died during our war
there. We met the Amerasians who were lost on the streets at the time. We saw
the lunarlike landscape near the Cambodian border which had been defoliated by
Agent Orange. We met disabled veterans, war widows, orphans and deformed
children in desperate need.

I went back again in 1982 and 1986 along with more and more Vietnam veterans who
are returning to build health clinics, clear land mines and help set up homes
for the Amerasians. Returning helps to break up the frozen images of the war and
replace them with those of a small country, poor and badly damaged as it is,
growing back and ever so beautiful.

I'm tired of the war movies. We must stop refighting the war. Let's not
mythologize Vietnam any further. Let's not create a new propaganda about our
loss and victimization. Let's move on.

Isn't there a studio in Hollywood today that will buck the system and make a
movie about the Vietnamese?

To truly get over Vietnam and its ghosts, we need to go further and show remorse
to all the Vietnamese. We need a movie or movies in which the Vietnamese are in
the forefront. We still owe them a peace.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photos: George Tyne and Richard Conte, above, in ''A Walk in the Sun''
(1945)-the child's favorite; and Charlie Sheen and Corey Glover, below, in
''Platoon'' (1986)-the veteran's choice (Culver Pictures (''A Walk in the
Sun''); Orion Pictures (''Platoon'')) (pg. 11); Thomas Bird, far right, in
action in 1966 near Pleiku in the Central Highlands of Vietnam (Associated
Press) (pg. 16)

                   Copyright 1990 The New York Times Company

                              192 of 288 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                   May 27, 1990, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

Voices At The Wall

BYLINE: By Michael Norman; Michael Norman is the author of ''These Good Men:
Friendships Forged From War.''

SECTION: Section 6; Page 16, Column 1; Magazine Desk

LENGTH: 1408 words


IN THE EARLY MORNING DARK, WHEN THE AIR IS A fine mist, I stand on a deserted
walkway at the Vietnam Veterans Memorial, listening for the footfalls of
comrades long gone and waiting for the strangers who daily come to visit.

I was an actor in the long and violent event that left so many names on the 140
panels of polished black granite now known simply as ''the wall,'' the most
visited site in this Capitol city.

Now, standing in Constitution Gardens in front of panel 50E - roughly the point
along the wall that marks the savage spring of 1968 -I remember a fierce battle
for a tiny bridge by the Quang Tri River. Panel 50E holds the names of some who
fell in that fire storm. Perhaps, as the day arrives, I will come upon another
pilgrim stopped at this spot along the wall's walkway, drawn here, as all
visitors are, by the powerful currents of memory - personal, communal, historic
- that flow through this green, chevron-shaped hollow, this spectral place.

AT DAYBREAK, ON THIS MORNING OF AJU new crescent moon, James Dinatale, a
sophomore at George Washington University, who says he has spent the night in
study, comes to the wall to let the crisp morning air clear his mind. (Strictly
speaking, the day's first visitor was a hulking man, hands shoved deep in the
pockets of a green field jacket, shoulders hunched against the cold, who said he
was from North Carolina, homeless and waiting to take his turn in a sleeping
bag, which at the moment is occupied, a heap beneath a tree.) At first light,
runners arrive - not running, of course; few hurry past this place - Clayton
Lewis, a businessman from Tulsa, Okla., then Vaughn Forrest, chief of staff to a
Florida Congressman. Lewis is soon gone, but Forrest lingers.

''I served in Nam as a medic,'' he says. ''Just got back from Cambodia on a
fact-finding tour to verify the positions of Vietnamese troops relocating there.
Yeah, they never left. People bought that stuff that we were wrong in Vietnam.
We weren't wrong. That's why I come by here.''

It is near 8 now and from Yakima, Wash., here are Dan Oliva and Caryn Regimbal,
high-school juniors on tour, hard put at this moment to describe a place so many
have found so ineffable.

''You know,'' says the girl, ''most of the people on the wall are only two or
three years older than us?''

''Mind-boggling,'' says the boy, shaking his head. ''How many, do you think? I
mean altogether.'' Fifty-eight thousand, one hundred and seventy five, he is
told.  ''How many?'' he says, eyes wide, mouth agape. ''How many?''

The sun starts to flood the hollow and here is a woman in a red cardigan and
simple black skirt. With her hair pulled back and her plain dark-framed glasses,
she has the look of a librarian. At the moment she is staring up at the blue
vault, drifting. I impose, introduce myself.

''Oh, I dare say you'll find more interesting stories than mine,'' she says,
politely. ''Well, I taught high school from 1962 to 1965 in Illinois. I've been
overseas for a very long time, and this is the first chance I've had to get to
the city. I came to see if any of the boys I remembered made the list. And I'm
happy - because none of them are here.''

A tour group from Avella, Pa., breezes through. ''Great day yesterday,'' says
the leader. ''We did Arlington, Jefferson, the Washington Monument, Mount
Vernon, the Capitol, the F.B.I., Ford's Theater. Today we start here. O.K.
people, hustle, hustle. Remember, no down time.'' Couples come side by side,
whispering as they walk.  Here, in their early 60's by the look of them, are
Alice and Raymond Staats from New Braunfels, Tex. ''Don't know anybody on it,''
says she.  ''Don't know anybody who knows anybody on it,'' says he. ''Seen it on
the TV,'' says she.  ''Seen it so much on TV, we had to come,'' says he.

Barry Grosscup of Mount Vernon, Ohio, has his daughter, Autumn Michelle, seven
months, nestled in the crook of his arm, leaning tenderly against him. ''I know
it's just names,'' he says, ''but it touches you, like there's a funeral here.''

Into view comes a sour-faced woman along the memorial's east wall. ''What's
this?'' she says sharply to her woman companion. ''I thought we were going
inside a building or something. What . . . is . . . this!''

Bernice and Earl Wade of Bullhead City, Ariz., are walking their large
mocha-colored poodle, Kahlua. ''Listen to this,'' says Mrs. Wade. ''We had this
friend, see, a Navy frogman from World War II. Well, he got out; became a
roofer. Then, he decided to go back in, see. Joined the Navy again and went to a
construction battalion, Seabees. They sent him to Vietnam. He was working on a
job there and one day died of a heart attack. Name's Robert Fisher. He's here.
Forty-one years old.''

Two men, middle-aged, both tall and robust, one with dark hair and wearing a
gold chain, the other in wire-rimmed sunglasses, are strolling slowly, elbow to
elbow. ''For what?'' says the gold chain, surveying the names.  ''For nothing,''
answers the sunglasses. ''All of 'em - for nothing.''

Gwen McNatt of Chicago and Martha White of St. Louis, two nurses in town for a
nephrology convention, have rented bicycles and are pushing them up the walkway.

''I like history,'' says Ms. White, ''and this'' - she pauses, looks along the
west wing of the wall - ''this is history we paid for in blood.''

A short time later, another pair of women approach. These two are older than the
nurses, though judging from their colloquy no less interested in the lessons of
time and place. ''You know?'' says the first. ''Yeah,'' says the second. ''They
should march politicians single file by this place.'' ''Yeah.'' ''And make them
stand here.'' ''Yeah.'' ''So they could see.'' ''Yeah.'' IT IS AN ESPECIALLY
PROUD DAY FOR PETTYJU Officer First Class Robert Henry Kane Jr., a dental
technician and veteran of 17 years with the United States Navy. He is here in
uniform, standing at attention beside his commander, Rear Adm. Milton C. Clegg,
and facing a contingent of shipmates, his wife and two small children at hand,
to sign on for yet another hitch. He has chosen this spot for his re-enlistment
ceremony to, in his words, ''honor the hospital corpsmen and nurses killed in
the war'' and because he could not think of a more fitting place to again bear
''true faith and allegiance'' to his country.

And here too is Laura Kovacs, a real-estate agent from Arizona, originally of
Chicago where, in 1967, she graduated from Senn High School, a large public
academy that sent so many boys off to war that 37 of them, she says, are now
remembered on this stark black siding. Here are the sweet friends of her youth,
and seeing their names for the first time, she is left, face buried in her
hands, sobbing in the afternoon sun.

I am about to abandon my post when, an hour or so before dusk, a man with sandy
hair stops beside me, staring hard at 50E. He appears to be in his early 40's,
perhaps once a soldier, or friend or kin to one who was. ''Who are you looking
for?'' I ask.  ''A guy named Houston,'' he says. ''Here he is, John D.
Houston.''

John D. Houston is not one of the names I know and thus Fred Leenerts, of
Englewood, Colo., has no connection to me save that of a fellow pilgrim.

Leenerts explains that his brother-in-law, Don Crain, was a United States marine
and that during a bloody engagement in 1968, the same year I was a marine on the
battlefield, Houston died in Crain's arms.

''I never really wanted to come here,'' Leenerts says. ''We did it for my
brother-in-law. But you know what, this is the most moving thing I've ever
seen.''

As I weigh those words now, a few weeks later, I am beginning to understand that
it is not just the names sandblasted on 50E, or any other panel, for that
matter, that give meaning to the wall.

It is people like Fred Leenerts - joggers and vagrants in the early morning
dark, pink-cheeked pupils on class trips, swarms of sightseers and
conventioneers, Gold Star Mothers, cyclists, pilgrims with grief sluicing down
their faces, a friend of a friend, a brother-in-law on a self-appointed mission
- people who come and study those names and remember or imagine the lives behind
them.

And the meaning changes with each person who passes, the men and women and
children who make their way across the rolling lawns, past the long Reflecting
Pool and down the walkway to stare deep into the face of the brilliant black
granite, that inexorable mirror of memory.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photos: All hours they come and study the names on the wall. Above: A
Handprint left by a visitor; Memorial Day 1987. Visitors come every day to the
memorial, the most visited site in Washington. (Wendy Watriss); Below: The wall
at sunrise; A typical spring day last month. Powerful currents of memory flow
through this green hollow. (Paula Barr for the New York Times); Veterans Day
1988 (Kirk Condyles/Photoreporters)

                   Copyright 1990 The New York Times Company

                              193 of 288 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                   May 27, 1990, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

Where Genghis Khan Is In

BYLINE: By Nicholas D. Kristof; Nicholas D. Kristof is chief of The New York
Times's Beijing bureau. He and his colleague Sheryl WuDunn were awarded this
year's Pulitzer Prize for international reporting.

SECTION: Section 6; Page 21, Column 2; Magazine Desk

LENGTH: 3884 words


MACHOL SIPPED DEEPLY FROM THE BOWL OF FERMENTED MARE'S milk and pondered
democracy. Machol knew all about horses and sheep and wolves, but now this
unfamiliar concept was sweeping Mongolia. His wife and five children hovered
silently in the rear of the gur, the white felt tent that is a herdsman's home,
waiting for his judgment. Sunlight peeked through the smoke hole at the top of
the gur and dappled his leathery features but brought no inspiration.

''Sometimes it's difficult to follow all those new political words,'' Machol
finally said, as he put some tobacco in a piece of the Communist Party newspaper
- Truth - and rolled it into a cigarette. ''My life is full just taking care of
livestock.'' After decades of domination by the Soviet Union, which has 50,000
troops stationed within its borders, Mongolia is preparing to become the first
Communist country in Asia to ditch Marxist orthodoxy and clamber aboard the
democratic bandwagon toward free elections and a market economy. Prodded by
thousands of demonstrators who rallied in subzero temeratures earlier this year
in Ulan Bator, the capital, the Mongolian Communist Party gave up its monopoly
on power and permitted the formation of opposition parties. Free elections are
expected this summer. Not since the 13th century, when Genghis Khan formed the
Mongol Empire and subdued most of the known world, has the West paid much
attention to what went on in Mongolia. It took until 1987 - 66 years after
Mongolia declared its independence - for Washington to get around to recognizing
it as a sovereign nation. There is still no resident American Ambassador. The
incumbent, Richard L. Williams, a career diplomat, lives in Washington.

Almost three times the size of France, with only 2 million people, nearly half
of them herding livestock, Mongolia is pretty much the end of the world. Credit
cards are unknown; the only international air connections are to the Soviet
Union and China; and even if an international telephone call can be arranged,
one must yell so loudly that an instrument is almost superfluous.

Today, all of Mongolian life is in a ferment as the people redefine their
history, their economy, their political system, their religious faith, their
allies, their trade partners and their alphabet. This is a country that is
concurrently moving forward and backward, frantically lunging in both directions
at once.

''There are two fads here now,'' declares a young Mongolian diplomat. The first,
he says, is to learn English. One of the country's most popular television shows
teaches the language. The program's popularity reflects the national drift out
of a tight Soviet orbit and toward an independent status with close ties to the
United States, Japan and Europe. The second fad, he says, is to learn the
traditional Mongolian script, abandoned by Communist leaders four decades ago
for the Cyrillic alphabet used in the Soviet Union. The old Mongolian script is
likely to become the official alphabet as soon as enough people can master its
intricacies. What is startling is that so many Mongolians are simultaneously
struggling with English, in order to plug into the modern world, and old
Mongolian, so that they can resurrect their ancient culture. In Ulan Bator
workmen construct modern glass-and-steel skyscrapers, but on the outskirts of
the city there are still horse carts and large encampments of gurs, better known
by their Russian name, yurts. Many older people still wear the long
wide-shouldered cloak that is the national costume, but young people prefer
Western clothing brought in from Moscow, which comparatively speaking is a
center of haute couture.

Striking change is evident at a recent rock concert by the hottest band in Ulan
Bator, Hongk, whose name means ''bell'' - to awaken the people from national
stagnation, according to its leader. The packed auditorium is, by Western
standards, subdued, but the adrenalin flows and the lid blows off when a
portrait of Genghis Khan is lowered from the ceiling and the band launches into
the song that would be No. 1 on the rock charts if Mongolia had charts. Fans
clap and cheer and join in as the band intones: ''Will you forgive us?/ For we
used to focus/ Only on the black spots of your life,/ Distorting the record of
history/ And thus deceiving future generations.'' Genghis Khan has returned as
national hero, 800 years after he was first pronounced a khan, or chieftain, and
several decades after he was relegated to the ash heap by Communist historians
as a regrettably talented thug. Mongolians concede he went a bit far - tens of
millions of deaths are attributed to his armies - but they quickly add that he
was a brilliant general and a patriot.

If the ancient Mongols' brutality is hard to exaggerate, so is their success.
The 13th-century Mongol warriors conquered a vast area from China to Central
Europe, and after Genghis Khan's death they might well have continued westward
except that they were called home to choose a new khan of khans. Otherwise, we
might now all be speaking Mongolian.

The threat these days is not that some new khan will emerge and sweep across the
steppes, but that this long-forgotten nation will become a wellspring of ideas
that could be no less alarming to the established order of its neighbors. The
Soviet Union's 500,000 ethnic Mongols, just across the border, are already
becoming more nationalistic, but the impact is likely to be greater elsewhere.

For the Communist archipelago in the East - especially China, North Korea and
Vietnam - the fear is that the idea of democracy will take root on Asian soil
and that the seeds will then blow across their borders. If democracy can
function on the grasslands of Mongolia, then perhaps it could also take hold in
the rice paddies of China and Vietnam or the hills of North Korea.

THAT THE DEMOCRACY MOVEMENT REACHED MONGOLIA AT ALL IS remarkable. A quarter of
the nation's population lives in Ulan Bator. Leave the city in any direction and
after 20 minutes there is no sign of life, only snow-dusted mountains and a sea
of grass. The southern part of the country is Gobi Desert. Even more remote is
the west, with immense lakes and the mighty Altai Mountains, home to the snow
leopard and Gobi bear. There are hopes that region will attract more and more
free-spending(Continued on Page 32) American big-game hunters in search of
gazelle, antelope and the argali, a wild sheep.

The vastness of Mongolia and the herding tradition still dominate the nation's
psyche, but for many young urban residents, the core of the democracy movement,
this legacy has little relevance. Many of these youngsters have never spent a
night in a gur and have no idea how to ride a horse. They admire the economic
success of Japan, but such a pattern of industrialization could scarcely be
further from Mongolia's immediate future.

For many of these young urbanites, life can be rather boring. There are some
movie theaters and a few places to dance, but Mongolia suffers from the
Communist failure to provide sufficient leisure activities.

The country's only with-it teen-ager is Faye Senko, the 17-year-old daughter of
the American charge d'affaires, Michael J. Senko. Faye, who is doing her best to
spread American pop trends, says: ''They're very interested in Western fashions
and culture. They look you over from head to toe, to see what's fashionable.''
They also like to borrow her Western magazines, and even want lessons in lambada
dancing.

Mongolia has never been a prudish society. In fact, some think of it as a Sweden
on the Steppes. This image may be rather exaggerated, but as one Mongolian woman
explains: ''If you're out on the grasslands, and there's not much else to do but
look after the livestock, then it's pretty natural to curl up with anyone who
comes along.'' Foreigners who live in Mongolia are quick to warn visitors to be
cautious; some of the prevalent sexual diseases are unknown to Western doctors
and can be fatal.

Yet, in sexuality, as in everything else, Mongolia is moving in two directions
at once. There is more indulgence, but there is also a growing ascetic religious
movement that seeks to restore Buddhist monasteries.

At the time of the 1921 Communist revolution, Mongolia had some 120,000 Buddhist
lamas - 40 percent of the male population. Almost all were forced to leave the
monasteries, all but one of which were closed down. But today the Gandan
Monastery in Ulan Bator is bustling with Mongolians dutifully turning the dozens
of prayer wheels at the main building and praying for children and other
blessings.

''I was a monk from the age of 5 until I was 27, when I had to leave the
monastery,'' says Luvsanosor, a wizened 78-year-old man who, like many other
Mongols, uses a single name (given names are sometimes preceded by patronymics).
''But I believe in my faith, and now it's time to go back to the monastery.''

HOW DID EVEN THE faintest whispers of democracy reach such an isolated country?

Sanjaasuren Zorig is part of the answer. Inspired by news of the Eastern
European protests, about which extensive information was available in the Soviet
newspapers that reach Ulan Bator only a few days late, Zorig and a handful of
others began to organize pro-democracy demonstrations. To put pressure on the
country's leadership, they formed the Mongolia Democratic Association.

If the Mongolian democracy movement was ever made into a film, Hollywood would
never cast Zorig, a skinny 27-year-old lecturer in Marxist theory, to play
himself. The part calls for a dynamic organizer and a natural leader; the real
Zorig has handsome features, but he rarely laughs, and he speaks more like a
diffident professor than a revolutionary.

A colleague and I found him in a classroom, where he was talking with his
lieutenants in one corner while elsewhere in the room other teachers relaxed and
a student cleaned blackboard erasers. Zorig seemed less than overjoyed to meet
intrusive journalists, but he agreed to chat with us. He told us that his
father, now deceased, was a historian, that he lives with his mother, who is a
doctor, and that neither of them had particularly suffered under the Communist
regime.

Does he favor socialism or capitalism? Does he favor public ownership? Does his
movement aim to help Mongols living in China? Will his party oppose the ruling
Communist Party, or form a coalition?

Zorig parried each question, but his vagueness was coupled by occasional hints
that his party might enter a coalition with the Communists, even nominating the
same candidate for president in elections expected in July or August.
Collectively, such assertions and ambiguities suggest that the Democratic party
is a much gentler opposition than those that confronted Eastern European
Governments.

Namhai, a leader of the Social Democratic Party, is a bit more specific than
Zorig. ''We don't like any kind of 'ism' - capitalism, socialism and so on,'' he
said firmly at a news conference with foreign reporters. ''But if you persist,
we would say that the Social Democratic forces believe the models in Austria or
Sweden are the ones we would like to see followed in Mongolia.''

In addition to young professionals like Zorig and Namhai, the mostly peaceful
protests in Ulan Bator apparently had the tacit backing of factions within the
ruling party. Kinayatyn Dzardyhan, a 50-year-old advocate of rapid restructuring
who in March became Deputy Prime Minister, is said to have supported the
demonstrations. There were others, like P. Nergui, a 56-year-old economist;
Boshigt, a 49-year-old doctor who advised the opposition; and, according to the
Ulan Bator rumor mill, possibly even Tserendashiyn Namsray, at the age of 50,
the youngest member of the old politburo. All these Communist Party members
share a deepening sense of dissatisfaction with Mongolia's closed political and
economic system and an apprehension that time is passing their nation by.

''Socialism is facing a deep crisis today,'' Dzardyhan said in a recent
interview on Radio Ulan Bator. Yet he insists that socialism is Mongolia's
eventual goal, and that democracy and openness should be expanded only within
the paradigm of a socialist country.

MORE IMPORTANT THAN any Mongol activist was another man: Mikhail S. Gorbachev.

The Soviet Union has controlled Mongolia ever since freeing it from China's
clutches early in this century. Perhaps it is this longtime domination that
helps to explain the emergence of Zorig and others like him who studied in the
Soviet Union (as did most of Mongolia's best and brightest). They were
particularly attuned to the contrast between Soviet ferment and Mongolian
stagnation. Since December, they and several thousand protesters have been
periodically gathering in Ulan Bator's central Suhbator Square to wave banners
and demand democracy.

In the Government Palace, next to the square, the Communist leadership was
wracked by indecision after the first demonstration. Zhambyn Batmonh, the
President and party leader and a former university rector, appeared to
understand the need for change, though he was less sympathetic to calls for his
own dismissal. At first, Batmonh tried tolerance, even allowing protest leaders
to discuss their demands on television. Later, he banned the demonstrations. The
protestors blithely violated the ban, just as students in China had a year ago.

Could the Mongolia protests have ended in bloodshed, as did the ones in
Tiananmen Square? Indeed, there is considerable evidence that the Mongolian
leadership came very close to resorting to force. Few foreign correspondents
were at the scene and so the drama was underreported at the time. The crisis
began after more than 4,000 demonstrators gathered in Suhbator Square on March 5
to call for the resignation of the entire Government. When their demands were
not met, they began a hunger strike.

Debates raged among top party leaders about what to do, and for a time the
hardliners seemed to be in control. Knowledgeable Government officials say that
military forces had been put on alert and that troops were moved into the Ulan
Bator stadium, a 20-minute march to the square.

Two days later, the Central Committee chose as its new party leader a popular
reformist, 61-year-old Gombogavyn Ochirbat. In late March, the Great People's
Hural, the national parliament, chose a new president, Punsalmaagiyn Ochirbat, a
former Economics Minister, who had tried to cultivate relations with the West.
(The two Ochirbats are unrelated.) Then at an extraordinary party congress in
April, the Communists - whose formal name is the Mongolian People's
Revolutionary Party - excised the word ''communism'' from their constitution and
declared that their aim was to build ''dem-ocratic humane socialism.'' The party
also replaced its central committee with much younger members more open to
change.

Perhaps Mongolia did not take China's path of violently crushing opposition
because it was in the Soviet orbit and so had had five years to absorb some of
Gorbachev's lessons in political liberalization. The degree of liberalization is
striking: not only does Mongolia appear not to have any political prisoners, but
when foreign reporters visit, the Government happily arranges news conferences
at which dissidents excoriate the leadership.

Some officials have suggested that only pro-socialist parties should compete in
the parliamentary elections expected to be held this summer, but at least five
new opposition parties of various persuasions have already sprung up.

What is striking about Mongolia is that the Communist Party could actually
maintain its power through free elections. If that happens, China and North
Korea might be more inclined to experiment with democracy; if the Communists
lose, the hardliners in Beijing and Pyongyang will have even more reason to be
alarmed.

Much will depend on voting patterns among rural families, which constitute
nearly half the population. Herdsmen are not very political, and the Communist
Party, with its organizational edge, may be able to arrange for them to cast
their ballots for familiar names. So far, the herdsmen have watched the
political goings-on with more bewilderment than passion.

''The hunger strike was very unusual in a country like Mongolia,'' Tselema, a
54-year-old grandmother and herder, told me as we sat in her gur in the
grasslands near the town of Sergelen, in the east central section of the
country. ''Normally, people have enough to eat in Mongolia.''

The interperter, a young Foreign Ministry diplomat, was puzzled at first by her
comment. But after questioning Tselema, he explained: ''It seems she doesn't
understand the hunger strike. She thought they didn't have enough to eat.''

As for democracy, Tselema said, ''I don't know very much about that,'' but she
seemed prepared to vote for the Communist Party, especially if it would get her
more fuel to keep the generator running at night so that the 10 people living in
the tiny family gur could enjoy electric light.

Suhkbator, the head of a newly formed Mongolian Herdsmen and Peasants Union,
welcomes such recent changes as an end to restrictions on the number of
livestock any family may own, but says that such measures are not enough: ''We
want the life of Mongolian peasants to reach international standards.'' He was
less specific about how to achieve this, but indicated that a market economy was
part of the answer. He, too, seemed prepared to back the Communist Party: ''If
it manages to reform itself, it should be the main force in Mongolia.''

POLITICAL Restructuring is at the top of Mongolia's agenda, but there is also a
broad consensus for the need to build a market-oriented economy. Mongolia's
former leaders tried to build a Stalinist, heavy industrial economy on the
grasslands, but with little success.

And although World Bank figures suggest that Mongolia has a per capita income of
about $1,000 a year, compared with about $300 for China, this is largely due to
exchange-rate distortions. In fact, the standard of living is probably roughly
comparable. Mongolians are more likely to enjoy good schools and hospitals, but
the Chinese enjoy the fruits of a decentralized economy and small-scale free
markets - an abundance of varied foods, colorful clothing and electronic
products. Mongolia's economy is still run according to the central planners'
vision, and incentives and private enterprise scarcely exist.

Any economic restructuring is likely to lead to new tensions with the Soviet
Union, partly because Mongolia owes the Russians 9.7 billion rubles ($5.5
billion). ''We would like the Soviet Union to cancel the debts,'' says
Suh-Erdene, a leader of the new National Progressive Union. In the past, the
Soviet Union has been very generous about debt reschedulings, but the present
agreement expires in 1991 and the next round of talks will probably be the
toughest yet.

There is a nearly universal conviction here that the Soviets have been robbing
Mongolia blind of its natural resources, paying far below market rates for
minerals and meat. How else, the Mongolians ask, can there be meat shortages in
a nation where livestock outnumber humans 12 to 1? In fact, Mongolians may
overstate the plunder. They tend not to factor in the oil, machinery and foreign
aid they get from Moscow. The resentments are compounded by the presence of tens
of thousands of Soviet citizens in top jobs in Ulan Bator, where they also tend
to have the best housing and life styles. One of the risks of being a Westerner
in Mongolia is that people will mistake you for a Russian and beat you up.
Several Western reporters have been menaced on the street and have slipped out
of tight spots only by proclaiming their nationality. Alicia J. Campi, a
Mongolian-speaking American diplomat now setting up a Mongolian-language program
in Ulan Bator for diplomats, says she gets terrible service in the shops until
she identifies herself as an American.

''Before, the United States was all bad, bad, bad,'' she reports. ''Now it's all
good, good, good.'' As for foreign trade, although Mongolia is increasingly
attuned to potential international investors, the cost of doing business there
is high. Transportation is a major problem, with only a single-track railway
into the country. But the Japanese have been looking to sell manufacturing
equipment and American companies have expressed interest in importing Mongolian
vodka, processing yak and camel hair into textiles and exploring for oil. As
yet, there has not been any real action.

IN ITS FOREIGN POLICY, Mongolia is moving toward greater neutrality. This
spring, in a blow to North Korea, it formally recognized South Korea. But the
most important realignment is Mongolia's determination to remove itself from the
Soviet umbrella. The two countries have agreed that Moscow will withdraw all of
its combat troops from Mongolia by the end of 1991 and all remaining military
staff by the end of 1992.

But a visitor from Beijing cannot help but wonder if the Mongolians shouldn't be
concerned. After the Soviet troops leave, does China pose a threat? No diplomat
expects China to attack or harass Mongolia, but it takes a brave analyst to rule
anything out where China is concerned. What if the 3.5 million Mongols in China
began demonstrating and received assistance from their kinsmen across the
border?

Many Mongols living in China listen to Mongolian radio stations and perhaps
absorb dangerous ideas about democracy and nationalism. There is little sign of
unrest so far, but Chinese authorities acknowledged during the recent national
legislative session that they were concerned.

The Mongolian who drove me around Ulan Bator said he felt strongly that ''there
should be a relationship with Inner Mongolia. We are one people, and we used to
be one nation.''

As part of the effort to redevelop ties with China - and reassure Beijing that
it need not worry - President Ochirbat visited there early this month. It was
his first trip abroad since assuming office, and the first visit to China by any
Mongolian head of Government since 1962. Yet Mongolians have very mixed views
about whether the democracy movement should stop at their borders.

The topic came up at a news conference as Mongolia's new Social Democratic Party
was announcing its formation. Batbaiar, a biologist who is a party leader, was
very diplomatic: ''We want to develop democracy in Mongolia, not in China.
Democracy in China is its own affair.'' But another party leader, Lamjav, a
mathematician by profession, objected to the Mongolian Government's refusal last
summer to protest the killings of pro-democracy demonstrators in China. ''We
regard our Government's position at that time as immoral,'' he declared. ''We
would take an entirely different position, proceeding from high morality.''

After the news conference, several reporters questioned Lamjav further. He noted
that other countries had protested the killings in Beijing, but we pointed out
that those countries were protected by distance, while Mongolia is a tidbit
sandwiched between two Communist giants.

The translator looked at us soberly for a moment, and then before interpreting
our question to Lamjav, she said, ''That is Mongolia's tragedy.''

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photos: Almost half of Mongolia's 2 million people herd livestock, like
the nomads above, on the move with their tent and other goods loaded and ready
to go; Mongolians and tourists alike visit the rocks at Terelj, right.
(PHOTOGRAPHS BY NANCY BUIRSKI); On the outskirts of Ulan Bator, as on the vast
steppes, many tradition-bound families, such as the one at top left, live in
white felt tents, or gurs. After the 1921 revolution, the Communists closed down
all but one of the Buddhist monasteries. Monks, left, at the Gandan Monastery,
which today is again a bustling place. Above, at Ulan Bator: the Genghis Khan
Hotel going up and, on the outskirts, gurs. (PHOTOGRAPHS BY PETER
CHARLESWORTH/JB PICTURES); Map of Mongolia.

                   Copyright 1990 The New York Times Company

                              194 of 288 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                   May 27, 1990, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

New & Noteworthy

BYLINE: By LAUREL GRAEBER

SECTION: Section 7; Page 22, Column 1; Book Review Desk

LENGTH: 935 words



1999: Victory Without War, by Richard Nixon. (Touchstone/Simon & Schuster,
$10.95.) Much has already changed in the two years since the former President
called for a more international and less isolationist approach to world
politics. ''The style and tone of the book suggest that Mr. Nixon has set
himself the task of reaching a broad mass audience,'' Marshall D. Shulman said
here in 1988, ''and if he succeeds in bringing home to that audience the logic
of the imperatives imposed by a world of nuclear weapons and turbulent
international politics, he will have made an important contribution to the
maturation of American foreign policy.'' This book is part of a special Richard
Nixon Library Edition, which also includes reprints of REAL PEACE/NO MORE
VIETNAMS ($12.95), LEADERS ($12.95), THE REAL WAR ($12.95), SIX CRISES ($12.95)
and R.N.: The Memoirs of Richard Nixon ($17.95), all updated with new
introductions.

BEND SINISTER, by Vladimir Nabokov. (Vintage International, $9.95.) The first
novel Vladimir Nabokov wrote after his move to the United States is set in an
unnamed totalitarian regime, where a philosophy professor comes into conflict
with the nation's dictator. When it was first published in 1947, Hal Borland
wrote in The Times that ''Nabokov writes with urbanity, with humor and with high
drama. Yet there are no melodramatics.'' The novel has ''a terrible
inevitability about its movement and a warm humanity about its main character.''


JEWISH TIMES: Voices of the American Jewish Experience, by Howard Simons.
(Anchor/Doubleday, $12.95.) These interviews include commentary from such
diverse sources as former Ambassador Arthur Goldberg, the television host Larry
King and Reuben Greenberg, a black Jewish police chief in the South. In 1988 our
reviewer, Phillip Lopate, criticized the work for its rose-colored viewpoint and
lack of female and literary voices, but noted that ''at least a third of the 227
interviews in this capacious book are electrifying, dazzling, remarkable.''

LOVE IN THE DAYS OF RAGE, by Lawrence Ferlinghetti. (Obelisk/Dutton, $6.95.) The
Beat poet has written a love story about Annie, an American painter, and Julian,
a banker and unlikely anarchist, that unfolds in the frenzied atmosphere of
Paris in 1968. In 1988 our reviewer, Richard Goodman, said that ''the real hero
. . . is the student uprising itself. Mr. Ferlinghetti writes very convincingly
about the turbulence and energy, the sheer letting loose that was May 1968 in
Paris.''

ISABELLE: The Life of Isabelle Eberhardt, by Annette Kobak. (Vintage, $10.95.)
Although brief - she died at 27 - the existence of Isabelle Eberhardt was
certainly eventful. Born in Switzerland in 1877, the child of a Russian
anarchist, she became a mystic, writer and Islamic convert in her adopted home,
Algeria. Last year our reviewer, Mary-Kay Wilmers, called this book ''an
extraordinary story, which Ms. Kobak tells with admirable sympathy.''

SUCH WAS THE SEASON, by Clarence Major. (Mercury House, $8.95.) An experimental
writer has turned to conventional narrative in this novel, the chronicle of an
event-filled week in contemporary Atlanta. It is narrated by an elderly black
woman, whose ''melodic voice, by turns lilting and gruff . . . salts and peppers
and sweetens this story, enriching its flavor and its meaning,'' Al Young said
in The Book Review in 1987.

MY PLACE, by Sally Morgan. (Arcade/Little, Brown, $9.95.) A woman of aboriginal
descent traces her family's history - and that of her people - in an Australia
that Europeans claimed for themselves. Part autobiography and part history, this
is ''a book for everyone,'' Janette Turner Hospital said here last year, ''with
the form and texture of a novel and the complexity and pace of a mystery not
solved until the final pages.''

A GRAVESTONE MADE OF WHEAT, by Will Weaver. (Graywolf, $8.95.) The author of
''Red Earth, White Earth'' has set these 12 short stories on the rolling plains
of the Midwest. Last year our reviewer, Andy Solomon, called the book ''a
graceful collection, one that views America's heartland with a charitable but
candid eye.''

THE LION AND THE THRONE: The Life and Times of Sir Edward Coke (1552-1634), by
Catherine Drinker Bowen. (Little, Brown, $12.95.) Although he never knew
America, Sir Edward Coke, Queen Elizabeth I's solicitor general and King James
I's chief justice, had enormous influence on the design of our own Government.
Winner of the National Book Award for nonfiction in 1958, this colorful
biography ''combines exhaustive legal and historical research . . . with
splendid artistic skill,'' A. T. Vanderbilt wrote in The Times in 1957.

A COUNTRY OF STRANGERS, by Susan Richards Shreve. (Anchor/Doubleday, $8.95.) In
the early 1940's, two families, one black, one white, become uneasy neighbors on
the grounds of a former Virginia plantation. Although our reviewer, Mel Watkins,
found the writing ''uneven,'' he praised the book last year as ''an ambitious
novel that attempts to create a parable of how racial harmony may be achieved.''


SCIENCE AND THE UNBORN: Choosing Human Futures, by Clifford Grobstein. (Basic
Books, $9.95.) A professor of biology and public policy argues that issues
relating to pregnancy intervention - or termination - must be considered from
the perspectives of both the scientific community and the society at large.
''Such situations are likely to remain forever difficult,'' Andrew H. Malcolm
said here last year, ''and, reading this discomfiting book, one thinks that may
actually be for the better.''

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo: Vladimir Nabokov (Theodore Brauner)

TYPE: Review

                   Copyright 1990 The New York Times Company

                              195 of 288 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                   May 27, 1990, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

BEST SELLERS: May 27, 1990

SECTION: Section 7; Page 20, Column 2; Book Review Desk

LENGTH: 1475 words




$

          Weeks
This Last    On
Week Week  List Fiction

 1      2   6    SEPTEMBER, by Rosamunde Pilcher. (Dunne/St.
                 Martin's, $22.95.) Guests from many parts of the
                 world encounter their often unexpected destinies
                 during a get-together in a small Scottish town.

 2      1   3    THE STAND, by Stephen King. (Doubleday,
                 $24.95.) Doomsday brings horrors to America; the
                 uncut version of a novel first published in 1978.

 3      3   14   OH, THE PLACES YOU'LL GO! by Dr. Seuss.
                 (Random House, $12.95.) The problems of finding
                 your way through life; in verse and pictures.

 4      4   3    DRAGON, by Clive Cussler. (Simon & Schuster,
                 $21.95.) In 1993, Dirk Pitt moves fast to save
                 America from a Japanese extremist.

 5      5   11   THE BOURNE ULTIMATUM, by Robert Ludlum.
                 (Random House, $21.95.) Jason Bourne plans to
                 infiltrate the ruthless Medusa Brigade.

 6      6   6    SKINNY LEGS AND ALL, by Tom Robbins.
                 (Bantam, $19.95.) The horror and humor of the
                 upcoming apocalypse are played out at a
                 restaurant near the United Nations.

 7      8   3    AN INCONVENIENT WOMAN, by Dominick
                 Dunne. (Crown, $19.95.) Manners, morals and
                 murder in Los Angeles's high society.

 8      9   3    FAMILY PICTURES, by Sue Miller. (Harper &
                 Row, $19.95.) The good and bad times of a large
                 Chicago clan during the past 40 years.

 9     15   2    THE GOLDEN ORANGE, by Joseph Wambaugh.
                 (Perigord/Morrow, $19.95.) Murder and chicanery
                 amid the yachts and mansions of California's
                 Orange County.

10            3           ''G'' IS FOR GUMSHOE, by Sue Grafton. (Holt,
                 $16.95.) On her 33d birthday, the private eye Kinsey
                 Millhone finds herself on a killer's hit list.

11     10   8    MASQUERADE, by Janet Dailey. (Little, Brown,
                 $19.95.) A New Orleans heiress encounters a
                 masked man during a carnival in Nice.

12     11   5    THE GOLD COAST, by Nelson DeMille. (Warner,
                 $19.95.) How life changes for an old WASP family
                 when the head of a crime family becomes its
                 neighbor on Long Island's North Shore.

13     13   39   CLEAR AND PRESENT DANGER, by Tom
                 Clancy. (Putnam, $21.95.) The C.I.A.'s Jack Ryan
                 fights Colombian drug lords.

14            1  ALWAYS AND FOREVER, by Cynthia Freeman.
                 (Putnam, $19.95.) When a woman's comfortable
                 marriage turns sour, she flees it, only to find
                 happiness with an old, long-lost flame.

15      7   7    THE EVENING NEWS, by Arthur Hailey.
                 (Doubleday, $21.95.) Life as lived by two
                 competitive television correspondents.

          Weeks
This Last    On
Week Week  List Nonfiction

 1      1   7    MEN AT WORK, by George F. Will. (Macmillan,
                 $19.95.) The political pundit and baseball buff
                 describes the craft of the game as practiced by
                 three players and a manager.

 2      3   18   BARBARIANS AT THE GATE, by Bryan
                 Burrough and John Helyar. (Harper & Row,
                 $22.95.) The 1988 battle for control of RJR Nabisco.

 3      7   36   IT WAS ON FIRE WHEN I LAY DOWN ON IT, by
                 Robert Fulghum. (Villard, $17.95.) A new collection
                 of inspirational essays.

 4 *    2   18   MEGATRENDS 2000, by John Naisbitt and
                 Patricia Aburdene. (Morrow, $21.95.)
                 Prognostications about political, economic and
                 social developments in the next decade.

 5      4   5    IN THE ARENA, by Richard Nixon. (Simon &
                 Schuster, $21.95.) The 37th President reflects on his
                 public career and private life.

 6     13   81   ALL I REALLY NEED TO KNOW I LEARNED IN
                 KINDERGARTEN, by Robert Fulghum. (Villard,
                 $17.95.) Inspirational essays about everyday
                 matters.

 7      5   16   HEAD FIRST, by Norman Cousins. (Dutton,
                 $19.95.) How the brain affects the body's endocrine
                 and immune systems.

 8      6   10   MEANS OF ASCENT, by Robert A. Caro. (Knopf,
                 $24.95.) Lyndon Johnson's seven-year pursuit of a
                 seat in the Senate, won in 1948 by 87 votes.

 9     14   4    LEGACIES, by Bette Bao Lord. (Knopf, $19.95.)
                 Reflections on the Chinese experience during the
                 past quarter-century by a writer who was born in
                 China, raised in America.

10      8   29   LIAR'S POKER, by Michael Lewis. (Norton,
                 $19.95.) Wall Street's tumultuous 1980's, as
                 witnessed by a young bond trader.

11      9   4    FLASHBACKS, by Morley Safer. (Random House,
                 $18.95.) The observations of a journalist on
                 revisiting Vietnam 25 years later.

12     10  110   A BRIEF HISTORY OF TIME, by Stephen W.
                 Hawking. (Bantam, $18.95.) A scientist reviews
                 efforts to create a unified theory of the universe.

13     11   14   WHAT I SAW AT THE REVOLUTION, by Peggy
                 Noonan. (Random House, $19.95.) The memoirs of
                 a former Presidential speechwriter.

14 *         10  PARTING WITH ILLUSIONS, by Vladimir
                 Pozner. (Atlantic Monthly, $19.95.) The
                 autobiography of a man, raised in New York, who
                 became a commentator on Radio Moscow.

15     15   2    SIMONE DE BEAUVOIR, by Deirdre Bair.
                 (Summit, $24.95.) A biography of the stellar French
                 intellectual, author of ''The Second Sex.''

          Weeks
This Last    On
Week Week  List Advice, How-to and Miscellaneous

 1      1   67   WEALTH WITHOUT RISK, by Charles J. Givens.
                 (Simon & Schuster, $19.95.) A Florida
                 entrepreneur's financial advice.

 2      2   24   THE GREAT WALDO SEARCH, by Martin
                 Handford. (Little, Brown, $10.95.) A book of
                 illustrations in which the game is to find a
                 ubiquitous chap named Waldo.

 3      3   14   BEWARE THE NAKED MAN WHO OFFERS
                 YOU HIS SHIRT, by Harvey Mackay. (Morrow,
                 $19.95.) Advice on how to get ahead in business.

 4      4   13   SECRETS ABOUT MEN EVERY WOMAN
                 SHOULD KNOW, by Barbara De Angelis.
                 (Delacorte, $17.95.) Ways by which women can
                 improve their relationships with men.

 5          177  WEBSTER'S NINTH NEW COLLEGIATE
                 DICTIONARY. (Merriam-Webster, $16.95.) A
                 standard reference work, revised and updated.


These listings are based on computer-processed sales figures from 3,000
bookstores and from representative wholesalers with more than 28,000 other
retail outlets, including variety stores and supermarkets. The figures are
statistically adjusted to represent sales in all such outlets across the United
States.

 *An asterisk before a book's title indicates that its sales, weighted to
reflect the book-selling industry nationally, are barely distinguishable from
those of the book above.

And Bear in Mind
 (Editors' choices of other recent books of particular interest)

CAPTAIN SIR RICHARD FRANCIS BURTON: The Secret Agent Who Made the Pilgrimage to
Mecca, Discovered the Kama Sutra, and Brought the Arabian Nights to the West, by
Edward Rice. (Scribners, $35.) This life of the 19th-century explorer and sage
is a first-class account of a strange and remarkable career.

SMALL VICTORIES, by Samuel G. Freedman. (Harper & Row, $22.95.) In a sad account
of social neglect and failure, a former New York Times reporter spends a year at
a battered inner-city high school and chronicles the heroic and often fruitless
efforts of students and teachers to make learning possible.

LIKE LIFE, by Lorrie Moore. (Knopf, $18.95.) Her characters are not a happy lot,
but the author's witty and wry observations prevent these stories from being
grim or maudlin.

THE WORST YEARS OF OUR LIVES: Irreverent Notes From a Decade of Greed, by
Barbara Ehrenreich. (Pantheon, $19.95.) Fifty essays - elegant, trenchant, angry
and funny - that sum up the author's view of the 80's aim to make us think (and
wince).

A STONE OF THE HEART, by Tom Grimes. (Four Walls Eight Windows, $15.95.) The
afflictions of adolescence are rendered in unique and universal terms in this
first novel, set in Queens in 1961, about a 14-year-old boy who idolizes Roger
Maris.

THE FUGITIVE, by Pramoedya Ananta Toer. (Morrow, $16.95.) Written while its
Indonesian author was imprisoned at the end of World War II, this suspenseful
novel of his country's occupation by the Japanese weaves a web of motivation,
character and emotion.

THE SEARCH FOR MODERN CHINA, by Jonathan D. Spence. (Norton, $29.95.) Four
centuries of Chinese history are illuminated in a sweeping study of a rich and
burdensome past.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: LIST

                   Copyright 1990 The New York Times Company

                              196 of 288 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                   May 28, 1990, Monday, Late Edition - Final

Bored With the Usual Fireworks? Try This

BYLINE: By LISA BELKIN, Special to The New York Times

SECTION: Section 1; Page 1, Column 2; National Desk

LENGTH: 1136 words

DATELINE: HELOTES, Tex., May 26


The sound of machine-gun fire echoed off the dusty hills all day as hundreds of
thousands of bullets shredded the refrigerators, washing machines, automobiles
and empty oil drums that were scattered about as targets.

Nearly 200 people took turns firing more than 100 different automatic weapons,
from an Uzi submachine gun to a Lahti anti-tank rifle (also useful against small
airplanes) to a Vietnam-era M-16.

''Can you think of a better way to spend a holiday weekend?'' said Jim James,
who traveled down from Austin today for the Third Annual Hill Country Machine
Gun Shoot in Helotes, 15 miles northwest of San Antonio. ''Soldiers died so we'd
have the right to shoot all we want. It's a tribute.''

The outdoor target range, just an open area behind a snack shed, was
particularly easy to find this weekend. One had only to follow the sounds of
rapid gunfire. The parking area was filled with cars sporting bumper stickers
proclaiming ''Freedom Wasn't Won with a Registered Gun'' and ''The more people I
meet, the more bullets I need.''

Participants paid $5 each to enter the range, then passed signs prohibiting
alcohol and intentional shooting at the trees. Another sign warned ''Not
Responsible for Accidents.''

Most brought their own ear protectors, which looked like bulbous stereo
headphones. The unprepared could buy a pair of squishy orange fluorescent
earplugs for 25 cents. The noise level was intolerable without them.

The shooting area was divided by a bright yellow plastic tape in front of which
45 registered shooters, as aficionados call themselves, had spread army blankets
and set up their guns. They came from around the country, but the vast majority
were from Texas, the state with the most machine-gun sales.

All the guns were legally registered, a status requiring a long application
process and payment of more than $200. All were automatic weapons, meaning that
a single pull of the trigger results in a spurt of gunfire. Some were machine
guns and others were submachine guns. The distinction is a matter of size.

Standing behind the tape were vendors of commemorative T-shirts, Machine Gun
News Magazine, barbecue sandwiches and iced tea. The families of shooters and
other spectators drifted between the guns and the food.

Everyone, including bystanders, was allowed to shoot, as long as he or she did
so from the area in front of the tape and in the presence of a licensed gun
owner. Those who did not own their own guns could rent one, and get 40 rounds of
ammunition, for $10.

Running the rental line was Bill Jonke. A former police officer, then a firearms
trainer and now a caterer in Ohio, he was an organizer of the shoot.

He says people who dabble in shooting machine guns have an undeserved
reputation. They are not madmen, he said, ''just mostly people who we down here
call good ol' boys.''

Guns, he said, are a hobby, like building model cars. ''It's something to goof
around with,'' he said. ''There's a satisfaction to putting the bullet where you
want to put it. Guys who own machine guns are tinkerers. Registered owners are
the straightest darn people you'll ever want to meet.'' Safer Than Drag-Racing?
Mark Rainwater, an operating-room nurse from Odessa, a 350-mile drive from here,
agreed. ''It's a way to spend some time,'' he said. ''I used to really enjoy
drag-racing, until it got too expensive. This is the same thrill, and it's
really more harmless.''

Not that machine guns are cheap. Mr. Jonke estimated that $15,000 worth of
ammunition would be fired today. Wholesale, the average .45-caliber cartridge
costs 10 cents, and .30-caliber and .50-caliber ammunition costs up to 50 cents
a round, he said. It takes only seconds to shoot several dozen rounds.

The guns can also cost thousands of dollars apiece. Pointing first to the guns
and then to the five junkyard cars, including a late model B.M.W., hauled in for
the occassion, Mr. Jonke said, ''Some of these cost more than some of those.''

Amid the affectionate descriptions of firearms, there was anger at the limits
being imposed on them. Last year, President Bush issued an executive order
banning 43 models of imported semiautomatic weapons (one shot per trigger pull),
and this week the Senate narrowly voted to ban the sale of nine types of
semiautomatic assault weapons for three years.

No Stereotypes, Please

The fact that these laws do not apply to automatic weapons, which have been
regulated by the Federal Government since the 1930's, did not matter one whit to
the shooters here, many of whom own semiautomatics. These laws, they said, were
giving people like themselves a bad reputation.

''I don't like being lumped into the same pot as drug dealers just because I own
the same kind of gun,'' said Jess Mills, who drove up from Pleasanton, 30 miles
south of San Antonio, with his two teen-age sons. ''It doesn't matter how many
times a gun goes bang,'' said Mr. Mills, who has been hunting since he was 6
years old. ''It depends on how you use it.''

Mr. Rainwater said outlawing guns will not outlaw crime. ''In places like New
York and Washington, where they don't understand these things, they think if
they take guns away from everybody, then the drug dealers won't have them,'' he
said. ''It's a flawed argument, because drug dealers don't care about the law.''


Earplugs for Baby

Though the anger over the recent Senate action was an ever-present subtext, this
was a day for holiday fun.

Mike Edwards was up from Houston with his wife, Jamie, and their 9-month-old
daughter, Julie, who had her own baby-sized set of ear protectors so she could
watch her daddy shoot. Mr. Edwards owns five automatic weapons. Between
sessions, the family munched turkey sandwiches they had brought from home.

''This isn't about politics; it's just fun,'' he said.

Here and there, there were hints of introspection. Joe Ashcroft, a fireman and
emergency medical technician from Tallahassee, Fla., came because he said he
felt a need to hear the sound of a machine gun.

''Think of the cities around the world that have to hear this all the time,'' he
said. ''Think of Beirut.''

Just Bought a Shotgun

He only recently bought his first weapon, a shotgun, for his wife, about whom he
worries when he is working 24-hour shifts. He paid $10 to fire a 1928
.45-caliber Thompson submachine gun, the kind Eliot Ness used to fight Al
Capone.

After his turn, he took a walk past a blanket filled with guns captured from the
Germans by American soldiers.

''I can't help thinking of my father and what he must have gone through during
World War II,'' he said. ''All those young boys, far away from home, hitting the
beach and hearing this.''

''I'm glad I heard it,'' he said, shouting over the noise. He paused, and then
added, ''I'm not sure I can say it was fun.''

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photos: Tim Foster, 10 years old, fires an M-16 with help from Bill
Jonke at the Machine Gun Shoot in Helotes, Tex. (Rick McFarland for The New York
Times) (pg. 1); Shooters participating Saturday in the Third Annual Memorial Day
Machine Gun Shoot in Helotes, Tex. (Rick McFarland for The New York Times); map:
Texas indicating Helotes (pg. 9)

                   Copyright 1990 The New York Times Company

                              197 of 288 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                   May 28, 1990, Monday, Late Edition - Final

Remember More

SECTION: Section 1; Page 20, Column 1; Editorial Desk

LENGTH: 329 words


The whole last half of the 20th century has been clouded by the cold war, a war
of deadly sparks if not of conflagration. That somber fact warrants note on this
day set aside to commemorate the valor of those who lost their lives in hot
wars.

Even the most pessimistic observers see evidence that the cold war is ending.
But no one expects it to end on a date certain with whistles and fireworks and
sailors kissing girls they don't know in cheering crowds in Times Square.

Nor are the two superpowers and the many nations long entangled in their rivalry
ready to set aside a day to remember the disappointments and tragedies suffered
by the victims of 45 relentless years of suspicion, hostility and outright
aggression. Yet why not?  Does the world overlook victims of the cold war
because the combatants never finally faced each other across a battlefield?
True, the ultimate catastrophe was avoided, but proxy wars - in Korea, Vietnam,
Afghanistan and Central America - exacted a fearful toll in human life and human
rights.

To the individual horrors may be added these: the subversion of democracy in
nations that had established it . . . the closing of frontiers to voluntary
travel or migration . . . the dedication of science and technology to the
encouragement of assured human destruction . . . the appalling waste of
resources caused by keeping millions of men under arms and out of productive
activities.

Literally all the people of the world bear the cost of the cold war to some
degree. Would it not be fitting to think of them, solemnly, today? Memorial Day
was originally set aside to celebrate the valor of the soldiers of the
Confederacy. It was later broadened to mourn and honor all who fought in the
Civil War. Later, Memorial Day's significance was broadened again to remember
all Americans killed in all the nation's wars.

Would not a further expansion of united regret help set the stage for the
tremendous work of reconstruction yet to come?

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Editorial

                   Copyright 1990 The New York Times Company

                              198 of 288 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                   May 28, 1990, Monday, Late Edition - Final

Faces of the Summit: 30 Years of High Drama

SECTION: Section 1; Page 6, Column 4; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 538 words




September 1959: President Eisenhower and Nikita S. Khrushchev meet at Camp
David, Md. The talks result in the ''spirit of Camp David,'' an effort to press
for scientific and cultural exchanges and disarmament.

June 1961: Khrushchev and President Kennedy have heated exchanges in Vienna.
There are no formal agreements. A year later, the Soviets send nuclear missiles
to Cuba; the United States forces their removal.

June 1967: President Johnson meets in Glassboro, N.J., with Aleksei N. Kosygin
to discuss the Middle East, the Vietnam War and nuclear arms. They come to no
agreement.

May 1972: President Nixon and Leonid I. Brezhbnev, in Moscow, sign the first
treaties setting limits on strategic nuclear arms, known as SALT I, and on
curbing antiballistic missile systems. They agree to keep negotiating arms, but
regional issues divide them.

June 1973: Nixon and Brezhnev meet in Washington. They agree ot try to complete
a new arms treaty by 1974.

June-July 1974: Nixon and Brezhnev meet in Moscow and Yalta. They agree to a
treaty banning underground nuclear-arms tests with yields exceeding 150
kilotons, and they arrange a 10-year economic accord.

November 1974: President Ford and Brezhnev, in Vladivostok, reach a tentative
deal limiting missile launchers and bombers and lay a base for a second
strategic arms treaty. The treaty is not completed before President Carter takes
office.

June 1979: President Carter and Brezhnev, in Vienna, sign the second treaty
limiting strtegic arms, or SALT II. Although the Senate never approves the
treaty because of the Soviet invasion of Afghanistan in December of 1979, both
sides agree informally to observe its limits.

November 1985: President Reagan and Mikhail S. Gorbachev meet in Geneva for
wide-ranging talks on arms control and other subjects. They agree to revive
cultural exchanges and to enhance air safety, but no arms-control agreements are
achieved.

October 1986: Reagan and Gorbachev meet in Reykjavik, Iceland, to provide
momentum to arms-control talks. The two sides speak of vast cuts in strategic
arms and medium-range missiles, but the accord falls through because of
disagreements over the American plan for a space-based missile defense system,
or ''Star Wars,'' and over Moscow's insistence on putting all arms issues in one
package.

December 1987: Reagan and Gorbachev meet in Washington. They sign a treaty to
destroy intermediate-range nuclear forces, known as I.N.F., and agree to seek a
treaty cugging long-range nuclear arsenals. But ''Star Wars'' remains a sticking
point.

May-June 1988: Gorbachev and Reagan, in Moscow, ratify the I.N.F. treaty but
make no breakthrough on cutting long-range nuclear forces. Reagan says important
work has been done but Gorbachev speaks of ''missed opportunities.''

December 1988: Gorbachev says farewell to Reagan and greets President-elect
George Bush at a two-hour luncheon on Governors Island in New York harbor.
Reagan assures Gorbachev of continuity under Bush.

December 1989: Bush and Grobachev meet in Malta. They say they will strive to
conclude treaties on long-range nuclear weapons and conventional arms in 1990.

''

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Chronology

                   Copyright 1990 The New York Times Company

                              199 of 288 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                  May 29, 1990, Tuesday, Late Edition - Final

As Wars Grow Distant, Holiday Turns Gray

BYLINE: By WILLIAM ROBBINS, Special to The New York Times

SECTION: Section A; Page 1, Column 2; National Desk

LENGTH: 816 words

DATELINE: PLATTSBURG, Mo., May 28


The sentiments here were as strong as ever, and Delmas E. Green voiced them in
words that were surely echoed 10,000 times as Americans paid tribute to fallen
heroes of all the nation's wars on this Memorial Day.

Under flags bright in a strong sun and rippling in a soft breeze, two Boy
Scouts, Bryan Davidson and Charles Martin, bugled taps in tones as clear and
poignant as ever.

But too many legs had weakened. Today, Plattsburg's veterans and their friends
and families, who in years past had marched briskly, allowed themselves to be
driven to Green Lawn Cemetery for a ceremony that some social historians say is
losing its immediacy for many Americans.

''Not everything in our country is perfect, but it is still the best place on
the face of this earth,'' said Mr. Green. ''And now let us live so that those
who made the supreme sacrifice will not have made it in vain.''

When Memorial Day is thought of as ''increasingly the property of older
Americans,'' as Gerald F. Linderman, a social historian at the University of
Michigan, put it the other day, the support for such assertions consists as much
of impressions as of documentation.

''As we move further and further from our last war, we have smaller and smaller
percentages of Americans who actually fought,'' Mr. Linderman said. ''Memories
recede, and fewer and fewer of us now have relatives who died in wars.''

This was demonstrably the case at the ceremony today in this town of 2,100
people about 50 miles north of Kansas City. At 82, Mr. Green was the oldest of
the 100 or so participants. Others, predominantly World War II veterans and
their wives but also veterans of the Korean and Vietnam wars, ranged downward in
age to the Boy Scouts who played taps, Bryan, 12, and Charles, 13.

This was the 45th Memorial Day ceremony in a series that began in Plattsburg
after World War II, said Charles Hoskins, the 76-year-old master of ceremonies.
In the early years, said Skip Tinnen, publisher of the weekly Plattsburg Leader,
the veterans, friends and families marched a mile and a half down an avenue of
flags to the cemetery.

Later, they shortened the route to the half-mile between the American Legion
Post and Green Lawn. Only recently, they began simply to drive or be driven.
Advancing ages are one reason, said Mr. Hoskins. Then, too, the marchers had
failed in recent years to get the accompaniment of a high school band.

The principal speaker, Mr. Green, is clearly one of this town's favorite people.
A black man in a town that is 80 percent white, he is a former chief deputy
sheriff here in Clinton County, a former police chief of Plattsburg and surely
one of the few black people ever to hold those posts in a predominantly white
town in Missouri.

Memories of Normandy

He survived ''158 days of hell,'' as he puts it, as a member of a port battalion
that unloaded supplies from freighters and landing craft after the Normandy
invasion, often under fire and aerial bombardments. It was that distinction that
gave him his role in the spotlight today.

His speech was bracketed by the words of the Rev. Ed McCurley of the First
Christian Church, who gave both the invocation and the benediction, including
this thought: ''May we also remember the suffering at war of those who returned
to us.''

Another Scout, Scott Peery, 14, saluted as the strains of taps wafted through
the clear air. In freshly pressed uniforms, E. W. Dixon, a 63-year-old veteran
of World War II; Wayne Ford, a Vietnam veteran who is 40, and other members of a
seven-man rifle team from American Legion Post 97 raised their weapons and fired
three times for a 21-gun salute.

Mary Fern Davis, widow of another World War II veteran, placed a wreath on a
brick memorial wall beneath an American flag that flew at half-staff and the
banners of the American Legion and Veterans of Foreign Wars. Standing at
attention were the rifle team; Mr. Hoskins, and Mark Goosey, a 75-year-old
veteran of 22 bombing raids over Japan who was a member of the color guard.

Flowers on the Graves

Memorial Day, originally named Decoration Day, grew out of a practice among
Confederate women of decorating the graves of fallen soldiers. May 30 was first
designated as a day for putting flowers on those graves in the North in 1868,
but other days - April 26, May 10, and June 3 -are celebrated in various
Southern states.

''The forces that keep the observance viable are veterans' interests,'' said Mr.
Linderman. ''And we can thank God that we may have no new wars to feed that
interest.''

Robert L. Daniel, a historian at Ohio University, noted that most students in
college today have no memories of any war, including Vietnam.

And he says observances of the holiday have been weakened even more by the
practice of moving Memorial Day from May 30 to the closest Monday in the last
May weekend. ''It's secularizing the day,'' he said.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: photo: Although social historians are describing Memorial Day as
increasingly becoming the property of older Americans, a Boy Scout, Charles
Martin, played taps while a fellow Scout, Scott Peery, saluted during the
closing of the service yesterday at Green Lawn Cemetery in Plattsburg, Mo.
(Lauren Chapin for The New York Times); map of Plattsburg, Mo. (pg. A14)

                   Copyright 1990 The New York Times Company

                              200 of 288 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                  May 29, 1990, Tuesday, Late Edition - Final

Corrections A Day to Sun, Sell and Even Remember

BYLINE: By JOHN TIERNEY

SECTION: Section A; Page 3, Column 1; Metropolitan Desk Section B; Page 1,
Column 2; Metropolitan Desk

LENGTH: 66 words974 words


A front-page picture caption yesterday about the Memorial Day parade in New York
misidentified the marchers. They were Chinese-American veterans from the
American Legion's Kim Lau Post, not Korean-Americans. Another Memorial Day
caption, about women performing folk dances, misidentifed the monument in the
picture. It was the World War II memorial in Battery Park, not the Vietnam
memorial.

It was a small parade, and the crowd was often only one-deep along the sidewalk.
But they clapped respectfully when the veterans of many wars marched by on West
72d Street yesterday morning, and there was a pleasing solemnity missing from
most Manhattan parades. At least until the truck of WHTZ-FM rolled by, towing a
set of speakers that required their own trailer.

Patrick Cooke, a 37-year-old from San Francisco, winced as he looked at the
title of the radio station's float and listened to the speakers blaring a
martial tune that was definitely not in beat with the parade's drummers.

''Lest we not forget - a boombox,'' he said. ''Call me a traditionalist, but I
really don't think our boys charged up Iwo Jima so they'd be remembered with
something called the Z-100 King Kong Master Blaster.''

Memorial Day, as always, was a day of many cultural rituals as people remembered
their war dead, endured car trips with relatives, got sunburned and bought
mattresses at super closeout prices. Those are disparate themes - the patriotic,
the domestic, the commercial -but at least one person, Nicholas Giammona,
managed to embody all of them yesterday.

He had taken his 4-year-old daughter, Nicole, in his van to a spot next to St.
John's Cemetery in Queens. There, on Woodhaven Boulevard, they lounged in the
sun selling American flags and an invention of Mr. Giammona's, the American
Dream Game.

''You have to go around the board and fulfill five dreams,'' explained Mr.
Giammona, 42, who lives in Woodhaven, Queens. ''Purchase a home, go on a
vacation, purchase a car, a boat and jewelry. Once you receive all five dreams,
you go up the golden ladders and enter into the box of Financial Freedom to win
the game.''

Mr. Giammona said that sales of flags and games were going well on Memorial Day.
''I'm a veteran,'' he said, referring to a stint in the Navy that took him to
Vietnam in the late 1960's, ''and I see this game as a chance to preach what I
fought for and what I believe.

''I really believe this is the best country there is,'' he said. ''It's where
someone like me can have his dreams and go in the street and sell whatever he
wants. That's what people around the world are fighting for.''

Like most Americans, Mr. Giammona was not at a Memorial Day parade yesterday.
Soldiers tend to get forgotten when much of the world is at peace, and the
biggest crowds yesterday were at the beaches and the parks in Long Island,
Connecticut, and New Jersey. ''As Rodney Dangerfield says, we don't get no
respect,'' said John J. Morahan, a spokesman for the American Legion, as the
parade began on the Upper West Side of Manhattan yesterday. ''We used to get 20
blocks of marchers; today we'll be lucky to get three or four. A lot of the
veterans who used to march have died, and a lot of the public doesn't remember
what this day is all about.''

There was a grander parade in Forest Hills, Queens, complete with equestrians,
bagpipers and Army vehicles carrying children sitting next to anti-tank weapons.
One burly man marched with a T-shirt emblazoned with an American flag and the
words, ''Just Try to Burn This One.''

The loudest applause, in Forest Hills and at some other parades, went to Vietnam
veterans. Many of them marched in camouflage uniforms decorated with slogans
like: ''Vietnam Vet And Damn Proud of It,'' ''Viet Cong Hunting Club'' and ''If
You Haven't Been There, Shut Your Mouth.''

Tom Wolf, a 43-year-old Vietnam veteran from the Bronx who brought his
9-year-old son in a matching maroon beret to the Forest Hills parade, said he
was moved by the crowd's warm reception.

Few Problems at Beaches

''We've started coming out of the closet,'' he said. ''I got the goose pimples
again, remembering the war. It makes me think about the buddies I lost and how
glad I am that I survived to have a son.''

Officials reported few problems at beaches - few traffic tie-ups, arrests or
seaborne invasions of garbage. There were 60,000 people at the Coney Island
beach and 90,000 enjoying salsa bands and barbecues at Orchard Beach in the
Bronx. Jones Beach State Park attracted 80,000 people, slightly more than it
gets on a typical Memorial Day.

In Asbury Park, N.J., however, the beach drew only about 15,000 people, which
Police Chief Gary Wheary called a relatively light crowd. ''It's nice, it's
bright, it's sunny but it's cool,'' he said. ''Not exactly ideal weather for
Memorial Day.''

Point Pleasant, N.J., celebrated the reopening of Jenkinson's Pavilion, a
boardwalk structure built in 1928 and damaged by a fire last November. The new
structure features an arcade, bars and restaurant patterned on the ones ruined
in the fire.

Wreaths From the Intrepid

At the Intrepid Sea-Air-Space Museum, the Marine Corps Memorial Association
honored the military services by dropping six wreaths of carnations and daisies
into the Hudson River from the hangar deck of the aircraft carrier, docked at
West 46th Street in Manhattan.

''What does Memorial Day mean to you?'' asked Louis P. Wein, a lieutenant
colonel in the Marine Corps Reserve, at the Intrepid ceremony. ''Unfortunately,
some think it's the holiday that starts the summer season, a season of sun,
swimming and relaxation. Others rightly believe it is that holiday that
commemorates those who have served in war.''

Mabelle E. Elife, one of several hundred people in attendance, was in full
agreement. It was the fifth straight year she had taken the bus by herself from
Harlem to attend the ceremony at the Intrepid. She said she had come to honor
the memory of her late husband, a veteran of World War II, and all his
compatriots.

''I find this ceremony very touching,'' she said. ''It's almost as if they're
talking to me personally. I'm very sentimental about our veterans, and I want to
remember them. We forget too easily.''

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Members of the Marine Corps Memorial Association casting wreaths into
the Hudson River yesterday from the museum at the aircraft carrier Intrepid.
(Neal Boenzi/NYT) (pg. B1); A group of women performed folk dances yesterday to
celebrate Memorial Day near the Vietnam War Memorial in Battery Park. (Dith
Pran/NYT) (pg. B3)

                   Copyright 1990 The New York Times Company

                              201 of 288 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 May 30, 1990, Wednesday, Late Edition - Final
                              Correction Appended

Bok to Step Aside at Harvard, Ending 20 Years as President

BYLINE: By FOX BUTTERFIELD, Special to The New York Times

SECTION: Section A; Page 1, Column 2; National Desk

LENGTH: 1413 words

DATELINE: CAMBRIDGE, Mass., May 29


Derek C. Bok announced today that he would step down next spring as president of
Harvard University, ending his 20-year tenure in perhaps the most prestigious
post in American higher education.

The resignation of Mr. Bok has been rumored for some time. In an interview
today, Mr. Bok, who is 60 years old, said he was leaving partly because ''I've
always thought 20 years was a good round number,'' and partly because Harvard is
about to begin a $2 billion multi-year fund-raising campaign that he said
''calls for continuity.''

His announcement comes when Harvard is also without a dean of the Faculty of
Arts and Sciences, the school's second-most important post. Henry Rosovsky, a
popular and highly respected former dean whom Mr. Bok has named to be acting
dean next year, had been widely considered a leading candidate to succeed Mr.
Bok as president. But Mr. Rosovsky is 62, and he said today that he would not
seek the job.

A search committee will be formed shortly, Harvard officials said today.

Two Eventful Decades

Mr. Bok, a graduate of Stanford University and the Harvard Law School, is only
the second president since Harvard was founded in 1636 who did not graduate from
Harvard College, the undergraduate school. The other was the university's first
president, Henry Dunster.

Mr. Bok's years at Harvard have been marked by the creation of the John F.
Kennedy School of Government; the effective merger of Harvard with Radcliffe;
the development of a new curriculum for undergraduates, and a record of strong
financial management.

Mr. Bok oversaw the establishment of the Harvard Management Company, which
helped Harvard's endowment grow from $1 billion when he assumed the presidency
in 1971 to $5 billion today.

Mr. Bok has come under criticism from some students and alumni for refusing to
divest all of Harvard's holdings in companies doing business in South Africa,
and he lost a nasty battle with the school's clerical workers in 1988, when they
won an election that permitted them to unionize.

'What a Wonderful Tour'

But Mr. Bok was widely praised today by faculty members and other university
presidents for his advocacy of liberal education, his eloquence in articulating
the troubles facing American universities and his decency as a colleague.

''He's just been extraordinary -what a wonderful tour Derek had,'' said Donald
Kennedy, the president of Stanford. ''I've found him terrific to talk to about
issues in higher education or when I just had a practical problem.''

William G. Bowen, the president of Princeton University from 1972 to 1988 and
now the head of the Mellon Foundation in New York, said of Mr. Bok: ''He has
been and continues to be a simply extraordinary leader in higher education. He
served Harvard's interests very well.''

'No Cult of Personality'

It was natural for Mr. Bok to assume a leading national role, Mr. Bowen said,
given Harvard's status as the oldest university in the country and its
reputation as one of the pre-eminent institutions of higher learning. But Mr.
Bowen added that with Mr. Bok, ''There was no cult of personality, no
overwhelming ego involved.''

John Kenneth Galbraith, a Harvard professor emeritus in economics, said Mr. Bok
''sets a model for all college presidents in his amiable response to intrusive
and even obnoxious professors.'' Professor Galbraith said that whenever he wrote
a note of suggestion or complaint, Mr. Bok always wrote back by hand. ''No one
in the computer age was so addicted to the pen,'' Professor Galbraith said.

Mr. Kennedy of Stanford, a graduate of Harvard College who also received his
Ph.D. in biology from Harvard, said he sees three major challenges for Mr. Bok's
successor. The first is insuring Harvard's financial stability, even though it
has the largest endowment of any private university in the country, because of
rapidly rising costs.

The other problems are reconsidering the unique relationships among Harvard's
different schools, including the Medical School, the Law School, the Business
School and the Faculty of Arts and Sciences, which are run independently, and
improving the quality of undergraduate education.

Next Decade's Challenge

James O. Freedman, the president of Dartmouth College and also a graduate of
Harvard, said the biggest challenge would be improving teaching for
undergraduates, a perpetual student complaint at Harvard. ''It is very hard in a
large research institution to place adequate emphasis on undergraduate
teaching,'' Mr. Freedman said. ''That's the challenge of Harvard's next
decade.''

But Mr. Freedman, who is chairman of the Ivy League Group of Presidents, said
Mr. Bok's greatest achievement was his role in revising Harvard's undergraduate
curriculum after the student upheavals of the late 1960's. In the late 1970's,
Harvard began to return to a ''core curriculum'' of required liberal arts
courses, including some newly created classes in what was termed ''moral
reasoning,'' or ethics.

Mr. Bok was chosen Harvard's 25th president shortly after anti-Vietnam War
demonstrations had disrupted the campus. There were widespread hopes that his
expertise as a labor lawyer and his experience as dean of the Harvard Law School
would help him calm the university.

After the United States withdrew from Vietnam and the student protests subsided,
Mr. Bok was able to preside over a period of sustained growth at Harvard.

Turmoil in Law School

Paradoxically, the one Harvard school that has remained beset by unrest is Mr.
Bok's own original unit, the law school. It has been embroiled in a controversy
over hiring more minority faculty members and divided by a dispute on the proper
way of teaching the law.

Mr. Bok's most obvious achievement has been the creation of the Kennedy School
of Government. Just as earlier Harvard presidents had founded the medical school
and the business school, Mr. Bok had a vision of helping stimulate the growth of
a new class of professionally trained experts in government to improve American
politics and public service.

Under Mr. Bok's guidance and with a large infusion of funds, the Kennedy School
has emerged as one of the most dynamic parts of the university, with popular
public lectures by visiting dignitaries, new case studies in public-policy
problems and a growing faculty roster that has included a number of senior
members of the Reagan and Bush administrations, such as Richard G. Darman, the
director of the Office of Management and Budget.

But some professors in other departments have charged that, unlike the law or
medical schools, the Kennedy School does not teach any real discipline, and has
diverted funds from other parts of the university.

Another Leading Candidate

The Kennedy School's dean, Robert D. Putnam, a professor of government, is
another leading candidate to succeed Mr. Bok.

Among Mr. Bok's other accomplishments was his reorganization of the university's
administration to install a series of powerful vice presidents, a move some
professors have criticized as infringing on the faculty's powers. Mr. Bok also
set up Harvard's own in-house legal team.

Mr. Rosovsky, who will become acting dean of the faculty this summer, said one
of Mr. Bok's real achievements was simply his longevity, at a time when most
college presidents burn out after a decade or less because of the demands of
fund-raising and faculty disputes.

Moreover, Mr. Rosovsky said, Mr. Bok had been ''very accessible, very
pastoral,'' in his contact with professors, and he had taken enormous pleasure
in his authority to make all tenured appointments to Harvard's faculty.

''He always said that was the part of the job he enjoyed most,'' Mr. Rosovsky
commented. ''It was what kept him intellectually curious.''

The only current presidents of major universities who have served longer than
Mr. Bok, according to the Association of American Universities, are Chancellor
Charles E. Young of the University of California at Los Angeles, who took office
in 1968, and Wesley W. Posvar of the University of Pittsburgh, who assumed his
job in 1967. Mr. Posvar has announced he will retire next year.

In the interview today, Mr. Bok insisted he had been too busy to think about
what he would do after leaving. The Harvard Corporation, which governs Harvard,
has offered him the prestigious job of university professor, the best teaching
position at Harvard. But Mr. Bok said, ''I'm not sure if this is what I will
do.''

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

CORRECTION-DATE: May 31, 1990, Thursday, Late Edition - Final

CORRECTION:

An article yesterday about Derek Bok's plan to leave the presidency of Harvard
misstated the number of the university's presidents who were not graduates of
Harvard College. Mr. Bok was the third; the others were Harvard's first two
presidents, Henry Dunster and Charles Chauncy.

GRAPHIC: Photo: Derek C. Bok yesterday after announcing his resignation. (Joe
Wrinn for The New York Times)

                   Copyright 1990 The New York Times Company

                              202 of 288 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 May 30, 1990, Wednesday, Late Edition - Final

Corrections

SECTION: Section A; Page 3, Column 1; Metropolitan Desk

LENGTH: 66 words


A front-page picture caption yesterday about the Memorial Day parade in New York
misidentified the marchers. They were Chinese-American veterans from the
American Legion's Kim Lau Post, not Korean-Americans. Another Memorial Day
caption, about women performing folk dances, misidentifed the monument in the
picture. It was the World War II memorial in Battery Park, not the Vietnam
memorial.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Correction

                   Copyright 1990 The New York Times Company

                              203 of 288 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                   June 1, 1990, Friday, Late Edition - Final

Asians to Press U.S. on Boat People

BYLINE: By PAUL LEWIS, Special to The New York Times

SECTION: Section A; Page 3, Column 4; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 713 words

DATELINE: UNITED NATIONS, May 31


Britain and six Southeast Asian nations plan a new attempt to persuade the Bush
Administration and the Vietnamese Government to agree to the forced return of
thousands of Vietnamese boat people later this summer.

The six Asian nations are warning that unless the forcible repatriation is
accepted, they will no longer allow boat people to land, and an international
plan for looking after these refugees will collapse.

The diplomatic campaign, which diplomats say will involve high level appeals in
Washington and Hanoi next month is intended to secure American and Vietnamese
backing for the return of boat people who are deemed to be economic migrants
rather than political refugees by July 1.

Asians Present an Ultimatum

This deadline was set at a meeting in Manila earlier this month of the 29
countries that drew up the Comprehensive Plan of Action on Indochinese Refugees
at a United Nations-sponsored conference in Geneva last year. If the United
States and Vietnam agree, these countries will meet again in Geneva on June 26
to prepare the repatriation.

The six members of the Association of Southeast Asian Nations - Singapore,
Malaysia, Indonesia, the Philippines, Thailand and Brunei - which are caring for
about 50,000 Vietnamese boat people, warned that unless the United States and
Vietnam agree to forced return of economic migrants, they will refuse to accept
any more boat people, as Malaysia is increasingly doing already.

This would effectively destroy the Comprehensive Action Plan, diplomats say,
under which these countries and Hong Kong agreed to offer asylum to boat people
fleeing Vietnam but to resettle only those deemed genuine political refugees.

Hong Kong Wants Thousands Out

Britain has said it also wants to send back the roughly 8,500 Vietnamese boat
people in Hong Kong to whom it has already refused refugee status as soon as
another 1,700 who have agreed to go back on a voluntary basis have been sent
home.

By the end of the year British officials say about 40,000 of Hong Kong's
estimated 55,000 boat people will probably have had their requests for asylum
denied and be designated for forced repatriation.

Britain and the six Asian nations want the forced repatriations to be carried
out under the supervision of the United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees
to ensure that the returnees are well treated by the Vietnamese and found
housing and jobs.

But the United States has blocked their plan, arguing that conditions in Vietnam
are too bad for the refugees to be sent back there. Privately, British and
Southeast Asian officials feel that the Bush Administration's attitude is
chiefly influenced by fear of a political backlash among Vietnamese Americans if
the United States supports repatriation.

Britain Calls for Special Camp

As a result, Britain has proposed that the Bush Administration build a special
camp for the boat people on Guam, the American Pacific island, and accept boat
people denied refuge there until it judges that conditions in Vietnam have
sufficiently improved for them to go back.

It has also asked the United States to pay up to $80 million toward the cost of
caring for boat people currently housed in Hong Kong's refugee camps.

The Administration has refused both requests, saying it cannot accept people who
are not genuine refugees and that, in any event, housing them on American soil
would only encourage more Vietnamese to flee the country.

Fewer Arriving in Hong Kong

While Hong Kong's overcrowded refugee camps have forced Britain to take the lead
in pressing for forced repatriation in the past, refugee officials say fewer
refugees are arriving there now and conditions are easing. In the Southeast
Asian countries, on the other hand, the flow of new arrivals is still runnning
at relatively high levels, and the governments are increasingly anxious to start
sending boat people home, by force if necessary.

According to the latest United Nations figures, Indonesia has received 5,087
boat people so far this year, lifting the total to 12,169. Thailand has taken in
3,772, giving it a total of 13,069. Malaysia, which already cares for over
19,000 boat people, has received another 988. And the Philippines with 9,092 has
taken in another 200 this year.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1990 The New York Times Company

                              204 of 288 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                   June 1, 1990, Friday, Late Edition - Final

Review/Photography;
The Personal Side of Johnson as President

BYLINE: By ANDY GRUNDBERG

SECTION: Section C; Page 1, Column 3; Weekend Desk

LENGTH: 1421 words


THOSE who were not around in the 1960's will find ''L.B.J.: The White House
Years,'' a show of some 120 black-and-white photographs at the International
Center of Photography, an intriguing and occasionally edifying pictorial history
of the Presidency of Lyndon Baines Johnson. Those who experienced the years 1963
to 1968, however, may recognize the exhibition as something else: an ingenious
attempt to rehabilitate the memory of a politician whose integrity and
accomplishments are as much under attack today as they were some 25 years ago.

The exhibition, which is based on an illustrated book of the same title written
by Harry Middleton and published by Harry N. Abrams, begins with an image that
is etched into the memories of all Americans over the age of 40. Taken by the
photojournalist Cecil Stoughton, it shows Johnson being sworn in as President in
the cabin of Air Force One, with his wife, Lady Bird, to his right and
Jacqueline Kennedy, still wearing a blood-stained wool suit, to his left. The
photograph, which remains discomfiting because of its ungainly mix of public
event and private grief, might be said to foreshadow the end of the exhibition,
which is dominated by images related to the war in Vietnam.

In between, there are pictures of Johnson campaigning for election in 1964,
visiting Appalachia in a helicopter as part of what he called his War on
Poverty, huddling with his staff, Congressmen and civil rights and labor leaders
while organizing legislation for the Great Society he envisioned, face to face
with Richard M. Nixon in a White House office, and entertaining visitors to his
Texas ranch. Most are apparently behind-the-scenes views taken by Yoichi
Okamoto, a United States Information Agency photographer assigned to the White
House. Okamoto, who died in 1985, managed to cover the Johnson Presidency in a
photojournalistic fashion, capturing such intimate moments as Johnson's 1968
phone call to console the family of Robert F. Kennedy after his assassination,
as well as more reportorial ones, including images of the President in the
hospital before and after a gallbladder operation.

But the notorious photograph of Johnson pulling up his shirt to reveal his scar
from the operation - the scar was later transformed by a political cartoonist
into a map of Vietnam - was taken by a United Press International photographer,
not by Okamoto or any other photographer on his staff. This suggests that there
were limits to the candid approach the White House photographers employed,
limits determined at least in part by the public relations value of the images
that were released to the news media.

Indeed, the image of Johnson portrayed throughout the exhibit - of an avuncular,
high-spirited but sincere and caring man who tried to make the Presidency more
human and humane, in the tradition of Andrew Jackson - is at radical odds with
the portrait of venality and chicanery meticulously traced by Robert A. Caro in
his best-selling biography of Johnson's political rise, ''Means of Ascent''
(Alfred A. Knopf). One might even say that the pictures of ''L.B.J.: The White
House Years'' resemble a public relations campaign as much now as they did when
they were first taken.

Johnson's Presidency could be said to have ended as it began, in tragedy. The
war in Vietnam led to domestic protest and discontent, and the projected Great
Society never materialized. A picture in the exhibition of Johnson with his head
down while listening to a tape-recorded account of action in Vietnam speaks
eloquently (albeit metaphorically) of the war's impact on his state of mind. But
overall the show masks the extent to which the war had become a major public and
political preoccupation by 1968.

This neglect is partly remedied by a second exhibition at the photography
center, ''Sal Lopes: The Wall.'' Consisting of 50 vivid color photographs taken
at the Vietnam Veterans Memorial in Washington by Mr. Lopes, a Boston
photojournalist, ''The Wall'' gives the war's toll an emotional immediacy
missing from ''L.B.J.: The White House Years.'' Mr. Lopes has done well with the
powerful monument designed by Maya Ying Lin and dedicated in 1982, using it as a
backdrop to highlight the human interactions it provokes. In some prints the
monument is a dense ebony, isolating arms that reach out to touch the names
inscribed in its surface. Elsewhere, it appears forest green, reflecting a
visitor's pained expression.

Mr. Lopes's pictures of tear-stained faces and fatigue-clad men embracing one
another convey some of the emotion one feels when experiencing the wall in
person. This is no small accomplishment, but it is in the final analysis a
derivative one: without the pre-existing power of Miss Lin's 250-foot-long wedge
of granite, the photographs would not carry as much weight. In the final
analysis, both the Lopes and Okamoto photographs are of interest primarily
because of the information they provide, not because of any esthetic or
pictorial values. This is a distinction that is essential to any definition of
art, photographs or not, and one that the International Center of Photography
has yet to clearly perceive.

''L.B.J.: The White House Years'' was organized by the International Center of
Photography in collaboration with the Lyndon Baines Johnson Library and Museum
in Austin, Tex., and is sponsored by the professional division of the Eastman
Kodak Company. ''Sal Lopes: The Wall'' was organized by the Chrysler Museum in
Norfolk, Va. Both exhibitions remain on view at the photography center, 1130
Fifth Avenue, at 94th Street, through July 15.

Barbara Steinman: 'Icon'
Museum of Modern Art
11 West 53d Street
Through July 31

Although it is a video installation, Barbara Steinman's ''Icon'' resists video's
seemingly inherent propensity for spectacle and entertainment. The installation
is remarkably low key and understated: on passing a color photograph of a marble
Madonna, one enters a room populated by a backlighted, black-and-white image of
the same Madonna and two black-and-white video monitors. On the screens, which
lie behind sheets of frosted glass with oval apertures, are images of test
tubes. One tube remains still, while the other slowly fills with a dark fluid
(blood, presumably), despite being tilted so that it normally would empty. At
intervals of a minute or so, a voice fills the room with the words, ''Take a
deep breath.''

Given the test tubes, and what appears to be an X-ray machine pointed at the
photograph in the entry, Ms. Steinman seems to be making a connection between
the technologies of medicine and art conservation. But there is more to it than
that: the use of the Madonna figure within this technological arena suggests an
eerie equation of religion, art and medicine. Art and Christianity, the Canadian
artist seems to be saying, are linked by a faith in their transformative powers.
And by alluding to the taking of blood and the X-raying of a painting, she
implies that both are being emptied of their mythic vitality. These are large
subjects for any artist to take on, especially in an installation this small in
scope, but Ms. Steinman grapples with them with admirable economy and aplomb.

Edward Maxey
James Danziger Gallery 415 West Broadway (near Spring Street)
Through June 9

In the tradition of Elaine Sturtevant and Sherrie Levine, Edward Maxey
reinterprets well-known 20th-century art, in Mr. Maxey's case, the photographs
of Robert Mapplethorpe. What distinguishes Mr. Maxey, however, is that he
apparently doesn't mean to. He is simply under the spell of the now
much-talked-about photographer, who died last year. This is not particularly
surprising, since Mr. Maxey is Mapplethorpe's youngest brother and one-time
studio assistant, but it does make his first one-man show of 31 black-and-white
photographs an unnerving experience.

Like his brother, Mr. Maxey makes crisp, dramatic photographs of nudes, still
lifes, demimonde celebrities and himself. At their best, they may rival his
brother's images - his portraits of Annie Lennox and Sandra Bernhard, in
particular - and occasionally he strays into new territory, as in an untitled
close-up of a cat's face. But to equal an already clearly defined style is
clearly a Sisyphean enterprise, as followers of Henri Cartier-Bresson and Walker
Evans have already discovered. Mr. Maxey needs to learn to despise his brother's
style as much as he loves it; as it is, this exhibition is merely the season's
most haunting curiosity.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: photos: Yoichi Okamoto's 1968 portrait of Lyndon Johnson at his ranch
is in a show of Johnson photographs. (Lyndon B. Johnson Library/ICP) (pg. C1);
One of 50 photographs, taken by Sal Lopes at the Vietnam Veterans Memorial, in
an exhibit at the International Center of Photography. (Sal Lopes/International
Center of Photography) (pg. C26)

TYPE: Review

                   Copyright 1990 The New York Times Company

                              205 of 288 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                  June 2, 1990, Saturday, Late Edition - Final

Books of The Times;
The Glitter That Brings On a Shiver

BYLINE: By JAMES CARROLL; James Carroll is the author of seven novels, the most
recent ''Firebird.''

SECTION: Section 1; Page 17, Column 1; Cultural Desk

LENGTH: 1012 words



Markers
By Sidney Zion
426 pages. Donald I. Fine Inc.. $19.95.

''Markers'' is a shrewd novel full of interesting action and complex characters.
Its subject - the disenchantment of America - is large and important. Sidney
Zion has set out to expose the hollowness of what passes for power in our age.
If ''Markers'' finally disappoints, it does so powerfully because its positive
aspects are numerous. The pages crackle with savvy dialogue and vigorous prose.
The story sweeps through some of the great public events of our time
-particularly of the Kennedy era -and it lays bare the hidden workings of
politics, law, journalism and crime.

Mr. Zion has the novelist's gift for details that matter, and he uses it to
bring freshness and zip to some of fiction's most familiar scenes - courtrooms,
glitzy parties, newsrooms, New York saloons - and familiar types: the Jewish
grandfather, cynical but wise; the big city Irish pol, charming and amoral; the
ruthlessly loving mother; the ice-cold deal maker; the Mafia capo; the writer
with a conscience and a taste for booze.

''Markers'' is a flashy, entertaining novel about the slick, star-studded world
of men and women who have made it - made it with a vengeance. They are rich,
successful, glamorous, beautiful. Our magazines, movies and television shows are
full of such people, and we are interested in them partly because their surfaces
shine so and partly because of the way they make us shiver. They are a warning
to us, and we want to understand more fully the danger they represent. No wonder
we look for them in intelligent fiction.

Jessie Frank is one of the two main characters of ''Markers,'' and the shiver he
evokes is like the shiver Donald Trump or Michael R. Milken send so efficiently
up the spine. Frank is the ice-cold deal maker, a criminal lawyer who never
loses. An eerie embodiment of what has gone awry in our culture, he relates to
the world only in terms of ''markers,'' the game players' system of recording
the score, and therefore his every transaction is essentially commercial. Before
he makes a choice he measures it for its potential as a gain or a loss, but only
with reference to himself. Whether he is mounting a stunning defense of a man
accused of incest or plotting to win absolute power over the Oval Office or
conducting an affair with the gorgeous but treacherous Wylie Forester, who ''is
more beautiful than Marilyn Monroe,'' he is always collecting markers.

Frank's mother, a Broadway producer; his adopted grandfather, a retired Jewish
mobster; his mentor, an Irish politician; and various figures from real life -
Mayor Richard J. Daley of Chicago, Joseph P. Kennedy Sr., the gangster Meyer
Lansky, Lyndon B. Johnson - all operate according to the rule of markers. They
ruthlessly keep score on one another with threats, favors, invitations, requests
and even, in the case of a cruelly perverted inheritance, bequests. This is a
world in which there are no gifts -only new debts to be cashed in later -and
therefore in which there is no sense of the givenness of human life itself, that
it is all a gift. By showing us that, Mr. Zion shows us the absolute
impoverishment, despite their riches, of people who live only for the
accumulation of power.

''Markers'' focuses at crucial points on the Kennedys, perhaps because in
American politics they are regarded as having raised the old tradition of
''keeping score'' to an art form. Mr. Zion's point is that the heartless system
of markers, having begun as the essential structure of criminal interaction and
having moved with devastating effect into the political realm, has now corrupted
personal life as well. Witness the pathetic Jessie Frank.

The other main character of this novel is Mike O'Rourke, the journalist. He and
Frank are best friends from boyhood. ''Markers'' wants us to take Mike O'Rourke
as a man of principle, and indeed the central conflict of the novel, introduced
in its opening and ''resolved'' at its close, is supposed to consist of
O'Rourke's moral challenge to his old friend, the heartless lawyer.

It is precisely here that the novel fails most, however. There is no conflict of
consequence between these two because, though O'Rourke behaves like a modern man
of principle - he opposes the war in Vietnam, defies Mayor Daley to his face,
chooses conscience over his unscrupulous father, attacks the establishment in
his newspaper column and makes a good marriage - he does so out of the author's
impulses, not his own.

O'Rourke is portrayed as a raw, plain-spoken news guy in the mold of the
antiestablishment blue-collar journalist who defends the interests of the little
people, but like most of those writers, O'Rourke, despite Mr. Zion's intentions
for him, is a fake. The reader simply cannot believe anything he says or does,
and that kills the novel.

''Markers'' falls short because, like O'Rourke, it too has a hollowness about
it. At crucial turns in the plot, Mr. Zion forces events in ways that are simply
unbelievable, and certain key choices of main characters, which serve all too
obviously to turn the narrative wheels, are not remotely consistent with who the
novel has told us those characters are. Nothing sounds as hollow as a story that
lacks the ring of truth, and unfortunately for those who care about its subject
or admire its style, that is the kind of story ''Markers'' is. It lacks inner
coherence. Instead of exposing the assumptions of the corrupt world in which
appearances count for more than realities, this novel shares them.

Not that O'Rourke is too good to be true, but that goodness itself is so thinly
conceived here. It is a matter of received gestures and familiar liberal
attitudes that still are at the service, finally, only of the self. Nowhere does
this novel imply that goodness might involve authentic acts of real, high-cost -
one dares to say - sacrifice for someone else. Evil is rendered with energy, wit
and glamour. It is virtue that once again - here is American culture's essential
decadence - has been made to seem banal.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo: Sidney Zion. (Tony Triolo/Donald I. Fine Inc.)

TYPE: Review

                   Copyright 1990 The New York Times Company

                              206 of 288 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                   June 3, 1990, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

CAMPUS LIFE: Georgia;
A Student Group Works to End Racial Incidents

SECTION: Section 1; Part 2, Page 44, Column 4; Metropolitan Desk

LENGTH: 445 words

DATELINE: ATHENS, Ga.


Residents of a dormitory at the University of Georgia have organized to put a
stop to racial harassment.

The latest such incident occurred in April when someone threw eggs into the room
of Teckchee Chew, a native of Singapore, who has been in the United States for
two academic quarters as an agriculture major.

Mr. Chew told the university police that someone also tore down the blinds in
his room in Myers Hall and left a Confederate flag outside his window with a
threatening racial slur alluding to the Vietnam War.

After he reported the incident, Mr. Chew dropped the matter, saying he did not
want it blown out of proportion. But the Myers Hall Racial Awareness Task Force
refuses to forget the incident.

The group was formed in February after racial slurs were scrawled on Black
History Month posters and bulletin boards in the residence hall.

Eddie Bussey, like Mr. Chew one of the 500 residents of Myers Hall and the
president of its council, said: ''I was affected in three ways: as a resident,
as president of Myers Hall and as a black student. In my position, I had to take
some type of action. I want to combat this problem and get the point across to
the residents and the students at the university that these things just can't be
tolerated from college students.''

Group Meets Weekly

The 50-member task force met frequently when posters were defaced in February,
but has met weekly since the incident involving Mr. Chew.

Barbara Roland, a sophomore journalism major from Augusta, Ga., a member of
Myers's security staff and a co-chairman of the task force, said that the group
was developing a student questionnaire to survey attitudes toward minorities
including blacks, Asians and homosexuals, and had increased building security.

The task force has recommended improved lighting outside the building and has
succeeded in having bushes around the first floor trimmed. Extra people have
been hired by the university's housing department to patrol halls in Myers from
11 P.M. to 7 A.M.

Leslie Bates, director of the university's newly formed Department of Minority
Services and Programs, said, ''This could be the first time some people have had
any kind of meaningful dialogue with someone different from them.'' He is
developing an African-American Cultural Center which is to open next fall in the
university's Memorial Hall.

''I in no way want to force my culture on anyone, but now is the time to open
our minds,'' said Mr. Bussey, who is a junior management major from Augusta. ''I
would never say we've stamped out racism in Myers Hall or on this campus, but
we've made a statement as students that this isn't acceptable.''

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo: Residents of Myers Hall at the University of Georgia have
organized a task force to stop incidents of racial harassment. Barbara Roland, a
co-chairman of the task force, patrols the dormitory's halls. (Mari L. Berry for
The New York Times)

                   Copyright 1990 The New York Times Company

                              207 of 288 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                   June 3, 1990, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

FILM VIEW;
What the Beauty And the Beasts Have in Common

BYLINE: By Vincent Canby

SECTION: Section 2; Page 13, Column 1; Arts and Leisure Desk

LENGTH: 2189 words


In ''Pretty Woman,'' Julia Roberts shows off legs that begin somewhere above
Augusta, Me., and are still going strong beyond Baja California. In fact, they
are 44 inches from hip to toe - the measurements she gives in the movie. The
legs of the four teen-age mutant ninja turtles, in ''Teen-Age Mutant Ninja
Turtles,'' are a good deal shorter, stubbier and more rubbery, their feet
two-toed. Yet magnificent legs are what the two films have in common. According
to the May 23 issue of Variety, ''Teen-Age Mutant Ninja Turtles'' has earned
$114,032,497 in its first 52 days at American box offices, and ''Pretty Woman''
$109,624,898 in 59 days.

That's what people in the movie business call ''legs,'' meaning staying power.
''Teen-Age Mutant Ninja Turtles,'' about anthropomorphic, crime-fighting
turtles, and ''Pretty Woman,'' in which a Reagan-era corporate raider (Richard
Gere) finds happiness with a Hollywood Boulevard hooker (Ms. Roberts), are
America's two most popular movies at the moment.

Having somehow managed to miss both films when they opened, and being put off by
the way they were described in even enthusiastic reviews, I stayed away from
each until their popularity more or less demanded that they be seen for
sociological if not esthetic reasons.

Seeing movies, especially very successful movies, after nearly everyone has had
a say, is a great sport usually denied anyone who writes for a large
metropolitan daily. On such rare occasions, the second-guessed gets a chance to
second-guess the second-guessers. This time the fun was doubled or, possibly,
quadrupled - there being two films in question.

One fact should be admitted first. That is, that most extremely popular films
are not always, to put it kindly, the best films or even the most interesting.
There have been exceptions: the George Lucas ''Star Wars'' trilogy, Steven
Spielberg's ''E. T.'' and ''Indiana Jones'' adventures, Francis Coppola's first
''Godfather.''

Very few of the other huge money-makers of their day will ever show up in a
festival devoted to all-time classics. They tend to have been fads of one degree
of eptitude or another: ''Batman,'' ''Flashdance,'' ''Porky's,'' ''Airport,''
''Ben-Hur'' (the William Wyler version), ''The Exorcist,'' ''Beverly Hills Cop
II,'' ''The Sound of Music.''

They can only be read for what they tell us about our hopes, our fears, our
times and, in the case of ''Animal House,'' our table manners.

Though Sylvester Stallone's ''Rambo'' movies didn't have a single coherent
political thought in their respective heads (or maybe for that very reason),
they became emblematic of the Reagan era. Their loudly expressed fury over the
loss of the Vietnam War was the only way their popularity could be understood.
That, and the spectacular viciousness of their absurdist battle scenes.

The astonishing success of ''Teen-Age Mutant Ninja Turtles'' promised to be
somewhat more difficult to explain. Even the title is a mind-twister. It could
as easily be ''Mutant Teen-Age Ninja Turtles'' or ''Ninja Teen-Age Mutant
Turtles.'' A title not easily remembered is, in most instances, a title quickly
forgotten.

As someone who came in late to the whole ninja-turtle phenomenon, I learned in
advance, among other things, that the movie is based on comic book characters
created by Kevin Eastman and Peter Laird. The same characters are also featured
in an animated weekly television series, which comes on too early in the day for
me to see, but which some of my colleagues say is far more endearing (and less
harmful) than the live-action film.

Just what ninja turtles are is explained in the movie by Splinter, who himself
needs a bit of explaining.

Splinter is a sage brown Japanese-born rat, largish (even by Manhattan
standards), which is to say about the size of Tatum O'Neal before she grew up
and married the tennis player.

It seems that many years ago in Japan, Splinter was the pet of Yoshi, an
honorable ninja fighter (a super karate-kid sort) who was forced to flee to New
York with his girlfriend (or wife, I'm fuzzy on their legal status).

After Yoshi and his wife (or girlfriend) were slain by Yoshi's archrival from
Japan, Splinter sought refuge in New York's sewers where, by chance, he found
four baby green turtles mucking around in some radioactive slime. In saving the
baby turtles, Splinter himself became radioactive, and suddenly grew to human
size and superhuman intelligence. The baby turtles mutated into the hardbacked,
karate-chopping, pizza-eating turtle-teenagers of the title.

All of this (revealed in straight exposition and in flashbacks) happens before
the story of the movie begins, but such is the stretchability of minds that
can't yet tie their shoelaces that, when I saw the film, the small kids in the
audience knew what was happening long before I did.

If ''Teen-Age Mutant Ninja Turtles'' were no more than a live-action spinoff of
a cartoon strip and a television series, it seems unlikely that it could have
had such long-lasting box-office legs. Something else is at work here, something
that lies beyond the ken of Bruno Bettelheim (''The Uses of Enchantment'') and
almost everyone else who has analyzed fairy tales into the ground. The
mysterious ingredient: great good, utterly contemporary young-teen-age humor.

As written by Todd W. Langen and Bobby Herbeck, and directed by Steve Barron,
with Animatronic characters created by Jim Henson's Creature Shop, ''Teen-Age
Mutant Ninja Turtles'' is a most unusual lark, played out in a Dickensian
landscape of urban squalor and scored by Chuck Rio's jauntily repetitive, upbeat
ode ''Tequila.''

The film's story is far less complex than the events leading up to it. When the
movie opens, New York City is in the grip of a terrible crime wave, thefts of
everything from stereos to, gulp, skateboards. The perpetrators are latchkey
kids, befriended and then brainwashed by Shredder, a Fagin-like crime lord who
has a heavy Japanese accent and operates a discolike den of iniquity. There,
after a long day of thievery, the lost boys gross out on video games, pool,
poker, soft drinks and the occasional forbidden cigarette.

Because the Manhattan police are so dimwitted, the job of saving the city falls
to a pretty television newscaster named April, a young man named Casey Jones,
the wise old Splinter and his four exuberant ninja turtles, named Raphael,
Michelangelo, Donatello and Leonardo, but more frequently called Ray, Mikey, Don
and Leo.

''Teen-Age Mutant Ninja Turtles'' breaks a lot of rules. Japanese myths, like
VCR's, have been effortlessly integrated into our pop culture. Because so much
of the story takes place at night, the movie is exceptionally dark for a
children's film. Yet the sewer-home of Splinter and his ninja students has the
cozy atmosphere of a kids' clubhouse furnished with stuff discarded by others: a
moth-eaten couch, an ancient television set, a pay-telephone and a rump-sprung
easy chair where Splinter, his bones aching with age, sits and instructs his
charges in truth, karate, beauty, patience and meditation.

The ninja turtles, like ordinary turtles (or ordinary teenagers), all look
exactly alike, except for the color of their headbands. Ray may be a bit more
introspective than the other three, Don more fixated on the next piece of pizza.
I'm still not sure. Yet, acting in concert, they are an endearing crew of
jokesters with hearts of purest, all-American junk food, much more human, in
fact, than the Bill and Ted of the less than ''Excellent Adventure.''

Much has been written about the mayhem in the movie, in which Ray, Leo, Don,
Mikey and the others take on platoons of lost boys and the members of the
Shredder's armed household guard. Yet these encounters seem no more lethal than
similar confrontations in cartoons, and they often have a grace of movement that
is both comic and balletic.

Some of the jokes are not entirely fresh. When Casey Jones is accused of being
claustrophobic, he is insulted and bigoted: ''I've never looked at another man
in my life.'' Mostly, though, the humor is teen-age-cheeky. One of Ray's ninja
pals asks why he brought the pretty April back to their hideaway. Says Ray, ''I
wanted to redecorate - a couple of throw pillows and a TV news reporter.''

''Teen-Age Mutant Ninja Turtles'' is short and sweet and as irrepressible as its
engaging title characters.

''Pretty Woman'' is even more difficult to resist, largely though not entirely
because of the performance by the tall, beautiful Julia Roberts, who has the
no-nonsense stride of Katharine Hepburn and the melting smile of Audrey. From
start to finish, Ms. Roberts glows within the film like the filament in a
crystal-clear light bulb.

According to published reports, ''Pretty Woman,'' written by J. F. Lawton, began
life as a much more somber piece about the brief time-out-of-time shared by a
successful, ruthless young business tycoon and the Hollywood prostitute he hires
for a week. Eventually, the realities of life were to overtake their idyll.

All that changed when the property was taken over by Garry Marshall, the
television writer (''The Dick Van Dyke Show,'' ''The Odd Couple,'' ''Mork and
Mindy'') who went on to become to become a successful film director
(''Overboard'' and the strikingly funny ''Flamingo Kid,'' among others).

Though no one has invoked Bruno Bettelheim's name and work in connection with
''Pretty Woman,'' it owes far more to fairy tales (''Cinderella,'' ''Sleeping
Beauty,'' ''Snow White,'' to name three) than does ''Teen-Age Mutant Ninja
Turtles.''

It also exhibits a lot of the slick savviness of television sitcoms at their
best, which, in turn, carry on the tradition of the kind of Broadway comedy once
written, season after season, by Sam and Bella Spewack, F. Hugh Herbert and
Jerome Chodorov and Joseph Fields.

Much in the way that Herbert's ''Moon Is Blue'' titillated mass audiences by
darting around the subject of sex-out-of-wedlock (the union is never
consummated), ''Pretty Woman'' neutralizes the loaded subject of prostitution.

That is, it's about a prostitute who really isn't, at least as far as the
audience is concerned. She is, instead, a bright, funny, incredibly healthy
young woman who looks gorgeous - almost drop-dead chic - when walking the
Hollywood streets in black boots, a miniskirt and a halter.

It's enough that Mr. Marshall presents the two lovers, Edward (Richard Gere) and
Vivian (Ms. Roberts), as representatives of separate worlds with such conviction
that their final union can't be taken for granted. Having done this, the
director is able to have his cake and eat it too.

Vivian talks tough hooker-talk, but with enormous cheeriness. When Edward seems
shy on their first night in his Beverly Wilshire penthouse, she says, meaning to
help, ''You could pay me. That would break the ice.'' She does unmentionable
things but discreetly, out of camera range. As a result, the audience is soon
rooting that the stuffy, soon to be liberated Edward will take her out of the
profession that the audience can't quite believe she's really in.

The movie borrows a thing or two from ''Pygmalion'' and its spinoff, ''My Fair
Lady,'' including Eliza Doolitle's curtain line in the Ascot scene, but it has
its own canniness, wit and brilliant sleight of hand. When Edward takes Vivian
on a Rodeo Drive shopping spree, the film revels in the same out-of-control
consumerism it is sending up.

''Pretty Woman'' even has a social conscience. It is Vivian who makes Edward see
that buying companies and liquidating them might somehow be less satisfying than
making a company profitable in its own right. The morals do get a little muddled
when Mr. Marshall has Vivian turn down Edward's offer to set her up in a condo,
so he can visit her when he returns to Los Angeles.

Edward isn't prepared for her rage. ''It would keep you off the streets,'' he
says weakly. Says Vivian, ''That's just geography.''

Ultimately, morals and geography are beside the point of ''Pretty Woman,'' which
is the most satisfying romantic comedy in years. Mr. Gere is back in business as
a major movie actor. He is splendidly funny - low-keyed and quizzical - as he
reacts with increasing pleasure and surprise to the remarkable Vivian.

Everybody in the film appears to share his wonder, including Hector Elizondo,
who does a very great deal with the small but key role of hotel manager, and
Laura San Giacomo, who plays Kit, Vivian's hooker-pal. Says Kit, on seeing
Vivian in her Rodeo Drive duds, ''You clean up real nice.''

At the center of the film, and worthy of all wonder, is Ms. Roberts. She is a
breathtaking new screen presence. I didn't see her in ''Mystic Pizza,'' and I've
forgotten ''Steel Magnolias,'' so, by my own sleight of hand, I see this as the
most invigorating debut performance since Audrey Hepburn's in ''Roman Holiday.''

No matter that ''Roman Holiday'' wasn't actually Miss Hepburn's first screen
appearance. It might as well have been.

The legs of ''Pretty Woman'' are not difficult to identify. Julia Roberts has
arrived. The public, for a change, is absolutely right.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo: Teen-Age Mutant Ninja Turtle-a mysterious ingredient that goes
beyond fairy tales (New Line Cinema) (pg. 13); Julia Roberts-a breathtaking new
presence worthy of the wonder of all around her (Touchstone Pictures) (pg. 19)

                   Copyright 1990 The New York Times Company

                              208 of 288 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                   June 3, 1990, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

HOME ENTERTAINMENT/VIDEO: AND KEEP IN MIND

SECTION: Section 2; Page 26, Column 1; Arts and Leisure Desk

LENGTH: 902 words


Here are some notable releases of the last few months.

BACK TO THE FUTURE, Part II - Dr. Emmett Brown's time machine races ahead to
2015 and back to 1955, creating ''merrily mind-boggling fun.'' (Janet Maslin)
1989. MCA/Universal. $91.95. Laser disk, $34.98. 1:48. Closed captioned. R.
BLACK RAIN - Ridley Scott's police melodrama starring Michael Douglas is ''easy
to sit through'' mostly because of the way it captures ''the singular look of
contemporary urban Japan.'' (Vincent Canby) 1989. Paramount. No price listed.
2:05. Closed captioned. R. CASUALTIES OF WAR - Sean Penn is ''extremely fine''
as a ''comradely foul-mouthed naif'' in Brian De Palma's ''earnest, troubling''
film about rape and murder in Vietnam. (Canby) 1989. RCA/Columbia. $89.95. LD,
$34.95. 1:53. CC. R. CRIMES AND MISDEMEANORS - In Woody Allen's most securely
serious and funny film to date, a dozen disparate characters try to fit their
lives into some larger scheme of things. ''Truly an ensemble piece.'' (Canby)
1989. Orion. $89.98. LD, $39.95. 1:44. CC. PG-13.

A DRY WHITE SEASON - Euzhan Palcy's film about apartheid works best ''when it
avoids flourishes and concentrates simply and forcefully on the painful story at
hand.'' (Maslin) 1989. CBS/Fox. $89.98. 1:33. CC. R. DRUGSTORE COWBOY - In Gus
Van Sant Jr.'s absorbing film about young heroine addicts, we ''feel the scary
thrills and bleak, fatalistic uncertainty.'' (Stephen Holden) 1989. I.V.E.
$89.95. LD: $39.95. 1:44. R. FAT MAN AND LITTLE BOY - Intended as an appraisal
of the morality behind the Los Alamos atomic bomb project, Roland Joffe's film
''does little more than depict the clash of personalities.'' (Canby) 1989.
Paramount. No price listed. LD, $34.95. 2:07. CC. PG-13. HARLEM NIGHTS - This
gangster film, starring Eddie Murphy, is also a tribute to its co-stars Redd
Fox, Della Reese and Richard Pryor but is ''never as funny as it should be.''
(Maslin) 1989. Paramount. No price listed. LD, $24.95. 1:55. CC. R. HARVEY - In
a performance ''beguiling and disarming of all annoyance,'' James Stewart
befriends an invisible rabbit. 1950. MCA/Universal. $19.95. LD, $34.98. 1:44. No
rating. IMMEDIATE FAMILY - Jonathan Kaplan's film about a childless couple
(Glenn Close and James Woods) who adopt the baby of a teen-age couple (Mary
Stuart Masterson and Kevin Dillon) is ''thoroughly compelling, at least as far
as it goes.'' (Maslin) 1989. RCA/Columbia. $89.95. LD: $34.95. 1:39. CC. PG-13.

JOHNNY HANDSOME - Walter Hill's film about a thief who tries to get even with
the moll (Ellen Barkin) and others who have betrayed him is ''played by a
furiously vibrant cast.'' (Maslin) 1989. I.V.E. $89.95. LD, $39.95. 1:36. CC. R.
LIBELED LADY - Jean Harlow, Myrna Loy, William Powell and Spencer Tracy make
about as ''perfect a light-comedy foursome as you will encounter anywhere.''
1936. MGM/UA. $29.95. 1:38. No rating.

THE LITTLE MERMAID - The Hans Christan Andersen story is a marvel of skillful
animation. ''The best animated Disney film in at least 30 years.'' (Maslin)
1989. Disney. $26.99. LD, $29.99. 1:23. CC. G. LOOK WHO'S TALKING - ''Cute is
the operative word'' as a baby with the voice of Bruce Willis looks for a
suitable father. (Canby) 1989. RCA/Columbia. No price listed. LD, $34.95. 1:36.
CC. PG-13. THE PAJAMA GAME - Doris Day, John Rait, ''Hey There,'' Hernando's
hideaway and boy meets union girl in an Iowa shirt factory. ''The whole thing is
splendid,'' said the Times reviewer. ''Fresh, funny, lively and tuneful.'' 1957.
Warner. $59.95. 1:41. CC. No rating.

PRINCESS TAM TAM - Josephine Baker storms Paris as a reconstructed Indian
princess in a film that ''preserves something of the star's singular grace,
energy and frequently self-mocking humor.'' 1935. Kino. $59.95. 1:17. No rating.

ROCCO AND HIS BROTHERS - Luchino Visconti's film about a rural family's struggle
to survive in Milan is a ''vast tangle of cold fact and hot feeling.'' 1960.
Connoisseur. $79.95. 2:24. Italian with English subtitles. No rating.

SEA OF LOVE - As a New York cop after a killer, Al Pacino gets involved with
Ellen Barkin, the prime suspect, in a film that ''finds itself in a corner from
which it can't be plausibly extricated.'' (Canby) 1989. MCA/Universal. No price
listed. LD: $34.98. 1:53. CC. R. SEX, LIES AND VIDEOTAPE - Steven Soderbergh's
astonishing first film is a ''Liaisons Dangereuses'' of the video age, a ''rich,
absorbing tale of sexual greed and fear, love and betrayal.'' (Caryn James)
1989. RCA/Columbia. $89.95. LD: $34.95. 1:40. CC. R. A TAXING WOMAN'S RETURN -
Juzo Itami's sequel is ''another major film from a man who is possibly the only
true social satirist at work in movies today.'' (Canby) 1988. New Yorker.
$79.95. 2:07. Japanese with English subtitles. No rating. TRIUMPH OF THE SPIRIT
- The true story of a Greek boxer (played by Willem Dafoe) who survived
Auschwitz ''is blunted by obviousness and sentimentality.'' (Maslin) 1989.
RCA/Columbia. $89.95. LD, $34.95. 2:00. CC. R. WHEN THE WHALES CAME - In the
Scilly Islands off England a silent old hermit (Paul Scofield), two children and
some narwhals solve a mystery. ''The mechanical narwhals are fairly agile.''
(Maslin) 1989. CBS/Fox. $89.98. 1:39. PG.

YESTERDAY, TODAY AND TOMORROW - Vittorio De Sica's three-part comedy starring
Sophia Loren and Marcello Mastroianni won an Oscar as best foreign film. 1964.
Victory. $79.95. 1:59. CC. No rating.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Review

                   Copyright 1990 The New York Times Company

                              209 of 288 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                   June 3, 1990, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

BEST SELLERS: June 3, 1990

SECTION: Section 7; Page 36, Column 2; Book Review Desk

LENGTH: 1470 words




$

          Weeks
This Last    On
Week Week  List Fiction

 1      2   4    THE STAND, by Stephen King. (Doubleday,
                 $24.95.) Doomsday brings horrors to America; the
                 uncut version of a novel first published in 1978.

 2      1   7    SEPTEMBER, by Rosamunde Pilcher. (Dunne/St.
                 Martin's, $22.95.) Guests from many parts of the
                 world encounter their often unexpected destinies
                 during a get-together in a small Scottish town.

 3      4   4    DRAGON, by Clive Cussler. (Simon & Schuster,
                 $21.95.) In 1993, Dirk Pitt moves fast to save
                 America from a Japanese extremist.

 4      3   15   OH, THE PLACES YOU'LL GO! by Dr. Seuss.
                 (Random House, $12.95.) The problems of finding
                 your way through life; in verse and pictures.

 5      9   3    THE GOLDEN ORANGE, by Joseph Wambaugh.
                 (Perigord/Morrow, $19.95.) Murder and chicanery
                 amid the yachts and mansions of California's
                 Orange County.

 6      5   12   THE BOURNE ULTIMATUM, by Robert Ludlum.
                 (Random House, $21.95.) Jason Bourne plans to
                 infiltrate the ruthless Medusa Brigade.

 7      7   4    AN INCONVENIENT WOMAN, by Dominick
                 Dunne. (Crown, $19.95.) Manners, morals and
                 murder in Los Angeles's high society.

 8      6   7    SKINNY LEGS AND ALL, by Tom Robbins.
                 (Bantam, $19.95.) The horror and humor of the
                 upcoming apocalypse are played out at a
                 restaurant near the United Nations.

 9      8   4    FAMILY PICTURES, by Sue Miller. (Harper &
                 Row, $19.95.) The good and bad times of a large
                 Chicago clan during the past 40 years.

10     13   40   CLEAR AND PRESENT DANGER, by Tom
                 Clancy. (Putnam, $21.95.) The C.I.A.'s Jack Ryan
                 fights Colombian drug lords.

11            1  THE OUTLAWS OF MESQUITE, by Louis
                 L'Amour. (Bantam, $16.95.) Eight short stories
                 about the American frontier.

12 *   11   9    MASQUERADE, by Janet Dailey. (Little, Brown,
                 $19.95.) A New Orleans heiress encounters a
                 masked man during a carnival in Nice.

13     10   4    ''G'' IS FOR GUMSHOE, by Sue Grafton. (Holt,
                 $16.95.) On her 33d birthday, the private eye Kinsey
                 Mlhlhe e ndnds herself onhehe hit lt t of a kmmler she
                 once tracked down.

14 *   15   8    THE EVENING NEWS, by Arthur Hailey.
                 (Doubleday, $21.95.) Life as lived by two
                 competitive television correspondents.

15     12   6    THE GOLD COAST, by Nelson DeMille. (Warner,
                 $19.95.) How life changes for an old WASP family
                 when the head of a crime family becomes its
                 neighbor on Long Island's North Shore.

          Weeks
This Last    On
Week Week  List Nonfiction

 1      1   8    MEN AT WORK, by George F. Will. (Macmillan,
                 $19.95.) The political pundit and baseball buff
                 describes the craft of the game as practiced by
                 three players and a manager.

 2      4   19   MEGATRENDS 2000, by John Naisbitt and
                 Patricia Aburdene. (Morrow, $21.95.)
                 Prognostications about political, economic and
                 social developments in the next decade.

 3      2   19   BARBARIANS AT THE GATE, by Bryan
                 Burrough and John Helyar. (Harper & Row,
                 $22.95.) The 1988 battle for control of RJR Nabisco.

 4      5   6    IN THE ARENA, by Richard Nixon. (Simon &
                 Schuster, $21.95.) The 37th President reflects on his
                 public career and private life.

 5      6   82   ALL I REALLY NEED TO KNOW I LEARNED IN
                 KINDERGARTEN, by Robert Fulghum. (Villard,
                 $17.95.) Inspirational essays about everyday
                 matters.

 6      3   37   IT WAS ON FIRE WHEN I LAY DOWN ON IT, by
                 Robert Fulghum. (Villard, $17.95.) A new collection
                 of inspirational essays.

 7            1  DAVE BARRY TURNS 40, by Dave Barry. (Crown,
                 $16.95.) Reflections on the crises of middle age by
                 the syndicated humorist.

 8     10   30   LIAR'S POKER, by Michael Lewis. (Norton,
                 $19.95.) Wall Street's tumultuous 1980's, as
                 witnessed and participated in by a young bond
                 trader.

 9            1  MY LIFE IN THREE ACTS, by Helen Hayes with
                 Katherine Hatch. (Harcourt Brace Jovanovich,
                 $19.95.) The actress's memoirs.

10     11   5    FLASHBACKS, by Morley Safer. (Random House,
                 $18.95.) The observations of a journalist on
                 revisiting Vietnam 25 years later.

11      7   17   HEAD FIRST, by Norman Cousins. (Dutton,
                 $19.95.) How the brain affects the body's endocrine
                 and immune systems.

12     13   15   WHAT I SAW AT THE REVOLUTION, by Peggy
                 Noonan. (Random House, $19.95.) The memoirs of
                 a former Presidential speechwriter.

13      8   11   MEANS OF ASCENT, by Robert A. Caro. (Knopf,
                 $24.95.) Lyndon Johnson's seven-year pursuit of a
                 seat in the Senate, won in 1948 by 87 votes.

14 *    9   5    LEGACIES, by Bette Bao Lord. (Knopf, $19.95.)
                 Reflections on the Chinese experience during the
                 past quarter-century by a writer who was born in
                 China, raised in America.

15     12  111   A BRIEF HISTORY OF TIME, by Stephen W.
                 Hawking. (Bantam, $18.95.) A scientist reviews
                 efforts to create a unified theory of the universe.

          Weeks
This Last    On
Week Week  List Advice, How-to and Miscellaneous

 1      2   25   THE GREAT WALDO SEARCH, by Martin
                 Handford. (Little, Brown, $10.95.) A book of
                 illustrations in which the game is to find a
                 ubiquitous chap named Waldo.

 2      1   68   WEALTH WITHOUT RISK, by Charles J. Givens.
                 (Simon & Schuster, $19.95.) A Florida
                 entrepreneur's advice about how to make a
                 personal fortune.

 3      5  178   WEBSTER'S NINTH NEW COLLEGIATE
                 DICTIONARY. (Merriam-Webster, $16.95.) A
                 standard reference work, revised and updated.

 4           22  WEBSTER'S NEW WORLD DICTIONARY.
                 (Simon & Schuster, $17.95.) The Third College
                 Edition of a standard work, revised in 1988.

 5 *    3   15   BEWARE THE NAKED MAN WHO OFFERS
                 YOU HIS SHIRT, by Harvey Mackay. (Morrow,
                 $19.95.) Advice on how to get ahead in business.


These listings are based on computer-processed sales figures from 3,000
bookstores and from representative wholesalers with more than 28,000 other
retail outlets, including variety stores and supermarkets. The figures are
statistically adjusted to represent sales in all such outlets across the United
States.

*An asterisk before a book's title indicates that its sales, weighted to reflect
the book-selling industry nationally, are barely distinguishable from those of
the book above.



AND BEAR IN MIND
(Editors' choices of other recent books of particular interest)

FIVE O'CLOCK ANGEL: Letters of Tennessee Williams to Maria St. Just, 1948-1982.
(Knopf, $24.95.) Williams's letters to the Russian-born Englishwoman Maria St.
Just reveal a cheerful, tender, civilized man far different from what has become
the drugged, drunken, despondent received version of the playwright.

LETTERS OF KATHERINE ANNE PORTER, edited by Isabel Bayley. (Atlantic Monthly,
$29.95.) Letters of astonishing clarity, keenness and vigor showing the author
of ''Pale Horse, Pale Rider'' as a solid critic of life and a good help to her
friends.

FRANCOIS TRUFFAUT: CORRESPONDENCE 1945-1984, edited by Gilles Jacob and Claude
de Givray. (Noonday/Farrar, Straus & Giroux, Cloth, $50; Paper, $19.95.) A
hefty, well-annotated collection of the great French director's almost
compulsive correspondence - often joking, always self-revealing.

WRITERS IN HOLLYWOOD: 1915-1951, by Ian Hamilton. (Edward Burlingame/Harper &
Row, $25.) An ably researched and entertaining account of the literati who
condescended to, and profited by, the movie industry during its infant and
golden years.

A HIGHER KIND OF LOYALTY: A Memoir by China's Foremost Journalist, by Liu
Binyan. (Pantheon, $22.95.) Repeatedly Mr. Liu wrote the truth; repeatedly he
was punished for it, but never gave up faith in the party until Tiananmen
Square. Strange and sad.

THEN SHE FOUND ME, by Elinor Lipman. (Pocket Books, $18.95.) A deft, amusing
first novel, full of entertaining mysteries, about an adopted daughter awkwardly
reunited with her birth mother.

THE KING, by Donald Barthelme. (Edward Burlingame/Harper & Row, $16.95.) The
author, who died last year, left us one more wild, parodic metafiction; in this
one, King Arthur meets World War II.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: LIST

                   Copyright 1990 The New York Times Company

                              210 of 288 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                   June 3, 1990, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

Cold War Mentality: Alive and Well

BYLINE: By Gene Guerrero and Jeanne M. Woods; Gene Guerrero is field coordinator
for the American Civil Liberties Union's national office. Jeanne M. Woods is a
legislative counsel there.

SECTION: Section 4; Page 27, Column 2; Editorial Desk

LENGTH: 675 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON


The cold war is dead and has been buried by George Bush and Mikhail Gorbachev.
But the cold war mentality, and undemocratic policies and practices designed to
limit Americans' thoughts and associations that it engendered, live on. They,
too, should be given a funeral.

Ask Dan Snow, a Texas fisherman. On April 6, he was fined $5,000 and sentenced
to 90 days in prison for organizing groups of fishermen to travel to Cuba ''for
the purpose of pleasure fishing.''

Absurdly, the Government will not let ABC televise the 1991 Pan American Games
in Cuba, even though U.S. athletes will participate.

Americans take pride in their freedom of movement, considering it a right of
citizenship. Our Government seeks to have other nations equal our standard of
free movement. Yet, paradoxically, the Government curtails this right, declaring
certain countries off limits on foreign policy grounds. At present, there are
restrictions on travel to Cuba, Cambodia, Libya, North Korea and Vietnam.

Under the Trading With the Enemy Act and International Emergency Economic Powers
Act, the Treasury Department can bar Americans from spending money for personal
travel-related expenses. This bans travel to lands the Government views
unfavorably. For example, with a few exceptions, Americans cannot travel to Cuba
at their own expense.

The U.S. permits individuals to travel to Vietnam and Cambodia, but has made it
illegal to ''organize, arrange or facilitate'' group travel.

Groups of Vietnam vets have been warned to stop arranging nonprofit trips to
battlefields for psychological healing, universities have been denied permission
to take students on academic studies, and travel agencies have been prosecuted
and fined.

President Bush recently signed a law that prohibits the refusal of visas to
visitors to the U.S. because of ''past, current or expected beliefs, statements
or associations.'' Good. But the Administration still insists that people
belonging to ''proscribed organizations'' are excludable. It asks visa
applicants if they have ever belonged to a Communist organization; if the answer
is yes, the visitor must apply for a waiver of excludability to be admitted.

The Government still claims broad power to exclude individuals on foreign policy
grounds. The State Department last month denied a visa to the Cambodian Minister
of Culture, Cheng Pon, saying admittance would convey recognition of his
Government. Last year it denied a visa to Khieu Kanharith, a prominent Cambodian
journalist invited to the U.S. by individuals and groups concerned about his
country's political transition.

The Administration is imposing new and expanded security-clearance procedures,
approved by the Reagan Administration, on thousands of Federal workers who do
not hold jobs with real national security responsibilities.

Even though the Civil Service Commission ruled in 1977 that inquiries about
personal and political associations ''might infringe on rights guaranteed by the
Constitution,'' the Government is requiring Federal employees in ''sensitive''
positions to divulge information about their associations, including Communist
Party membership.

Almost all Federal employees are obliged to provide detailed medical,
psychiatric and criminal histories and must permit unlimited access to records
held by third parties such as health insurance companies.

Such inquiries are justified, the Government says, for ''background
investigations'' required by a 1953 executive order. Such invasions of privacy
have no place in today's world.

Representative Howard Berman has introduced legislation to give Americans back
the right to travel freely throughout the world. Representative Don Edwards, a
former F.B.I. agent, and John Conyers have sponsored legislation to forbid
political surveillance by the F.B.I.

The Administration should support these measures and, on its own initiative,
institute new security and classification systems that safeguard legitimate
national security interests without undue infringement of the rights of
Americans.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Op-ed

                   Copyright 1990 The New York Times Company

                              211 of 288 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                   June 3, 1990, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

STALKING THE HYENA

BYLINE: By THOMAS FLEMING; Thomas Fleming's most recent novel is ''Time and
Tide.''

SECTION: Section 7; Page 19, Column 1; Book Review Desk

LENGTH: 859 words



EDGE OF EDEN
By Nicholas Proffitt.
369 pp. New York: Bantam Books. $19.95.

This novel has the kind of guttiness that signals a book whose author is on to
some important truths. After two novels that were almost clotted with
indignation about Vietnam (''Gardens of Stone'' and ''The Embassy House''),
Nicholas Proffitt has turned his uncompromising realist's eye on Africa. The
result is a revelatory work of fiction that takes us inside Kenya, the country
that in many ways symbolizes the problems of black independence.

Mr. Proffitt is a former Nairobi correspondent for Newsweek. But ''Edge of
Eden'' is far more than thinly disguised journalism. The author has gained an
inner knowledge of his beat, a feel for Kenya's people, an appreciation of its
stunning geography that few reporters ever acquire. He has an uncanny ability to
get inside the heads and hearts of Kenyans, from the corrupt ruling Kikuyus to
the proud, doomed Masai to the embittered white colonials. He even has an ear
for their patois, a marvelous mixture of English, African and American idioms.

The main character in ''Edge of Eden,'' Adrian Glenton, is the sour son of an
English settler who was forced to sell his farm to ''Wabenzis'' soon after Kenya
won independence from Britain in 1963. Wabenzis are what Africans call the new
ruling class; the literal meaning of the word is ''men of the Mercedes-Benz.''
In Kenya they live in gorgeous houses protected by armed guards, a few hundred
yards from one of the worst slums in the world. For a while Glenton was a
successful leader of safaris and an expert hunter; then the Government banned
the killing of endangered animals. As the story opens in the late 1970's, he has
been reduced to guide and wet nurse for camera-happy ugly American tourists.

Enter Peter Odongo, a black policeman who has the misfortune to be a member of
the Luo, the second-largest tribe in Kenya, feared and despised by the ruling
Kikuyus. He asks Glenton to help him catch a gang of poachers who are
slaughtering elephants and rhinos for their tusks and horns and leopards for
their pelts. The poachers also have no compunction about killing people who get
in their way, dispatching them with grisly ingenuity. They are led by a man
known as Fisi - the Hyena.

The uneducated claim Fisi is a witch doctor who can turn himself into a real
hyena whenever he feels like it. The Assistant Minister of Tourism and Wildlife,
Odongo's boss, dismisses this as utter rot. Odongo, wryly noting how much this
Wabenzi sounds and acts like his arrogant British predecessor, is not so sure.
In this part of the story, Mr. Proffitt takes us to the edge of the darkness in
Africa's heart that writers such as Graham Greene and Joseph Conrad have
explored. It is only a minor theme in ''Edge of Eden,'' but it adds a nice chill
to this drama of greed and abuse of power.

Odongo has been reduced to chasing poachers because he tried to prosecute a
group of young Wabenzis, including a general's son, who had raped and murdered a
prostitute (who happened to be a Luo). The case was quashed, and Odongo found
himself exiled to the Ministry of Tourism and Wildlife in a windowless office
the size of the Assistant Minister's toilet.

Though Mr. Proffitt's prose occasionally lapses into cliches that a good editor
should have excised, the author makes the reader care about this gorgeous,
tormented nation. Through Glenton we get superb word pictures of the Masai Mara,
the great central veld teeming with zebras, giraffes and elephants, the tangled
splendor of the Aberdare Forest (the site of the famed Treetops resort), the
harsh northern desert where Glenton goes to recruit some of his team of trackers
and hunters. As they pursue Fisi and his cutthroats, the reader gets an
education in forest lore - and a glimpse of how a multitribal Africa, committed
to a common task, might work.

In a neat reversal, the honest black realist, Odongo, slowly persuades the
bitter Glenton to accept the Kenya he loves for its physical beauty, its ability
to give its inhabitants the feeling that they are on the edge of Eden. Glenton
knows that there were deadly mambas in this Eden from the beginning, and he
gradually joins Odongo in facing the reality of the human mambas, some of whom
drive Mercedes-Benzes, in modern Kenya. Although the Mercedes-driving snakes
seem, for the moment, to be in control, we are left with the hope that men like
Odongo and Glenton, who share a common decency and courage, may eventually
prevail and save both the country and the animals that are being slaughtered
with the Wabenzis' complicity.

Less successful is Glenton's relationship with the local Newsweek reporter, a
foulmouthed, street-smart Philadelphian named Roberta Angelina D'Agostino Lewis,
known to her friends as Robbie. I found it difficult to believe that the starchy
Glenton would succumb to a woman who persisted in greeting him with ''Yo!'' But
there is a compensation even here. Through Robbie's gripes we get an insider's
view of what the news media will and won't report about Africa. Among the
omissions is the story at the heart of this absorbing novel.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Review

                   Copyright 1990 The New York Times Company

                              212 of 288 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                   June 4, 1990, Monday, Late Edition - Final

Japanese-U.S. Relations Undergoing a Redesign

BYLINE: By STEVEN R. WEISMAN, Special to The New York Times

SECTION: Section A; Page 2, Column 3; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 1375 words

DATELINE: TOKYO, May 30


Thirty years ago, leftist protesters mobbed the streets of Tokyo to denounce a
new security treaty with the United States. The turmoil toppled the Government
and forced President Dwight D. Eisenhower to cancel a trip to Japan.

Today, the collapse of the cold war and Japan's coming of age as an economic and
technological superpower -a rival as well as a friend - have brought a quiet
redefinition of some basic assumptions of the 30-year-old partnership, including
the rationale for the presence of 51,000 troops on Japanese soil.

''Japan and the United States need a new map to define our interests,'' said
Terumasa Nakanishi, professor of international relations at Shizuoka University.
''The question is whether we have the intellectual vitality to face a new era of
history.''

In a report in April on the American presence in East Asia, the Defense
Department acknowledged that ''traditional threat perceptions are changing'' and
that ''our presence in the region is now seen as less relevant'' because of the
Soviet decline.

Defense officials cite such developments as the Soviet Union's troop withdrawals
from its border with China and Mongolia, its reduction in naval forces at Cam
Ranh Bay, Vietnam, and the general preoccupation of Moscow with domestic
economic problems.

U.S. Pullback Upsets Japanese

Such factors helped persuade the Bush Administration to withdraw 14,000 to
15,000 of the 135,000 troops currently stationed in Japan, South Korea and the
Philippines over the next three years, a decision that has unsettled Tokyo.

Soviet intentions in Asia are still widely viewed as uncertain and its armed
power remains potent. Military experts say that Russian naval and air forces are
undergoing rapid modernization even as they are being nominally reduced. Japan
is especially skeptical of Moscow because of a lingering bitter territorial
dispute over several islands north of the country that were seized by the Soviet
Union in the final days of World War II.

Beyond these military concerns, officials note that trans-Pacific trade is now
about $300 billion a year, or about 50 percent more than trans-Atlantic trade,
and that instability in Asia, such as China or North Korea, could disrupt vital
American interests.

''Even if the Russians withdrew completely, you'd still have a host of security
problems,'' said Lieut. Gen. James B. Davis, commander of United States forces
in Japan. ''You've got unstable situations in North Korea, China, Cambodia and a
lot of other places. We are here because it is in our interest, not just
Japan's.''

Like many others, General Davis said he saw Japanese economic power - as the No.
1 investor, trade partner and aid donor in Asia - as a force for stability
perhaps equal to the presence of American troops.

U.S. Urges Japanese On

In light of this has come American encouragement for Japan to involve itself in
Asian problems, which Tokyo has been wary of since the war. For the first time,
Japan has begun to respond.

For example, beginning on Monday, Japan will play host to talks on Cambodia
between Prince Sihanouk and Prime Minister Hun Sen. Japan's moves came after it
warned members of the United Nations Security Council that if they expect
Japanese aid to be a part of a Cambodian settlement, this country would have to
be involved in the political discussions along the way.

In general, economic cooperation between Japan and the United States is now no
longer advertised as crucial to stem Communism in Asia, but to cope with a new
generation of problems -from aid to Eastern Europe to third world debt,
refugees, terrorism, drugs and the environment.

Perhaps the most sensitive rationale for the Japanese-American partnership is
one that has been less widely discussed until recently, but now considered
central since the Soviet Union has receded as a threat.

This is the perception that American troops are needed to reassure Asian
neighbors about Tokyo's intentions. Like Germany in Europe, an economically
powerful Japan continues to generate wariness 45 years after its defeat in World
War II.

Accordingly, Japanese officials increasingly argue that Tokyo's spreading trade,
investments and economic aid in Asia are actually made possible by an American
military presence in Japan that effectively blocks any chance of Japan's
rearming.

In addition, Japan has taken a supportive role on the negotiations to renew the
lease on American bases in the Philippines. Indeed, at American urging, Japan
has committed about $1 billion in aid to the Philippines in the last year.

Opinion surveys show that in spite of well-publicized economic friction, the
Japanese-American partnership has broad popular support in both countries. Like
Americans, Japanese are yearning for a ''peace dividend'' growing out of the
declining Soviet threat, some polls say.

American policy makers say it ought to be obvious that two countries accounting
for 40 percent of the world's economic output and 40 percent of aid to poor
nations must work together.

Japanese and American economic interdependence is also at an all-time high. Not
only does military technology now flow both ways, but Japan has $66 billion in
direct investment in United States companies and property and Japanese investors
have been essential in financing the United States budget deficit.

The United States estimates, for instance, that Japanese institutions own
perhaps $100 billion worth of government securities and that they buy perhaps 30
to 40 percent of the debt offerings of the Treasury Department.

When Closeness Hurts

But specialists in Japanese-American relations are also nervous that just this
interdependent relationship is causing concern and eroding support for the
relationship.

On the American side, a recent Japanese-sponsored survey showed sharp increases
in the number of people who view Japan as less than reliable. Most Americans now
seem to feel more threatened by Japanese economic power than by Soviet military
power.

In Japan, officials note that many leading advocates of Japanese-American
friendship were defeated for re-election this year, and Japanese politicians are
increasingly inclined to criticize the United States.

Aides to Mr. Kaifu said that Ichiro Ozawa, secretary general of the governing
Liberal Democratic Party and the Prime Minister's chief political official,
spoke for many when he accused Washington of ''self-righteousness and
arrogance'' in recent trade negotiations.

By far the greatest concern among those seeking to preserve Japanese-American
cooperation stems from the economic friction surrounding the persistent $50
billion American trade deficit with Japan.

Thus the United States Ambassador, Michael H. Armacost, has repeatedly warned
Japan of ''an erosion of public support in the United States for our
relationship'' because of a perception of unfair Japanese trade and investment
practices. Accords Without Much Effect?  A flurry of trade accords were
negotiated in April, the centerpiece of which was an agreement that Japan curb
some of its deep-rooted ''structural impediments'' to American imports,
including monopolistic business practices and regulations that bar competition
in crucial areas.

But Japanese and American specialists agree that these agreements are unlikely
to have a significant effect on the trade imbalance. For one thing, the accords
are expected to change Japanese practices marginally, if at all, with many
people uncertain that a rise in American exports would result.

Another cause of tension, specialists in both countries say, is the rapid growth
of Japanese investment in the United States and the perception that certain
crucial industries, like automobiles, computers and semiconductors, are
endangered by Japanese competition.

Worst of all, in the view of American and Japanese policy makers, is a growth in
the feeling in Japan that the United States is blaming Tokyo for its own
shortcomings and unwilling to address deep-seated problems at home.

There is also tension surrounding the United States desire for Japanese military
technology, coupled with fear that this technology could spur Japan into new
commercial areas like commercial aircraft, undercutting American business.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1990 The New York Times Company

                              213 of 288 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                   June 4, 1990, Monday, Late Edition - Final

Cambodian Factions to Meet Today

BYLINE: By STEVEN ERLANGER, Special to The New York Times

SECTION: Section A; Page 3, Column 4; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 680 words

DATELINE: TOKYO, June 3


A new round of talks on Cambodia begins here on Monday, with at least limited
success already insured for their Japanese hosts who have stepping gingerly into
regional peacemaking for the first time.

The leaders of all four rival Cambodian factions will attend and all of them
have already initialed a memorandum, including a symbolic cease-fire agreement,
worked out by the Defense Minister of Thailand, Gen. Chavalit Yongchaiyudh.

While American officials are said to want a stronger document, one calling for a
comprehensive settlement and providing a greater monitoring and administrative
role for the United Nations, Washington will applaud anything that looks like an
agreement.

The memorandum, according to Thai officials and Western and Asian diplomats,
calls for an immediate cease-fire, military ''self-restraint'' and a cessation
of foreign military aid, though without effective monitoring. That lack will
render it largely symbolic. In any case, the rainy season has already imposed a
sort of cease-fire.

A Transitional Council

The agreement also calls for the formation of a Supreme National Council made up
of six representatives from each of the two rival governments. The council would
serve as the repository of Cambodian sovereignty until a new government is
formed, presumably after a final settlement and elections.

By itself, the agreement will do little to end the war in Cambodia but, unless
derailed here, it will represent the first agreed understanding among all the
four factions. And it does resolve a few vexing issues.

Prime Minister Hun Sen of Cambodia, whose Government was installed by Vietnam
when it drove the Khmer Rouge out of Cambodia in January 1979, is opposed by an
uneasy, three-part coalition: the Khmer Rouge guerrillas, who are supported and
armed by China, and two non-Communist factions, headed by Prince Norodom
Sihanouk and a former Sihanouk Prime Minister, Son Sann, backed by China and the
United States.

Sihanouk and Hun Sen to Sign

While all four factions are represented here and separately initialed General
Chavalit's memorandum, Japanese officials say it will be signed by Mr. Hun Sen
and Prince Sihanouk as leaders of the two rival governments.

That fact itself, combined with equal representation for the two sides on the
Supreme National Council, represents a concession on the part of China and the
Khmer Rouge, which have long insisted on equal representation for all four
factions.

Vietnam and Mr. Hun Sen have opposed equal treatment for the Khmer Rouge, which
was responsible for the deaths of more than a million Cambodians between April
1975 and December 1978, when Vietnam invaded Cambodia. But Hanoi and Phnom Penh
have agreed that the Khmer Rouge can participate on the Council as members of
the opposition coalition headed by Prince Sihanouk.

The Thais have long been pushing for a step-by-step settlement to Cambodia,
beginning with a cease-fire, an approach criticized by Washington, which fears
it favors Mr. Hun Sen.

The Japanese have been pushing quietly for a diplomatic role on Cambodia, in
part as a sign of their postwar stature and influence. They are also expected to
pay the bulk of the costs.

Thai officials say that Tokyo urged them to invite Japan to play host to this
meeting. The Thais, whose boom is largely dependent on Japanese investment and
aid, were happy to oblige, at the same time co-opting the Japanese.

But this meeting might not have happened without progress in other forums
concerned with Cambodia. The five permanent members of the United Nations
Security Council - Britain, China, France, the Soviet Union and the United
States - have been meeting regularly on Cambodia. Also, China has opened talks
with Vietnam, after a long period of inaction, on the level of Deputy Foreign
Ministers.

Dinh Ngo Liem of Vietnam met his Chinese counterpart, Xu Dunxin, in Beijing in
early May. Another meeting is scheduled. Western and Asian diplomats suggest
that the new flexibility on the part of Mr. Hun Sen and the Khmer Rouge stems
from these meetings.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1990 The New York Times Company

                              214 of 288 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                   June 4, 1990, Monday, Late Edition - Final

TOPICS OF THE TIMES;
Unifying the Yemens

SECTION: Section A; Page 22, Column 2; Editorial Desk

LENGTH: 123 words


It's another sign of no more cold war: Yemen and Southern Yemen are unifying.
That may not mean much to most Americans, but it must be a relief to
geopoliticians in Washington. Unlike Korea and Vietnam, Southern Yemen was the
pro-Communist one. And that was only part of the confusion: Southern Yemen
looked more like East Yemen. Yemen lay mostly to its west.  In Sana, the capital
of united Yemen, Yemenis celebrated unification beneath banners proclaiming,
''Yemeni unity is an immortal victory for democracy, development and freedom.''

It's liberating to U.S. officials, too. They'll henceforth be spared the
embarrassment of having an aide lean over to prompt them at meetings, ''Uh, sir,
Southern Yemen is theirs, not ours.''

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Editorial

                   Copyright 1990 The New York Times Company

                              215 of 288 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                   June 4, 1990, Monday, Late Edition - Final

In Florio's Old Stumping Grounds

BYLINE: By WAYNE KING, Special to The New York Times

SECTION: Section B; Page 4, Column 4; Metropolitan Desk

LENGTH: 903 words

DATELINE: CAMDEN, N.J., June 2


Until an intense young New Jersey Assemblyman named Jim Florio won New Jersey's
First District Congressional seat in 1974, no Democrat had held it since before
the turn of the century.

Mr. Florio held the seat for 16 years before he resigned to become Governor in
January, and in that time the district became increasingly Democratic -even
though Democratic Presidential candidates fared little better here than
nationally.

So entrenched did the Democrats become at the Congressional level that four
candidates are seeking the Democratic nomination this year while the lone
Republican, Daniel J. Mangini, agreed to run only if he were unopposed in the
primary.

Robert Andrews, a 32-year-old lawyer and director of the Camden County Board of
Chosen Freeholders, is the Democratic organization's candidate and the
acknowledged front-runner.

Aggressive Challengers

But he is being aggressively challenged by two other Democrats. Linda Bowker,
41, New Jersey president of the National Organization for Women, is basing her
campaign in part on her support for abortion rights and family planning. But she
is also calling for strong controls on pollution, universal health insurance,
more money for low- and moderate-income housing and greater workplace
protections.

John A. Dramesi, 57, a retired Air Force colonel who was a prisoner of war in
Hanoi for seven years and who wrote a well-received book titled ''Code of
Honor'' on his torture, escape, recapture and ultimate release, is basing his
campaign largely on the rights of veterans and the elderly. He is also appealing
to opponents of gun control and calling for strong measures against crime and
drugs.

A fourth Democratic candidate, Joel Farley, 35, a New York lawyer who
established residence in Collingswood last year, has curtailed campaigning
because of a family illness and is not considered a significant contender.

The district itself is a pastiche of 526,000 residents stretching from the
gritty depressed inner city of Camden, the district's largest city, to the
semirural areas of Winslow Township 20-odd miles to the east, where orchards and
tomato fields are being fast transformed into green-lawned suburbs.

Candidates are thus compelled to deal with issues as disparate as a welfare
mother's quest for a job to an outdoorsman's demand for access to guns.

As the Democratic organization candidate, Mr. Andrews claims Governor Florio's
support. Mr. Florio has declared neutrality in the primary, but even so, he is
himself an issue, standing as he does as something of a symbol of higher taxes
and tighter gun control.

As Governor, he has proposed new and increased taxes and sharp cuts in services
in the face of a critical budget deficit. He has also forced though the
Legislature a ban on the sale of military-style assault weapons.

It can make for tough campaigning. When retired Colonel Dramesi, dressed in
military-style khakis and bearing his book, walked into the Little Sportsman's
Shop, an outdoorsman's supply in Glassboro last Friday, to talk about his
opposition to gun control, he walked past a bulletin board dominated by a
sticker urging, ''Impeach Florio.''

And before he could present his views, he was embroiled in a shouting match with
the store owner, Bob Viden, 48, who, flanked by a half dozen men in baseball
hats and hunting garb, promptly told him Democrats were not to be trusted on gun
issues.

''Democrats have stuck it to the sportsmen in this state forever,'' Mr. Viden
said.

Mr. Dramesi shot back: ''You're insulting me and questioning my integrity! I put
my life on the line for what I believe!''

''Don't give us a speech,'' said one man. ''Tell us what you think about the ban
on assault rifles.''

''I'm opposed to it,'' Mr. Dramesi said.

The meeting ended amicably, although it was unclear what support, if any, Mr.
Dramesi had picked up.

'You Can't Believe Them, Liars'

A few miles away, campaigning door to door in the sprawling subdivision of
Elmtown in Winslow Township, Mr. Andrews also encountered skepticism.

''I'm not much of a believer in politicians,'' Walter Simon, a retired meat
cutter, said after a visit from Mr. Andrews. ''You can't believe them, liars,
you might say.'' He laughed.

Mr. Andrews got a warmer reception in Camden, helping to open a drop-in
child-care center, which, as Freehold Director, he was instrumental in creating.
The center provides day care for children of welfare mothers while they seek
jobs or get job counseling.

Job training is the top priority in Camden, one of the poorest cities in the
country. ''People here don't want to hear about school prayer and abortion,''
Mr. Andrews said. ''They worry about whether they're going to have a job or
not.''

'I'm for Freedom of Choice'

In Winston Township, Ms. Bowker was campaigning at a shopping center when she
encountered a woman with silver hair pushing a shopping cart.

''How do you stand on abortion?'' the woman asked politely.

''I'm for freedom of choice,'' replied the candidate.

''Well, I'm definitely against it,'' said the woman, who smiled but took herself
and her cart firmly away.

But Frank Falance, 48, a Gloucester County Highway Department employee
accompanying Ms. Bowker, said abortion was not the primary issue.

''She's not a one-issue candidate,'' he said. ''I've got a 13-year-old daughter
and I want her to have a Representative in Congress like Linda Bowker.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1990 The New York Times Company

                              216 of 288 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                  June 5, 1990, Tuesday, Late Edition - Final

NEWS SUMMARY

SECTION: Section A; Page 2, Column 5; Metropolitan Desk

LENGTH: 1348 words



International    A2-21



The leaders of two rival nations met in San Francisco. After his discussion with
President Gorbachev of the Soviet Union, President Roh Tae Woo of South Korea
said the two nations would establish diplomatic relations in the future.    Page
A1



The Soviets and South Korea: At odds since Day 1    A18



President Gorbachev ended his visit to the U.S. with an appeal for a radically
changed system of global alliances in a speech at Stanford University in
California.    A1



Reporter's Notebook: A communist at home with capitalists    A16



White House sees aura from summit    A17



Japanese feel quite ready for a visit from Gorbachev    A18



A nine-point program for NATO was given to Soviet leaders by Bush Administration
officials. The plan was designed to induce Moscow to accept the presence of a
united Germany in the alliance, officials say.    A17



In Europe, few are cheering    A17



U.S. says Soviets will field fewer of its latest bombers    A20



Dubcek rebukes Slovak protesters who interrupted Havel    A20



Communist named Ukraine president    A20



Eastern Europe's road to riches? A former Hungarian rock musician found an
answer: hire young people untainted by Communist work experience, pay them four
times the going rate and offer customers a one-hour film-developing service.
A1

Talks with the P.L.O. may stop. Bush Administration officials said they would
like to continue the dialogue but were prepared to suspend it if Yasir Arafat
refuses to condemn the abortive seaborne guerrilla raid on Israel last week.
A2



Shamir rebuffs Gorbachev on emigres    A3



Arabs applaud Gorbachev remark    A3



A Beirut ''cease-fire'' is but a wary interlude    A21



U.N. finds that higher incomes do not assure a better life

    A12



Bush nudges China on anniversary of crackdown    A9



Cambodia talks collapse

    A10



Congress looks anew at ties with Vietnam    A11



The current rebellion in Liberia may have begun to take root at the moment when
President Samuel K. Doe's grip on power seemed tightest - in 1985, when his
troops crushed a coup attempt.    A7



Mandela, off on world trip, will urge retention of sanctions    A6



Urban life is expensive in Zambia    A13



Canada premiers try to save pact    A14



Bush and Colombian President to assess drug war today    A15



Santiago journal: Allende's widow meditates anew    A4



National    A22-27, B8



A dispute over religion in the schools was the subject of a Supreme Court
decision. The justices upheld a 1984 Federal law that requires public high
schools to allow religious and political clubs to meet on the same basis as
other extracurricular activities.    A1



A confession given by an inmate to a law enforcement officer posing as an inmate
can be used in court even if the officer gave no warning about the inmate's
constitutional rights, the Supreme Court ruled.    A24



State must offer remedy on unlawful taxes, court rules    D2



The Los Angeles County Supervisors unconstitutionally gerrymandered their
districts to exclude Hispanic people from representation, a Federal judge
declared. Hispanic leaders equated the ruling with landmark desegregation
decisions.    A1



Polls show Feinstein with a lead in California    A26



Runoff requirements in the South are being challenged by civil rights advocates
who say the states' election rules effectively discriminate against black
candidates.    A27



James Dobson, a radio-psychologist, has become one of America's most influential
religious figures, not by calling sinners to repentance but by counseling
parents on toilet training and spouses on mid-life crises.    A22



Mayor Marion Barry's trial opened in Federal District Court in Washington, with
the judge ordering a pool of 250 prospective jurors to ask themselves whther
they could render an impartial verdict in the much-publicized, highly charged
case.    A22



Washington Talk: A schism at the top on budget tactics    A22



Two hotly contested provisions jeapordize crime bill    A25



Bush decision expected on whether to delay oil drilling    B8



Regional    B1-6



New York City's Board of Elections has failed to award a huge contract to
replace its obsolete voting machinery. The highly politicized agency has been
stymied by five years of bureaucratic infighting, favoritism and charges of
corruption.    A1



The Bronx may get a new area code. The New York Telephone Company asked the
state's Public Service Commission for permission to assign the area code - 917 -
to the Bronx and to all cellular phones and paging devices in the 212 area.
B1



Governor Cuomo was nominated for a third term by the Democratic Party. Delegates
also renominated Lieut. Gov. Stan Lundine and designated Carol Bellamy, a former
New York City Council President, as their candidate for comptroller.    B1



CUNY and school chancellors to confer on goals    B3



Three school unions suspend a strike in Yonkers    B2



Top New Jersey court will issue crucial school ruling    B2



M.T.A. gets $176.5 million

    B3



Puerto Ricans living in the U.S. are at the center of an emotional debate about
who should vote on whether Puerto Rico becomes the 51st state, an independent
country or a U.S. commonwealth, as it is now, but in a modified form.    B1



Reputed mobsters were arrested yesterday and on Sunday and accused of taking
part in an organized-crime operation that specialized in robbing and killing
drug traffickers, Federal authorities said.    B1



L.I. youth killed by classmate, police say    B3



Woman testifies in mother's slaying    B3



Business Digest    D1



Science Times



The mastermind of a famous hoax may have been uncovered by scholarly sleuths.
The skull and jaw of the ''Piltdown Man,'' found in a gravel pit in 1912, was
later exposed as a fraud. But the mystery of who did it has persisted to this
day.    A1



Project to decipher genes encounters opposition    C1



Beginning scientists face a research fund drought    C1



'Dip' in Earth's magnetic field is trouble in space    C1



Rare white rhino avoids extinction    C4



Arts/Entertainment



Tony winner's personal journey    C13



Pact opens up Irving Berlin's musical legacy    C14



'Obscene' painting covered up    C16



Theater: ''The Cry of the Body''    C15



Music: Menotti's ''Parsifal''    C13



Rock version of ''La Boheme''    C14



Canticum Novum performs    C14



Dance: Jawole Willa Jo Zollar    C13



Lori Belilove and Company    C14



Word and Image: Feminist view of Cleopatra    C17



George Carlin on HBO    C18



Fashion    B15



Sports



Baseball: Yanks lose to Red Sox    B17



Xaverian captures title    B18



Basketball: N.B.A. matchups

    B17



Columns: Berkow on Isiah Thomas    B17



Football: Big Ten makes Penn State No. 11    B20



Obituaries    D30



Jack Gilford, actor

Guy C. McElroy, art historian

Editorials/Letters/Op-Ed



Editorials    A28

A fresh wind in Africa

There's wisdom in WIC

Shameless Senate dawdling

Leslie H. Gelb: Summit critics

Letters    A28



Anthony Lewis: Arafat to choose    A29



Flora Lewis: The right shoulder    A29



David K. Shipler: A workmanlike summit    A29



Linda Lipsen: Insurance firms - privileged class    A29


LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Summary

                   Copyright 1990 The New York Times Company

                              217 of 288 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                  June 5, 1990, Tuesday, Late Edition - Final

Congress Looks Anew at Ties With Vietnam

BYLINE: By CLIFFORD KRAUSS, Special to The New York Times

SECTION: Section A; Page 11, Column 1; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 676 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, June 4


Pushed by Vietnam War veterans, Congress is reopening a debate on normalizing
economic and diplomatic relations with Hanoi.

The opening salvo is a piece of legislation introduced by Representative Howard
L. Berman, Democrat of California, that would remove legal restrictions on
travel to Vietnam and four other nations - Cambodia, Cuba, Libya and North
Korea.

Veterans groups around the country have testified in favor of the legislation
and have begun to urge their members to write supporting letters to their
representatives in Congress. The legislation is expected to be considered by the
House Foreign Affairs Committee before the July 4 recess.

''This is the first step towards Congress's getting over its trauma over
Vietnam,'' said Representative Sam Gejdenson, Democrat of Connecticut, chairman
of the House Subcommittee on International Economic Policy and Trade. ''There is
no reason we can't review our relationship. Veterans groups are leading the
charge.''

Mr. Gejdenson's subcommittee, which is handling the travel legislation, is at
the forefront of Congressional efforts to normalize relations. In a small
gesture toward that end, the subcommittee recently removed language in PL-480
Food for Peace legislation that prohibited the sale of American food and other
commodities to Vietnam.

Since losing the Vietnam War 15 years ago, the United States has not pursued
normal diplomatic relations with Hanoi. The Bush Administration has said it is
not opposed to normalizing ties once a complete removal of Vietnamese military
forces from Cambodia can be verified.

The Vietnamese invaded Cambodia, then ruled by the Khmer Rouge, in 1978 and
installed the Hun Sen Government. Vietnam announced the withdrawal of its troops
last September, but persistent reports have indicated that elite Vietnamese
combat units still back the Hun Sen Government in its war against a guerrilla
insurgency consisting mainly of the Khmer Rouge.

A State Department official who deals with East Asian affairs said that now
would be a bad time to send friendly signals to Hanoi, given the stepped-up
diplomatic activity to resolve the Cambodian conflict.

''We need leverage'' to make sure Vietnamese forces leave Cambodia, he said.
''It would be unwise to act unilaterally to satisfy Vietnamese demands.'' The
United States would like to see a coalition, backed by an international
peacekeeping force, replace the Hun Sen Government.

Currently, under the Trading With the Enemy Act, it is illegal for commercial or
non-profit tour groups to organize or advertise trips to Vietnam. Individuals
may travel legally to Vietnam on their own. But without the help of people
experienced in dealing with the Vietnamese, they often have trouble arranging
visas and hotels.

Allied with the Bush Administration opposing the Berman bill, which is called
the Free Trade in Ideas Act, are Cuban exile groups opposed to liberalizing
travel to Cuba.

A growing number of legislators disagree with the Administration position.
Senator Mark O. Hatfield, Republican of Oregon, said that liberalizing travel
and trade with Vietnam made sense ''from every angle'' because it would not only
help moderate Hanoi's foreign and domestic policies but would also enable
relatives of Americans missing in action to visit Vietnam to press their search
for information.

Mr. Hatfield said the Berman bill ''could be a triggering action toward
normalizing relationships because it does have the support of those who in
previous times were against normalization, like the veterans groups.''

Don Mills, from Akron, Ohio, told the committee: ''Twenty years ago, if I didn't
go to Vietnam I was threatened with jail, and now if I want to go to Vietnam I
am threatened with jail.''

Mr. Mills has helped organize tours of Vietnam for more than 200 veterans. The
Treasury Department has warned him that he may be prosecuted unless he halts his
activity. A letter sent to Mr. Mills from the Treasury Department said he could
face up to 10 years' imprisonment and a fine of up to $50,000.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1990 The New York Times Company

                              218 of 288 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                   June 8, 1990, Friday, Late Edition - Final

Loss of Tropical Forests Is Found Much Worse Than Was Thought

BYLINE: By PHILIP SHABECOFF, Special to The New York Times

SECTION: Section A; Page 1, Column 1; National Desk

LENGTH: 1172 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, June 7


Tropical forests, which play a vital role in regulating the global climate, are
disappearing much more rapidly than previously estimated, an international
research group said today.

Each year recently, 40 million to 50 million acres of tropical forest, an area
the size of Washington State, has been vanishing as trees are cut for timber and
to clear land for agriculture and other development, the World Resources
Institute said in a report. The group said 1.9 billion acres of tropical forest
remained.

The report, ''World Resources 1990-91,'' prepared in collaboration with the
United Nations, was described by its authors as the first comprehensive estimate
in a decade of tropical-forest losses around the world.

The rate of loss, measured in most countries in 1987, was nearly 50 percent
greater than the last global estimate, prepared by the United Nations Food and
Agricultural Organization in 1980, according to the institute.

''We were startled to uncover this rate of global deforestation,'' said James
Gustave Speth, president of the institute, a nonprofit Washington-based research
and policy organization that specialized in environmental issues. ''We were
saying we were losing the forests at an acre a second, but it is much closer to
an acre and a half a second.''

The disappearance of tropical forests is regarded by environmental experts as
one of the most serious global environmental problems. Through photosynthesis,
the forests absorb huge quantities of carbon dioxide, the most important of the
gases that are accumulating in the atmosphere. Many scientists believe that
carbon dioxide, if not kept in check, will cause a significant warming of the
earth in the next century, through a process known as the greenhouse effect.

From Satellite Data

The report on forests was based on remote sensing data from National Oceanic and
Atmospheric Administration and Landsat satellites that was orginally analyzed by
each of the affected tropical countries. Dr. Allen L. Hammond, editor in chief
of the report, said at a news conference here that for most of the countries the
satellite data covered 1987, but for Brazil it covered 1988, since newer data
were available for that country.

He said the estimates of actual forest loss were ''very conservative,'' and that
the actually losses probably were considerably higher.

The group's report said that in nine major tropical countries, the estimates of
total annual losses of tropical-forest acreage were about four times as high as
estimates from the years 1981 to 1985. The nine countries were Brazil, India,
Indonesia, Vietnam, Thailand, the Philippines, Costa Rica, Cameroon and Myanmar
(formerly Burma). Dr. Hammond said, however, that in Brazil, the rate of
deforestation declined in 1988 from 1987, largely because the levels from the
latter year were the highest on record.

As the tropical forests shrink, their capacity to absorb carbon dioxide
declines, hastening the onset and increasing the magnitude of the warming
phenomenon. And as the vegetation from the cut forests decays or is burned, it
emits more carbon dioxide.

The tropical forests also contain the largest and most diverse populations of
plant and animal species of any habitat. As the forests vanish, so do many of
these species, many before they ever have been discovered, named and analyzed.

Tropical forests have infertile soil because most of the nutrients are in the
vegetation, not the soil. Thus, when these forests are cleared they tend to
regenerate slowly, if at all.

'An Unparalleled Tragedy'

''Tropical deforestation is an unparalleled tragedy,'' said Mr. Speth. ''If we
don't reverse the trend soon, it will be too late.''

Senator Patrick Leahy, Democrat of Vermont and chairman of the Senate
Agriculture Committee, said in a statement: ''This is the first reliable data
we've had on tropical deforestation in 10 years. A situation we knew was bleak
is now shown to be truly horrendous.''

The World Resources Institute report was prepared in collaboration with the
United Nations Environment Program and the United Nations Development Program.
Joan Martin Brown, special adviser to the executive director of the United
Nations Environment Program, said at the news conference that her organization
did not have its own capacity to do the kind of research contained in the
report.

Since preagricultural times, the report said, the world has lost about one-fifth
of all its forests, from more than 12 billion acres to under 10 billion acres.
In the past, most of the losses were in the temperate forests of Europe, Asia
and North America. In recent years, however, it is the tropical forests of the
developing countries of Latin America, Asia and Africa that have been
disappearing most rapidly.

Forests Without Trees

Brazil, with the largest remaining tropical forest area, is also experiencing
the worst losses - between 12.5 million and 22.5 million acres a year, the
report found. Myanamar is losing 1.7 million acres a year, more than 500 times
the 1980 estimate by the Food and Agricultural Organization.

India, according to the data, is losing its forests at a rate of 3.7 million
acres a year. Large areas legally designated as forest land ''are already
virtually treeless,'' the report said. Indonesia is losing 2.2 million acres a
year, and Costa Rica 300,000 acres, both substantially more than the 1980
estimate.

The problem of deforestation in developing countries ''has been exacerbated by
government economic, land tenure and agricultureal policies as well as
population pressures, poverty and debt,'' the report said.

The World Resources report also contains a new index of countries that are the
greatest net contributors to the atmosphere of carbon dioxide,
chlorofluorcarbons and methane, the major gases contributing to global warming.

Surprises on List

The United States and the Soviet Union are the first and second-largest net
producers of these greenhouse gases, the report found. It added that if the
European Community were considered a single country, it would rank second behind
the United States.

But the next three countries on the index, surprisingly, were developing
nations, Brazil, China and India.

It has been widely believed that the industrialized countries are the main
producers of greenhouse gases. But the research group found that the developing
countries already account for 45 percent of emissions of these gases, and that
their contribution is likely to rise sharply as they consume more energy for
industrial development.

While there is still uncertainty about global warming, Mr. Speth said, the
scientific consensus is that ''the risks of global climate change are very real
and it would be very shortsighted to conclude otherwise.''

''The conclusion of the great bulk of credible scientists is that enough is
known to act now,'' said Mr. Speth, who was chairman of the Council on
Environmental Quality in the Carter Administration. ''It is our view that it is
already late.''

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Graph: estimated annual loss of tropical forest in nine key countries,
in thousand of acres from '81 to '89 (Source: Food and Agriculture Organization
of the United Nations, World Resources Institute) (pg. B6)

                   Copyright 1990 The New York Times Company

                              219 of 288 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                  June 9, 1990, Saturday, Late Edition - Final

About New York;
The Doctor Is In (Row F, Seat 12); Now Sing Ahhhh!

BYLINE: By DOUGLAS MARTIN

SECTION: Section 1; Page 1, Column 1; Metropolitan Desk

LENGTH: 782 words


In these bedraggled times, that old New York swagger has grown elusive. Yankee
Stadium is just a ballpark in a bad neighborhood where a last-place team bumbles
along. The British have bought Madison Avenue and the Japanese most everything
else.

But there is one Gotham splendor that still sparkles like a million diamonds:
the Metropolitan Opera House in Lincoln Center.

On Tuesday evening, thousands milled about the vast marble lobby, awaiting the
American Ballet Theater's sumptuous production of ''Romeo and Juliet.'' They
shared the unequivocal knowledge that they stood at the exact center of the
universe.

Just then the attending physician, Dr. Gerald Zelikovsky, breezed in, looking
dapper in suspenders, bow tie and scrupulously sculpted beard. As usual, he
stopped to chat with James Cope, the performance manager who is in charge of
everything but the performance.

Mr. Cope is of the opinion that it is decidedly unremarkable that the house
retains a different physician for each night of the week, something he says is
unheard of elsewhere. ''It's just consistent with the Met,'' he explained in a
velvet voice. ''The best.''

Dr. Zelikovsky is Tuesday, and has been for 13 years. He gets two free seats for
his efforts, hardly a princely reward by the standards of a physician who is
chairman of the urology department at Doctors Hospital, has a thriving private
practice and lives on Fifth Avenue. But the position is so coveted that the only
way to get aboard is for someone to die. (The 49-year-old Dr. Zelikovsky's
health is so robust he runs five miles the mornings he doesn't bike 15, thank
you very much.) The work is certainly varied. ''About the only thing we haven't
had is a birth,'' Mr. Cope said.

Not to worry. ''I can deliver babies,'' Dr. Zelikovsky piped up. ''We can do
babies.''

He seems to have done about everything else, though he was grateful not to be on
duty when an opera lover dived from the balcony and killed himself on seats R17
and R19. At the last two performances he treated epileptic seizures in the
audience, and over the years he has done everything from stemming the diarrhea
of nervous young artists to soothing prima donnas enraged by someone stealing a
note.

Once, a famous and very large soprano was horrified that her voice felt a bit
tight. So Dr. Zelikovsky listened to her attack a stratospheric note in her
dressing room. His immediate diagnosis was that her throat looked fine and that
her voice was indubitably strong enough to leave a piercing ringing in his ears.
But the soprano announced she could go on only if she had a particular medicine.

An usher was dispatched to her apartment. Moments before she was to appear, the
panting usher returned and thrust the medicine into the hands of Dr. Zelikovsky,
who held a hypodermic needle. The singer pulled up her skirt, Dr. Zelikovsky
aimed truly and the show went on - even though there was no way the medicine
could have had any effect so quickly.

The doctor's stories seem as fantastical as, well, an opera. A famous tenor's
hired clack -the person whose job it is to clap after a performance - once threw
a bouquet of roses during an encore ovation only to poke the perfomer in the
eye. Another night, the doctor treated a Kirov ballerina's sprained ankle under
the watchful eyes of a gaggle of K.G.B. agents. When someone threw a tear gas
cannister into the audience, Dr. Zelikovsky immediately recognized the scent
from his service in Vietnam and instructed the audience to evacuate to a lower
level.

On at least one occasion he has been a star in one of the world's premier halls.
During a performance by the Stuttgart Ballet, a man suffered a heart attack and
the show was canceled. But virtually the entire audience -4,000 people - stayed
for 45 minutes raptly watching Dr. Zelikovsky perform C.P.R. in a futile effort
to save the man's life.

It's been a long road. Dr. Zelikovsky grew up in the Brownsville section of
Brooklyn in an immigrant home where conversations darted between a half dozen
languages. He attended medical school in Belgium, where it was free. He served
in the Army in Vietnam. After that, urology, a quiet branch of medicine where
you can often see positive results, seemed right . ''I'd had my quota of
heroics,'' he said.  Except, perhaps, for heroic tenors. Opera has become
entwined with the family of Dr. Zelikovsky and his wife, Parice. On their first
date he took her to her first opera. When she was pregnant, they went backstage
and Luciano Pavarotti put his ear to her belly and predicted the child would be
a boy.

Now 10, Gregory loves to put on a bow tie like Dad's and go to the opera. He
likes ''Tales of Hoffmann'' best.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1990 The New York Times Company

                              220 of 288 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                  June 10, 1990, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

ANTIQUES;
OBJECTS OF HIS DESIRE: ONE COLLECTOR'S CHINA SYNDROME

BYLINE: By RITA REIF

SECTION: Section 2; Page 38, Column 1; Arts and Leisure Desk

LENGTH: 928 words


The color-splashed and richly figured Chinese ceramics on view at the
Metropolitan Museum of Art through Aug. 26 are a highly personal document of
more than 2,000 years of stylistic developments in pottery. The vessels and
figures, which date from the Han Dynasty (206 B.C. to A.D. 220) through the
Ching Dynasty of the 19th century, are from a collection amassed over 50 years
by Stanley Herzman, a New York collector and clothing manufacturer.

The 94 jars, bottles, vases and tomb guardians exhibited in ''A Selection of
Chinese Ceramics From the Collection of Adele and Stanley Herzman'' were either
donated by the couple to the museum several years ago or are promised gifts. The
collection is one of only three major holdings of Chinese ceramics given or
promised to the museum since World War II. Most of the pieces reflect the
interest of Mr. Herzman, 82 years old, in the boldly colored or patterned
earthenware and porcelain he discovered on his first trip to China, in 1936,
when he was an importer of embroidered linens.

Over the years, said Mr. Herzman in a telephone interview last weekend from his
office in Englewood Cliffs, N.J., his taste became increasingly focused on Ming
blue and white and polychromed porcelains, Tang earthenware vessels and tomb
sculptures, and Sung stoneware and porcelain.

The most memorable object in the show, and one of Mr. Herzman's favorites, is
the essence of simplicity - a potted, cone-shaped dish with a shimmering
brown-black glaze. The glaze terminates in a ragged line near the base,
revealing the chalk-white clay. The egg-shell fineness of this clay, which
resembles porcelain, is also emphasized in the rim of the dish, where the glaze
was wiped when wet to leave a thin copper-colored line.

One of the more arresting Tang vessels, produced between A.D. 618 and 906, is a
ewer with a bamboolike handle and a bud-shaped mouth. Its spherical body is
dribbled with greens and caramels - the same palette and approach Morris Louis
would usein his color-field paintings of the late 1950's. These colors appear in
more muted lead glazes on numerous Tang sculptures - on women of the court
wearing softly draped shawls that cover their hands, on a fierce-faced tomb
guardian, his right arm raised to stave off an unseen attacker. Another
impressive Tang figure is an earthenware camel, its head reared back
dramatically.

According to Suzanne Vallenstein, the museum's research curator who organized
the show, Mr. Herzman's Tang and Ming ceramics will fill out the museum's
holdings in key areas. ''It's a dancing taste - but with consistencies,'' Mrs.
Vallenstein said. ''There's an eye for color and pattern throughout.''

Dragons are a dominant theme on the Ming porcelain pieces - whipping around
jars, raging across dishes, slithering up and down the sides of vases. Incised
green dragons show up on three stunning buttercup yellow bowls. A fiery red
dragon marches around the sides of a white dish, and green dragons embellish an
incense vessel with bright green handles in the shape of elephant heads.

Calligraphy decorates several objects. The most exquisite is a white Ming bowl
on a stem base. Blue Tibetan characters that translate into the phrase ''prayer
of blessings'' encircle the sides, visually balanced by a band of scrolls at the
base.

The show's most arresting piece of stoneware is a two-foot-tall wine jar,
painted with robust flattened flowers, which bears below its neck the
inscription: ''Eighteen scholars, loving their cups, grasp them and ascend to
Ying mountain. Eight mortals, after they're drunk, are oblivious of their
returning to their grottos. Heavenly wine, immortal pool of dew.''

Mr. Herzman said he bought most of these pieces after World War II. Some were
purchased during his textile-buying trips to the Far East and when he served as
an adviser on cottage industries for the United States Government in South
Vietnam. Others were bought over the last 10 years at auctions and from dealers
in New York and London. During this period prices for these pieces have doubled
and in some cases increased more than tenfold. Mr. Herzman said that most of the
pieces in the collection were priced from $25,000 to $125,000.

''My wife says to be a true collector it has to hurt,'' Mr. Herzman said.
''Well, I have been in pain for many years.''

James J. Lally, an Oriential-art dealer based in New York and the former
president of Sotheby's in North America, said he has followed Mr. Herzman's
collecting strategy for more than 15 years.

''I think he is a vanishing breed - a collector who bought for the fun of it,
with a constantly active approach, willing to listen to anyone but always making
up his own mind,'' Mr. Lally said. ''He has tried to find what was not well
represented in American collections. He has tried to buy unusual things.''

Giuseppe Eskenazi, a London dealer in Oriental art, agreed that Mr. Herzman is a
collector with an independent spirit. ''He has done this collection on his
own,'' he said. ''It is a very personal collection and very representative of
the periods covered with different wares, different materials and different
shapes.''

When the exhibition closes, the ceramics that are not among the Herzmans' future
gifts to the museum will be returned to the couple's apartment on Fifth Avenue
in Manhattan.

There, they are exhibited more casually on shelves and tabletops in rooms that
also display Mrs. Herzman's collection of 20th-century sculpture and paintings
by Matisse, David Smith, Henry Moore, Barbara Hepworth and Milton Avery.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photos: A stoneware vessel made during the Yuan Dynasty (Metropolitan
Museumof Art); An earthenware figure of a camel from the Tang Dynasty.
(Metropolitan Museumof Art)

                   Copyright 1990 The New York Times Company

                              221 of 288 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                  June 10, 1990, Sunday, Late Edition - Final
                              Correction Appended

C.I.A. - Costly, Inept, Anachronistic

BYLINE: By Roger Morris; Roger Morris was a member of the National Security
Council in the Johnson and Nixon Administrations.

SECTION: Section 4; Page 23, Column 2; Editorial Desk

LENGTH: 1859 words

DATELINE: SANTA FE, N.M.


Of all the rusting relics of the cold war, none lingers on with more irony, more
resistance to its growing anachronism than the Central Intelligence Agency.

Born in the crucible of the great postwar U.S.-Soviet rivalry and some of its
worst expedients, with often no apparent vision save conflict, no abiding
purpose save bureaucratic justification or aggrandizement, America's ministry of
espionage should be facing questions about its mission and ethic, its practical
and constitutional role in the international relations and security of a
democratic society. Yet there seems little evidence that either the C.I.A. or
the Bush Administration has begun to ponder a more relevant concept of an
intelligence service in a radically changed world.

Not surprisingly, the C.I.A. has resorted to the hoary but dependable politics
of the past 45 years. It has trotted out suitably new, old or simply hidden
dangers, asked for more money and scrambled to protect bureaucratic flanks.

Along with its 11 related institutions in the U.S. espionage community -
including the Defense Intelligence Agency and the electronic eavesdroppers and
code breakers of the National Security Agency - the C.I.A. dined well on the
flush national security spending of the 1980's. Intelligence budgets tripled
over the decade to reach nearly $30 billion in fiscal 1990. Money for C.I.A.
operations and analyses has continued to grow throughout the past five years,
even as Pentagon appropriations have peaked and declined.

To preserve and extend that expanding domain while much of its rationale
disappears, the C.I.A. has begun to advertise new perils of the post-cold-war
period - international narcotics, terrorism, industrial espionage, even the
spread of chemical weapons. In each field, however, the agency's own performance
has been inept if not worse.

From hostage-taking to airline bombing, U.S. intelligence on terrorist attacks
has been notoriously flawed, and little better on the humming commerce and
intrigue that built chemical warfare arsenals in the Middle East. As for
policing the narcotics trade, the C.I.A. itself stands shrouded in a long
history of alleged, still unresolved complicity with drug traffickers - from
mountain tribesmen and corrupt colonels of Southeast Asia in the 1960's to Gen.
Manuel Noriega and the contras of Central America in the 1980's.

As if aware of the vulnerability of these newer projects, C.I.A. lobbyists have
summoned an old ally in the budget wars - the agency's major foreign counterpart
and in some disturbing ways its mirror image, the Soviet K.G.B. Thus the
predictable speeches, leaks and briefings in which the C.I.A. Director, William
H. Webster, sees what he calls ''more aggressive, more robust'' Soviet
intelligence efforts, lavishly funded and cunningly effective despite the
veritable bankruptcy, political chaos and disintegration within the U.S.S.R.

The Russians somehow retain their secret police control in Eastern Europe even
as the bloc crumbles, Mr. Webster told one audience last winter. The
now-acknowledged backwardness and disarray of the Soviet economy, he maintained,
only means even greater K.G.B. zeal in industrial and technological espionage.

Moreover, there are the imminent new U.S.-Soviet arms agreements, the
intelligence demands of on-site monitoring and verification, the inspectors who
are spies and thus the spies to watch the inspectors. Nor can it all be done
safely with a mere $10 billion to $15 billion more for new radar-imaging
satellites, part of a major investment in reconnaissance and listening posts
already committed by Congress and the White House last year.

In its perennial rivalry with electronic intelligence, the C.I.A. will require
added ''humint'' - human-collected intelligence - and thus more manpower. As Mr.
Webster told the National Press Club last November, his needs are
''staggering.'' Peace, it turns out, is going to be even more expensive than the
cold war, and by all odds a growth industry for the intelligence community.

It is symptomatic of our plight, of our gagged dialogue in national security,
that there has been in Congress or the media so little challenge to this
campaign, however transparent or contrived. As usual, hard edges of issues and
money have been softened by settling on personality, in this case on the
somewhat bland and dutiful Mr. Webster.

A U.S. Court of Appeals judge from St. Louis and the F.B.I. Director for nine
years, Mr. Webster came to the agency in 1987 to calm everyone after the swift
exit and death of William Casey amid the Iran-contra affair - still another
scandal in which the C.I.A. was deeply embroiled yet escaped virtually free of
consequence.

Mr. Webster was hardly a reformer. He had left behind at the F.B.I. an unsavory
record of surveillance of dissident groups as well as charges of racial
discrimination. His anemic response to the constitutional atrocity of
Iran-contra was to dismiss a pair of lesser officials and demote or reprimand
five others, moves widely interpreted in Washington as essential immunity for
the agency at large.

The new Director went on to oppose the creation of a quasi-independent C.I.A.
inspector general, legislation that became law late last year despite
Administration opposition, and to date the only potentially significant new
oversight measure to emerge from the Iran-contra revelations.

For his loyalty, Mr. Webster has been rewarded with fattening budgets and only
occasional sniping of the sort reserved by the intelligence bureaucracy for
exogenous directors. (In acid comparison with William ''Wild Bill'' Donovan, the
legendary head of U.S. wartime intelligence and godfather of the C.I.A., agency
veterans reportedly call the current Director ''Mild Bill.'') Rather more
ominous are the first accounts this spring by a Houston Post reporter, Pete
Brewton, of extensive ties between failed financial institutions and the C.I.A.
- more than 20 savings and loan institutions and at least two banks with agency
connections or relationships with organized crime figures with links themselves
to the C.I.A.

Money-laundering, looting of thrifts to finance forbidden covert actions,
manipulation of markets, Mafia alliances - hovering over the Post stories and an
inquiry by the House Select Committee on Intelligence are too-familiar,
too-believable ghosts. These are all too consistent with a shady, seamy margin
on which the agency has operated for so long, and which now threatens to mock
Mr. Webster's rectitude and hands-off management.

The Central Intelligence Agency has been at the core of America's cold-war
Faustian bargain: by one count, at least 900 major projects and several thousand
secondary actions over more than four decades, often deliberate decisions to
enlist or engage evil in the service of perceived good, often to match in kind
an enemy whose values we deplored.

It will not be necessary for scholars of the next century to seize upon the
agency's relatively rare renegade departures from Presidential edict. The record
of proposing, organizing, executing, rationalizing and then concealing
authorized policy will be enough for the most extraordinary chapter in the
history of American foreign relations.

The proof, as they like to say at C.I.A. headquarters, is in results. Off only
the briefest roll call - Iran, Guatemala, Indonesia, Zaire, Ecuador, Ethiopia,
Chile, Somalia, Brazil, Angola, Libya, Nicaragua, Vietnam, El Salvador,
Cambodia, Panama, Lebanon, Korea - some conclusions are already plain. Whatever
the presumed alternative, most C.I.A. interventions have consigned or left
countries to repression and prolonged suffering. Despite billions in secret
subsidies of U.S. tax dollars, several of our most favored clients fell of their
own savagery and corruption, leading to violently anti-American successor
regimes. Many of our secret police proxies and proteges have displayed an
amazingly consistent penchant for torture.

Yet history may not judge so harshly, after all, the seedy bag men or sleepy
watch officers counting off the moments to a faraway coup d'etat. Far worse than
any covert action, however wrong or misshapen, is an intelligence agency's
intellectual dishonesty, the ideological, political or bureaucratic corruption
of the information that is the essence of the art. Expected to deceive everyone
else, it must never willfully or by incompetence lie to itself.

That the C.I.A. has done just that so often, and especially vis-a-vis the Soviet
Union, its most vital object of study, should now raise the gravest doubts about
its future role and funding. The agency's bafflement at the process loosed by
glasnost, its stuffy, orthodox ignorance of the volcanic forces so close beneath
the surface of Soviet society, is only the latest and most spectacular failure.

There is, too, what one scholar has called ''politics and guesswork,'' the
systematic overstatement of Soviet military expenditures since 1948, distorted
estimates that in the eerie cold-war twilight of the past decade came to look
somehow moderate beside the wildly tendentious and budget-plumping analyses of
the Defense Intelligence Agency. Without a discourse of integrity, the C.I.A.
could not accurately gauge the old Soviet threat, or honestly inform U.S. policy
in response. Now, with little sense at home or abroad of a politics of the left,
it sees clearly neither the present nor the future of a new Soviet Union that is
still the most important power in Europe or Asia.

Reconversion is as essential to the C.I.A. as to so much of the bloated weapons
industry it helped feed. In a Washington no longer in thrall to the old myths of
ideology and power, most political intelligence could be vested in a revitalized
foreign ministry and diplomatic service, where it belongs. Military
intelligence, much too important and tempting to be left to the generals, should
be shifted entirely to a broader new National Security Agency with no stake in
either the Pentagon budget or old bureaucratic quarrels.

Left - with open budgets, openly arrived at - would be a truly new C.I.A. for an
obviously new world, a select and streamlined agency shorn of its operational
folly and extraconstitutional means. The new agency would be dedicated
unequivocally to analyses of cultural sensibility and socioeconomic
developments. One might hope that these would inform a new relevance in
government decision-making, from development aid to control of the arms or drug
traffic, from combating AIDS to fostering human rights. The peace dividend of
that C.I.A., of course, would not only be billions in savings and genuine
national security but also a fresh generation of talented and idealistic young
officials for whom intelligence was once again a public service.

Like high priests railing at an end to superstition, the professionals will call
such a plan heresy, impossible. If only they could tell us that the danger were
really gone, they have always said. Only then could we change this obese,
tunnel-vision relic, slouching toward Capitol Hill for still more money, still
more ominous briefings on a world already past.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

CORRECTION-DATE: June 12, 1990, Tuesday, Late Edition - Final

CORRECTION:

An article Sunday about the Central Intelligence Agency incorrectly identified
its author. Roger Morris was a staff member of the National Security Council in
the Johnson and Nixon Administrations.

GRAPHIC: Drawing

TYPE: Op-ed

                   Copyright 1990 The New York Times Company

                              222 of 288 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                  June 10, 1990, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

Mothers: Tired of Taking the Rap

BYLINE: By Janna Malamud Smith; Janna Malamud Smith is a clinical social worker
in Cambridge, Mass.

SECTION: Section 6; Page 32, Column 1; Magazine Desk

LENGTH: 2832 words


INfant colic,'' i remember a child psychopathology professor in graduate school
casually asserting one day, ''develops when mothers are having problems with
their maternal role.'' The professor was unmarried and had never mothered, but I
copied the comment down. If an experienced child therapist connected colic to a
maternal deficit, I had no reason to question her. Most of us in the class were
young and childless, though there was one student who had two young children.
And one had had infant colic. I remember her face flushing as she leaned over to
whisper to a woman seated next to her, and then her hand going up. ''My child
had colic,'' she said. ''It had nothing to do with my feelings.''

My stomach knotted and I looked at the floor. I could not decide if she was very
brave or merely crazy. In graduate school, we had learned to suppress any
personal experiences that disagreed with the theories we were learning, lest we
reveal our own character flaws. Besides, after two years of training to become
clinical social workers, we took it for granted that mothers caused much
pathology. We were all relieved when the professor shrugged and changed the
subject.

Now I have two children of my own, and my view of mothers has been transformed.
The experience of motherhood has left me increasingly perplexed by how
psychotherapists who are so concerned with mothering have so misunderstood
mothers.

In the dozen years I have worked in an outpatient psychiatric service at a
hospital, I do not remember ever having heard a clinician suggest that a patient
had a really terrific mother. I used to believe that the dearth of good mothers
was merely an outgrowth of natural selection, that the people who came for
psychotherapy were the ones who had been inadequately mothered. But the more I
look around, the more I am convinced that the people who choose to see
psychotherapists and the people who do not are more likely to be distinguished
by their ideas about the acceptability of therapy than by the personality of
their mothers. The real reason clinicians rarely talk much about the good
mothering patients receive is that clinicians are fixated on bad mothering.

If a patient is in trouble, the underlying assumption is that the mother must
have done something wrong. Just as strep throat comes from bacteria, other
problems come from inadequate mothers. Here is an example from ''Psychosomatic
Medicine and Contemporary Psychoanalysis,'' by Dr. Graeme J. Taylor, published
in 1987: The ''typical 'psychosomatic mother' . . . may be domineering, overly
involved and intrusive, excessively demanding, and clinging and smothering.''
Her behavior is said to be an important cause of her offspring's bronchial
asthma, ulcerative colitis, anorexia nervosa, peptic ulcers, hyperthyroidism,
eczema and neurodermatitis. While colic apparently no longer makes the list,
mothers remain, according to studies cited by writers like Taylor, a convenient
missing link in germ theory. If it is not viral or bacterial, it must be
maternal.

Such one-dimensional portrayals are hardly new. Mothers have rarely fared well
in psychological literature. Freud tended to dismiss them in a few quick
strokes. Dora's mother in the famous ''Case of Hysteria'' gets four sentences in
a piece that runs 120 pages. Although he never met the mother, Freud wrote:
''From the accounts given me by the girl and her father I was led to imagine her
as an uncultivated woman and above all as a foolish one, who had concentrated
all her interests upon domestic affairs. . . . She presented the picture, in
fact, of what might be called the 'housewife's psychosis.' She had no
understanding of her children's more active interests, and was occupied all day
long in cleaning the house. . . .''

After Freud, analytic theorists and developmental psychologists came to
recognize that mothers were important to their children's psychological
development. Unfortunately, once recognized, that importance has mostly been
observed in the negative. The so-called ''pre-Oedipal'' phase (the years before
the Oedipal drama is said to take center stage for children) is dominated by a
mother who almost always botches the job.

Either she does not attach well enough, or she does not let go sufficiently to
promote her child's optimal development. Or perhaps she does not overcome her
debilitating penis envy. The psychoanalyst Helene Deutsch wrote in 1945, ''In my
opinion the highest stage of maternal love, motherliness, is achieved only when
all masculine wishes have been given up or sublimated into other goals.''
Quoting Freud, she adds, ''If 'the old factor of lack of a penis has not yet
forfeited its power,' complete motherliness remains still to be achieved.''

Thanks in large measure to psychology and psychoanalysis, this century has
witnessed an exhaustive cataloging of the varieties of maternal failure. One
such example is a story about the Boston Strangler. (Susan Brownmiller tells it
in her book ''Against Our Will.'') In the 1960's when the Strangler was
terrorizing Bostonians, the police asked a group of doctors and psychiatrists to
draw a psychological profile of the killer. The committee hypothesized the
killer was consumed by raging hatred for his ''sweet, orderly, neat, compulsive,
seductive, punitive, overwhelming'' mother. When Albert DeSalvo was finally
arrested, it turned out that he was in fact attached to his mother, who was said
not to be terribly sweet, neat or overwhelming. If there was a childhood source
for his violence, Brownmiller speculates that it may well have come from being
beaten regularly and watching his mother being beaten regularly by his drunken
and violent father.

I do not believe that fathers are bad and mothers good, or that mothers are
blameless victims, or that children aren't harmed by poor parenting (including
real abuses of parental power so vile as to be almost inconceivable). It is just
that the indictment of mothers in the psychological literature has historically
been so nasty, so massive, so undifferentiated and so oblivious of the actual
limits of a mother's power or of her context that it precludes a just assessment
of real responsibility. Judith Grunebaum, a colleague whose thinking on this
subject has informed my own, observes that the social context of mothering is
largely left out of any account of parenting.

As part of my work I have made many home visits to very poor women in housing
projects. I witness the obstacles these mothers must overcome to arrange a day's
worth of juice and Pampers for their toddlers. They have no money, bad housing,
no day care, no way to earn a living, no physical safety, few reliable
relationships and no social support. But when their children are evaluated at
mental-health clinics the all-too-common requiem for the mother's effort is
simply ''neglectful and unmotivated.''

The fact that mothers have had primary responsibility for raising children does
not mean they have had the power and the resources to protect children from the
world's tricks and perils - nor from their own circumstances and limitations.
Primary responsibility for raising children cannot be simply equated with
primary responsibility for harming children.

Such fantasy notions of the good mother harm all mothers and cause them to
assume too much blame for damaging their children. Mothers imagine irreparable
psychological consequences whenever they yell, stay late at a meeting, use the
TV as a baby sitter, forget to serve a vegetable, let a child share a bed, or
leave a bad marriage. I cannot remember ever working with a mother - wealthy,
middle class or poor - who did not have secret theories about how behaviors, or
choices, or feelings of hers had deeply harmed her children. While some part of
such worry and guilt is appropriate to the task of child rearing, it is
increased unfairly and exponentially by the pervasive and unremitting image of
what a really good mother would have done in her place.

Beginning in the mid-1970's, a number of authors, including Nancy J. Chodorow,
Susan Contratto Weisskopf and Sara Ruddick have discussed ''mother blaming'' and
have pointed out how the society and the psychological literature both idealize
the mythic ''good mother,'' and lambaste any mother who falls short. One of the
opening salvos of this ongoing debate was fired by Jean Baker Miller, who
suggests in her 1976 book ''Toward a New Psychology of Women'' that the mother's
capacity to connect successfully with her children is influenced and frequently
impeded by her relative powerlessness in society: ''It is easier to blame
mothers than to comprehend the entire system that has restricted women.''

Nor has it been clear what a mother has to do to escape blame. The qualities
desired from the good mother have not been consistent. In ''For Her Own Good:
150 Years of the Experts' Advice to Women,'' Barbara Ehrenreich and Deirdre
English traced the changing and contradictory contortions each cultural vogue
has required from the ''good'' mother. In one decade, they point out, she was
castigated for comforting her child; in the next, for letting him cry.

Feminist criticisms and social change have had an impact on expert advice.
Benjamin Spock begins the 1976 edition of ''Baby and Child Care'' by explaining
that he has revised the book to eliminate sex biases. And with the fervor of a
convert he declares, ''Now I recognize that the father's responsibility is as
great as the mother's.'' Nor is Spock alone. In ''A Good Enough Parent,''
published in 1987, Bruno Bettelheim carefully acknowledged that he had adapted
D. W. Winnicott's phrase ''the good enough mother'' to include both parents,
''since both are important for their child's development.'' So too, T. Berry
Brazelton notes that ''Working and Caring'' was originally conceived as a book
about ''mothers who work'' until women pointed out to him that the situation
involved fathers as well.

Both Bettelheim (a devoted Freudian) and Brazelton offer sympathetic comments on
the great difficulty of trying to raise children in a complex, rapidly changing
industrial world characterized by individual isolation, high expectations for
psychological well-being and an absence of secure cultural traditions. And both
(as well as Spock) embrace the message of American individualism and try to
reassure and encourage parents to trust themselves. (Am I the only person who
finds such advice paradoxical? If parents knew which of their diverse and often
contradictory impulses to trust, why would they have cracked the cover of these
books in the first place?) Brazelton also speaks about society's responsibility
to improve child care, and to legislate conditions that support family life.

Relief for blamed mothers can be found in more academic works as well. Jerome
Kagan is a renowned developmental psychologist at Harvard. In ''The Nature of
The Child'' (1984), his carefully constructed treatise on childhood, he examines
the current knowledge about children's biological development and criticizes
what he refers to as an ''idealistic assumption'' that ''a mother's love for her
infant is necessary for the child's future mental health.''

Kagan is loath to draw conclusions about which childhood experiences connect to
which adult outcomes. He suggests that it is extremely difficult to demonstrate
that what happens in the early environment of an infant can be connected to the
happiness or unhappiness of an adult.

While there is little doubt that an early secure attachment to a parent is an
unmitigated good for an infant, Kagan writes: ''The consequences of these
benevolent experiences, however, will depend on the demands that the social
environment will make upon the child in the future. There is no way to inoculate
the infant against adult misery, even though parents might be able to make that
mood a little less probable.'' One's ethnicity, cultural values, moment in
history, social class, constitution, biological makeup and individual fortune
are all important variables in the elusive equation of a mentally healthy life.

Whether - and how much - the view of the mother's responsibility for her
children's problems is actually changing in the psychotherapeutic world (where
psychoanalysis is in some ways the most conservative discipline) is harder to
assess. Certainly, the presence of fathers in Lamaze classes is grimly
paralleled by their burgeoning presence in psychiatric literature, where they
are increasingly described as malefactors who harm their children by violence,
alcoholism and sexual abuse.

Along with fathers, bad luck has also earned a place in the literature.
Psychiatry's understanding of traumatic harm caused by accidents or natural and
human disasters has deepened, thanks to studies of a wide range of groups: from
children who were kidnapped on their school bus to Vietnam War veterans. It is
now recognized and well documented that traumas outside the parent-child
relationship can create very serious troubles, as can inherent biological
factors.

For instance, biological research on mental illness has exculpated the cold and
rejecting ''refrigerator mother'' from her responsibility for childhood autism.
(Neurological damage is the likely villain.) And schizophrenia is no longer
understood only as the product of a mother's intrusive and smothering behavior.
(She may be a player, but hardly alone on the stage.) Both manic-depressive
illness and panic disorder are recognized to have some genetic determinants.

But the psychoanalytic literature continues to argue for the central importance
of the child's early relationships. Events matter much less, psychoanalysis
contends, than how the child interprets them. And while biology and genetics are
acknowledged, the central determinant of how the child interprets an event is
bound up in his relationship to his ''caretaker.'' The most recent
psychoanalytic writing about infant development by Daniel Stern, Charles Zeanah,
Arnold Sameroff, Robert Emde and others is more sophisticated and complex than
earlier efforts. These writers tend to explain infant pathology as relational:
as stemming from problems within the relationship between the infant and his or
her ''primary caretaker'' or the ''caretaking system.'' It is not exactly the
infant who is deficient, nor exactly the mother, but something that goes wrong
in the way they come together.

While these phrases seem to acknowledge the presence of fathers, nannies and
grandmothers, even of neighborhoods, one senses a great political tactfulness.
The textual examples tend to focus on troubled mothers. So too, even as late as
''A Good Enough Parent,'' published in 1987, Bettelheim seemed still to view the
mother-child relationship as central. In that book, he describes a young girl
whom Anna Freud interviewed during the London blitz. According to the story, the
girl had witnessed a bomb exploding and had experienced it as an exciting and
interesting event. When Miss Freud sought to understand how the child had
managed such a happy view, she decided that it was because the mother had
successfully protected her by hiding her own anxiety from the child. Thus,
Bettelheim reiterates, the child was spared the trauma that many other children
suffered because of their parents' greater manifest anxiety.

One lesson I draw from this story is that were we in a war zone, my children
would wish they had another mother. (I think it is generally a good idea to be
scared of bombs falling near you.) But I think Bettelheim's story points to the
two important unresolved questions in the debate about the mothers'
responsibility. First of all, to what degree does any child's resiliency really
rest on her mother's capacity to frame experience for her? And second, if the
mother's reactions are uniquely important, is it fair that psychoanalytic
theories implicitly or explicitly suggest that any mother in a dangerous city
during a deadly war who lets her fear show should be viewed as having
psychologically failed her child? Why does the psychiatric literature remain
loath to acknowledge the mother's context? Don't all those soldiers dropping the
bombs fit into the equation somehow?

Maybe Bettelheim and Anna Freud, and many psychoanalysts of their generation who
were uprooted and emotionally affected by the Second World War, needed to
believe that with the right mother and the right amount of mother love you could
overcome all obstacles. Still, it is a noble ideal, and one that I am not ready
to abandon completely even if it means owning up to my own shortcomings.

But now that I have first-hand experience about what a 12-hour day alone with a
toddler feels like, or the horror of balancing a sick child and a busy job (even
with lots of help from a husband), I say the psychiatric world could still
afford to focus less on dissecting and perfecting mothers and more on removing
some of the real obstacles that remain in their paths.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1990 The New York Times Company

This document could not be formatted for delivery. If your delivery request
included other documents, they completed successfully.

                              224 of 288 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                  June 10, 1990, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

BOOKS FOR VACATION READING

SECTION: Section 7; Page 28, Column 2; Book Review Desk

LENGTH: 7142 words


This list has been selected from books reviewed since the Christmas issue of
December 1989. It only suggests high points in the main fields of reader
interest. Books are arranged alphabetically under subject headings.

Autobiography and Biography

AGAINST THE GRAIN: An Autobiography. By Boris Yeltsin. (Summit, $19.95.) This
provocative book gives voice to the Russian-style populism and antiparty
insurgency of its author, the most visible leader of the opposition to Mikhail
S. Gorbachev.

AMELIA EARHART: A Biography. By Doris L. Rich. (Smithsonian Institution,
$19.95.) THE SOUND OF WINGS: The Life of Amelia Earhart, by Mary S. Lovell. (St.
Martin's, $22.95.) Two biographies of the famous American pilot (and feminist)
who vanished in the South Pacific in 1937. The authors agree on the important
facts; Ms. Lovell is more skeptical about her flying skills than Ms. Rich, and
thinks better of her husband and publicist, G. P. Putnam.

BECOMING A POET: Elizabeth Bishop With Marianne Moore and Robert Lowell. By
David Kalstone. (Farrar, Straus & Giroux, $22.50.) The fullest account so far of
Bishop's life, David Kalstone's presentation approaches her creative activity
through her close friendships with two other major poets.

THE BOY-MAN: The Life of Lord Baden-Powell. By Tim Jeal. (Morrow, $24.95.) A
monumental (670 pages) biography of the founder of Scouting, doing full justice
to the complexities of the man and the contradictions in the movement he
fathered.

CAPTAIN SIR RICHARD FRANCIS BURTON: The Secret Agent Who Made the Pilgrimage to
Mecca, Discovered the Kama Sutra, and Brought the Arabian Nights to the West. By
Edward Rice. (Scribners, $35.) This life of the 19th-century explorer and sage
is a first-class account of a strange and remarkable career.

C. S. LEWIS: A Biography. By A. N. Wilson. (Norton, $22.50.) A skilled novelist
and biographer (of Tolstoy) brilliantly and sympathetically demythologizes one
of the most tendentiously written-about British authors of the 20th century.

DADDY, WE HARDLY KNEW YOU. By Germaine Greer. (Knopf, $19.95.) Ms. Greer's
enormous digressions and rambles are as entertaining as the principal action in
this account of her quest to learn the origins of her own father, a man who, she
finds, never knew his birth name or parents and lied about what little he knew.

EVERY GOOD-BYE AIN'T GONE: Family Portraits and Personal Escapades. By Itabari
Njeri. (Times Books/Random House, $17.95.) An impassioned, skillful, frankly
subjective attempt to explore and expose the depth of a black American family
heritage.

A HIGHER KIND OF LOYALTY: A Memoir by China's Foremost Journalist. By Liu
Binyan. (Pantheon, $22.95.) Repeatedly Mr. Liu wrote the truth; repeatedly he
was punished for it, but never gave up faith in the party until Tiananmen
Square. Strange and sad.

HOW I BECAME HETTIE JONES. By Hettie Jones. (Dutton, $18.95.) The memoir of a
young Jewish woman of the Beat Generation, who loved - and lost - the poet and
black nationalist LeRoi Jones, is a valuable social document.

THE LABYRINTH OF EXILE: A Life of Theodor Herzl. By Ernst Pawel. (Farrar, Straus
& Giroux, $30.) Zionism's founder subtly rendered in the round, with both his
grandeur and his pettiness.

LOVE AND OTHER INFECTIOUS DISEASES: A Memoir. By Molly Haskell. (Morrow,
$18.95.) A film critic's psychological journey through the terrifying sickness
and near death of her husband, Andrew Sarris, also a distinguished film critic.

MEANS OF ASCENT: The Years of Lyndon Johnson. By Robert A. Caro. (Knopf,
$24.95.) The second volume of a projected four, Mr. Caro's account of Johnson's
life from 1941 to 1948 - especially the ''stolen election'' that put him in the
Senate - is the work of an indefatigable researcher and master narrator.

MIDSTREAM. By Le Anne Schreiber. (Viking, $18.95.) A dauntless and moving memoir
by a former Times editor who became a freelance writer while her mother died
cruelly of cancer.

RANDALL JARRELL: A Literary Life. By William H. Pritchard. (Michael di
Capua/Farrar, Straus & Giroux, $25.) One of the most literary lives ever lived,
Jarrell's was short on event but plentiful in wit, pathos and brilliance, as
this careful biography shows.

RICHARD NIXON AND HIS AMERICA. By Herbert S. Parmet. (Little, Brown, $24.95.) A
thorough and thoughtful biography of both the 37th President and the society in
which he came to power.

SIMONE DE BEAUVOIR: A Biography. By Deirdre Bair. (Summit, $24.95.) Ms. Bair -
to whom de Beauvoir granted liberal access for the last six years of her life -
presents a detailed and demystifying account of the stellar French intellectual.

WHAT I SAW AT THE REVOLUTION: A Political Life in the Reagan Era. By Peggy
Noonan. (Random House, $19.95.) Ronald Reagan's speechwriter, an articulate true
believer in her President's greatness, transforms what she beheld in Washington
into fine, sometimes brusque and rough-cut social comedy.

Children

ANTARCTICA. Written and illustrated by Helen Cowcher. (Farrar, Straus & Giroux,
$13.95.) The message of this visually dazzling book is clear: penguins have
natural predators, and man, though different from the others, is part of that
continuum. (Ages 5 to 8) BASEBALL IN APRIL: And Other Stories. By Gary Soto.
(Harcourt Brace Jovanovich, $14.95.) These short stories deal sensitively with
Mexican-American boys and girls becoming teen-agers in contemporary California
neighborhoods. (Ages 12 and up) GALIMOTO. By Karen Lynn Williams. Illustrated by
Catherine Stock. (Lothrop, Lee & Shepard, $13.95.) A little boy in a village on
the shores of Lake Malawi spends a day making a galimoto - a toy car - from
various wires he gathers. The watercolor art broadens the scope of this engaging
story. (Ages 5 to 9) JULY. Written and illustrated by James Stevenson.
(Greenwillow, $12.95.) These childhood recollections incorporate soft-spoken
pictures, touched with amusing grace and completely in harmony with the story
they serve. (Ages 5 and up) TEHANU: The Last Book of Earthsea. By Ursula K.
LeGuin. (Jean Karl/Atheneum, $15. 95.) This sequel to the prize-winning Earthsea
fantasy trilogy explores the necessary and life-giving contributions of female
magic, which is sometimes disguised as domesticity. There are dragons, of
course, but also a poignant consideration of aging, among other adult themes.
(Ages 12 and up)

Crime

THE BONE ORCHARD. By Joseph Trigoboff. (Blue Star/Walker, $18.95.) A New York
City police detective tracks down the connection between a Latin American
diplomat and two murdered male hustlers; the novelist has an eye for the murky,
nighttime colors of New York's neighborhoods.

DARK OBSESSION: A True Story of Incest and Justice. By Shelley Sessions with
Peter Meyer. (Putnam, $21.95.) The finely detailed and thoroughly shocking
narrative, both personal and social, of a Texas teen-ager who found all too
little family or institutional support in trying to escape from an incestuous
stepfather.

DEVICES AND DESIRES. By P. D. James. (Knopf, $19.95.) This absorbing novel, the
11th by the British writer, places the detective Adam Dalgliesh on the trail of
a serial killer.

THE END OF LIEUTENANT BORUVKA. By Josef Skvorecky. (Norton, $18.95.) Five
stories, camouflaged as police thrillers, about a good man's melancholy
trajectory through the corrupt and corrupting world of post-Dubcek, pre-Havel
Prague.

AN EASY THING. By Paco Ignacio Taibo 2d. (Viking, $16.95.) Mr. Taibo composes a
dense and disquieting picture of pervasive political chaos and social cynicism
in a novel about a moody Mexico City gumshoe.

IF EVER I RETURN, PRETTY PEGGY-O. By Sharyn McCrumb. (Scribners, $17.95.) Ms.
McCrumb's characters give serious and intelligent thought to the ghosts raised
by a high school reunion in Tennessee - including the tangible specter of a
murderer.

MURPHY'S FAULT. By Steven Womack. (Thomas Dunne/St. Martin's, $17.95.) New
Orleans is the setting for this tough and articulate first novel about greedy
politicians and their dirty deals.

OCTOPUS: The Long Reach of the International Sicilian Mafia. By Claire Sterling.
(Norton, $19.95.) Ms. Sterling's Palermo-based bosses are credited with the
creation of a multinational empire whose principal target has long been the
United States. SKELETON-IN-WAITING. By Peter Dickinson. (Pantheon, $16.95.)
Spunky, clever Princess Louise is on the case in the author's second nifty
thriller about an imaginary British royal family.

UNBRIDLED. By Mark Daniel. (Ticknor & Fields, $17.95.) This flashy debut novel
features Georgie Blane, a champion steeplechase jockey turned crooked
steeplechase jockey. The author's vision of this sporting world offers beauty
and brutality, but no romance whatsoever.

THE WESTIES: Inside the Hell's Kitchen Irish Mob. By T. J. English. (Putnam,
$21.95.) The last incarnation and, apparently, final collapse of Manhattan's
long-running West Side gang under the twin assaults of Federal crime fighters
and gentrification.

Current Affairs and Social Commentary

BARBARIANS AT THE GATE: The Fall of RJR Nabisco. By Bryan Burrough and John
Helyar. (Harper & Row, $22.95.) A vivid and compelling account of the 1988 sale
of RJR Nabisco for $25 billion.

BIRTH POWER: The Case for Surrogacy. By Carmel Shalev. (Yale University,
$19.95.) A liberal feminist lawyer argues forcibly that women should have the
legal right to sell their reproductive services (and the obligation to fulfill
their contracts).

THE CATHOLIC MYTH: The Behavior and Beliefs of American Catholics. By Andrew M.
Greeley. (Scribners, $21.95.) The priest, novelist, sociologist and maverick
argues, with cogent figures, that Roman Catholics are better educated and richer
than Protestants and more liberal on political issues.

DIVORCING THE DICTATOR: America's Bungled Affair With Noriega. By Frederick
Kempe. (Putnam, $24.95.) OUR MAN IN PANAMA: How General Noriega Used the United
States - and Made Millions in Drugs and Arms. By John Dinges. (Random House,
$21.95.) Much in these two accounts by professional journalists has been known
to our Government all along but kept secret. Both books are excellent guides
through the undergrowth of America's affair with the Panamanian dictator.

THE FALL OF PAN AM 103: Inside the Lockerbie Investigation. By Steven Emerson
and Brian Duffy. (Putnam, $21.95.) Two professional journalists have constructed
a surpassing account of the 1988 bombing, rich both in drama and in anecdotal
details.

FLASHBACKS: On Returning to Vietnam. By Morley Safer. (Random House, $18.95.) A
postwar reinterpretation of the country by a CBS correspondent whose reporting
on the war was among the best broadcast journalism of the 1960's.

FRUIT TRAMPS: A Family of Migrant Farmworkers. By Herman LeRoy Emmet.
(University of New Mexico, Cloth, $45; Paper, $24.95.) In this study of a
migrant family, words and pictures echo and drive each other to portray a life
of deprivation and triumph.

INTIFADA: The Palestinian Uprising - Israel's Third Front. By Ze'ev Schiff and
Ehud Ya'ari. (Simon & Schuster, $22.95.) A reporters' book that focuses on
long-term trends and inquires what is distinctive or continuous about the
Palestinian uprising.

JUSTICE NOT VENGEANCE. By Simon Wiesenthal. (Grove Weidenfeld, $22.50.) Did
Josef Mengele really drown in Brazil in 1979, or may the physician-murderer of
Auschwitz still be alive? The man who brought Adolf Eichmann to judgment
reflects on this and other cases from a life spent tracking Nazis.

A LAW UNTO ITSELF: Power, Politics, and the IRS. By David Burnham. (Random
House, $22.50.) An absorbing, critical, well-argued inquiry into our tax agency,
by a former Times reporter.

A MIRACLE, A UNIVERSE: Settling Accounts With Torturers. By Lawrence Weschler.
(Pantheon, $22.95.) A disturbing account of the uneasy compromises between new
civilian governments and the brutal military regimes they succeeded in Latin
America.

ONE, BY ONE, BY ONE: Facing the Holocaust. By Judith Miller. (Simon & Schuster,
$21.95.) A reporter and editor for The Times examines the ways five European
countries and the United States have distorted and manipulated the memory of the
Holocaust.

THE PRIVATIZATION DECISION: Public Ends, Private Means. By John D. Donahue.
(Basic Books, $22.95.) What government activities should be contracted out? This
thoughtful book shuns global answers and explores how to examine individual
cases.

SLOW BURN: The Rise and Bitter Fall of American Intelligence in Vietnam. By
Orrin DeForest and David Chanoff. (Simon & Schuster, $19.95.) Mr. DeForest, the
principal author, is an angry C.I.A. veteran, offering a sad tale of obduracy
and incompetence.

SMALL VICTORIES: The Real World of a Teacher, Her Students, and Their High
School. By Samuel G. Freedman. (Harper & Row, $22.95.) In a sad account of
social neglect and failure, a former New York Times reporter spends a year at a
battered inner-city high school and chronicles the heroic and often fruitless
efforts of students and teachers to make learning possible.

SOVIET WOMEN: Walking the Tightrope. By Francine du Plessix Gray. (Doubleday,
$19.95.) Brilliant, sympathetic portraits of overworked, frustrated women whose
men have neither the authority of patriarchs nor the utility of househusbands.

TRIBES WITH FLAGS: A Dangerous Passage Through the Chaos of the Middle East. By
Charles Glass. (Atlantic Monthly, $22.95.) An unfunny thing happened to this ABC
correspondent in Beirut: he got kidnapped. But he escaped, and his story,
despite its basic sadness, is entertaining, often even cheerful.

THE UNDESERVING POOR: From the War on Poverty to the War on Welfare. By Michael
B. Katz. (Pantheon, Cloth, $22.95; Paper, $14.95.) A searching, unsettling
history of Government policies toward poor people, with provocative solutions
for what to do next. WHAT LISA KNEW: The Truth and Lies of the Steinberg Case.
By Joyce Johnson. (Putnam, $22.95.) A painful, fascinating effort by a skilled
novelist to both narrate and understand (but not to excuse) the events and
personalities that led to the horrendous child-abuse case of Lisa Steinberg,
dead at 6 in November 1987 in New York.

THE WORST YEARS OF OUR LIVES: Irreverent Notes From a Decade of Greed. By
Barbara Ehrenreich. (Pantheon, $19.95.) Fifty essays - elegant, trenchant, angry
and funny - that sum up the author's view of the 80's and aim to make us think
(and wince).

Essays, Criticism and Letters

THE BOY WHO WOULD BE A HELICOPTER. By Vivian Gussin Paley. (Harvard University,
$19.95.) An original essay on the practice of teaching young children, using
their own stories as a vehicle of instruction, by a University of Chicago master
teacher.

THE DIARY OF H. L. MENCKEN. Edited by Charles A. Fecher. (Knopf, $30.) The good
Mencken - a great writer, editor and friend - and the bad Mencken - anti-Semite,
racist and crank - revealed in a compulsively readable diary, kept from 1930 to
1948.

FIVE O'CLOCK ANGEL: Letters of Tennessee Williams to Maria St. Just, 1948-1982.
(Knopf, $24.95.) Williams's letters to the Russian-born Englishwoman Maria St.
Just reveal a cheerful, tender, civilized man far different from what has become
the drugged, drunken, despondent received version of the playwright.

FRANCOIS TRUFFAUT: CORRESPONDENCE 1945-1984. Edited by Gilles Jacob and Claude
de Givray. (Noonday/Farrar, Straus & Giroux, Cloth, $50; Paper, $19.95.) A
hefty, well-annotated collection of the great French director's almost
compulsive correspondence - often joking, always self-revealing.

HENRY JAMES AND EDITH WHARTON. Letters: 1900-1915. Edited by Lyall H. Powers.
(Scribners, $29.95.) The delightful record of a friendship between two very high
literary pinnacles.

IN SEARCH OF LOST ROSES. By Thomas Christopher. (Summit, $18.95.) A charming
book-length essay on antique roses, from ancient Rome to Tombstone, Ariz., and
on the obsessional characters who hunt and love them, by one of their number.

LETTERS OF KATHERINE ANNE PORTER. Edited by Isabel Bayley. (Atlantic Monthly,
$29.95.) Letters of astonishing clarity, keenness and vigor showing the author
of ''Pale Horse, Pale Rider'' as an astute critic of life and a solid help to
her friends.

NOTES OF A HANGING JUDGE: Essays and Reviews, 1979-1989. By Stanley Crouch.
(Oxford University, $22.95.) A bold and pitiless critic focuses his wrath
chiefly on other African-American intellectuals and spokesmen whom he finds
short on seriousness.

A PRESENT OF THINGS PAST: Selected Essays. By Theodore Draper. (Hill & Wang,
$25.) Informed, argumentative observations by the hardest-headed of liberals,
taking on cold-war bungling, American Communism and journalistic ethics.

SOME FREAKS. By David Mamet. (Viking, $16.95.) Reminiscences and ruminations
from left to right and back by a considerable playwright who is happy to exhibit
his inconsistencies.

THE PARIS REVIEW ANTHOLOGY. Edited by George Plimpton. (Norton, $25.) THE
WRITER'S CHAPBOOK: A Compendium of Fact, Opinion, Wit, and Advice From the 20th
Century's Preeminent Writers. Edited by George Plimpton. (Viking, $19.95.) Much
has changed since Mr. Plimpton conceived The Paris Review in 1952, and these
volumes - the first a collection of writing from the magazine, the second a
compendium from its interviews - are handy, entertaining and high-spirited
guides to the last four decades by the engineers of change themselves.

Fiction

ADULT ENTERTAINMENT. By John Metcalf. (St. Martin's, $15.95.) Two novellas and
three short stories whose heroes long for lust but instead get wives, children,
bills and crushed hopes; the truth, according to this Canadian writer, is simply
no fun.

ADVANCE, RETREAT: Selected Short Stories. By Richard Rive. (St. Martin's,
$16.95.) Humane, observant stories from three decades by the late South African
writer, one of the first to explore the meaning of mixed race in a rigid,
dualistic society.

AFTERLIFE. By Paul Monette. (Crown, $19.95.) A gallant, painful novel that
concerns three ''AIDS widowers'' trying to reconstruct lives tenuously held in
the wake of their lovers' deaths.

AT THE GATES OF THE ANIMAL KINGDOM. By Amy Hempel. (Knopf, $17.95.) Tiny stories
and lots of them, bringing an almost miraculous exactitude of observation and
execution to bear on men and women stuck in various poses of comedy and loss.

BABY OF THE FAMILY. By Tina McElroy Ansa. (Harcourt Brace Jovanovich, $18.95.)
This genial first novel renders the life of a black Georgia family of the 1950's
in rich detail; but humdrum it's not, for the protagonist is a little girl who
talks with ghosts.

BARKING MAN: And Other Stories. By Madison Smartt Bell. (Ticknor & Fields,
$19.95.) In a shifty, dangerous world, Mr. Bell's humane and mature stories
require - and get - frequent small acts of heroism from their characters, even
against heavy odds.

BECAUSE IT IS BITTER, AND BECAUSE IT IS MY HEART. By Joyce Carol Oates. (William
Abrahams/Dutton, $19.95.) That heart is dark, ignorant and isolated for the
arriviste heroine of Ms. Oates's novel, who lives with responsibility for a
homicide.

BLUE TAXIS: Stories About Africa. By Eileen Drew. (Milkweed, Paper, $9.95.) The
narrators of these deft, direct tales are mostly expatriate Americans whose
ambivalent relationships to third-world surroundings make political problems
deeply personal.

THE BOOK OF EVIDENCE. By John Banville. (Scribners, $17.95.) In this persuasive
novel we meet a first-person narrator who is a murderer and an existential
philosopher of exceptional depravity.

CHEKHOV'S SISTER. By W. D. Wetherell. (Little, Brown, $17.95.) Mr. Wetherell's
elegant, subtle novel, which takes place in Yalta in 1941, is about people who
refuse to be humiliated or become losers.

THE CLONING OF JOANNA MAY. By Fay Weldon. (Viking, $18.95.) After the
protagonist of this energetic, intelligent satirical fantasy learns that her
domineering husband had her cloned 30 years ago, all five Joannas band together
to readjust their lives.

COLLECTED STORIES OF WALLACE STEGNER. (Random House, $21.95.) This gathering
yields an overview of the author's progress and that of his medium: big,
wholehearted tales that proceed with a characteristic sauntering ease.

DECEPTION. By Philip Roth. (Simon & Schuster, $18.95.) A swift, elegant,
disturbing novel, composed of fragments of talk (much of it about sex) between a
woman and a man named Philip, whose relation to the real-life Philip Roth is as
problematical as ever.

DOGEATERS. By Jessica Hagedorn. (Pantheon, $19.95.) A fast, frequently
hair-raising first novel, full of images and fantasies reflecting the author's
Philippine background, that maps the ruin at the heart of Philippine society in
the last four decades.

ESCAPES. By Joy Williams. (Atlantic Monthly, $18.95.) A collection of quirky,
ominous short stories in which ''every person is on the brink of eternity every
moment'' and few fail to fall in.

FAMILY PICTURES. By Sue Miller. (Harper & Row, $19.95.) A virtuoso realistic
novel about the family and the perspectives within it, spacious and
encompassing, that explores what it means to make a home, live at home and learn
what home is.

FEVER: Twelve Stories. By John Edgar Wideman. (Holt, $16.95.) A collection of
strange and powerful work, stories grand at once in their impartiality and their
sorrow, whose characters - like the rest of us - fail to recognize and love
their fellow humans.

FLOATING IN MY MOTHER'S PALM. By Ursula Hegi. (Poseidon, $17.95.) A deft,
convincing little memoirlike novel about a girl growing up in Dusseldorf in the
1950's, a child's phantasmagoria of love versus loneliness, wholeness versus
amputation.

FRIEND OF MY YOUTH. By Alice Munro. (Knopf, $18.95.) This collection of short
stories is full of marvels of construction, inquiry and retrospection as Ms.
Munro's compulsively curious men and women work at finding out what has happened
in their lives.

THE FUGITIVE. By Pramoedya Ananta Toer. (Morrow, $16.95.) Written while its
Indonesian author was imprisoned at the end of World War II, this suspenseful
novel of his country's occupation by the Japanese weaves a web of motivation,
character and emotion.

THE FULL CATASTROPHE. By David Carkeet. (Linden/Simon & Schuster, $18.95.) With
humor and insight, Mr. Carkeet's fourth novel addresses the commonest of social
diseases - a failing marriage - with the least likely of therapies: a live-in
linguist.

GOODNIGHT! By Abram Tertz (Andrei Sinyavsky). (Viking, $22.95.) A novel in the
form of a chatty memoir whose charm lies more in details than exposition, even
if the details concern the pre-Gorbachev bad old days of the author-narrator's
imprisonment.

HELL-BENT MEN AND THEIR CITIES. By Susan Dodd. (Viking, $17.95.) Short stories,
intelligent, sympathetic and sometimes satirical, whose brave though unheroic
late-20th-century characters endure while keeping one another's spirits up.

HIS LITTLE WOMEN. By Judith Rossner. (Summit, $19.95.) Ms. Rossner's eighth book
of fiction takes on - always with energy and humor - Hollywood, multiple
marriages, the effect of divorce on children, cosmetic surgery, Playboy and Ms.
magazine.

HOLLYWOOD: A Novel of America in the 1920s. By Gore Vidal. (Random House,
$19.95.) The latest wonderfully literate installment in Mr. Vidal's docudramatic
revision of American history and politics features a movie star with a mission:
to persuade producers to make anti-German World War I movies.

HOMEBOY. By Seth Morgan. (Random House, $19.95.) Savagely comic and often
brilliant, Mr. Morgan's first novel conveys a relentless, hellish vision of a
San Francisco nether world of drugs and hustlers, thieves and exotic pimps.

IN A FATHER'S PLACE. By Christopher Tilghman. (Farrar, Straus & Giroux, $18.95.)
The author's first book contains seven short stories, clear and charged with
feeling, set in various places, rich enough in significant detail to do the work
of novels.

THE KING. By Donald Barthelme. (Edward Burlingame/Harper & Row, $16.95.) The
author, who died last year, left us one more wild, parodic metafiction; in this
one, King Arthur meets World War II.

THE KNIGHT, DEATH AND THE DEVIL. By Ella Leffland. (Morrow, $22.95.) This
vigorous novel about Hermann Goring, Hitler's baroque, enigmatic No. 2 Nazi,
gives a credible sense of why Nazism succeeded in inflaming so many
imaginations.

LEWIS PERCY. By Anita Brookner. (Pantheon, $18.95.) Ms. Brookner concentrates
her mature novelist's intelligence on an innocent, well-meaning man who gets
beat up in the sexual wars.

LIKE LIFE. By Lorrie Moore. (Knopf, $18.95.) Her characters are not a happy lot,
but the author's witty and wry observations prevent these stories from being
grim or maudlin.

LONDON FIELDS. By Martin Amis. (Harmony, $19.95.) Set in the grimmest of
possible worlds (London in 1999, where a global catastrophe - called just ''the
Crisis'' - impends), Mr. Amis's novel pursues its vivid characters through a
rich and complicated picaresque tale of destruction and self-destruction.

MARY REILLY. By Valerie Martin. (Doubleday, $18.95.) Stevenson's story of Dr.
Jekyll and Mr. Hyde from the unexpected viewpoint of a housemaid, a woman fierce
with love, loyalty and the will to figure out what's going on between good and
evil.

ME AND MY BABY VIEW THE ECLIPSE. By Lee Smith. (Putnam, $18.95.) Powerful short
stories of small-town life and the passage of time in the American South, full
of striving, jealousy and pettiness but also of transcendent generosity and
devotion.

THE MESSAGE TO THE PLANET. By Iris Murdoch. (Viking, $22.95.) Miss Murdoch's
24th novel treats men and women seriously through a kind of high philosophical
clowning, starring a charismatic philosopher exposed to huge overdoses of real
life.

THE MUSIC ROOM. By Dennis McFarland. (Houghton Mifflin, $18.95.) The themes
struck in Mr. McFarland's generous, hopeful and stylistically bold first novel
include history and continuity, independence and separation, as its 29-year-old
hero searches past and present for secrets of identity.

THE NEUMILLER STORIES. By Larry Woiwode. (Farrar, Straus & Giroux, $18.95.)
Utterly direct but sometimes painfully difficult in their emotional
discriminations, most of these stories are the original versions of material
later incorporated into the author's fine 1975 novel of Great Plains life,
''Beyond the Bedroom Wall.''

ORDINARY MONEY. By Louis B. Jones. (Viking, $18.95.) A wacky, satirical first
novel of life among the relatively disadvantaged of Marin County, California,
who are saddled with responsibility for a truckload of counterfeit money (except
it may be real).

PALACE WALK. By Naguib Mahfouz. (Doubleday, $22.95.) Now available in English,
the first volume of ''The Cairo Trilogy,'' reputed to be the masterpiece of the
Egyptian novelist and 1988 Nobel laureate, nobly supports that reputation.

PASSING ON. By Penelope Lively. (Grove Weidenfeld, $17.95.) Tough and shrewd,
precise and understated, Ms. Lively's eighth novel renders a family's painful
efforts to sort out and overcome the emotional legacy of a truly awful mother.

PICTURING WILL. By Ann Beattie. (Random House, $18.95.) Complex points of view
unfold to yield the shock of enlightenment in Ms. Beattie's fourth novel, a
lyrical, deeply affecting story about a little boy and the people who love him,
or should.

THE QUINCUNX. By Charles Palliser. (Ballantine, $25.) Can you imagine a gigantic
(788 pages) imitation of Dickens, abounding in wickedness, full of descriptive
power, replete with plot and gratifyingly difficult to put down? Mr. Palliser
did!

REACHING TIN RIVER. By Thea Astley. (Putnam, $19.95.) A vivid novel about
growing up in great big Australia; at its heart is an eerie, hypnotic,
sentimental excursion across that brown land.

RESTORATION: A Novel of Seventeenth-Century England. By Rose Tremain. (Viking,
$19.95.) Ms. Tremain's fine sixth novel restores the good name of historical
fiction as it propels its insecure hero through hassles high and low in Charles
II's England.

SHIRA. By S. Y. Agnon. (Schocken, $24.95.) For more than 20 years the Israeli
Nobel laureate worked on this unfinished novel, whose protagonist is a
German-born scholar and whose theme is art's search for a vision of tragedy when
real horror is unbearably vast.

SILVER LIGHT. By David Thomson. (Knopf, $19.95.) Mr. Thomson's third novel
presents America's wild West from the Civil War to the 1950's, writ very large
and loony in handsome prose, with loads of real, imaginary and intermediate
characters.

SOLOMON GURSKY WAS HERE. By Mordecai Richler. (Knopf, $19.95.) Mr. Richler's
ninth and most complex novel chronicles, with frequent and intense indignation,
the generations of the convoluted, manic Gursky family through Canadian history.

A STONE OF THE HEART. By Tom Grimes. (Four Walls Eight Windows, $15.95.) The
afflictions of adolescence are rendered in unique and universal terms in this
first novel, set in Queens in 1961, about a 14-year-old boy who idolizes Roger
Maris.

SWEET TALK. By Stephanie Vaughn. (Random House, $16.95.) Ms. Vaughn's fine first
story collection offers harrowing situations made alternately funny and sad by
lively, believable characters.

A TENURED PROFESSOR. By John Kenneth Galbraith. (Houghton Mifflin, $19.95.) A
liberal economist learns to quantify investor irrationality and makes millions
until conservatives cut him down in Mr. Galbraith's rollicking spoof of
free-market ideology.

THEN SHE FOUND ME. By Elinor Lipman. (Pocket Books, $18.95.) A deft, amusing
first novel, full of entertaining mysteries, about an adopted daughter awkwardly
reunited with her birth mother.

THE THINGS THEY CARRIED. By Tim O'Brien. (Seymour Lawrence/Houghton Mifflin,
$19.95.) A collection of interrelated stories that confront the meaning of the
Vietnam War, examining with insight and sensitivity the nature of courage and
fear.

TITMUSS REGAINED. By John Mortimer. (Viking, $19.95.) Mr. Mortimer's splendid
classical comedy of political manners in an English village paints all
participants as greedy ninnies, most notably the title character, a politically
prominent twerp.

THE TONGUES OF ANGELS. By Reynolds Price. (Atheneum, $17.95.) The narrator of
this chastely visionary novel looks back 34 years to examine his responsibility,
perhaps, for a boy's death.

THE TRICK OF IT. By Michael Frayn. (Viking, $17.95.) The versatile British
satirist is right on form in this novel about an embittered critic who marries a
distinguished novelist.

WEDDING SONG. By Naguib Mahfouz. (Doubleday, Cloth, $16.95; Paper, $7.95.) THE
BEGINNING AND THE END. By Naguib Mahfouz. (Doubleday, Cloth, $19.95; Paper,
$9.95.) THE THIEF AND THE DOGS. By Naguib Mahfouz. (Doubleday, Cloth, $16.95;
Paper, $7.95.) Three samples, all impressive, all diverse in both period and
style, from among the 40-plus books of fiction by the versatile 1988 Nobel Prize
winner, an Egyptian born in 1911.

THE WILD COLONIAL BOY. By James Hynes. (Atheneum, $18.95.) Brian Donovan, the
American protagonist of Mr. Hynes's sharp-eyed and convincing first novel, finds
himself swiftly involved with an I.R.A. dispute and a young American woman
backpacker.

THE WOMAN AT THE WINDOW. By Marian Eldridge. (University of
Queensland/International Specialized Book Services, Paper, $12.95.) Sixteen
short stories, set in Australia with side trips, elegantly shaped and alive with
narrative brilliance.

VINELAND. By Thomas Pynchon. (Little, Brown, $19.95.)The passions of the 1960's
continue to govern the lives of members of a California community.

History

BITING AT THE GRAVE: The Irish Hunger Strikes and the Politics of Despair. By
Padraig O'Malley. (Beacon, $22.95.) The macabre enthusiasm of 10 I.R.A.
prisoners who starved themselves to death is made at least explicable in this
shrewd analysis. COMING OUT UNDER FIRE: The History of Gay Men and Women in
World War Two. By Allan Berube. (Free Press, $22.95.) This deeply researched
account shows that the military and perhaps a million homosexuals often coped
with each other fairly well.

FORGED IN BATTLE: The Civil War Alliance of Black Soldiers and White Officers.
By Joseph T. Glatthaar. (Free Press, $24.95.) The absorbing story, more social
than military, of the revolution through which 180,000 blacks fought for the
Union in the Civil War.

THE JEWS IN AMERICA. Four Centuries of an Uneasy Encounter: A History. By Arthur
Hertzberg. (Simon & Schuster, $22.95.) A broadly familiar story that rises to
the superb in its account of the last 60 years or so, but is pessimistic about
the future, foreseeing an end to Jewish history unless a spiritual revival
supervenes.

RED VICTORY: A History of the Russian Civil War. By W. Bruce Lincoln. (Simon &
Schuster, $24.95.) Between 1919 and 1921 the Soviet state was created out of
chaos by armed force, this timely and thorough account by a university historian
reminds us.

THE SEARCH FOR MODERN CHINA. By Jonathan D. Spence. (Norton, $29.95.) Four
centuries of Chinese history, from the decline of the Ming dynasty to the
crushing of the democracy movement last June, are illuminated in a sweeping
study of a nation both burdened and blessed with a rich past. THE SECOND WORLD
WAR. by John Keegan. (Viking, $29.95.) THE TIMES ATLAS OF THE SECOND WORLD WAR.
Edited by John Keegan. (Harper & Row, $50.) A bold but balanced one-volume
military history and a superbly produced and edited historical atlas that has no
equivalent in its field.

TOKYO RISING: The City Since the Great Earthquake. By Edward Seidensticker.
(Knopf, $24.95.) An informal and contentious history of the Japanese capital
from 1923 to the present, often anecdotal, equally often painstakingly thorough.
AN UNCERTAIN HOUR: The French, the Germans, the Jews, the Klaus Barbie Trial,
and the City of Lyon, 1940-1945. By Ted Morgan. (Arbor House/Morrow, $21,95.) An
eloquent book of personal and public history by a French-born American
journalist out to understand the contradictions of his former country.

VOICES OF FREEDOM: An Oral History of the Civil Rights Movement From the 1950s
Through the 1980s. By Henry Hampton and Steve Fayer with Sarah Flynn. (Bantam,
$25.95.) An intimate survey sprung from the ''Eyes on the Prize'' television
series.

Poetry

BETWEEN ANGELS. By Stephen Dunn. (Norton, $15.95.) Stephen Dunn is one of the
strongest poetic voices in this country now. A man of quiet passion, he is a
master of the short phrase. He can encapsulate daily experience wonderfully in
lines that are richly crafted, but never decorative.

THE COMPLETE POEMS OF ANNA AKHMATOVA. Edited by Roberta Reeder. (Zephyr, $85.)
The first edition of all of the poems, in Russian and in an admirable English
translation by Judith Hemschemeyer in which both sense and message strike with
all the force of the original. All the passion, conscience, repentance,
suffering that made Akhmatova the high priestess of Russian poetry in this
century sing out.

THE NIGHT PARADE. By Edward Hirsch. (Knopf, $18.95.) Emotional richness combined
with a precision of language and metaphor make the best of these poems wonderful
to read. Some seem to have forced themselves into being; silence was no longer
possible.

THE TONGUES WE SPEAK: New and Selected Poems. By Patricia Goedicke. (Milkweed,
$9.95.) This volume spans 25 years of the work of a poet who is always aware of
the political state of the world and of history. Her strengths are sincerity,
memorable rhythms and great emotional power.

Popular Culture

THE DAME IN THE KIMONO: Hollywood, Censorship, and the Production Code From the
1920s to the 1960s. By Leonard J. Leff and Jerold L. Simmons. (Grove Weidenfeld,
$22.50.) What couldn't happen on screen: a virtual negative history of sex in
America.

ENCHANTED DRAWINGS: The History of Animation. By Charles Solomon. (Knopf, $75.)
An ambitious, sprawling illustrated account of the evolution of animated movies,
packed with tales of warring studios, greedy producers and great artists.

THE GREAT GOOD PLACE. By Ray Oldenburg. (Paragon House, $19.95.) A good society
has places for people to hang out - taverns, cafes, barbershops - and Mr.
Oldenburg, a sociologist, investigates what's become of ours and how to get them
back.

JEAN HOWARD'S HOLLYWOOD: A Photo Memoir. With photographs by Jean Howard and
text by James Watters. (Abrams, $39.95.) Herself one of Hollywood's most
beautiful and privileged people, Jean Howard snapped her shutter with a social
historian's eye, capturing the great at play in the 1940's and 50's.

THE MAN WHO SHOT GARBO: The Hollywood Photographs of Clarence Sinclair Bull.
(Simon & Schuster, $40.) Greta Garbo and other gods and goddesses, luminously
rendered by the head of the M-G-M stills department from 1924 to 1961; 183
portraits in all.

OUR NEW YORK. Text by Alfred Kazin. Photographs by David Finn. (Harper & Row,
$35.) A delightful collaboration on the New York landscape and its meaning by
two wise old Brooklyn hands.

SATURDAY NIGHT. By Susan Orlean. (Knopf, $19.95.) Eight hours in the hebdomadal
cycle of American culture, sharply observed by a journalist with a gift for
hanging around while paying attention.

THE SPIRIT OF FOLK ART: The Girard Collection at the Museum of International
Folk Art. By Henry Glassie. Color photographs by Michael Monteaux. (Abrams,
$60.) With 154 splendid color pages, this rather ambitious illustrated essay
celebrates a collection (located in Santa Fe, N.M.) that richly deserves it.

WRITERS IN HOLLYWOOD: 1915-1951. By Ian Hamilton. (Edward Burlingame/Harper &
Row, $25.) An ably researched and entertaining account of the literati who
condescended to, and profited from, the movie industry during its infant and
golden years.

Science Fiction

HYPERION. By Dan Simmons. (Foundation/Doubleday, Cloth, $18.95; Paper, $8.95;
Spectra/Bantam, Paper, $4.95.) THE FALL OF HYPERION. By Dan Simmons.
(Foundation/Doubleday, Cloth, $18.95; Paper, $8.95.) Combined, these two make up
a thousand-page novel; both are generously conceived and stylistically
sure-handed works. THE DIVIDE. By Robert Charles Wilson. (Foundation/Doubleday,
$19.95.) This literate thriller is a superbly crafted novel of character and a
thoughtful exploration of what it might feel like to be a superman.

RAMA II. By Arthur C. Clarke and Gentry Lee. (Spectra/Bantam, $18.95.) The
sequel to Mr. Clarke's famous novel ''Rendezvous With Rama'' - about a vast
alien spaceship that seems oblivious to humanity's best efforts to make an
impression - is just as gripping in this second encounter.

Science, Medicine and Psychology

DISAPPEARING THROUGH THE SKYLIGHT: Culture and Technology in the Twentieth
Century. By O. B. Hardison Jr. (Viking, $22.95.) A polymathic scholar and social
critic's optimistic synthesis of future technology and consciousness.

FLOW: The Psychology of Optimal Experience. By Mihaly Csikszentmihalyi. (Harper
& Row, $21.95.) ''Flow,'' according to the author, a professor of psychology at
the University of Chicago, is a learnable state of consciousness that comes with
rightly interpreting what we are doing and what is happening to us.

FIRE & ICE: The Greenhouse Effect, Ozone Depletion, and Nuclear Winter. By David
E. Fisher. (Harper & Row, $19.95.) THE NEXT ONE HUNDRED YEARS: Shaping the Fate
of Our Living Earth. By Jonathan Weiner. (Bantam, $19.95.) There is, both
authors assure us, a scientific consensus about global warming: it's coming. But
something can be done, they believe, and these studies passionately and credibly
urge attention to a threatening future that many of us seem to have despaired of
in advance.

THE SPACE TELESCOPE: A Study of NASA, Science, Technology, and Politics. By
Robert W. Smith. (Cambridge University, $39.50.) A big book about big science,
focused on the history of space technology and the development of the Hubble
Space Telescope.

WHAT KIND OF LIFE: The Limits of Medical Progress. By Daniel Callahan. (Simon &
Schuster, $19.95.) An ethical philosopher's tough-minded look at the debate
about medical costs and society's resources, arguing for rules that would give
far higher priorities to prevention than to high-cost care in marginal cases.

Spies & Thrillers

THE BLUE GATE OF BABYLON. By Paul Pickering. (Random House, $18.95.) This
blackly humorous espionage novel is about a young British diplomat in West
Berlin who likes women too much for his own good.

DEATH ROLL. By Sam Llewellyn. (Summit, $18.95.) Mr. Llewellyn, the Dick Francis
of sailing, writes cleanly and unaffectedly about racing boats, real estate
deals - and murder.

PAPER CHASE. By Bob Cook. (St. Martin's, $14.95.) Four elderly, retired British
agents decide to write their memoirs, gleefully inventing sensational stories
about their past.

ROMAN CIRCUS. By Frank O'Neill. (Simon & Schuster, $19.95.) Mr. O'Neill's
absorbing tale is about many things: Arab terrorism in Italy, a fading
aristocracy, the Red Brigades, a romance between a princess and a C.I.A. man.

THE RUNNING TARGET. By Gerald Seymour. (Morrow, $19.95.) A top deskman at
British intelligence is kidnapped by Iranians in this scary and searing book.

Sports

BASEBALL: The People's Game, by Harold Seymour. (Oxford University, $24.95.) The
third volume in Mr. Seymour's history of baseball broadly details the game
outside so-called Organized Baseball and its capture by designing institutions.

DAMNED YANKEES: A No-Holds-Barred Account of Life With ''Boss'' Steinbrenner. By
Bill Madden and Moss Klein. (Warner, $19.95.) A well-told account of the decline
and fall of the New York Yankees at the hands of the team's principal owner.

KAREEM. By Kareem Abdul-Jabbar with Mignon McCarthy. (Random House, $18.95.) A
memoir in the form of a diary, combining this amazing player's last season as a
Los Angeles Laker with autobiographical recollections, mostly magnanimous.

MEN AT WORK: The Craft of Baseball, by George F. Will. (Macmillan, $19.95.) An
elegant analysis of what baseball players actually do, investigated by the
conservative columnist with love and curiosity but without sentimentality or
mythologizing.

Travel, Nature and Adventure

PLAYING WITH WATER: Passion and Solitude on a Philippine Island. By James
Hamilton-Paterson. (New Amsterdam Books, Cloth, $19.95; Paper, $11.95.) A truly
remarkable lyrical meditation on sea, sunlight and the analysis of
consciousness.

SONORAN DESERT SUMMER. By John Alcock. (University of Arizona, $19.95.) A
handsome, thoughtful record of nature observation and conceptual ecology in a
very hard place to live.

A YEAR IN PROVENCE. By Peter Mayle. (Knopf, $19.95.) When the author, his wife
and their dogs leave London for a sojourn in sunny Provence they encounter
year-round surprises - icy mistrals, unwelcome visitors, burst pipes and village
rustics.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Drawings

TYPE: Review; List

                   Copyright 1990 The New York Times Company

                              225 of 288 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                  June 10, 1990, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

BARBARELLA'S PROGRESS

BYLINE: By HELEN DUDAR; Helen Dudar writes frequently about the entertainment
industry.

SECTION: Section 7; Page 20, Column 4; Book Review Desk

LENGTH: 653 words



CITIZEN JANE
The Turbulent Life of
Jane Fonda.
By Christopher Andersen.
Illustrated. 389 pp. New York:
A Donald Hutter Book/
Henry Holt & Company.
$19.95.

After Christopher Andersen has told us about the love-starved childhood, about
the progression from pill-enslaved, chain-smoking bulimic to multimillionaire
fitness empress of the universe, about the 38 movies, the professional disasters
and triumphs, the pair of Oscars, the Emmy; after he has chronicled the two
marriages as well as a hearty range of extracurricular sexual adventures, and
discussed the transformation from boy toy to La Pasionaria of the New Left and,
finally, to the relatively demure ideological state she calls progressive
Democrat; after he has detailed recent tucks around the eyes and a breast
augmentation (to a small C cup); after more than 300 pages of film lore and
drugstore psychology, he coils around the last paragraph of ''Citizen Jane: The
Turbulent Life of Jane Fonda'' with a heartfelt question. ''Who,'' Mr. Andersen
asks, ''is Jane Fonda, really?'' Gracious, if Mr. Andersen, having burrowed
through archives and libraries and talked to friends and, better yet,
ex-friends, can't say, where is the certainty for the reader? Sure, I know that
my question is even sillier than his. After all, we don't read superstar
biographies for blinding insights into talent or character. These are books to
be saved for mind-numbing rainy country weekends; the hope is that they will
brighten the day with the kind of juicy bedroom data that even The National
Enquirer may have overlooked. The author can hardly be faulted on that score.

And there is more, much more in this prodigiously detailed, deeply pedestrian
work by Mr. Andersen, who has also written books about Susan Hayward and the
young Katharine Hepburn. From the evidence of the notes, Mr. Andersen had
limited access to his subject, but decades of old interviews have been mined.

The Jane Fonda whom America has come to love or hate was a child of material
plenty and emotional poverty. Her profoundly neurotic mother, Frances Seymour
Brokaw, would take her life before her daughter and son were out of their teens.
Away from theater audiences or the eye of the camera, her father, Henry, a fine
and famous actor, would be forever incapable of indicating affection.

Ms. Fonda's response, conceivably even her salvation, seems to have been a
bottomless capacity for volcanic monomania. Whatever seizes her interest -
acting, producing, restoring a French country house during her marriage to the
director Roger Vadim, financing the political career of her second husband, Tom
Hayden, or merely setting out to save the world - has been undertaken in a
methodically structured fashion and with the scary conviction that nothing else
matters.

''Benevolent fanaticism,'' Gregory Peck genially called it after spending days
on a single screen kiss for ''The Old Gringo,'' a Fonda Films production. Mr.
Andersen sees her endowed with ''almost robotic efficiency.'' He also notes a
former associate's report that her recent discovery that dollars could be
translated into power has made her a ''money-mad monster.''

No martyr to moderation, in 1972 Ms. Fonda turned up in Hanoi perched on an
antiaircraft gun, infuriating many of her countrymen and disturbing at least a
few who were as opposed to America's involvement in Vietnam as she was. Then and
later, she seemed impervious to the idea that her trip might have inflicted
psychic and tangible damage on Americans held prisoner of North Vietnam or
fighting in the South.

Still, at 52, she has survived, brilliantly. She has scaled box-office heights
as a star and has been voted to high positions on lists of the world's most
admired women. It is tempting to consider the possibility that the really
interesting and largely unexplored aspect of Jane Fonda is our splendid
ambivalence about her.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo: Jane Fonda in 1968 (From ''Citizen Jane'')

TYPE: Review

                   Copyright 1990 The New York Times Company

                              226 of 288 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                  June 10, 1990, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

SAIGON SWAP

BYLINE: By ELLEN GOODMAN; Ellen Goodman is a syndicated columnist for The Boston
Globe. Her most recent book is ''Making Sense,'' a collection of her columns.

SECTION: Section 7; Page 14, Column 1; Book Review Desk

LENGTH: 745 words



MESSAGE FROM NAM
By Danielle Steel.
389 pp. New York: Delacorte Press. $21.95.

While reading my very first Danielle Steel novel, I began to fantasize about a
new rating system for books:


*

*

* Read this even if you have to miss work the next day.


*

* Read this if you're on vacation and it's cloudy.


* Read this if you're flying to the West Coast and you've already seen the
movie.

For Ms. Steel's new novel, ''Message From Nam,'' I devised a separate and
starless category: Read this only if you have to review it.

But even as this rating system was forming in my own drifting mind, all over
America tens of thousands of readers had just closed the covers of ''Daddy,''
Ms. Steel's last novel. They are eagerly, happily, greedily awaiting this new
volume.

These fans most certainly don't care that I regard this novel as a work without
redeeming social value, unless it can be recycled as a cardboard box. Nor do
they care if the esthetes at writers' workshops -all those people whose
bathrooms are papered with rejection slips - read passages to feed their
paranoia about publishers and their scorn for success.

How to explain the Steel phenomenon? That she is quite the storyteller? This is
her latest tale in its entirety: Beautiful, intelligent Paxton Andrews, raised
in Savannah, Ga., with a cold white mommy and a warm black mammy, goes to
Berkeley, Calif., determined to become a journalist. There she meets Peter
Wilson, loves him and loses him to ''friendly fire'' in Vietnam. Paxton then
goes off to Vietnam, loves and loses again and writes and wins.

Does Ms. Steel offer some special insight into our era? After all, Paxton's
story is thrown across time, rather like a Frisbee, skimming the years from the
Kennedy assassination to the final helicopters leaving Saigon. But this is what
passes for insight: ''She had believed in good, and happiness, and trust. And
they had all been lies. The happy ending doesn't always come. And Camelot does
not go on forever. For anyone. You grow old, you die, or sometimes you die
young.'' That is by no means the most banal passage in the book.

Is Ms. Steel, then, well, what the heck, raunchy, funny, lustful, down and
dirty? If anything, her characters are missionary-position proper. A great deal
of longing, much love, no thrusting.

I remain bewildered by the popularity of Danielle Steel; the only explanation I
can think of is the sheer power of marketing. As far as I can read - all the way
to the end - Ms. Steel is the sort of author Evelyn Wood might have become: a
speed-writer of fiction, so breathless to get to the finish line she doesn't
even stop for character development or for rewriting.

Occasional characters are introduced for no apparent reason. A roommate enters
in one chapter, only to fade away. A journalist is introduced and promises to be
of some prominence in the novel, only to be reduced to a cameo role.

On the other hand, a theme emerges and - lest we forget it before the finale -
appears again and again. ''I want to tell people here the truth, whatever that
truth is.'' ''She wanted nothing except to go to Viet Nam and find the truth
about the war.'' ''I wanted to . . . come here and speak the truth about the war
through my paper.'' ''Maybe none of it mattered, except the truth.'' Help.

But what is most extraordinary about Ms. Steel's stream-of-consciousness writing
style is that it was allowed to pass unexpurgated, unedited, from author to
reader. No one, apparently, says ''no'' to Danielle.

No, Danielle, you mustn't write, ''The irony of it all seemed like a bad joke.''
No, no, Danielle, it doesn't make sense to write, ''It seemed a miracle each
time he came to her . . . which he was able to do fairly often.'' No, no,
Danielle, we do not begin so many sentences with ''And.'' We most certainly do
not begin 17 sentences with ''And'' in two pages.

It is particularly painful when such ghastly writing is used to tell a story
about a journalist. We are repeatedly told that Paxton is destined for a
Pulitzer Prize. Not without an editor she isn't. Paxton, sweetheart, get me
rewrite.

There was, however, one line in ''Message From Nam'' that gave me great
pleasure. The book closes as Paxton rises above Saigon, her rescued lover beside
her in the helicopter. Ms. Steel writes of these Vietnam days: ''A distant
memory . . . a nightmare . . . a dream. For them, and everyone else, now, it was
finally over.''

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Review

                   Copyright 1990 The New York Times Company

                              227 of 288 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                  June 12, 1990, Tuesday, Late Edition - Final

Thai Visit, Cambodian Opportunity

SECTION: Section A; Page 20, Column 1; Editorial Desk

LENGTH: 451 words


New Thai diplomatic initiatives offer a realistic chance to break the long
diplomatic stalemate over Cambodia. Tomorrow Thailand's first democratically
elected Prime Minister, Chatichai Choonhavan, turns his attention from a
military crisis at home to Washington and a meeting with President Bush. It's a
chance for the U.S. to bring its policies more closely in line with the Thais,
other Asian allies - and with good sense.

At a Thai-initiated conference in Tokyo last week, Prince Sihanouk took a
welcome half-step away from his Khmer Rouge allies. Despite a Khmer Rouge
walkout, the Prince endorsed a Thai proposal to create a supreme national
council with equal representation for Hun Sen's Cambodian Government and
opposition factions.

The Prince's show of independence should be encouraging news for the Bush
Administration. Despite protestations to the contrary, its formal support of the
Prince looks too much like informal support for the Khmer Rouge. That doesn't
sit well with Americans who remember Pol Pot's systematic killing of more than a
million Cambodians when the Khmer Rouge held power between 1975 and 1978.

Unfortunately, the Administration and the Prince still insist that for a peace
settlement to succeed it must include the Khmer Rouge. Why?

Washington points to Khmer Rouge military strength. But Pol Pot's army has no
significant popular support. Its military might depends on the weapons it gets
from China through Thai ports.

If the Thais, and perhaps the Chinese, agreed to halt this arms supply, the
Khmer Rouge might eventually disintegrate. A reconstituted Phnom Penh
government, with international recognition and support, might contain the
short-term Khmer Rouge threat. The Thai proposal agreed to in Tokyo calls for
ending external military aid to all Cambodian factions.

Thai leaders, both civilian and military, have shown increasing eagerness to
promote a political settlement. Even China seems to be exploring new approaches.
With its longstanding demand for Vietnamese withdrawal now met, Beijing has
started direct talks with Hanoi, the Khmer Rouge's staunchest opponent.

Still, President Bush insists his policy remains unchanged. That makes no sense.
American policy is based on support for Prince Sihanouk and Cambodia's
non-Communist neighbors. With these local allies now looking for ways around
Khmer Rouge obstructionism, the U.S. needs to do the same.

Washington could make a critical contribution by encouraging the Prince in his
more independent course and by testing Thai willingness to squeeze the Khmer
Rouge arms pipeline. If the Bush Administration prefers not to lead the way to
peace, at least it can support its allies' initiatives.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Editorial

                   Copyright 1990 The New York Times Company

                              228 of 288 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                  June 12, 1990, Tuesday, Late Edition - Final

Court's Majority and Dissenting Opinions on the Flag Protection Act of 1989

BYLINE: Special to The New York Times

SECTION: Section B; Page 6, Column 1; National Desk

LENGTH: 3416 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, June 11


Following is the text, without footnotes, of the Supreme Court's 5-to-4 ruling
today that the new Federal law against flag-burning is unconstitutional.

Justice William J. Brennan's majority opinion was joined by Justices Thurgood
Marshall, Harry A. Blackmun, Antonin Scalia and Anthony M. Kennedy.

The dissenting opinion by Justice John Paul Stevens was joined by Chief Justice
Rehnquist and by Justices Byron R. White and Sandra Day O'Connor.

FROM THE OPINION
By Justice Brennan

In these consolidated appeals, we consider whether appellees' prosecution for
burning a United States flag in violation of the Flag Protection Act of 1989 is
consistent with the First Amendment. Applying our recent decision in Texas v.
Johnson (1989), the District Courts held that the Act cannot constitutionally be
applied to appellees. We affirm.

In No. 89-1433, [U.S. v. Eichman] the United States prosecuted certain appellees
for violating the Flag Protection Act of 1989 by knowingly setting fire to
several United States flags on the steps of the United States Capitol while
protecting various aspects of the Government's domestic and foreign policy. In
No. 89-1434, [U.S. v. Haggerty] the United States prosecuted other appellees for
violating the Act by knowingly setting fire to a United States flag while
protesting the Act's passage.

In each case, the respective appellees moved to dismiss the flag-burning charge
on the ground that the Act, both on its face and as applied, violates the First
Amendment. Both the United States District Court for the Western District of
Washington and the United States District Court for the District of Columbia,
following Johnson, held the Act unconstitutional as applied to appellees and
dismissed the charges. The United States appealed both decisions directly to
this Court pursuant to 18 U.S.C.A. Sec. 700(d) (Supp. 1990). We noted probable
jurisdiction and consolidated the two cases.

II

Last Term in Johnson, we held that a Texas statute criminalizing the desecration
of venerated objects, including the United States flag, was unconstitutional as
applied to an individual who had set such a flag on fire during a political
demonstration. The Texas statute provided that ''[a] person commits an offense
if he intentionally or knowingly desecrates . . . [a] national flag,'' where
''desecrate'' meant to ''deface, damage, or otherwise physically mistreat in a
way that the actor knows will seriously offend one or more persons likely to
observe or discover his action.''

We first held that Johnson's flag-burning was ''conduct 'sufficiently imbued
with elements of communication' to implicate the First Amendment.'' We next
considered and rejected the state's contention that, under United States v.
O'Brien, we ought to apply the deferential standard with which we have reviewed
Government regulations of conduct containing both speech and nonspeech elements
where ''the governmental interest is unrelated to the suppression of free
expression.''

We reasoned that the state's asserted interest ''in preserving the flag as a
symbol of nationhood and national unity,'' was an interest ''related 'to the
suppression of free expression' within the meaning of O'Brien'' because the
state's concern with protecting the flag's symbolic meaning is implicated ''only
when a person's treatment of the flag communicates some message.'' We therefore
subjected the statute to '' 'the most exacting scrutiny,' '' quoting Boos v.
Barry, (1988), and we concluded that the state's asserted interests could not
justify the infringement on the demonstrator's First Amendment rights.

After our decision in Johnson, Congress passed the Flag Protection Act of 1989.
The Act provides in relevant part:

''(a)(1) Whoever knowingly mutilates, defaces, physically defiles, burns,
maintains on the floor or ground, or tramples upon any flag of the United States
shall be fined under this title or imprisoned for not more than one year, or
both.

''(2) This subsection does not prohibit any conduct consisting of the disposal
of a flag when it has come worn or soiled.

''(b) As used in this section, the term 'flag of the United States' means any
flag of the United States, or any part thereof, made of any substance, of any
size, in a form that is commonly displayed.''

Protection of First Amendment

The Government concedes in this case, as it must, that appellees' flag-burning
constituted expressive conduct, but invites us to reconsider our rejection in
Johnson of the claim that flag-burning as a mode of expression, like obscenity
or ''fighting words,'' does not enjoy the full protection of the First
Amendment. Cf. Chaplinsky v. New Hamsphire, (1942). This we decline to do. The
only remaining question is whether the Flag Protection Act is sufficiently
distinct from the Texas statute that it may constitutionally be applied to
proscribe appellees' expressive conduct.

The Government contends that the Flag Protection Act is constitutional because,
unlike the state addressed in Johnson, the Act does not target expressive
conduct on the basis of the content of its message. The Government asserts an
interest in ''protect[ing] the physical integrity of the flag under all
circumstances'' in order to safeguard the flag's identity '' 'as the unique and
unalloyed symbol of the Nation.' ''

The Act proscribes conduct (other than disposal) that damages or mistreats a
flag, without regard to the actor's motive, his intended message, or the likely
effects of his conduct on onlookers. By contrast, the Texas statute expressly
prohibited only those acts of physical flag desecration ''that the actor knows
will seriously offend' onlookers, and the former Federal statute prohibited only
those acts of desecration that ''cas[t] contempt upon'' the flag.

Although the Flag Protection Act contains no explicit content-based limitation
on the scope of prohibited conduct, it is nevertheless clear that the
Government's asserted interest is ''related 'to the suppression of free
expression,' '' and concerned with the content of such expression. The
Government's interest in protecting the ''physical integrity'' of a privately
owned flag rests upon a perceived need to preserve the flag's status as a symbol
of our nation and certain national ideals.

But the mere destruction or disfigurement of a particular physical manifestation
of the symbol, without more, does not diminish or otherwise affect the symbol
itself in any way. For example, the secret destruction of a flag in one's own
basement would not threaten the flag's recognized meaning. Rather, the
Government's desire to preserve the flag as a symbol for certain national ideals
is implicated ''only when a person's treatment of the flag communicates [a]
message'' to others that is inconsistent with those ideals.

Impact of Flag Destruction

Moreover, the precise language of the Act's prohibitions confirms Congress's
interest in the communicative impact of flag destruction. The Act criminalizes
the conduct of anyone who ''knowingly mutilates, defaces, physically defiles,
burns, maintains on the floor or ground, or tramples upon any flag.'' Each of
the specified terms - with the possible exception of ''burns'' - unmistakably
connotes disrespectful treatment of the flag and suggests a focus on those acts
likely to damage the flag's symbolic value. And the explicit exemption in Sec.
700(a)(2) for disposal of ''worn or soiled'' flags protects certain acts
traditionally associated with patriotic respect for the flag.

As we explained in Johnson: ''[I]f we were to hold that a state may forbid
flag-burning wherever it is likely to endanger the flag's symbolic role, but
allow it wherever burning a flag promotes that role - as where, for example, a
person ceremoniously burns a dirty flag - we would be . . . permitting a state
to 'prescribe what shall be orthodox' by saying that one may burn the flag to
convey one's attitude toward it and its referents only if one does not endanger
the flag's representation of nationhood and national unity.''

Although Congress cast the Flag Protection Act in somewhat broader terms than
the Texas statute at issue in Johnson, the Act still suffers from the same
fundamental flaw: it suppresses expression out of concern for its likely
communicative impact. Despite the Act's wider scope, its restriction on
expression cannot be '' 'justified without reference to the content of the
regulated speech.' '' Boos,; see Spence v. Washington, (1974) (State's interest
in protecting flag's symbolic value is directly related to suppression of
expression and thus O'Brien test is inapplicable even where statute declared
''simply . . . that nothing may be affixed to or superimposed on a United States
flag''). the Act therefore must be subjected to ''the most exacting scrutiny,''
Boos, and for the reasons stated in Johnson, the Government's interest cannot
justify its infringement on first Amendment rights. We decline the Government's
invitation to reassess this conclusion in light of Congress's recent recognition
of a purported ''national consensus'' favoring a prohibition on flag-burning.
Even assuming such a consensus exists, any suggestion that the Government's
interest in suppressing speech becomes more weighty as popular opposition to
that speech grows is foreign to the First Amendment.

III

'' 'National unity as an end which officials may foster by persuasion and
example is not in question.' '' Johnson, quoting West Virginia Board of
Education v. Barnette, (1943). Government may create national symbols, promote
them, and encourage their respectful treatment. But the Flag Protection Act goes
well beyond this by criminally proscribing expressive conduct because of its
likely communicative impact.

We are aware that desecration of the flag is deeply offensive to many. But the
same might be said, for example, of virulent ethnic and religious epithets, see
Terminiello V. Chicago, (1949), vulgar repudiations of the draft, see Cohen v.
California, (1971), and scurrilous caricatures, see Hustler Magazine, Inc. v.
Falwell, (1988). ''If there is a bedrock principle underlying the First
Amendment, it is that the Government may not prohibit the expression of an idea
simply because society finds the idea itself offensive or disagreeable.''
Johnson. Punishing desecration of the flag dilutes the very freedom that makes
this emblem so revered, and worth revering. The judgments are affirmed.

FROM DISSENTING OPINION

By Justice Stevens

The Court's opinion ends where proper analysis of the issue should begin. Of
course ''the Government may not prohibit the expression of an idea simply
because society finds the idea itself offensive or disagreeable.'' None of us
disagrees with that proposition. But it is equally well settled that certain
methods of expression may be prohibited if (a) the prohibition is supported by a
legitimate societal interest that is unrelated to suppression of the ideas the
speaker desires to express; (b) the prohibition does not entail any interference
with the speaker's freedom to express those ideas by other means; and (c) the
interest in allowing the speaker complete freedom of choice among alternative
methods of expression is less important than the societal interest supporting
the prohibition.

Contrary to the position taken by counsel for the flag-burners in Texas v.
Johnson, it is now conceded that the Federal Government has a legitimate
interest in protecting the symbolic value of the American flag. Obviously that
value cannot be measured, or even described, with any precision. It has at least
these two components; in times of national crisis, it inspires and motivates the
average citizen to make personal sacrifices in order to achieve societal goals
of overriding importance; at all times, it serves as a reminder of the paramount
importance of pursuing the ideals that characterize our society.

The first question the Court should consider is whether the interest in
preserving the value of that symbol is unrelated to suppression of the ideas
that flag-burners are trying to express. In my judgment the answer depends, at
least in part, on what those ideas are. A flag-burner might intend various
messages. The flag-burner may wish simply to convey hatred, contempt, or sheer
opposition directed at the United States. This might be the case if the flag
were burned by an enemy during time of war.

Motivations of Flag-Burners

A flag-burner may also, or instead, seek to convey the depth of his personal
conviction about some issue, by willingly provoking the use of force against
himself. In so doing, he says that ''my disagreement with certain policies is so
strong that I am prepared to risk physical harm (and perhaps imprisonment) in
order to call attention to my views.'' This second possibility apparently
describes the expressive conduct of the flag-burners in these cases. Like the
protesters who dramatized their opposition to our engagement in Vietnam by
publicly burning their draft cards - and who were punished for doing so - their
expressive conduct is consistent with affection for this country and respect for
the ideals that the flag symbolizes.

There is at least one further possibility; a flag-burner may intend to make an
accusation against the integrity of the American people who disagree with him.
By burning the embodiment of America's collective commitment to freedom and
equality, the flag burner charges that the majority has forsaken that commitment
that continued respect for the flag is nothing more that hypocrisy. Such a
charge may be made even if the flag-burner loves the country and zealously
pursues the ideals that the country claims to honor.

The idea expressed by a particular act of flag-burning is necessarily dependent
on the temporal and political context in which it occurs. In the 1960's it may
have expressed opposition to the country's Vietnam policies, or at least to the
compulsory draft. In Texas v. Johnson, it apparently expressed opposition to the
platform of the Republican Party. In these cases, the respondents have explained
that it expressed opposition to racial discrimination, to the failure to care
for the homeless, and. of course, to statutory prohibitions of flag-burning. In
any of these examples, the protesters may wish both to say that their own
position is the only one faithful to liberty and equality and to accuse their
fellow citizens of hypocritical indifference to -or even of a selfish departure
from - the ideals which the flag is supposed to symbolize. The ideas expressed
by flag-burners are thus various and often ambiguous.

Legitimate Government Interests

The Government's legitimate interest in preserving the symbolic value of the
flag is, however, essentially the same regardless of which of many different
ideas may have motivated a particular act of flag-burning. As I explained in my
dissent in Johnson, the flag uniquely symbolizes the ideas of liberty, equality,
and tolerance - ideas that Americans have passionately defended and debated
throughout our history.

The flag embodies the spirit of our national commitment to those ideals. The
message thereby transmitted does not take a stand upon our disagreements, except
to say that those disagreements are best regarded as competing interpretations
of shared ideals. It does not judge particular policies, except to say that they
command respect when they are enlightened by the spirit of liberty and equality.
To the world, the flag is our promise that we will continue to strive for these
ideals. To us, the flag is a reminder both that the struggle for liberty and
equality is unceasing, and that our obligation of tolerance and respect for all
or our fellow citizens encompasses those who disagree with us - indeed, even
those whose ideas are disagreeable or offensive .

Thus, the Government may - indeed, it should - protect the symbolic value of the
flag without regard to the specific content of the flag-burners' speech. The
prosecution in this case does not depend upon the object of the defendants'
protest. It is, moreover, equally clear that the prohibition does not entail any
interference with the speaker's freedom to express his or her ideas by other
means. It may well be true that other means of expression may be less effective
in drawing attention to those ideas, but that is not itself a sufficient reason
for immunizing flag burning. Presumably a gigantic fireworks display or a parade
of nude models in a public park might draw even more attention to a
controversial message, but such methods of expression are nevertheless subject
to regulation.

A Question of Judgment

This case therefore comes down to a question of judgment. Does the admittedly
important interest in allowing every speaker to choose the method of expressing
his or her ideas that he or she deems most effective and appropriate outweigh
the societal interest in preserving the symbolic value of the flag? (1) This
importance of the individual interest in selecting the preferred means of
communication; (2) the importance of the national symbol; and (3) the question
whether tolerance of flag-burning will enhance or tarnish that value. The
opinions in Texas v. Johnson demonstrate that reasonable judges may differ with
respect to each of these judgments.

The individual interest is unquestionably a matter of great importance. Indeed,
it is one of the critical components of the idea of liberty that the flag itself
is intended to symbolize. Moreover, it is buttressed by the societal interest in
being alerted to the need for thoughtful response to voices that might otherwise
go unheard. The freedom of expression protected by the First Amendment embraces
not only the freedom to communicate particular ideas, but also the right to
communicate them effectively. That right, however, is not absolute - the
communicative value of a well-placed bomb in the Capitol does not entitle it to
the protection of the First Amendment.

Burning a flag is not, of course, equivalent to burning a public building.
Assuming that the protester is burning his own flag, it causes no physical harm
to other persons or to their property. The impact is purely symbolic, and it is
apparent that some thoughtful persons believe that impact, far from depreciating
the value of the symbol, will actually enhance its meaning. I most respectfully
disagree.

Indeed, what makes this case particularly difficult for me is what I regard as
the damage to the symbol that has already occurred as a result of this Court's
decision to place its stamp of approval on the act of flag-burning. A formerly
dramatic expression of protest is now rather commonplace. In today's marketplace
of ideas, the public burning of a Vietnam draft card is probably less
provocative than lighting a cigarette. Tomorrow flag burning may produce a
similar reaction. There is surely a direct relationship between the
communicative value of the act of flag burning and the symbolic value of the
object being burned.

The symbolic value of the American flag is not the same today as it was
yesterday. Events during the last three decades have altered the country's image
in the eyes of numerous Americans, and some now have difficulty understanding
the message that the flag conveyed to their parents and grandparents - whether
born abroad and naturalized or native born. Moreover, the integrity of the
symbol has been compromised by those leaders who seem to advocate compulsory
worship of the flag even by individuals whom it offends, or who seem to
manipulate the symbol of national purpose into a pretext for partisan disputes
about meaner ends. And, as I have suggested, the residual value of the symbol
after this Court's decision in Texas v. Johnson is surely not the same as it was
a year ago.

Given all these considerations, plus the fact that the Court today is really
doing nothing more than reconfirming what it has already decided, it might be
appropriate to defer to the judgment of the majority and merely apply the
doctrine of stare decisis to the case at hand. That action, however, would not
honestly reflect my considered judgment concerning the relative importance of
the conflicting interests that are at stake. I remain persuaded that the
considerations identified in my opinion in Texas v. Johnson are of controlling
importance in this case as well.

Accordingly, I respectfully dissent.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Text

                   Copyright 1990 The New York Times Company

                              229 of 288 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                  June 12, 1990, Tuesday, Late Edition - Final

Patriotism and Politics Mix in Reaction to Flag Ruling

BYLINE: By ROBIN TONER, Special to The New York Times

SECTION: Section B; Page 6, Column 1; National Desk

LENGTH: 910 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, June 11


President Bush today renewed his call for a Constitutional amendment to outlaw
flag desecration while the Democratic leadership in Congress reiterated its
opposition to the measure and both sides began organizing for another emotional
struggle over the flag.

The Supreme Court's decision overturning the Flag Protection Act of 1989
reverberated quickly through Congress and set up a battle in the middle of an
election year. It will force lawmakers to balance Constitutional precepts,
patriotic symbols and political needs, knowing their votes will be the stuff of
campaign commercials this fall.

The lines were quickly drawn. Mr. Bush said today he would ''absolutely'' renew
his push for an amendment, saying it was ''in the best interest of this
country.'' He and other supporters of an amendment, including many Democrats on
Capitol Hill, argue that the flag is such a critical symbol that it deserves
special protection in the Constitution.

Concern About Bill of Rights

Opponents of an amendment argue that it constitutes a dangerous tinkering with
the Bill of Rights. George J. Mitchell, the Senate majority leader, said today:
''The question before us is whether or not, after 200 years, the most effective
statement of individual liberty in all human history is to be changed for the
first time. I do not believe we should tamper with this sacred document.''

Thomas S. Foley, the Speaker of the House, repeated his opposition to an
amendment, saying, ''We should be extremely conservative in tampering with the
most fundamental repository of personal liberties in the Constitution.'' He said
that there would be no official party position on an amendment and that members
would be urged to follow their conscience.

But underscoring his own strong feelings on the issue, Mr. Foley plans to take
an unusual step for a Speaker and vote when an amendment comes to the floor,
adding his voice to the opposition.

Supporters of an amendment called for a speedy vote. A spokesman for the
Democratic leadership in the House said a vote would be held next week or the
week after. Mr. Mitchell declined to set a date, although Senator Bob Dole, the
minority leader and sponsor an amendment, said he would like to see it brought
to the floor on Thursday, which is Flag Day.

Supporters Begin Work

While no head counts were available, supporters said they hoped to get the votes
needed to win approval, urging veterans groups and other supporters of an
amendment to begin to rally lawmakers. A Constitutional amendment requires the
approval of two-thirds of the House and Senate and ratification by 38 state
legislatures.

The amendment never came to a vote in the House last year. It failed in the
Senate by a vote of 51 to 48. But Mr. Dole noted that many people said they
voted against a Constitutional amendment because they believed the legislative
approach would work. In the aftermath of today's ruling, Mr. Dole said, ''I
think we have the votes.''

Asked about the chances for passage of an amendment in the House, Representative
Robert H. Michel, the Republican leader and a sponsor of the measure, replied,
''I have to be very confident because of the very nature of what we're talking
about here: Who wants to be against the flag?''

Still, supporters said it was always an uphill battle to come up with a
two-thirds majority to support an amendment.

Representative Newt Gingrich, the Republican whip, said, ''I think it will be a
difficult vote; as of today, not an automatic vote.''

A Strategy Shattered

Today's ruling shattered the Democratic strategy of 1989, when party leaders
tried to derail the drive for a Constitutional amendment by passing legislation
that outlawed flag desecration. Democratic leaders argued that a statute could
protect the flag as well as the First Amendment.

Now lawmakers are headed for a straight up-or-down vote on an amendment without
the political cover devised last year. Democrats, who have bitter memories of
the way patriotic symbols were used against them in the 1988 Presidential
campaign, are particularly wary.

''As chairman of the Democratic Party and as a proud veteran, let me make it
clear and simple: Those who seek political advantage from the flag and the Bill
of Rights slander the memory of every man or woman who fought for this land,''
said Ronald H. Brown, chairman of the Democratic National Committee. ''To drag
the flag through cheap politics is every bit as offensive as burning it.''

Indeed, behind the substance of the flag debate is political anxiety.

And the comments of some Republicans today were hardly intended to ease that
edginess. ''I think it's an excellent issue upon which you define your opponent,
his character and values,'' said Edward Rollins, co-chairman of the National
Republican Congressional Committee. ''And if Democrats choose to vote against a
Constitutional amendment, I think they'll pay a price.''

Mr. Dole told reporters that a vote against an amendment ''would make a good
30-second spot.''

At the end of the day, Senator Bob Kerrey, the Nebraska Democrat who lost a leg
in combat in Vietnam and won the Medal of Honor, took the floor of the Senate
and declared, ''It is not America's finest hour.''

Mr. Kerrey, who opposes an amendment, assailed those who cast the debate as
being between those who sided with the flag-burners and those who sided with the
nation's veterans.

''Shame on that argument,'' Mr. Kerrey said.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo: Robert H. Michel, the House minority leader, said he was
confident that an anti-flag-burning amendment would pass despite the Supreme
Court's decision to overturn the Flag Protection Act of 1989. (Michael
Geissinger for The New York Times)

                   Copyright 1990 The New York Times Company

                              230 of 288 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                  June 12, 1990, Tuesday, Late Edition - Final
                              Correction Appended

A Key to Post-Traumatic Stress Lies In Brain Chemistry, Scientists Find

BYLINE: By DANIEL GOLEMAN

SECTION: Section C; Page 1, Column 4; Science Desk

LENGTH: 1849 words


A SINGLE instance of overwhelming terror can alter the chemistry of the brain,
making people more sensitive to adrenaline surges even decades later, scientists
are finding.

This sensitivity to adrenaline surges is a major factor in post-traumatic stress
disorder, in which people can experience normal events as repetitions of the
original trauma. The new findings are the first direct evidence that the
condition, which affects combat veterans, crime victims and millions of others,
has biological basis.

New studies in animals and humans suggest that specific sites in the brain
undergo these changes. Scientists say the findings may allow development of
medications to blunt the biological changes in post-traumatic stress disorder.

For the brain changes to occur, scientists now say, people usually have to
experience the stress as catastrophic, an overwhelming threat to life or safety
and one over which they has no control. Less severe stress, such as the death of
a loved one or relentless financial problems, do not seem to trigger the
biological changes.

''Victims of a devastating trauma may never be the same biologically,'' said Dr.
Dennis Charney, a psychiatrist at Yale and director of clinical neuroscience at
the National Center for Post-Traumatic Stress Disorder.

''It does not matter if it was the incessant terror of combat, torture or
repeated abuse in childhood, or a one-time experience, like being trapped in a
hurricane or almost dying in an auto accident,'' said Dr. Charney. ''All
uncontrollable stress can have the same biological impact.''

The more intense the trauma, and the longer it lasts, the more likely it is to
result in post-traumatic stress. But researchers are trying to discover why some
people exposed to the identical catastrophe develop post-traumatic stress
symptoms, while others do not. And though the symptoms can last 40 years or
longer, they clear up in some people, either spontaneously or through therapy.

Evidence for the biological changes has been growing over the last 10 years from
laboratory experiments on animals who were subjected to stress - often electric
shocks they could not excape - while their brain activity was studied. The main
changes observed have been in the way and rate in which the brain secretes
chemicals it normally produces under stress. Now the effects seen in animals
have indirectly been confirmed in people.

Changes occur in three ways:

* Some of the main changes are in the locus ceruleus, a structure which
regulates the brain's secretion of two catecholamines, hormones that mobilize
the body for an emergency. This structure becomes ''hyper-reactive,'' secreting
too much of these brain chemicals, even in situations that hold little or no
threat.

* There are also increases in the secretion of corticotropin-releasing factor,
or CRF, one of the main hormones that mobilize the body to meet an emergency.
This hormone is regulated by the circuit linking the hypothalamus, a structure
in the brain's emotional center, and the pituitary gland. The increased
secretions alert the body for emergencies that are not there in reality.

* The opioid system of the brain, which can blunt the feeling of pain, is
hyperactive. This may account for the emotional numbing, an inability to
experience tender feelings, that often accompanies post traumatic stress.

''You find irregularities and abnormalities in all three of these brain
systems,'' said Dr. Matthew Friedman, executive director of the National Center
for Post-Traumatic Stress Disorder. Hope for Medication Researchers say the
findings may hold a promise of relief for those who suffer the symptoms of
post-traumatic stress disorder, including being startled at the most innocuous
surprise, troubled sleep, irritabilty and rages, and recurrent nightmares and
frightening flashbacks that repeat the original horror.

''Understanding the brain basis of post-traumatic stress can help us design a
medication that reverses these changes,'' said Dr. Friedman.

While a few existing psychiatric drugs bring relief for some patients, their
effects have been hit-or-miss. Following leads from the brain studies, Dr.
Friedman said, researchers at several pharmaceutical firms have begun to develop
drugs tailored to the specific brain imbalances.

Despite that work, some of those who treat post-traumatic stress hesitate to see
it as being entirely due to brain changes. ''The idea that these people reset
their central nervous system is intriguing,'' said Dr. David Spiegel, a
psychiatrist at Stanford University. ''But I'm troubled reducing everything to
biology. It's a human experience, and when you help people with it in
psychotherapy, you can help them get over it that way too.''

About one in 10 Americans has suffered the symptoms of the disorder, at least in
some degree, according to new findings presented last month at the meeting of
the American Pyschiatric Association in New York City. Detroit Study Cited In a
study of 1,007 men and women in Detroit, Naomi Breslau, a psychiatrist at the
Henry Ford Hospital there, found that 39 percent of people had gone through a
traumatic event at some point. Most common were being raped or physically
assaulted, a serious accident or injury, or witnessing someone else be killed or
injured.

Of those who had experienced such trauma, one in four developed post-traumatic
stress.

Being unable to do anything to stop the trauma makes it more likely that it will
result in post-traumatic stress. Experimental studies with animals have shown
that being able to control or escape a stress means the brain changes do not
occur.

''If two rats are given the same amount of shock, but one of them can push a
lever to stop it, only the rat that can do nothing to escape the pain will
develop a symptom'' and display the brain changes, said Dr.John Krystal,
director of the laboratory of clinical psychopharmacology at the National Center
for PTSD at Yale.

''The same holds for humans,'' Dr. Krystal said. ''If an attacker has a knife,
one person may feel he knows how to defend himself, and takes action. Another
does not, and thinks, that's it, I'm dead. That's the moment the brain changes
begin. But the stress must be quite intense to produce the changes.''

Exactly how the brain changes occur is unknown, but they all resemble the
transitory activity of normal brains under intense stress.

Among the experiences of Vietnam veterans most likely to cause the disorder was
witnessing or participating in mutilation of Vietnamese, as well as intense
combat, according to a study reoprted in the current issue of the Archives of
General Psychiatry. Studies With Animals Studies with animals have found that
exposure to milder stress early in life increases vulnerability to brain changes
in the face of intense stress later in life. Scientists say this may be one
explanation for why in a given catastrophe one person develops the disorderwhile
another does not.

In one of the newest studies linking a specific brain mechanism to the symptoms,
a group led by Dr. Charney administered the drug yohimbine to a group of Vietnam
veterans being treated for the problem. The drug triggered panic attacks in nine
of the 15 patients, and flashbacks in six of them.

''I was sitting in the room with one vet who told me he could see a helicopter
go down, in a trail of smoke and a bright flash,'' said Dr. Krystal. Yohimbine
blocks the action of the ''alpha 2'' receptor, which ordinarily acts as a brake
on the catecholemines set into motion by the locus coruleus.

''Under stress, as brain cells secrete norepinephrine, the alpha 2 receptor
senses it'' and slows down the accumulation, said Dr. Charney. Blood Samples
Studied Researchers at Yale who studied blood samples of men with the disorder
found they had 40 percent fewer alpha 2 receptors than did men without the
symptoms.

''When you give most people yohimbine, their heart rate speeds up and they might
feel more alert, but they don't get particularly anxious,'' said Dr. Charney.
''But in these men, you get intense fear and other P.T.S.D. symptoms.''

''That suggests one of the lasting changes from trauma is a decrease in alpha 2
receptors,'' Dr. Charney added. ''That's one reason you see a hyperactive
catecholamine system even 20 years after the experience.''

Other brain chemicals in imbalance among those with the problem are opioids,
such as endorphin, which block the perception of pain. In a study reported in
the current issue of the Archives of General Psychiatry, Vietnam veterans with
post traumatic stress disorder were shown a 15-minute video of combat scenes
from the film ''Platoon.''

After watching, the men showed a 30 percent decrease in their sensitivity to
pain, a sign that the scenes had triggered the secretion of opioids. There was
no such effect on veterans who did not have the disorder.

The pain insensitivity was blocked by injections of naloxone, a chemical that
blocks the opioids. This suggests a conditioning of the nerve pathways that
regulate opioids in those with the disorder, according to Dr. Roger Pitman, a
psychiatrist at Harvard medical school, who did the study.

''When they see the battle scenes, the amygdala, part of the brain's emotional
center, sets in motion the triggering of opioids, just as though the danger were
real,'' said Dr. Pitman. Focus on Brain Circuits Other key work has focused on
the activity of a brain circuit linking the hypothalamus and the pituitary
gland; this circuit triggers the release of the stress hormone CRF.

Researchers at Duke University have injected CRF in eight patients with the
disorder and eight who did not have the symptoms.

''The men with the symptoms had a blunted pituitary response to the
injections,'' said Dr. Charles Nemeroff, one of the researchers. ''That implies
they have been chronically over secreting CRF.''

When the hypothalamus over-secretes CRF for a long period, Dr. Nemeroff said,
the pituitary adjusts by lowering its number of CRF receptors. But other regions
of the brain which also are sensitive to CRF do not appear capable of lowering
their number of receptors so readily as can the pituitary.

''Excess release of CRF from the hypothalamus to these other brain centers could
cause many of the symptoms of post-traumatic stress,'' Dr. Nemeroff said. ''Too
much CRF makes you over-react,'' Dr. Nemeroff said. ''If a car backfires at the
mall parking lot, it floods you with the same feelings as in the original
trauma: you start sweating, you're scared, you have chills and the shakes.'' The
Next Step The next step, researchers say, is to develop drugs that counter the
specific brain mechanisms underlying the disorder.

The search for a drug specific to PTSD is seen as only part of the answer,
though. ''You can use a drug to turn down the volume of the physiological
symptoms, so people feel less driven, anxious, can sleep better and have fewer
nightmares,'' said Dr. Friedman. ''But there are other problems, such as
alienation, emotional numbness, guilt and moral pain that you need psychotherapy
for.''

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

CORRECTION-DATE: June 18, 1990, Monday, Late Edition - Final

CORRECTION:

An article in Science Times on Tuesday about findings relating brain chemistry
to post-traumatic stress referred incorrectly to the National Center for
Post-Traumatic Stress Disorder. Its headquarters are at the Department of
Veterans Affairs Medical Center in West Haven, Conn., not at Yale.

GRAPHIC: Diagram (pg. C1); Photo: Dr. Dennis Charney heads stress disorder
center in West Haven, Conn. (Stephen Castagneto for The New York Times) (pg.
C12)

                   Copyright 1990 The New York Times Company

                              231 of 288 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                  June 12, 1990, Tuesday, Late Edition - Final

That Loathsome Winchell. A Natural for a Book.

BYLINE: By MERVYN ROTHSTEIN

SECTION: Section C; Page 15, Column 1; Cultural Desk

LENGTH: 1589 words


His initials were W. W., and in the 1930's and 1940's, they were enough to
identify him to most of America. He was widely considered the creator of modern
gossip writing, and in his heyday this rude, abrasive, egotistical and witty man
was the country's best known and most widely read journalist and one of its most
influential.

In 1943, when there were 140 million people in the United States, more than 50
million of them read his gossip column every day in more than 1,000 newspapers,
including his flagship, The New York Daily Mirror. Even more people listened to
his weekly radio broadcast. Hated, feared and revered, he presided over Table 50
of the Stork Club on East 53d Street in Manhattan, creating and destroying
celebrities at the drop of his trademark gray snap-brim fedora.

Yet when he died in 1972, at age 74, he was practically forgotten. Only two
people attended his funeral: his daughter, Walda, and the rabbi who officiated
at his services. Today, not many people under 40 even know the name of Walter
Winchell.

Someone who does remember, however, is Michael Herr, the author of
''Dispatches,'' the widely praised hallucinatory memoir of the Vietnam War, and
a co-author of the screenplay for Stanley Kubrick's Vietnam movie, ''Full Metal
Jacket.'' Mr. Herr has written a novel about the columnist, a novel
appropriately titled ''Walter Winchell: A Novel.'' It began life as a screenplay
and in some ways still is one. It is a highly unusual combination of cinema and
prose, and some critics have even called it an experimental novel. It is short
(158 smallish pages), and it was recently published by Alfred A. Knopf.

'Energy and Chutzpah'

''There was something about the shape of Winchell's life that attracted me,''
Mr. Herr says, speaking by telephone from his London home. ''The rise and fall,
and the way he sort of invented himself and invented his own place in American
life: his ambition, his hunger, his pathology, his extraordinary energy and
chutzpah.

''He had no education, but he was very smart. He was shameless. He had nothing
to lose. He wasn't technically an immigrant, but he was barely removed from
being one. And there was that immigrant hunger and rage and ambition and that
feeling that anybody could be or do anything they wanted in America. He just
rode that for all it was worth, and it was worth a lot.''

Mr. Herr, who is 50 years old, remembers Winchell from his youth. ''When I was a
kid he was so pervasive and powerful,'' the author says. ''I grew up with that
voice in my ear.'' It was a voice that would start the radio program with the
words that became the columnist's anthem: ''Good evening, Mr. and Mrs. America
and all the ships at sea! This is Walter Winchell in New York. Let's go to
press.''

Prompted by a Portrait

It wasn't until a few years ago, however, when Mr. Herr was working with the
artist Guy Peellaert on a book called ''The Big Room,'' that the author's
interest in Winchell was renewed. The book was about fame and power in America,
and Mr. Peellaert had done portraits of 48 Americans connected in the American
mind with Las Vegas. One portrait was of Winchell, who had starred in a stage
show there in the 1960's, and in researching a long caption for the portrait Mr.
Herr became intrigued.

He read of how Winchell was born in poverty in 1897 near the corner of Madison
Avenue and 116th Street in Harlem; how Winchell quit school in the sixth grade
and became a not very successful song-and-dance man in vaudeville.

Mr. Herr read of how Winchell began his writing career by typing and posting a
gossip bulletin backstage during his vaudeville tours, and went from there to
The Vaudeville News, The Evening Graphic and then the Daily Mirror.

How Winchell's saucy and unheard of brand of gossip brought him a fame that
rivaled that of anyone he wrote about, including his friends and confidants
Franklin D. Roosevelt and J. Edgar Hoover. He read of how Winchell even arranged
for the gangster Louis (Lepke) Buchalter to surrender to Hoover on a Manhattan
street corner. (Surrendering didn't do Lepke any good; he was electrocuted
anyway.) A Film or a Book?

''In 1987, about a year after I finished 'The Big Room,' someone asked me to
write a screenplay,'' Mr. Herr recalls. ''I didn't want to do the project he was
discussing, and he said, 'We'd love to have you write something,' and I found
myself blurting out spontaneously that I would love to do a kind of old-style
Hollywood biography about Walter Winchell.

''And as I said that, I could see the style for this film: 'The Jolson Story'
crossed with 'Raging Bull,' glamorous and exotic and colorful but somewhere very
hard-edged, too; romantic but not sentimental.''

The project was set in motion, and Mr. Herr began writing the screenplay, in
prose, as he had for ''Full Metal Jacket,'' rather than in standard screenplay
form. Bob Fosse agreed to direct.

''I began writing with him as a reference,'' Mr. Herr says, ''thinking about him
and talking to him on the phone, and then he died.''

Mr. Herr says he continued his work, but by the time he finished the first third
of the screenplay he suspected that he was subverting his own intentions.

''Something else was going on,'' he says. ''I liked the speed of the form for
telling a story and the choppiness of the form, the short scenes, and the
rhythms, and all the conventions of the Hollywood biography. But I felt in my
heart that I wasn't writing a normal, formal screenplay, that I was really
writing a kind of prose work.''

Of Form and Substance

Mr. Herr is extremely reluctant to call his book experimental. ''I'm very
sensitive about that,'' he says. ''Every work suggests its own form, and that
was the form this work suggested to me. And that's the form it's in. It just
turned out to be not exactly a screenplay, not exactly a novel, but in spirit
more like a novel than a screenplay. What I ended up with was a screenplay for a
three-and-a-half-hour movie about a guy nobody under 40 had ever heard of.''

There were problems with the producers, Mr. Herr says, and then there was a
parting of the ways. ''And I was left with this thing,'' he says. ''I had shown
it to a few people, including Sonny Mehta, the head of Knopf, and right from the
beginning he said he wanted to publish it.''

Mr. Herr emphasizes the fact that the book is fiction, not biography. ''My book
is not a historical Walter Winchell,'' he says. ''There's a lot of real stuff in
it, including a lot of his actual words. But this is an interpretation.

''I read about 3,000 of his columns, written over a 35-year period. It was in
the columns of the 1930's and 40's that I really found Walter Winchell. The
incredible vitality, even wit, of some of those columns, the tension that ran
through them, the excitement. This Winchell had pizazz, charm. And I felt it was
true that a lot of people who had good reason to hate him liked him anyway.
There was something irrepressible about him. That was the Winchell I wanted to
write.''

More Than 15 Minutes of Fame

Winchell wasn't really a journalist, Mr. Herr says. ''He was a show-biz guy,''
he says. ''He had no talent as a performer, but he was a cheap genius. He
understood the techniques of show business, and he brought them into journalism.
Nobody had ever really done that before. He invented that. He knew there was a
way to convert his own tumult-making, nosy, intrusive self; he knew that people
wanted to know this gossip stuff. He knew there was an audience for it.

''That was his vision of the new America: a kind of promiscuous awarding of
fame. And it wasn't being famous for 15 minutes. In those days, the turnover
wasn't as unremitting and brutal as it is now.''

And then, Mr. Herr says, the world changed, and Winchell didn't. One major
change, he says, was the advent of television. ''That's the critical scene in
the book,'' he says, ''where Winchell goes on television, and the shadows are
too hard, and he's a hot guy in a cold medium. And it's a disaster. Whereas a
shlump like Ed Sullivan is a star because he doesn't give off any shadows
anyway.

''The rules totally changed. The appetites changed. Winchell had fed those
appetites for 20 years, and he could no longer keep up with them.'' (Winchell
did achieve success of sorts on television, but only through his radio voice, as
the narrator of ''The Untouchables.'') And Then the Fall Then came the years of
decline. Winchell's syndication dwindled, and it virtually disappeared after the
demise of The Daily Mirror in 1963. His son, Walter Jr., committed suicide; his
wife, June, died, and then so did he, unmourned by the millions who had followed
him reverently all those years.

Some people who knew Winchell, especially those who were disaffected by his
support of Senator Joseph R. McCarthy's anti-Communist hearings in the 1950's,
have been shocked by Mr. Herr's sympathetic portrayal of the columnist.

''I'm sure he was a really terrible guy,'' Mr. Herr says. ''He never talked
about anything but himself. His ego was unbelievable. But I find that strangely
touching and endearing. It's his pathology that touches me. It's this guy driven
because he always knew - I think he always knew - he was going to go down. He
was always looking over his shoulder for that hungry young kid with the new idea
who would displace him.

''And when it came, it was a whole hungry generation with a new idea that
displaced him. Because the idea was television, and there was no place for him
in it.''

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photos: Michael Herr, left, is the author of a novel about Walter
Winchell. (Don McCullin/Alfred A. Knopf, American International Pictures)

                   Copyright 1990 The New York Times Company

                              232 of 288 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                  June 12, 1990, Tuesday, Late Edition - Final

THE MEDIA BUSINESS;
Entertainment Weekly Editor Quits

BYLINE: By ROGER COHEN

SECTION: Section D; Page 1, Column 3; Financial Desk

LENGTH: 903 words


After a clash with senior management at Time Warner Inc. over the direction of
the company's Entertainment Weekly magazine, the publication's managing editor,
Jeff A. Jarvis, resigned yesterday.

He was replaced by James W. Seymore, the 47-year-old executive editor of People
magazine, another Time Warner publication.

The move appeared to be intended to redirect the four-month-old publication,
which has received mixed reviews from subscribers and advertisers, toward more
of a middle American audience and to bring it into the mainstream of Time
Warner's magazine group.

According to company employees, who spoke yesterday on the condition that they
not be identified, Mr. Jarvis wanted tough reviews and offbeat subjects to have
a prominent place in the magazine, which covers videos, movies, books, music and
television.

More Personality Driven

But the senior managemers of the magazine group - Jason McManus, the editor in
chief; Richard B. Stolley, editorial director, and Gilbert Rogin, the corporate
editor - are said to prefer a more personality-driven publication.

The appointment of Mr. Seymore from People magazine, which has enjoyed great
success by chronicling the lives of celebrities, suggests that Entertainment
Weekly will now take a less irreverent approach. Mr. Seymore declined to be
interviewed.

''Management wants more celebrity coverage and a more mainstream magazine,''
said one employee at Time Warner, adding that the magazine's staff was
''shell-shocked'' by Mr. Jarvis's departure.

Along with Michael Klingensmith, the publisher of Entertainment Weekly, Mr.
Jarvis, 35, was the driving force behind the magazine. He first proposed the
idea in 1984, while he was a television critic at People.

''I spent six years working on it,'' Mr. Jarvis said in an interview yesterday.
''I am very disappointed. Of course, I am.'' He declined to comment further.

Peter Castiglio, a Time Warner spokesman, said only that there had been
''creative differences'' between Mr. Jarvis and senior management.

According to company employees, one clash involved the magazine's review of the
movie ''Pretty Woman.'' The magazine group's management was not pleased when
Entertainment Weekly panned the movie, which was a box-office success.

At the outset, executives of the magazine group had promised Mr. Jarvis and Mr.
Klingensmith a free rein, believing this worked better than a bureaucratic,
corporate approach. But the employees described an increasingly tense situation
in which top management had become steadily more involved in the day-to-day
operations, to make sure the magazine proved a success.

The magazine is the first introduced since Time's merger with Warner, which left
the company with about $10.6 billion in debt. Media analysts believe the company
has been acutely preoccupied with the magazine's success because Time's last big
effort, TV-Cable Week, cost the company more than $45 million when it closed in
1983.

Picture Week, a black-and-white news and photo magazine, was abandoned in 1986
after test-marketing and a $30 million investment by Time. Time Warner has spent
an estimated $40 million to test market and introduce Entertainment Weekly.

Circulation at 600,000

Mr. Castiglio said that Entertainment Weekly was doing well, with a circulation
of 600,000, including subscribers and newsstand sales, and that advertising was
running ''ahead of schedule.'' Mr. Klingensmith said he was ''increasingly
satisfied'' with the publication and predicted that it would ''go on and
prosper.''

But Peter P. Appert, an analyst at C. J. Lawrence, Morgan Grenfell Inc., said,
''This is a very difficult advertising environment for magazines, and I believe
Entertainment Weekly is off to a rough start.''

Advertising at many leading magazines has been down at least 10 percent this
year.

''The future has to be cloudy,'' said Bob Zach of Chiat/Day/Mojo Inc. ''When
there are so many changes in so short a time, you have to ask whether they are
focused on where they are going. Such turmoil does not sit well with the
advertising community, which tends to be conservative about where it puts its
money.''

The magazine's design has already changed once since introduction, after
widespread criticism that its different graphics, typefaces, column sizes and
print colors made the publication cluttered and hard to read. Moreover, initial
covers on K. D. Lang, the country-and-western singer, and books on Vietnam,
which were criticized as too esoteric, have given way to more recent covers
featuring the movie star Tom Cruise and the rock star Madonna.

The Jury Is Still Out

''The magazine has improved,'' said Joseph Ostrow, media director at Foote, Cone
& Belding Communications, the advertising agency. ''It was too downtown and too
young in tone. It looks a lot more like a Time magazine now, and I'm comfortable
with that.'' But he added that ''the jury is still very much out.''

But Entertainment Weekly faces tough competition from the News Corporation's
Premiere and Arrow Publishers Inc.'s Rolling Stone. Analysts said doubts still
hanging over the magazine included whether the public would adopt a single
publication for news on media and entertainment products, and whether it could
really provide a service that was not already available.

The Time Warner employees are fearful that the magazine will, as one put it,
''become another People.''

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photos: Jeff A. Jarvis, one of the driving forces behind the creation
of Entertainment Weekly, has resigned as managing editor of the publication.
(Linda M. Baron for The New York Times) (pg. D1); The current issue of
Entertainment Weekly features a cover story on the film ''Dick Tracy'' and
Warren Beatty, its producer, director and star. (Entertainment Weekly) (pg. D20)

                   Copyright 1990 The New York Times Company

                              233 of 288 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 June 13, 1990, Wednesday, Late Edition - Final

Management Woes Hobble U.S. Air Fleet in Drug War

BYLINE: By JEFF GERTH, Special to The New York Times

SECTION: Section A; Page 1, Column 1; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 1746 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, June 12


A private air force organized by the State Department to support United States
paramilitary operations against the illicit drug industry in Latin America has
developed an array of management problems, officials involved in the program
say.

The program uses private pilots to fly United States Government helicopter
gunships, transport planes and crop-dusters used by American drug agents and
foreign police officers in operations barred to United States military
personnel, like raids on cocaine laboratories. Many of the pilots are veterans
of the Vietnam War or of service with the Central Intelligence Agency.

Tangled Lines of Authority

The program, begun in 1987, before the Pentagon became active in antidrug
efforts, has many problems stemming from the State Department's inexperience in
paramilitary and law enforcement activities, documents and officials involved
indicate.

Two outside consulting companies help manage the operations of the private
aviation company that runs the program, creating tangled lines of authority.
Some of the pilots, who earn up to $150,000 a year, went on strike for higher
pay. More than a quarter of the force has been laid off because of cost overruns
and 5 of the fleet's 53 planes have been destroyed, resulting in the loss of 10
lives.

In addition, some personnel were caught pilfering from the Government and a
chief operations officer was indicted for conspiring to smuggle drugs from
Mexico before taking the State Department job.

Concern over the program's management has mounted in Congress as the United
States has stepped up its anti-drug activities in Colombia, Peru and Bolivia,
where the line between fighting drugs and fighting insurgencies is becoming
increasingly blurred.

The pilots played a crucial role in the firefight two months ago at an anti-drug
base in Santa Lucia, Peru, piloting a helicopter gunship that repelled an attack
by the Shining Path guerrillas, who protect the cocaine barons, and helping kill
a number of rebels.

Military Increases Its Role

The United States military, now committed to broadening its role in anti-drug
efforts but barred from direct participation because of the sensitivity of
foreign governments, is providing aid in areas like intelligence-gathering and
training. All the activities are coordinated by the State Department's Bureau of
International Narcotics Matters, which has been headed since last year by
Assistant Secretary of State Melvyn Levitsky.

In an interview, Mr. Levitsky said that ''while everybody beats up on this air
wing,'' the department's management of the operation had improved. He said the
program had been successful in building up the ability of other countries to
fight drug production and trafficking and in reducing marijuana production in
Colombia, Guatemala and Jamaica.

He added that his bureau was borrowing 30 military officials from the Pentagon
to help manage what he called ''an enterprise that is more or less foreign to
the culture of the institution in which it is functioning.''

The enterprise revolves around a Pennsylvania-based aviation services company,
Corporate Jets. Some 150 employees fly and maintain the State Department's fleet
of UH-1H and Bell 212 helicopters, T-65 Turbothrush spray planes and various
transport aircraft that make up the aerial support program. Based in Opa-Locka,
Fla., and operating for security reasons under the name National Air Transport
Inc., the enterprise is the linchpin for some of the Government's most sensitive
operations.

The air wing operators use the Florida headquarters for logistical support, but
most of the planes are based in Latin America, where they are used in remote
areas by agents of the Drug Enforcement Administration and foreign police
officers to spray crops, supply food and equipment to base camps, make aerial
surveys, transport personnel and help interdict drug supply lines.

The logistical operation includes the maintenance of the air fleet, the supply
of fuel and spare parts, and the training of foreign pilots. The work rules for
the contract employees are not clearly defined. They are not provided with
weapons, though they often carry them, and are not required to be trained in
combat operations, although they find themselves in combat situations.

The State Department's aerial support role stems from a decision by Congress in
1986 that the United States must retain title to aircraft used in anti-drug
operations abroad. As the Pentagon was reluctant at the time to become involved,
the State Department, which is responsible for anti-drug operations abroad,
turned to an outside contractor. The arrangement, officials said, permits the
Government to deny the involvement of Federal officials but leaves the United
States with less control over the contract employees' actions.

In the 1960's and 1970's the C.I.A. operated a secret air force in Southeast
Asia and elsewhere, including an air charter company, Air America. The company
was liquidated in the 1970's, although some of the people who worked for Air
America were hired by Corporate Jets and were involved in operations like the
firefight in Peru.

The State Department program has attracted little public attention, though
Congress has provided funds for its expansion and reviewed questions about the
program raised by department investigators.

The State Department's Inspector General, Sherman M. Funk, said last year that
Corporate Jets had been allowed to operate ''virtually carte blanche.'' And in
January the Pentagon's Defense Logistics Agency found that the company was not
complying with numerous parts of its contract.

Mr. Funk also cited as inappropriate the use of an outside consulting company to
prepare the air wing's budget. That company helps oversee Corporate Jets,
creating yet another tier of supervision and further blurring the management of
the program.

This same consulting company helped design the 1988 bidding process that was won
by Corporate Jets. The contract is now being rebid, again with the consulting
company's help, because the earlier contest was flawed, according to public
documents.

Memos Are Unanswered

State Department investigators praised Mr. Levitsky's recent efforts to improve
the bureau's management, but problems remain. The narcotics bureau, which told
Congress last year that it provided direction over Corporate Jets on a ''daily
basis,'' has not responded in recent months to dozens of memos from the aviation
company on all facets of the operation.

Company officials said they had provided safe and efficient services and charged
the State Department with poor management.

William Smith, a vice president, said in an interview that the department had
modified the contract 17 times, had ignored monthly reports and had not
responded to 34 memos written between March and May involving issues like export
licenses, Pentagon contact, inspections, computer systems, night vision goggle
training, and parts and inventory control.

Andrew Thoms, the narcotics bureau's director of transnational issues, said the
memos and reports would be dealt with once an appropriate management information
system had been completed by still another consulting company. But department
investigators and company employees said the issues raised in the memos required
a quicker response.

Pilots Strike Over Pay

The issue of combat-related training, including the use of night vision goggles,
arose after the Shining Path attack on the Santa Lucia base in Peru, in which at
least one pilot, despite rules to the contrary, used night goggles to operate
his helicopter. The State Department contract has no provision for such
training, Mr. Thoms and Corporate Jets officials said.

The risky nature of the work led some of Corporate Jets' pilots, who earn
$120,000 to $150,000 a year, to strike for higher pay in April. About the same
time the company, at the insistence of the State Department, laid off about a
quarter of its personnel, including 6 of 14 spray pilots, Mr. Thoms and Mr.
Smith said. Budget constraints necessitate a further 10 percent reduction by
August.

Mr. Levitsky said that a 10 percent overrun on spending, one of the causes for
the layoffs, was now under control.

A series of legal problems has also affected the program in the last few months.
The company's chief aircraft operations officer in the program was indicted in
February for conspiring to smuggle drugs from Mexico before working for the
State Department, according to officials and documents.

And in recent months, according to investigators and documents, a senior company
pilot pleaded guilty to theft from the Government and a supervisor pleaded
guilty to stealing $150,000 worth of State Department helicopter parts. Other
cases involving possible criminal misuse of the program are pending, including
an allegation that the former program manager improperly refurbished his own
plane with State Department property.

Last year officials involved in the program told Mr. Funk's auditors that the
$64 million cost of aquiring and managing the spare parts inventory could be
reduced by a third through better management and procurement practices.

Mr. Levitsky took issue with that estimate but in the interview referred
questions about the department's inventory to Mr. Thoms. Mr. Thoms said he could
not provide firm numbers until the Army completed a survey for the State
Department.

Some Planes Are Grounded

On the loss of the five planes, Mr. Levitsky said that concern about safety had
led to the recent grounding of some spray planes. The planes were lost because
of mechanical problems, pilot error and sabotage, he said.

The program's $28 million budget for this year was increased by $4.7 million
last month when funds were shifted from other accounts in the narcotics bureau.
The bureau, in a shift still under review by Congress, wants to increase its own
$113 million budget this year by transferring $16.5 million in military aid for
law enforcement efforts in Colombia and Bolivia.

The Pentagon, which has given its approval to the transfer, is increasingly
involved in the air-support program, providing airfields, aircraft, spare parts,
investigators and managers, according to documents and officials.

A new supervisor brought in from the Pentagon, Col. David Rankin, was a military
attache in El Salvador during the height of efforts to help the Nicaraguan
contras and repel Salvadoran guerrillas.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo: The State Department's program of using private pilots to fly
helicopters and planes for the Government's war on drugs in Latin America is
riddled with problems. Gunships took part in a firefight two months ago in Peru
to repel an attack on an anti-drug chase by guerrillas who protect cocaine
barons. (James Brooke/The New York Times) (pg. A12)

                   Copyright 1990 The New York Times Company

                              234 of 288 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 June 13, 1990, Wednesday, Late Edition - Final

NEWS SUMMARY

SECTION: Section A; Page 2, Column 5; Metropolitan Desk

LENGTH: 1286 words



International    A3-19



An obstacle to German unification was removed by President Gorbachev. He agreed
for the first time that West German troops could remain in NATO without a
corresponding role for the East Germans in the Soviet-led Warsaw Pact.    Page
A1



Bush Administration sees Gorbachev easing on NATO    A18



A Soviet law on freedom of the press intended to end decades of Government
censorship and allow individual citizens to start newspapers was approved by the
Parliament.    A1



Gorbachev and Baltic leaders confer    A18



Russian patriarch asks church role in schools    A19



The Warsaw Pact may be converted. The Foreign Minister of Czechoslovakia said
that at last week's Warsaw Pact meeting the Soviet Union had agreed in effect to
change the organization from a military alliance to a more political one.    A18



A private air force hired by the U.S. to provide support for its paramilitary
operations against the illicit drug industry in Latin America has developed an
array of management problems, officials say.    A1

Japan ambivalent on Peruvian vote    A13



Korean students attack a U.S. site    A15



Thai tempers cool after army crisis    A14



A fresh cycle of violence in Liberia? The killing of three men in a town near
Monrovia is a foreboding sign that the retaliatory killings in the country may
begin to include American-Liberians.    A3



Strategic interests tie U.S. to Liberia    A3



South Africans mend a fence with the U.N.    A5



Johannesburg journal: An exile comes home    A4



Hopes for peace in Israel are fading. The advent of a hard-line Government has
begun to convince Palestinians, as well as Israelis, that the peace process that
held some hope of a reconciliation between them over the last year is dying.
A7



Algerian vote begins despite calls for a boycott    A6



A heavy burden is lifted, and Venice sighs    A11



U.S. urged to end opposition to ozone aid    A9



Poorer countries are hit hardest by AIDS, U.N. reports    A8



National    A20-29, B6



A Senate ethics panel began hearings into the conduct of Dave Durenberger. The
panel's special counsel recommended that the full Senate publicly denounce the
Minnesota Republican and that his party consider stripping him of his seniority.

    A1



Halting trading on exchanges at times of market stress was among the
recommendations made by a panel of business leaders created to restore investor
confidence after last October's stock plunge.    A1



The blaze on a crippled supertanker in the Gulf of Mexico began to come under
control, but because the flames no longer consumed the leaking oil, a growing
slick was forming behind the Norwegian ship.    A26



In Texas, new look at deal that brings profit and peril    A26



Oil companies rethink risk of having tankers    A27



The Hatch Act would be revised under a bill approved by Congress despite a veto
threat from President Bush. The bill would allow Federal workers to take part in
many political activities from which they have been barred for half a century.
    A20



Cheney backs his budget and his cuts    A22



Washington Talk: Flag amendment raises fears in Congress    A22



Senate upholds Bush veto of bill to keep Amtrak subsidies    A22



Immunity granted to H.U.D. witness    A24



Klan supporter is soundly beaten in runoff in Arkansas    B6



The lead singer of 2 Live Crew, the rap group whose record was found obscene by
a Florida judge, is a former leader of a Miami youth gang who turned to music
and became a self-made millionaire.    A20



Southern Baptists pick conservative    A29



Program helped underweight babies, study shows    A20



Shuttle is back in hangar

    B6



Mercury's poles called very hot    B6



Reactor restart is challenged    B6



Op-Ed changes are announced by The Times    C17



Regional    B1-5



The most stable homeless settlement in New York City may be the railroad tunnel
beneath Riverside Park, which houses as many as 100 people. But their quiet life
along the Hudson River is becoming problematic.    A1



A shooting in a Harlem high-rise that was once an oasis of luxury in a troubled
neighborhood has led its tenants to protest. They say lax management has let
crack dealers move in.    B1



New Jersey's modest middle class is the key to success or failure for Gov. Jim
Florio and his plan to increase the burden on the affluent, say administration
officials and Democratic legislators.    B1



Passaic housing aides guilty

    B3



Plan to increase power at Indian Point is delayed    B2



Connecticut's Democrats seem lost after decades of nearly unbroken dominance in
state politics. Recent polls show the party's gubernatorial front-runner
preferred by fewer than 1 in 10 voters.    B1



Rinfret suggests selling some authorities to private industry    B2



Holtzman offers investment plan to help budget    B2



State agency suggests keeping a Harlem maternity ward    B2



Most papers won't name jogger    B3



TV barred at jogger rape trial    B3



Crackdown on cruising by limousines is planned    B3



Business Digest    D1



Education



A school program in New Haven developed by a Yale psychiatrist has resulted in
higher attendance, fewer behavior problems and improved academic performance and
is being tried on a wider basis.    A1



Robert F. Wagner Jr. ends his term as president of New York City's Board of
Education at the end of this month, leaving behind a school system that he
altered in important ways.    B1



A tireless voice and bedrock beliefs    B7



Head of University of Utah quits amid cold-fusion furor    B7



Provost from Michigan named to head M.I.T.    B6



The Living Section



Food

For summer, cool tastes from Vietnam    C1



''I'll take a six pack; hold the alcohol''    C1



60-Minute Gourmet    C2



At the Nation's Table    C3



Eating Well    C4



De Gustibus    C6



Food Notes    C7



Wine Talk    C9



Living

Adults befriend an old friend (the piano)    C1



Metropolitan Diary    C2



Arts/Entertainment



French artists boycott museum opening    C11



Team with a genius for sitcoms    C11



Music: Madonna at Nassau Coliseum    C11



Word and Image: Carlos Fuentes novellas    C17



Sports



Baseball: Mets rout Cubs, 19-8    D25



Ryan shows wisdom    D25



Milestone for Righetti as Yankees win, 5-4    D26



Basketball: Pistons take charge in edging Blazers    D25



Column: Berkow on Merrill    D25



Soccer: Changes loom for U.S.    D29



Obituaries    B20



Solomon Freehof, rabbi

Valerian S. Rybar, designer

Editorials/Letters/Op-Ed



Editorials    A30



There's no tolerating terror

Prosecute the torture doctor

Leon V. Sigal: Wired world

Letters    A30



Russell Baker: Secrets of the trade    A31



Hodding Carter: In public schools, class will tell

    A31



Edward J. Markey: Democracy on hold    A31


LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Summary

                   Copyright 1990 The New York Times Company

                              235 of 288 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 June 13, 1990, Wednesday, Late Edition - Final

For Summer, Cool Tastes From Vietnam

BYLINE: By MOLLY O'NEILL

SECTION: Section C; Page 1, Column 4; Living Desk

LENGTH: 2281 words


WHEN the barometric pressure sinks and the mercury rises like a lazy bubble of
molasses, life leans toward the shade and moves as slowly as a swing on an
indolent veranda. Inspiration rides the occasional breeze, but it evaporates
faster than a quake of heat lightning.

Dinner, especially for company, is a frequent casualty. On one breeze, the meal
appears: a vision of cool, stylish dishes designed to tempt and slake. Then the
wind dies and dinner becomes yet another
hot-dog-hamburger-piece-of-fish-from-the-grill.

The instinctual response to cooking for a crowd in summer has been tempered,
heat wave by heat wave. The urge to leave the kitchen stove and head to the
outdoor grill was influenced by the tandoori ovens of India, the pit-cookery of
the Caribbean, the vine-grilling of southern France. The chili peppers used in
Mexico and southern China, to create a cooling sweat, have become a staple of
the American summer kitchen. So has a taste for curry from India, the yogurt and
citrus marinades of northern Africa. And now a breeze from Vietnam is blowing.
With an explosion of Vietnamese restaurants across the country and a spate of
Vietnamese cookbooks on the shelves, the cuisine's distinct play of cool food
against steamy ones, fiery food against sweet and sour, and crisp and crunchy
textures against softer ones is invading our national summer menu. The mounds of
mint, basil and coriander and light salads garnished with bits of heavier cooked
meat or fish that are a mainstay of Vietnamese cooking are finding a place on
the American summer table.

''We've had over 2,000 years of summer to cook for,'' said Nicole Routhier,
author of ''Foods of Vietnam,'' (Stewart Tabori & Chang, 1989). ''We should have
figured it out by now.''

Bruce Cost, owner and chef of Monsoon, a pan-Asian restaurant in San Francisco,
said that this time of the year, the other dishes he serves cannot compete with
his Vietnamese offerings.

Vietnam has only two seasons. The monsoon season is hot and wet. The other eight
months are hot and dry, the time when outdoor charcoal grills are fired up, raw
and lightly pickled vegetables are the stars of most meals and the fresh herb
and chili content of the fare soars.

The countryhas also been a culinary crossroads of the Asian world. A thousand
years of Chinese occupation brought stir-frying, deep-frying, noodles, tofu,
ginger and star anise to the country.

Trade with India left curry; commerce with Western Europe left watercress,
asparagus and potatoes. The French colonization created a taste for milk, ice
cream, pastries, bread and filtered coffee.

Ms. Routhier, who was born in Saigon, says the French influence distinguishes
Vietnamese from other Asian cuisines; as far as cooking goes, the French were
great governors.

More and more, she says, she is being asked about the cooking of her birthplace.
''When people ask me to describe the cooking of my country, I can usually only
do it by comparison,'' she said. ''It is like Chinese but more flavorful, like
Indian but more subtle, like Thai but less intense.''

Since the end of the Vietnam War, refugees have opened thousands of Vietnamese
restaurants in the United States, particularly in large Vietnamese communities
in Seattle, Los Angeles, San Diego, Galveston, Minneapolis, Chicago and
Washington. The smaller immigrant communities in New York City and Boston have
fewer Vietnamese restaurants, but benchmark dishes like the cold spring roll and
pho, a beef noodle soup, are beginning to appear on menus in local Chinese
restaurants.

Across the country, home cooks have started to add Vietnamese recipes to their
Asian repertoire. Ms. Routhier's Vietnamese cookbook, which was released last
year, is selling briskly; it was named best of the year by the International
Association of Cooking Professionals and Joseph E. Seagram & Sons. Two other
cookbooks, ''The Southeast Asia Cookbook,'' by Ruth Law (Donald I. Fine), and
''The Simple Secrets of Vietnamese Cooking,'' by Marcia Kiesel and Bihn Duong
(Prentice Hall Press), will be published soon.

Vietnam, which is about three-quarters the size of the state of California, is
shaped like a long ''S.'' In the northern part of the country, the Chinese
influence is the most pronounced: in the land around Hanoi, deep-fat frying,
congees, or rice soups, and hot-pot cooking are common. In the center of the
country, near the ancient imperial capital of Hue, a sophisticated, stylized
cuisine that uses rare Western-style vegetables like potatoes, asparagus,
artichokes and cauliflower still reigns. In the south, the hot-weather cooking
instinct is the most finely honed, the flavors are bold, the food is light.

The climate seems to inspire a burrito mentality: meals are all served family
style and platters of lettuce leaves are set out on the table. Diners arrange a
bit of grilled meat, some fresh herbs, rice and hot sauce in the leaf, fold or
roll it and then eat. Ms. Routhier was ''astounded the first time I went to
Mexico and saw the similarities in the style of eating and the pace of the
meals.''

Throughout Vietnam, and in the dishes that are recreated here, the abiding
nuance comes from nuoc mam, the Vietnamese fish sauce. In Europe, it is salt; in
China, soy sauce; in Vietnam, it is the briny sauce of barrel-fermented
anchovies that marshals the flavors and gives the cooking its nearly
indiscernible and completely unmistakable flavor.

Like olive oil, there are different grades of Vietnamese fish sauce. The best
sauce is the first that is drained off the anchovies after six months of barrel
fermentation. It is dark amber and deeply flavored. After the first of the cask
is drawn, additional water is added, resulting in lesser grades that are lighter
in color and flavor.

Mr. Cost favors Squid or Golden brands of Vietnamese fish sauce to cook with.
Ms. Routhier advises the more-refined Phuquoc brand for cold dipping sauces and
table use. Both agree that the deep, briny flavor of nuoc mam distinguishes
dishes from Thai, Cambodian and Laotian cooking. But as much as the distinct
flavor, it is the style of cooking - the exotic, backyard cooking that often
profits from being made ahead, almost needs a crowd and certainly demands cold
beer by its side - that can give American hot-weather cooking a Vietnamese
flair.

Cool, Steamy, Fiery, Sweet, Sour, Crispy, Crunchy

Shredded Cabbage And Chicken Salad
(Adapted from ''The Foods of Vietnam,'' Nicole Routhier; Stewart, Tabori &
Chang, 1989)
Preparation time: 30 minutes

2 chili peppers, seeded and minced
3 garlic cloves, minced
2 tablespoons sugar
1 tablespoon rice vinegar
3 tablespoons fresh lime juice
3 tablespoons Vietnamese fish sauce
3 tablespoons vegetable oil
1 medium-size onion, thinly sliced
Freshly ground black pepper to taste
2 cups cooked and shredded chicken
4 cups finely shredded white cabbage
1 cup shredded carrot
 1/2 cup fresh mint
 1/2 cup fresh coriander.

1.Combine the chili peppers, garlic, sugar, vinegar, lime juice, fish sauce,
oil, onion and black pepper in a bowl. Let the dressing stand for 30 minutes.

2.In a large mixing bowl, combine the shredded chicken, cabbage, carrot and
mint. Sprinkle with the dressing and toss well.

3.Transfer the salad to a serving platter and top with coriander sprigs.
Sprinkle with additional black pepper and serve.

Yield: 4 to 6 servings.

Spaghetti Squash Salad
(Adapted from Marcia Kiesel)

Preparation time: 30 minutes
Cooking time: 10 minutes

1 small spaghetti squash, about 2 pounds
5 ounces pork loin, in one piece
 1/4 pound medium-size shrimp, shells on
1 tablespoon sugar
1 tablespoon white vinegar
 1/4 teaspoon salt
2 tablespoons water
 1/4 teaspoon freshly ground black pepper
 1/4 cup minced fresh mint
 1/4 cup minced fresh coriander
 1/2 cup Vietnamese fish sauce
2 tablespoons chopped peanuts.

1.Trim both ends of the squash, peel and cut in half lengthwise. In a large pot
of boiling water, cook the squash halves until barely tender, about 6 minutes.
Drain and cool under cold water. Separate the squash into strands, measuring
about four cups and set aside.

2.Boil the pork in water to cover over high heat for 8 minutes. Use a slotted
spoon to remove the pork and set it aside. Place the shrimp in the boiling water
for 2 minutes, remove, cool under cold water and shell. Cut the shrimp in half
lengthwise and remove the vein. Cut the pork into thin julienne strips.

3.In a small bowl, whisk together the sugar, vinegar and salt and two
tablespoons of water.

4.In a large bowl, combine the pepper, pork, shrimp, squash, mint and coriander.
Add the vinegar mixture and the fish sauce and stir well. Divide the mixture
between four plates, sprinkle each with peanuts and serve.

Yield: 4 servings.

Cold Noodles With Barbecued Shrimp

Preparation time: 15 minutes, plus 30 minutes for marination and an hour for
chilling
Cooking time: 12 minutes

1 pound medium-size shrimp, peeled and deveined
2 tablespoons peanut oil
2 tablespoons fresh lime juice
1 garlic clove, minced
1 fresh hot chili, minced
1 teaspoon Vietnamese fish sauce
1 pound rice noodles
Salt to taste
Peanut dipping sauce (see recipe)
4 scallions, minced.

1.Preheat a charcoal grill.

2.Place the shrimp, peanut oil, lime juice, garlic, chili and fish sauce in a
bowl, toss and marinate for 30 minutes. Remove shrimp from marinade and grill
over charcoal about 7 minutes. Cool. Slice the shrimp in half lengthwise and set
aside.

3.Boil the noodles in well-salted water to cover until tender, about 5 minutes,
depending on size. Drain and cool under cold water and drain again. Place the
noodles, shrimp, peanut sauce and minced scallions in a large bowl and toss.
Chill in the refrigerator for one hour before serving.

Yield: 6 servings.

Vietnamese Sate
(Adapted From Monsoon Restaurant, San Francisco)

Preparation time: 15 minutes, plus 30 minutes for marination
Cooking time: 15 minutes

2 teaspoons coriander seed
2 teaspoons cumin seed
4 garlic cloves, smashed
2 tablespoons brown sugar
2 tablespoons Vietnamese fish sauce
4 tablespoons tamarind paste
2 tablespoons peanut oil
2 chicken breasts, cut in 3/4-inch strips.

1.Preheat oven to 350 degrees and preheat a charcoal grill.

2.Toast the coriander and cumin seeds in the oven for 15 minutes and grind them
to a fine powder. Do not do this ahead of time, as the spices lose their flavor
quickly. In a flat dish, combine the powdered seeds with the garlic cloves,
sugar and fish sauce to make a marinade.

3.Place the tamarind paste in a bowl, cover with hot water and stir to dissolve.
Strain through a fine mesh strainer. Add 6 tablespoons of the resulting liquid
to the marinade and reserve the rest for future use. Add the peanut oil.

4.Soak 12 bamboo skewers in water and drain or use 12 metal skewers. Thread the
chicken strips onto the skewers and place in the marinade for 30 minutes,
turning frequently. Drain and grill the chicken over charcoal. Serve alone or
with Vietnamese dipping sauce (see recipe). This marinade is also very good for
pork, beef and game.

Yield: 6 servings.

Vietnamese Dipping Sauce
(Adapted From Monsoon Restaurant, San Francisco)

Preparation time: 15 minutes
Cooking time: 2 minutes

1 cup peanut oil
 1/2 cup fresh peanuts
2 fresh green chili peppers
2 tablespoons fresh minced ginger
4 garlic cloves, peeled
Y cup coconut milk
2 teaspoons dark soy sauce
4 teaspoons Vietnamese fish sauce
1 teaspoon sugar
1 tablespoon fresh lime juice
 1/4 teaspoon salt
 1/2 cup minced fresh coriander.

1.Warm 3 tablespoons of the peanut oil in a heavy-bottomed skillet until nearly
smoking. Add the peanuts and stir. Remove from the heat and continue stirring
until the peanuts are toasted and then allow to cool.

2.Place the peanuts in a food processor and puree to a rough paste. Add the
chili peppers, ginger, garlic, coconut milk, soy and fish sauces, sugar, lime
juice and salt. Puree until almost smooth. Place the peanut mixture into a bowl
and, with a wooden spoon, stir in the remaining peanut oil until the sauce has a
nice sheen. Stir in the minced coriander. Use the sauce as a dip for grilled
meat, or as a sauce for cold noodle salad.

Yield: 6 servings.


Buying Them

FISH sauce, chili sauce, herbs and other staples of Vietnamese cooking are
available in most groceries that specialize in Asian ingredients. In addition,
these companies sell Vietnamese groceries by mail:

Asian Food Market, 217 Summit Avenue, Jersey City, N.J. 07306, 2o1-333-7254.
Bangkok Market, 4757 Melrose Avenue, Los Angeles, Calif. 90029, 213-662-9705.
De Wildt Imports, Route 3, Bangor, Pa. 18013, 215-588-0600.
Far East Trading Company, 1836 South Canal Street, Chicago, Ill. 60616,
312-733-1688.
Haig's Delicacies, 642 Clement Street, San Francisco, Calif. 94118,
415-752-6283.
Jung's Oriental Food Store, 1140 East Ninth Street, Des Moines, Iowa 50316,
515-266-3891.
Kam Kuo Food Products, 7 Mott Street, New York, N.Y. 10013, 212-349-3097.
Montana Mercantile, 1500 Montana Avenue, Santa Monica, Calif. 90403,
213-451-1418.
Pacific Mercantile Grocery, 1925 Lawrence Street, Denver, Colo. 80202,
303-295-0293.
Southeastern Food Supplies, 400 Northeast 67th, Miami, Fla. 33138, 305-758-1432.

Super Asian Market, 2719 Wilson Boulevard, Arlington, Va. 22201, 703-527-0777.
Uwajimaya, 519 Sixth Avenue South, Seattle, Wash. 98104, 206-624-6248.
Vietnam House, 242 Farmington Avenue, Hartford, Conn. 06105, 203-524-0010.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Drawings (pgs. C1 & C6); photo: Nicole Routhier shopping in New York's
Chinatown for Vietnamese ingredients. (Jim Wilson/The New York Times) (pg. C6)

                   Copyright 1990 The New York Times Company

                              236 of 288 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 June 13, 1990, Wednesday, Late Edition - Final

The Pop Life

BYLINE: By Stephen Holden

SECTION: Section C; Page 12, Column 5; Cultural Desk

LENGTH: 990 words



Mariah Carey's Debut

''It was incredible, like in a movie,'' Mariah Carey said the other day. The
20-year-old singer and songwriter from New York City was recalling the moment a
year and a half ago when she was discovered by Tommy Mottola, the president of
CBS Records, who has made her the company's pop Cinderella of 1990.

This week her debut album, ''Mariah Carey,'' was released by Columbia Records
with more fanfare and promotional hoopla than the label has bestowed on a new
young talent in years. ''Vision of Love,'' a single that was released three
weeks before the album, has already climbed to No. 38 on Billboard's pop singles
chart.

''Mariah Carey'' introduces a pop-gospel voice that is impressive in its power
and range and that has elaborate vocal embellishments strikingly reminiscent of
Whitney Houston's. In fact, Narada Michael Walden, one of three producers who
worked on Ms. Carey's record, also produced Ms. Houston's 1985 debut.

The singer, who lives with two cats in the Chelsea section of Manhattan, is one
of three children of Patricia Carey, a vocal coach who used to sing with the New
York City Opera. Mariah Carey's parents divorced when she was 3. In 1987, she
graduated from Harborfields High School in Huntington, L.I.

Although she was exposed to opera while growing up, Ms. Carey said she was never
drawn to it, preferring ''freer music.'' Her influences included her mother's
Billie Holiday records and her brother and sister's Al Green, Gladys Knight and
Stevie Wonder albums. Above all, she has been drawn to the gospel of Aretha
Franklin, the Clark Sisters, the Edwin Hawkins Singers and Shirley Caesar.

Ms. Carey said she had wanted to be a professional singer since she was 4 years
old. She began working with musicians when she was 13, and at 16 she started
writing songs with Ben Margulies, a young composer who collaborated with her on
six of her album's 11 songs. Her big break came in November 1988 when Brenda K.
Starr, a dance-pop vocalist with whom she had worked in clubs, took her to a
party to celebrate the inauguration of WTG Records, a CBS-affiliated label run
by Jerry Greenberg.

''Brenda walked up to Jerry, introduced me and said, 'This is my friend Mariah,
she's 18 and writes her own music,' '' Ms. Carey recalled. ''Tommy Mottola was
there, and when Brenda handed my tape to Jerry, Tommy grabbed it away from him.
When Brenda told me who he was, I was really nervous. I just said hi and walked
away. He went out to his car and put it on and listened to the first two songs
and turned around and came back to find me, but I was gone. There was no phone
number on the tape. That Monday, he contacted Brenda's manager, and Brenda
called me to tell me he had heard it. The next day I went up to CBS with my mom,
and we talked he said he wanted to give me a record deal and put me on
Columbia.''

Baerwald's Stories

In ''Liberty Lies,'' an acerbic rock ballad on David Baerwald's first solo
album, ''Bedtime Stories'' (A&M), the Los Angeles singer and songwriter reflects
sarcastically on urban decay:

It's like walking through Rome
Tenements all torn apart
Instead of Nero
We got Madonna
She's fiddling with herself.

The song is one of the album's several stinging evocations of American society's
becoming unglued. ''Stranger,'' which is even angrier, is addressed to a Vietnam
veteran and offers alarming statistics about poverty, hunger, violence and
social inequity. Interwoven with the songs of social despair are descriptions of
failed relationships that carry the sense of disintegration into a personal
sphere.

''Bedtime Stories'' is the first record Mr. Baerwald has made since the duo
David and David (Mr. Baerwald and his former musical partner, David Ricketts)
called it quits shortly after their album ''Boomtown'' won them critical notice
in 1986.

The breakup came after Mr. Ricketts took six weeks off to produce Toni Childs's
debut album. Mr. Baerwald waited impatiently while those six weeks stretched
into two years.

''I was going gradually insane,'' recalled Mr. Baerwald. After the duo broke up,
Mr. Baerwald had to audition all over again for A&M, which signed him again as a
solo performer.

''I don't think you can write about big topics in a song, but you can try to use
a well-detailed small story as a microcosm of what's happening on a larger
scale,'' said the 29-year-old singer, who is performing next Tuesday evening at
the Bottom Line.

Mr. Baerwald said he was inspired more by Randy Newman than by any other
songwriter.

''He brought in the idea of using literary techniques, such as writing songs
that are strictly one-sided conversations,'' he said. ''He was also willing to
write from an unattractive place, taking a villain's standpoint and pulling it
off by being three-dimensional about it.''

Classical Jazz

A salute to the New Orleans jazz legend King Oliver and an evening of the music
of Jackie McLean will be two high points of the Lincoln Center Classical Jazz
series, which returns to Alice Tully Hall on Aug. 3 for its fourth season.

On opening night, an all-New Orleans band featuring Dr. Michael White, the
trumpeter Wynton Marsalis and his father, Ellis Marsalis, will perform a salute
to Oliver. The next evening, the alto saxophonist Jackie McLean will play with
his quartet and with an octet of musical colleagues performing original
arrangements of his music.

''Blowin' In From Chicago,'' on Aug. 6, will feature Johnny Griffin and Von
Freeman, two tenor saxophonists who exemplify the Chicago style. ''Good Vibes
With Benny Carter,'' the program on Aug. 7, will feature specially commissioned
new works by Mr. Carter for the Lincoln Center Classical Jazz Orchestra and the
vibraphonists Milt Jackson and Bobby Hutcherson.

The series will close with two evenings of Duke Ellington's orchestral music on
Aug. 8 and 9, performed by the orchestra under the direction of David Berger.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1990 The New York Times Company

                              237 of 288 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 June 14, 1990, Thursday, Late Edition - Final

IN THE NATION;
Home of the Brave?

BYLINE: By Tom Wicker

SECTION: Section A; Page 27, Column 1; Editorial Desk

LENGTH: 745 words


This week the President of the United States proposed an amendment to limit the
First Amendment to the Constitution, the American guarantee of freedom of
speech, assembly and religion.

This same week, a Federal judge in Florida found that the words of a rap hit
(1.7 million albums sold) were obscene, whereupon police arrested a retailer for
selling it and members of the group 2 Live Crew for singing it.

This week, too, Senator Jesse Helms, who is running for re-election in North
Carolina, and other protectors of the public complacence continued their efforts
to abolish or restrict the grants of the National Endowment for the Arts.

Thus, at the highest level, and in all three of its branches, officials of the
Federal Government sponsored efforts to diminish a fundamental American right:
freedom of expression.

The most threatening of these efforts to limit freedom is President Bush's
renewed assault on the First Amendment. The constitutional amendment he proposed
ostensibly would outlaw nothing but burning a flag; but that might restrain not
just free speech but free assembly, in the event more than one person should
join in the attempt, and possibly even free religion, if a church group should
be involved.

Besides, once the First Amendment is opened to restriction, as it never has been
in American history, who can say what others of its magisterial provisions might
fall before fearful and passionate majorities? Freedom of assembly, for example,
might well have been endangered during the difficult years of protest against
the Vietnam War had Presidents Johnson or Nixon surrendered to political
temptation as abjectly as has George Bush in the puerile case of flag-burning.

Mr. Bush is playing politics with the Bill of Rights, assuming that Republicans
will support his disreputable amendment and that in the fall elections the
public will punish any Democrat with the courage and patriotism to oppose it.

But most Americans who applaud Mr. Bush against the mighty danger of
flag-burning, as well as those who support the attempt in Florida to suppress 2
Live Crew, and those who agree that ''there ought to be a law'' against Federal
grants to sexually explicit or anti-religious art - most of these Americans are
motivated by nothing more elevated than fear.

Fear of sex? Hardly. Not when Eddie Murphy concert films, Andrew Dice Clay
performances, shelves full of skin magazines can flourish as they do - even in
Miami, where 2 Live Crew felt the force of the law. Not when advertising,
television, movies are drenched with sex, and no one in authority lifts an
eyebrow.

Fear of the overthrow of the Government? Ridiculous. A flag-burning in every
city every day might signal much discontent, but not even that would threaten
Mr. Bush's power. A few flags burning occasionally threaten literally nothing;
the exploitation and demeaning of the flag by sleazy merchants is more obnoxious
to many Americans.

Fear of a threat to religion? Not likely. Not in a country where an overwhelming
percentage of the population professes, if it does not always practice, a faith;
and where the phrase ''under God'' can be inserted into a supposedly secular
Pledge of Allegiance with something like unanimous consent.

Fear of art? This gets closer to a truth, as the likes of Senator Helms proclaim
their anxiety that the morals of youth be protected from certain photographs and
paintings; but museums, movies, the theater, orchestras - all demonstrate that
it's not art itself but only some art that arouses the protectors.

Fear of race? That's even closer, since 2 Live Crew is a black group singing
quintessentially black lyrics. But Eddie Murphy is black, too, and so is Richard
Pryor, and they also offend many sensibilities. The artists whose work most
specifically brought criticism on the N.E.A. are white.

All those fears may be at work, to some extent, as are the overwrought emotional
appeals of Mr. Bush, Mr. Helms and other clever politicians. But what really
threatens freedom of expression in America, now only more visibly than usual, is
the persisting fear of difference, and the willingness to be different, even to
be despised.

Political dissent, provocative or outrageous art and expression, social protest,
an insistence on the rights of the individual - all at some point strike fear
into the hearts of many who loudly extol the land of the free. But that land
cannot exist if it is not also the home of the brave.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: OP-ED

                   Copyright 1990 The New York Times Company

                              238 of 288 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 June 14, 1990, Thursday, Late Edition - Final

Excerpts From Durenberger's Senate Testimony

BYLINE: Special to The New York Times

SECTION: Section B; Page 10, Column 3; National Desk

LENGTH: 1823 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, June 13


Following are excerpts from testimony today by Senator Dave Durenberger,
Republican of Minnesota, before the Senate Ethics Committee, on the second day
of hearings into his financial activities, as supplied by the Federal News
Service, a transcription company:

This investigation and this hearing focuses on only a few years of the 55 years
of my life. While it may appear proper to talk about those years as if we could
somehow cleanly separate them and study them, there is much living that has
affected those years. And very briefly, let me give you some context.

I was born on the campus of the monastery of St. John's Abbey and University in
Collegeville, a second-generation Minnesotan. My father, the college athletic
director for 42 years; my mom, a superwoman, a mother, teacher and a volunteer.
I graduated from grade school, a two-roomer; high school, and college at St.
John's. St. John's is a Benedictine community, and the Benedictine motto is
''Work and pray.'' And I must say I learned those lessons well, as you'll see
during the course of this matter.

I spent time in the Army. I graduated from the University of Minnesota Law
School in 1959, and I joined a firm in South St. Paul. In 1962, I married Judy
McGlumphy. Our sons were born in 1963, 1964, 1965 and 1967. We discovered that
Judy had breast cancer at the birth of our youngest son, Danny, who happens to
be with me here today. She died three and a half years later at the age of 31.

At that time, I was serving as Gov. Harold Evander's chief of staff. Shortly
after Judy's death, I became H. B. Fuller Company's legal and community affairs
counsel, and I became active in the leadership of literally dozens of community
organizations.

Struggles With Family

Despite appearances, I was overwhelmed by the sadness and the daunting challenge
of raising four small sons under the age of 8. Within a year of Judy's death, I
met and married Penny Tuohy. She was a Vietnam War widow of a U.S. Marine
captain. Steve Tuohy was killed in the Tet offensive, and Penny undertook to
help raise these four boys. While she had her own cross to bear, she added five
more - of ours. With a mother lost to Charlie, David, Mike, and Danny, a husband
lost to Penny and a wife lost to me, sadness made bonding difficult in our
family.

Some of that sadness was acknowledged, but a lot of it was never dealt with. My
grief counseling was to throw myself into my work and yes, gentlemen, that was a
serious mistake but one I didn't know how to acknowledge.

I was elected to the U.S. Senate in 1978 and again, I threw myself into my work,
and, as you know, that's not hard to do around here. Over the past 12 years, I
have been extremely proud of representing the people of Minnesota handling their
constituent issues; helping develop legislation on national health policy,
intergovernmental relations, national security, tax reform, civil rights and
economic equity, the environment and, most recently, as you know so well, the
work on the Clean Air Act, the Pepper Commission, and the Americans with
Disabilities Act, among just a few -among many other areas.

Yes, there have been many ups and downs in my personal life. But I thank God for
the friends; staff, past and present; and the constituents who have supported
me. And I thank God especially for my family because they have remained the keys
in my daily life even after everything I've put them through.

Passion of Public Service

Yes, there have been good times and tough times in my career. But I want to tell
you that one thing remains constant, I believe deeply in public service. It's
been my vocation, it's been my passion and, sometimes, my refuge. And whatever
public service has cost me, including the opportunity for personal wealth, or,
for that matter, even financial security, it's been worthwhile. There are many
things in my life I would change if I could start over. The opportunity to serve
my community, whether on a park commission or in the United States Senate, is
not something I've ever regretted.

Hopefully, some sense of my past will now help inform the future. Yesterday's
presentation painted a very different portrait of me and my situation. And I
would say to the members of the committee that you can only accept Mr. Bennett's
characterization if you ignore four clear and undisputed historical facts.

My personal history includes three decades of public service requiring
substantial responsibility and integrity. . . .

Secondly, I have a strong background in ethics in government. I was the vice
chair of the Minnesota Ethical Practices Board and its predecessor, the
Minnesota Ethics Commission. I was executive director of the Minnesota
Constitutional Study Commission and the Minnesota Supreme Court Advisory
Committee on Professional Standards for Judges.

Third, none of the people involved with me in these matters can be described as
anything but upstanding. They are well-respected members of their communities.
They're not fast-buck or special interest operators.

To me, reprehensible is an appropriate word to characterize the suggestion that
these people would participate in the kind of scheme outlined by the Special
Counsel.

And fourth, all of these matters were done in the open and disclosed. There has
been no obfuscation or cover-up. And I must say, somebody called yesterday who
were watching my facial expressions or something like that when Bob Bennett got
to the point of the Piranha Press chewing up the prey or whatever it was. I
guess I got one of those facial expressions that said I was arrogant or
something like that.

But I must say, every time somebody brings up this notion of Piranha Press I
just have to say: Would anybody in their right mind believe that anybody was
going to cook up a scheme to evade U.S. Senate rules by going out and creating a
company called Piranha Press? No, Mr. Bennett's characterization flies in the
face of these well-known facts, and I would urge you to take into account these
facts as you weigh his conclusions.

Political Realities

Now I want to turn to several comments which reflect in a more personal way on
the facts my counsel has given to you. And first let me talk about what has come
to be known as the condo deal. Those Americans who argue for a citizen
legislature can look to me, for better or worse, to see some of the realities
that face someone who comes into public office relatively late in life. I was a
grass-roots activist, and what I knew about the mechanics of the Senate came
when I was told how much I could spend for my staff, given the keys to my
office, and my unabridged dictionary, and told good luck.

While I don't presume on this occasion and in this forum to offer myself as an
expert or a guide to my colleagues on the committee or in the Senate on the
subject of political ethics, there are a few personal thoughts that I need to
share.

It is with a great deal of sadness that I approach this proceeding and review my
own actions which have provoked them. The Senate is an institution I love. I've
come to love it. . . . To the extent my actions, my inactions, my failure to
perceive the consequences of my actions, have in any way reflected poorly on the
Senate as an institution, or been uncomfortable or distressful to you as a
person, I must say, I am sincerely sorry. I have tried to uphold and to
strengthen this institution. . . .

I've been careful not to abuse my rights, or my privileges, as a Senator, with
respect to allowing the Senate to work its will and get its business done, and I
think you've observed that. . . .

Proud of Work in Senate

I believe I've made a significant contribution to the work product of this
institution. I've taken my institutional responsibility very seriously to
protect the Senate's structure, and ease its operation. And that sense of the
value of the institutional responsibility, makes my sense of sadness over this
situation all the more acute.

As I've said, I was raised in a small town. I think when college was out it
wasn't more than about 200 people. The first 21 years of my life were in this
closely knit educational community. Other people's perceptions of what you did
weren't much of a factor in that kind of an environment, since we were all known
on a first-hand basis.

But those kinds of personal relationships can't exist in the larger public
arena. People must, of necessity, rely on other's views and impressions. And
that's when perception becomes a real factor. Appearances, I have learned, are
much more than a tool of public relations, in this business. They have ethical
consequences far greater than we usually attribute to them.

As Professor Thompson of Harvard testified to the House of Representatives, and
I'll quote him, Public officials have a ethical obligation to do all they can to
make sure that citizens do not have any reasonable basis for believing that they
or their colleagues are violating their own ethics rules.

There is an ethical obligation to protect the appearances of propriety almost as
great as to produce its reality, end quote.

What I have learned is simply that a clear conscience or a legal opinion does
not make you ethically bulletproof - a tough lesson to learn - a good lesson,
but it's tough to learn it the way I have. The difficulty for rules-driven
ethics is that it is difficult to write or to enforce a rule governing
appearances. It becomes quite difficult when ethics, like beauty, is in the eye
of the beholder.

Accountable for Mistakes

But let there be no misunderstanding of what I am saying. There's no excuse for
my actions to be found in changing public perceptions or in the way other
members conduct themselves. I am fully responsible, and I am accountable for the
mistakes that I have made. I am simply pointing out from my own experience that
the broader challenge of political ethics which we in this body will have to
address in campaign finance reform, limitations on honoraria, our associations
with nonprofit organizations, the proactive work that the Vice Chairman referred
to earlier of ethics, rules, disbursing, to inform and advise those and a host
of other issues.

Publc attitudes about political ethics have changed, and we have to change with
them or be swept aside.

In conclusion, members of the committee and the Senate and especially the people
of Minnesota, I want to express again my regret and my sadness for the
circumstances that have brought us to this point. I acted throughout in good
faith. I sought out competent legal and official advice. I worked too hard on
your public agenda to attend to my private one. Since my service to you began, I
have never sold your vote or bartered your influence to enrich myself.

But I recognize that real damage has been done, by what has been perceived as my
desire to push the limits and take advantage of the Senate. And for that, I am
deeply sorry.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Text

                   Copyright 1990 The New York Times Company

                              239 of 288 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                  June 15, 1990, Friday, Late Edition - Final

On Stage

BYLINE: By Enid Nemy

SECTION: Section C; Page 2, Column 3; Weekend Desk

LENGTH: 1084 words



Moving to the Front Burner

Cy Coleman, the composer who earlier this month won a Tony Award for ''City of
Angels,'' isn't resting on his laurels. He is working on ''Ziegfeld Presents
Will Rogers,'' but his immediate project is a showcase production of a musical
that has been on a back burner for 10 years. This situation isn't at all
strange, he said, because almost everything he works on - including ''City of
Angels'' - takes at least eight years.

The new-old piece, ''The Life,'' with lyrics by Ira Gasman and book by Mr.
Gasman and Mr. Coleman, is about prostitutes and pimps on 42d Street in the late
1960's and 70's. It will be produced by the Westbeth Theater Center, and Joe
Layton will direct.

''It's one of those slow growers, but all of a sudden it's becoming something to
be reckoned with,'' Mr. Coleman said. ''It's done from the inside of these
people - their life, their interaction, the way they function.'' He has written
16 songs for the production, which will have a cast of ''about 20,'' he said,
''and I think we've accomplished the Rainbow Coalition.'' Performances will
start the week of July 23.

As for Westbeth, Arnold Engelman, the producing director, said he hopes that
names like Coleman and Layton ''will attract others who want to do showcases of
musicals.''

Costumes for 'Shogun'

Patricia Zipprodt says that as far as she's concerned, ''it's a landmark, more
complicated than 'Tannhauser.' '' Miss Zipprodt, a 10-time Tony Award nominee
for costume design and three-time winner (for ''Fiddler on the Roof,''
''Cabaret'' and ''Sweet Charity'') is talking about ''Shogun,'' the $6 million
musical based on the James Clavell novel, scheduled to open in Washington on
Sept. 6 and in New York in mid-November. She and her staff are working on 300
costumes, most of them with five pieces and most of them Japanese. For the first
time in her experience (and she believes possibly the first in theater
generally) the 9,000 yards of fabric will be handpainted, silkscreened and
tie-dyed here from white fabrics, many of them, like brocades and silk gauze,
imported from Japan.

''These designs have nothing to do with the 'Pacific Overtures' and 'Madame
Butterfly' designs,'' said Miss Zipprodt, who is working with the Martin
Izquierdo Studio, one of the leading costume craft houses. ''This is a different
period, the Momoyama - much more free, more wild, more sensuous. To get the
right fabric, the right weave, the right weight and the right color would be
like looking for a needle in a haystack.'' Miss Zipprodt spent three weeks in
Japan, organizing contacts and visiting costume workrooms of Kabuki theater and
film companies to research fabrics used in 16th- and 17th-century plays. She
said her designs were inspired by paintings, period wall panels and museums.

More news on the ''Shogun'' front: Peter Karrie, who played the Phantom in the
London production of ''The Phantom of the Opera,'' and June Angela, whose
credits include a role in a 1977 Broadway revival of ''The King and I,'' will
co-star in the show.

From Seminary to Stage

Reathel Bean, who plays the taciturn father in ''Smoke on the Mountain'' at the
Lamb's Theater, finds it interesting to see how close he can get to himself
while playing a character ''and still keep that protective barrier.'' Mr. Bean
decided to become an actor while attending Union Theological Seminary in New
York. He had graduated from Drake University in Des Moines, Iowa, and was given
a grant to the seminary - ''a year for me to decide whether to go into the
ministry,'' he said. His decision before the year's end was that the ministry
was not for him but that the theater was, and off he went to theater classes at
the University of Iowa.

His first job in New York a year later was at the Judson Memorial Church in
Greenwich Village as janitor and handyman. ''I was a conscientious objector to
the Vietnam War, and it was my alternate service,'' he said. On his own time, he
also performed in shows at the church.

Now, as a family man, he finds theater hours the most difficult part of his
profession, he said.

''That's one of the reasons I think a play has to be fun,'' he said. ''You don't
get a lot of money, and you're working when others aren't. With those
conditions, you better have a good time doing the show or not do it.'' Madonna
as Evita?  ''Evita,'' which opened in New York in 1979, may finally make it as a
film. Madonna has long been interested in the title role, and Andrew Lloyd
Webber and Tim Rice, who co-wrote the musical, and Robert Stigwood, one of the
show's co-producers, are interested in her, said a spokesman for Mr. Lloyd
Webber. Mr. Lloyd Webber saw the rock star's ''Blond Ambition'' show in Los
Angeles, and Mr. Rice and Mr. Stigwood saw it this week on Long Island.

In the Wings

Beth Henley's new work, ''Signature,'' will open the New York Stage and Film
Company's summer season at the Powerhouse Theater at Vassar College in
Poughkeepsie, N.Y., with performances from June 29 through July 8. The cast of
the play, set in an American city in the year 2050, includes Carol Kane,
Christine Lahti and Mark Linn-Baker. . . . The cast of ''Prelude to a Kiss''
celebrated its new dressing rooms with a backstage party on Wednesday. The old
ones were destroyed by fire five weeks ago. . . . Mary McDonnell takes over the
title role in ''The Heidi Chronicles'' on July 2. . . . Pamela Blair will
replace Megan Gallagher in ''A Few Good Men'' on June 25. . . . Tonight
''Tamara'' celebrates its 1,000th performance in New York and its 2,500th in Los
Angeles. . . . A memorial service for Jack Gilford, who died on June 4, will be
held Thursday at 1 P.M. at the Plymouth Theater. . . . John Ford Noonan, who
wrote and is starring in ''Talking Things Over with Chekhov,'' at the Actors'
Playhouse, is working Sunday, as is his daughter, Jesse Sage Noonan, who is in
''Stay Away a Little Closer'' at the Ensemble Studio Theater. After their
respective performances, even though it's Father's Day, Mr. Noonan is playing
host to his daughter at dinner. Youth has its advantages: Jesse is 11 years old.
. . . ''What's Wrong With This Picture'' by Donald Margulies was presented in
New York five years ago, withdrawn by the author, reworked and then presented in
Los Angeles. Now the comedy about a Brooklyn family's attempt to cope with the
loss of its young matriarch is scheduled to open on Thursday at the Jewish
Repertory Theater, 344 East 14th Street (505-2667).

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Drawing

                   Copyright 1990 The New York Times Company

                              240 of 288 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                  June 15, 1990, Friday, Late Edition - Final

John Summerskill Is Dead at 65; Led San Francisco State in 60's

BYLINE: By GLENN FOWLER

SECTION: Section D; Page 18, Column 1; National Desk

LENGTH: 507 words


John Summerskill, an educator who was president of San Francisco State College
for two years when the campus was swept by political and social unrest in the
1960's, died yesterday at his home in Belle Mead, N.J. He was 65 years old. His
family said he died of liver cancer.

Dr. Summerskill, a clinical psychologist, was a teacher and administrator at
Cornell University for 15 years before being chosen in 1966 to head San
Francisco State.

At Cornell he conducted extensive research on student health and served as
professor of medical administration and director of the university's Sloan
Institute of Hospital Administration.

In 1958 he was appointed vice president for student affairs at Cornell, and he
subsequently reorganized student government in an effort to reduce growing
conflicts between students and administration officials.

Political Clashes With Reagan

As president of San Francisco State, along with other educators and heads of
state colleges and universities, he clashed with political leaders in
California, including its Governor, Ronald Reagan.

Dr. Summerskill, an early opponent of the United States role in the Vietnam War,
was criticized for failing to control violent student demonstrations. Less than
two years after becoming president of San Francisco State he was put on
probation by the trustees of the state college system. In May 1968, with campus
buildings occupied by a student sit-in, he resigned.

Dr. Summersill's successor, Dr. Robert R. Smith, was succeeded by Samuel I.
Hayakawa, the semantics professor who rose to national prominence by suppressing
disorders on the campus and eventually became a United States Senator from
California.

From 1968 to 1971 Dr. Summerskill lived and worked abroad, serving as a Ford
Foundation adviser at Haile Selassie University in Ethiopia before the Emperor,
Selassie I, was dethroned. Dr. Summerskill later traveled through Africa, the
Middle East and Asia for the Institute of Public Administration, examining the
work of family-planning agencies financed by the Population Council.

President of Athens College

In 1971 Dr. Summerskill became a vice president of the Educational Testing
Service in Princeton, N.J., with responsibility for operating the College Board
programs.

In 1979 he was named president of Athens College in Greece, a private
institution. Beginning early in the 1980's, Dr. Summerskill and his wife,
Miriam, returned each year to their farm in New Jersey to plant grapes to be
used in making wine.

In 1985 he resigned as president of Athens College to devote full time to his
vineyard and winery. He was president of the New Jersey Wine Growers Association
in 1989.

Besides his wife he is survived by two daughters, Kyle, of Ithaca, N.Y., and
Gail Cummins of Baltimore; a son, John, of New York; three stepsons, Richard
Wright of Princeton, William Wright of New York and Robert Wright of
Waterlooville, England; two stepdaughters, Helen Bodel of Watertown, Mass., and
Wendy Wright of Athens, and nine grandchildren.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Obituary

                   Copyright 1990 The New York Times Company

                              241 of 288 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 June 16, 1990, Saturday, Late Edition - Final

Who's Afraid of Foreign Ideas?

SECTION: Section 1; Page 20, Column 1; Editorial Desk

LENGTH: 334 words


Exposure to Western ideas helped undermine Communism in Eastern Europe. So it's
scarcely surprising that Communist regimes in Cuba, North Korea and Vietnam now
worry about infection from Western visitors, cultural imports and educational
exchanges. Perversely, U.S. law helps hard-liners exclude American ideas by
restricting the right of Americans to travel to these lands.

A worthy bill before the House would ease travel restrictions to countries where
Americans face no likely physical danger. It would also tighten travel barriers
where Americans face such risks. And it would reduce Washington's power to
restrict the entry of controversial films from abroad.

The bill, sponsored by Representative Howard Berman, a California Democrat, has
won support from Vietnam veterans but is opposed by many anti-Castro
Cuban-Americans. It awaits subcommittee action before the July 4 recess.

American citizens may travel legally to the five countries now under U.S.
economic embargo: Cuba, North Korea, Vietnam, Cambodia and Iran. But Americans
traveling to Cuba are barred from spending money there. And travel agencies and
private groups are prohibited from organizing tours to the three affected Asian
Communist countries.

No similar currency restrictions apply to Lebanon or Libya, where the risk of
kidnapping threatens travelers. Passport restrictions on travel to those
countries are too easily evaded. The Berman bill would fit U.S. travel
regulations to present realities. Currency restrictions would be applicable
where Americans are in actual danger.

The bill would also end a form of political censorship. The U.S. is bound by
treaty to permit free entry of films with an educational, scientific or cultural
character. But the U.S. Information Agency has restricted certain films based on
their political content. The bill would end that practice.

Mr. Berman has named his measure the Free Trade in Ideas Act of 1990. It's a
just description and its enactment would honor American law.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Editorial

                   Copyright 1990 The New York Times Company

                              242 of 288 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                  June 17, 1990, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

Boat People's Plight Seen as Likely to Worsen

BYLINE: By BARBARA BASLER, Special to The New York Times

SECTION: Section 1; Part 1, Page 13, Column 1; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 431 words

DATELINE: HONG KONG, June 16


Despite a dramatic drop in the number of Vietnamese boat people seeking asylum
here and in other parts of Southeast Asia in recent months, Hong Kong officials
and international relief workers said this week that they expected to see scores
of the fragile Vietnamese boats pushed back to sea this summer by angry Asian
governments.

''Hong Kong will continue to be a port of first asylum, accepting anyone who
lands here, but other countries -Malaysia, for example - have already begun to
push off Vietnamese boats, and that means that people are going to die,''
Michael Hanson, Hong Kong's refugee coordinator, said. He added that the heart
of the problem was the refusal by the United States to agree to the forcible
return of Vietnamese judged not to be genuine refugees fleeing religious or
political persecution.

All countries involved in the Indochina refugee question agreed last year in
Geneva to a comprehensive plan of action. This calls for Western countries to
take larger numbers of Vietnamese for resettlement, and for asylum countries to
accept all boat people arriving on their shores, screen them and hold those
deemed not to be genuine refugees in detention centers until they can be
returned.

In January of this year, all countries involved in the plan, except the United
States and Vietnam, also agreed that those screened out should be forcibly
returned home. Washington still insists that those screened out should be given
more time to return home voluntarily.

But Mr. Hanson explained, ''We agreed in January to continue first asylum only
if we had the right to forcibly repatriate those who did not meet the criteria
of genuine refugees.''

The United States, which has consistently opposed forced repatriation, ''has
jeopardized the whole plan,'' he said, adding that countries now seem to be
seeking their own solutions.

For the last two weeks, in protest over the American position on forced
repatriation, the Philippines, which automatically accepted Vietnamese, has
refused to allow 255 boat people rescued at sea by two American ships to
disembark. On Thursday, the Government there allowed all 255 to leave the ships
after the United Nations agreed to resettle them within three years.

The United States has argued that forced repatriation is out of the question now
because Vietnam is likely to persecute those who are returned.

About 2,500 Vietnamese in Hong Kong have been voluntarily returned to Vietnam
under a United Nations program begun in March 1989. But Mr. Hanson said:
''Voluntary repatriation, alone, will never solve the problem.''

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1990 The New York Times Company

                              243 of 288 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                  June 17, 1990, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

VIETNAM MOVIES;
Recollections Of a Combat Medic

SECTION: Section 2; Page 3, Column 1; Arts and Leisure Desk

LENGTH: 318 words


To the Editor:

Thomas Bird evoked familiar recollections in me of growing up in a victorious
postwar America two generations before his. We went ''over the top'' from
simulated trenches and slew innumerable Germans from about 1920 to 1932 despite
the Hollywood attempts to show the horror of combat in ''What Price Glory?'' and
''The Big Parade.'' The men portrayed were heroes and were part of an effort to
make the world safe for democracy. We were taught that the ''war to end war''
had been fought in 1914-18. Despite this we played at war and dreamed heroic
deeds.

Not until somewhere in the 30's, possibly after ''All Quiet on the Western
Front,'' did it finally penetrate my soul that dying in a hole in the ground was
not always heroic. There was also a gnawing feeling of concern for an enemy that
might be human. However, after Pearl Harbor I volunteered and served in the
southwest Pacific with the 20th Infantry Regiment as a combat medic.

We World War II veterans also were terrified, saw brains spill out of friends'
heads, bellies eviscerated, and the loss of personhood, along with atrocities on
all sides. We shared the same emotions as did Thomas Bird and his brothers in
arms. It is not the selective rejection by society of the Nam veteran that is
the cause of any emotional dysfunction, nor can the film world heal or evoke
guilt in our population. It may be a medium that properly used can provoke
serious thought eventually. However, as is the case with mourning, each one of
us combat veterans must go through the process of achieving solace in his own
fashion. Mere repression, which too many of us try to achieve, is not healing.
Mr. Bird faced the truth in himself and appears to me to have achieved some
peace through creativity.

GEORGE SHARPE, M.D.
  Kensington, Md.

The writer is the author of the recently published ''Brothers Beyond Blood''
(Diamond Books).

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Letter

                   Copyright 1990 The New York Times Company

                              244 of 288 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                  June 17, 1990, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

VIETNAM MOVIES;
A Plea For Remorse

SECTION: Section 2; Page 3, Column 2; Arts and Leisure Desk

LENGTH: 224 words


To the Editor:

At last! Thomas Bird's article and its conclusion - ''We need to show remorse to
all the Vietnamese. . . . We need movies in which the Vietnamese are in the
forefront. We still owe them a peace.'' - touched my heart.

Up until now I have sensed little American remorse, either in movies about that
war or in veterans I've spoken with, about the devastation left behind in
Vietnam by Americans. Agent Orange, for example, introduced, after all, by
Americans for the defoliation of that land, apparently only affected American
G.I.'s: nowhere have I seen statistics on cancer deaths or genetic harm done to
generations of Vietnamese people. And there has been little censure for the
sexual irresponsibility of American G.I.'s, who produced thousands of
Amerasians, most of whom, rejected, still live on the streets.

Through the experience of setting up a dental-surgery clinic in a
Vietnamese-Cambodian refugee camp in the Philippines, my husband and I came to
love these stoic, gentle people, and to realize the depth of their suffering.
Thomas Bird was fortunate enough to be able to return to Vietnam to try to
redress some of these grievances. Would that our Government would do more in
that direction, and more Vietnam veterans acknowledge and nourish that need for
more action.

JOAN B. MCNALLY
  Longmeadow, Mass.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Letter

                   Copyright 1990 The New York Times Company

                              245 of 288 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                  June 17, 1990, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

VIETNAM MOVIES;
Quieting Ghosts

SECTION: Section 2; Page 3, Column 1; Arts and Leisure Desk

LENGTH: 121 words


To the Editor:

It seems I've been waiting for 20 years for Thomas Bird's article about Vietnam
[''Man and Boy Confront the Images of War'' [May 27]. All through the loony,
crazy fights here on the home front, it was impossible to say: Yes, I mourn our
dead and wounded, but I also weep for the thousands of Vietnamese who are being
mangled and tortured and killed. That was tantamount to treason - to mourn the
enemy. The East Germans have expressed their grief to the Jews; the Russians are
fumbling toward remorse toward the Poles. When, I wonder, will the United States
Government be generous and compassionate enough to say to Vietnam: We were
wrong, and we are sorry''?

GABRIELLE BERNARD
  Winsted, Conn.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Letter

                   Copyright 1990 The New York Times Company

                              246 of 288 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                  June 17, 1990, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

BUSINESS DIARY

BYLINE: By ALLEN R. MYERSON

SECTION: Section 3; Page 2, Column 3; Financial Desk

LENGTH: 1681 words



COMPANIES

A New Game at Trump's Tables

Donald J. Trump had better hope he can bargain better than he can run a casino.
He failed on Friday to pay about $40 million due on ''junk bonds'' and another
$30 million on bank loans that financed his purchase of Trump's Castle Hotel and
Casino in Atlantic City. In 1987, he called it ''one of the most successful
hotel-casinos in the world.'' By Friday, it was a money-loser subject to being
taken from Mr. Trump's control. But he might just wriggle free of his problems
for the time being. He has 10 days of grace after missing his payments. And the
bankers were said to be close to reaching an agreement with him. In return for a
stake in his properties, they would give him more time and money while he tries
to sell off some possessions. Mr. Trump must be well aware that the bankers have
every reason to keep him afloat. Even the bondholders are better secured than
some of the bankers. And who's to blame Mr. Trump for a few delays in sending a
check? After all, he's celebrating his 44th birthday late, too. He marked the
actual date on Thursday by having lunch at his Plaza Hotel with his wife, Ivana.
The real bash waited for Saturday, at Trump's Castle.

Boeing's Burgeoning Backlog

How to reduce the trade deficit: Figure out a way for Boeing to work off its
entire, $80 billion-plus backlog this year. Boeing jets are one American product
that foreigners can't get enough of. Korea Air Lines agreed last week to buy 23
long-range 747-400's for almost $5 billion, but delivery won't begin until 1994.
The company recently announced sales to China and Japan totaling more than $5
billion. Peter L. Aseritis, an analyst at First Boston, calls Boeing ''far and
away America's largest industrial exporter.'' Mr. Aseritis worries that the
stock - up almost 50 percent last year and 50 percent so far this year - is
outrunning its immediate earnings prospects. But the unanticipated size of the
Korean and Chinese orders has prompted him to raise his estimate of Boeing's
year-end backlog by $10 billion, to a total of $100 billion.

Time-Warner Adjusts Sights

TV-Cable Week cost $45 million before it closed. Picture Week, $30 million. Time
Warner's latest new magazine, Entertainment Weekly, has cost about $40 million
so far. It remains open, but with a new direction and, last week, a new managing
editor. Jeff A. Jarvis, who favored tough reviews and highbrow subjects - one
cover featured books about Vietnam - quit last week. His replacement, James W.
Seymore, has been the executive editor of People magazine, a wildly successful
Time Warner publication. The new formula at Entertainment Weekly is already
evident: More celebrities. The more obvious, the better. Madonna, for instance.
But with advertising off for most magazines, some analysts still wonder whether
Entertainment Weekly will have a long run.

S.&L.-Based Indictment

As Don R. Dixon once explained in a California bankruptcy court, he did indeed
spend funds from the Vernon Savings and Loan Association on a Ferrari. But it
was no luxury car. ''It was a family Ferrari,'' he said, with four seats and an
automatic transmission. Now the Government also wants him to explain how
Vernon's deposits paid for political contributions, the rent on a California
beach house and companions for Vernon executives and their guests. Mr. Dixon,
Vernon's principal owner, was indicted by a Federal grand jury last week on 38
criminal charges. Examiners have said that the rescue of his failed Texas
savings institution will probably cost taxpayers $1.3 billion.

In Brief

Kohlberg, Kravis, Roberts & Company has dispatched an ambulance for RJR Holdings
Inc. and its sickly bonds. The Kohlberg, Kravis medics raised $1.7 billion for
an emergencycash infusion. As news of the planned treatment came out on
Thursday, the company's ''junk bonds'' revived, with two issues each gaining $7
per $100 of face value. Operations and asset sales have been going fine at RJR -
the largest leveraged buyout in history - but the junk bond market has been
ailing.

*

Martin A. Siegel, a former takeover expert at Kidder Peabody, was sentenced
Friday to two months in prison and five years of probation on insider trading
charges.

THE ECONOMY

Big Board - 24-Hour Day . . .

The city that never sleeps might have a stock exchange that doesn't either. The
New York Stock Exchange has decided to hustle to keep from losing more business
to Tokyo and London. A plan announced by John J. Phelan Jr., the exchange's
chairman, would bring about 24-hour trading over several years and in several
stages. Later this year, two brief trading sessions will be added after the
normal hours. The next phases would involve stock auctions during the night,
then rudimentary night trading, then continuous all-night action. The subplot
here might be titled ''The Twilight of the Specialists.'' The specialists -
princely floor traders who now handle every transaction - might be reduced to
quaint figures showing up for six-and-a-half hours a day while computers conduct
the exchange's business for the other 17 1/2. The specialists were among those
blamed for the chaos when the market crashed in 1987.

. . . And Trading Halts Too?

When the game gets tough, the New York Stock Exchange might well call a
time-out. A panel it created after stocks plunged last October recommended
trading halts timed in proportion to the market's volatility. After a 50-point
rise or fall, index arbitrage would be virtually banned; 100 points, and all
trading of stocks, futures and options would cease for an hour; 400 points, and
the markets would close for the day. Several Wall Street executives said the
restrictions would probably prevent another crash. But some said that investors
would simply switch their trades to foreign exchanges - even as the New York
market is planning to stay open at night to recapture the trading it has already
lost.

Cheaper by the West

''City of spires and masts,'' Walt Whitman called New York more than a century
ago. ''The countless masts, the white shore-steamers, the lighters, the
ferry-boats, the black sea-steamers well-model'd.'' These days, Whitman might be
more in awe of Los Angeles, which overtook New York last year as the nation's
busiest port. Los Angeles handled cargo worth $55 billion; New York, $49
billion. New York's port has suffered from high handling costs, a lack of
manufacturing exports, growth along the Pacific Rim and traffic that delays
trucks heading to the ships. Even cargo bound for the Eastern United States
often bypasses New York. Asian shippers can find it cheaper to unload their
goods onto trains in Los Angeles than to go through the Panama Canal and New
York.

The Trouble With Trade

The nation's trade deficit shrank to $6.9 billion in April from $8.4 billion the
month before - but for the wrong reasons. The figures probably say more about
the weakness of America's economy than the competitiveness of its producers.
Exports fell 3.5 percent to $32.3 billion, but imports fell even more, 6.2
percent to $39.3 billion. Lincoln F. Anderson, an economist at Bear, Stearns,
called the lower exports ''disappointing'' but said that the dollar's weakness
against European currencies might improve exports in the coming months.

Inflation Watch

Inflation is back down below the irksome levels of the first quarter. Producer
prices rose three-tenths of 1 percent and consumer prices two-tenths of 1
percent in May - in line with expectations but still pleasing to most
economists. Though the figures reflect a slowing economy, said Allen Sinai,
chief economist at the Boston Company, a healthy six-tenths of 1 percent rise in
industrial production last month is likely to keep the Federal Reserve from
easing interest rates. ''For manufacturing, the worst is over,'' he said. ''If
the Fed can hang on, and the economy doesn't cave in, the Fed's strategy of
bringing inflation down ought to work.''

In Brief

A Federal appeals court threw out the Securities and Exchange Commission's ''one
share one vote'' rule that has kept companies from countering hostile takeovers
by issuing shares with extra voting rights.

*

Retail sales fell seven-tenths of 1 percent in May, the third straight monthly
decline.

INTERNATIONAL

Bush and Salinas Reverse Roles

The United States has long urged Mexico to join in a free-trade market ''from
the Yukon to the Yucatan.'' Mexico, fearful of economic domination, has long
resisted. But last week, Mexican President Carlos Salinas de Gortari called on
President Bush to say that a trade agreement was the only way to compete with
economic blocs coalescing in Europe and the Far East. President Bush responded
coolly, endorsing the concept but initiating no talks. Prof. Robert A. Pastor of
Emory University, a former director of Latin American affairs for the National
Security Council, called it another of the ironic reversals so frequent in the
history of relations between Mexico and the United States. ''The U.S. and
Mexican presidents have exchanged roles,'' he said. ''Now it's the Mexican
President who's eager to move rapidly, and the U.S. President who's dragging his
feet.'' To help overcome likely opposition from Democrats and organized labor,
Professor Pastor recommends that President Bush quickly appoint a prominent
Democrat to negotiate a pact. Otherwise, he said, the foes of free trade in
Mexico might regain their sway.

In Brief

Soviet President Mikhail S. Gorbachev got a strong lesson in democracy last
week. The Soviet Parliament soundly rejected his plan to triple bread prices
this summer. But the lawmakers - and lawmakers they now are - did give Mr.
Gorbachev authority to break up Government monopolies and stimulate private
enterprise.

*

France's finance minister blocked a bid by Giancarlo Parretti, the Italian
financier, to take full control of Pathe-Cinema, a leading French film company.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photos: Trump's Castle, its bonds in a bind (Ray Fisk for The New York
Times); President Salinas; Don R. Dixon, S.&L. questions; graphs; imports,
exports and trade deficit, Nov. 1989-April 1990 (Source: Commerce Dept.);
monthly percent changes inconsumer prices, June, 1989-May 1990 (Source: Bureau
of Labor Statistics)

                   Copyright 1990 The New York Times Company

                              247 of 288 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                  June 17, 1990, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

Travel Advisory

SECTION: Section 5; Page 3, Column 1; Travel Desk

LENGTH: 1168 words



Oberammergau Ticket Frauds Are Reported     BONN

At least three cases involving a total of 29,000 fraudulent vouchers or
fraudulent promises for tickets for the Oberammergau Passion Play have been
uncovered, according to the Mayor of Oberammergau, Clement Fend. ''We think that
we now have the bulk of the problem in hand,'' he added.

The daylong pageant depicting the Easter story is performed in the Bavarian
village the first year of every decade. In an effort to prohibit the printing of
fraudulent tickets this year, officials in Oberammergau allowed travel agencies
and tour organizations to issue vouchers for tickets to be picked up in
Oberammergau. A total of 450,000 legitimate vouchers, 40 percent to foreign
countries, were issued for the 98 performances from May 21 to Sept. 30. About
300,000 tickets were combined with overnight stays and meals as packages.

The frauds involved a hotel owner in Oberammergau who promised 19,000 tickets he
did not have to two travel agencies in London, and a travel agency in Innsbruck
who distributed 10,000 fraudulent vouchers to other agencies.

Mr. Fend said he had no knowledge of fraudulent vouchers going to agencies in
the United States, but advised travelers wanting to confirm a voucher's validity
to call the community's tourist office, the Verkehrsburo der Gemeinde
Oberammergau at 1021 (the area code for Oberammergau is 8822). They should be
ready to give the date of performance and the name of the agency issuing the
voucher. Mayor Fend issued a plea to travelers to report any frauds to the
police and to press charges whenever possible. ''We are appalled by this scandal
and want to be sure that the perpetrators don't get away with it,'' he said.

Some fraud victims have lined up early at the box office - it opens daily at 8
A.M. - to buy returned tickets for that day's performance.    ADELE RIEPE

Visa-Free Cruise To Estonia

Another opening in the Iron Curtain was established this month with the
introduction of the first scheduled cruise service since World War II between
Stockholm and Tallinn, capital of Estonia. The crossings are aboard the Nord
Estonia, which carries up to 1,600 passengers and 300 cars and is operated by
Estline, a joint Swedish-Estonian company. Passengers do not need Soviet visas
if they sleep on board the ship when it is docked in Tallinn and return to
Stockholm on the same sailing. The year-round service departs Stockholm on
Monday, Wednesday and Friday and leaves Tallinn Tuesday, Thursday and Sunday.
The one-way crossing takes about 14 1/2 hours.

Cabin rates range from $95 to $197 a person, in double occupancy, one way. In
addition to the ferry trips, the ship's American representative, EuroCruises
(Post Office Box 30925, New York, N.Y. 10011; 212-691-2099 or 800-688-3876)
offers packages of three days or more that include meals and sightseeing, with
or without hotel. A three-day visa-free tour costs from $234 to $423 a person; a
hotel - for which a visa is required - is $60 to $90 a person more. A five-day
trip, which includes two nights at a hotel in Tallinn, starts at $242.

A Rail Roundup From Europe

French National Railroads has begun work on a 64-mile line to connect all T.G.V.
high-speed trains in the Paris metropolitan area and eliminate much of the
train-changing required in the city. The new system, when completed in 1994,
will, for example, allow passengers arriving at Charles de Gaulle Airport to
reach Marseilles in four hours. They would travel directly to Marseilles from a
station being built at the airport. Now, taking a taxi from the airport to the
Gare de Lyon and traveling to Marseilles by train takes at least six hours.

Greek Railways says it now has trains running at 100 miles an hour on the
Athens-Salonika route, linking the two cities in six and a quarter hours
compared with more than seven hours on older equipment.

New equipment on the Stavanger and Egersund line in Norway will reduce the
journey this summer to 55 minutes from the present time of an hour and 20
minutes.

Austria is introducing an office-in-compartment service, a folding table in a
first-class compartment, on some of the new trains going into service this
summer.

Warnings on China and Vietnam     BEIJING

Summer travelers to China will find that the police - uniformed and undercover -
are tense and ubiquitous, and some of them have assaulted foreign tourists. The
risk is slight, but it is important to be aware that the police may rough up
foreigners who attract their suspicion. Tourists are still welcome, but
authorities are worried about dissident activities before the fall, when Beijing
is host to the Asian Games.

Recently, tourists have had their film confiscated and their cameras damaged.
One Italian tourist filming at Tiananmen Square was shoved from behind and
knocked to the ground. Foreign students studying in China, as well as
journalists, have been beaten up outside Beijing University.

Generally, such incidents have occurred in two places: Tiananmen Square and the
university district. There is nothing illegal about photographing the square,
and hundreds of people do so every day. It is also legal to visit the university
district. But tourists lingering in the square, especially those with
sophisticated cameras, may be suspected of being journalists. If anyone demands
your film, whether in uniform or plain clothes, giving it up immediately is the
best way to avoid being beaten or detained. It is also best to avoid visiting
the university district, particularly Beijing University, after dusk.

The atmosphere is not as tense elsewhere in China. However, some travelers have
had their pockets picked, especially in the central city of Xian, where tourists
go to see the terra cotta soldiers. Several tourists have reported that their
purses or knapsacks were slashed by razor blades.     SHERYL WuDUNN

United States citizens who travel to Vietnam may be placed under surveillance by
Vietnamese security agencies simply because they are Americans, the State
Department warns. Failure to present a valid passport and visa or to comply with
Vietnamese regulations, or to act in a way deemed suspicious, ''could lead to
the arrest and detention of both the American traveler and his or her Vietnamese
contacts, relatives or friends,'' the department says in a travel advisory. The
warning was issued after an American was detained in Vietnam for two weeks last
month for reasons that were never explained, according to a State Department
spokeswoman.

There is no assurance that the Vietnamese authorities would inform the U.S.
Government or allow its represenatives access to detained Americans, the
department adds, because the United States does not have official relations with
Vietnam and cannot provide consular protective services to Americans there. In
the case of the detained American, consular officials had to get information
through intermediaries in Bangkok, the spokeswoman said.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo: Tourists and soldiers in Tiananmen Square in May. (Catherine
Henriette/Agence France-Presse); Map of the Western Russia Area; Chart listing
money changes in London.

                   Copyright 1990 The New York Times Company

                              248 of 288 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                  June 17, 1990, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

VOICES AT THE WALL

SECTION: Section 6; Page 8, Column 3; Magazine Desk

LENGTH: 121 words


Whenever I read about the Vietnam Veterans Memorial, I am reminded of the
negative uproar Yale architectural student Maya Lin's design generated when it
was first revealed in 1981 (''Memorial Day 1990: Voices at the Wall,'' by
Michael Norman, May 27). Many Vietnam veterans demanded a more traditional
monument - a realistic statue similar to those erected for other American
conflicts. They won approval for the bronze monument of three comrades-in-arms
that now faces the wall, even as Lin's polished black granite wall was being
erected.

How ironic that, after all that, Lin's memorial is now ''the most visited site
in the Capitol city.'' We owe her a debt of gratitude.

LLOYD S. HOWARD
  Millwood, N.Y.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Letter

                   Copyright 1990 The New York Times Company

                              249 of 288 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                  June 17, 1990, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

THE BEST AND THE ANGRIEST

BYLINE: By SARA M. EVANS; Sara M. Evans is the author of ''Born for Liberty: A
History of Women in America.''

SECTION: Section 7; Page 18, Column 2; Book Review Desk

LENGTH: 1177 words



AN AMERICAN ORDEAL
The Antiwar Movement of the Vietnam Era.
By Charles DeBenedetti.
Charles Chatfield, assisting author.
Illustrated. 495 pp. Syracuse:
Syracuse University Press.
Cloth, $49.50. Paper, $16.95.

The antiwar movement of the Vietnam era was a sprawling, amorphous, seemingly
chaotic mass phenomenon. That the movement was able to mobilize sustained public
dissent for nearly a decade represents a major achievement. In the process it
shaped a generation that was already destined, by its sheer size and the nature
of its historical moment, to leave a deep mark on American culture.

The exhaustive research and 1,100-page original draft of a history of the
antiwar movement, ''An American Ordeal,'' was done by Charles DeBenedetti, a
professor of history at the University of Toledo. Upon his death in 1987,
Charles Chatfield, a professor of history at Wittenberg University, undertook to
rewrite, shorten by half and complete the book. The result is far too mired in
detail and occasionally repetitious. Yet the detail itself gains a kind of power
as the reader begins to share the movement's frustration at the seeming
endlessness of the war and at its own internal factiousness. The strength of
''An American Ordeal'' lies in its detailed chronicle of the interaction between
the antiwar movement and the United States Government.

In the midst of multiplying organizations, personality conflicts, turf fights
and deep schisms over tactics, there were always two distinct strategic and
ideological tendencies, one liberal and one radical. One of the values of ''An
American Ordeal'' is its painstaking charting of the pre-Vietnam existence and
the revival after 1969 of a liberal peace movement focused on working through
existing political channels and electoral politics.

Before the Vietnam War galvanized American politics, signs of a new peace
movement had already emerged around issues like the test-ban treaty, disarmament
and disengagement from the cold war. Its liberal and radical wings differed
fundamentally in their definitions of broad strategic issues and goals, but they
shared a moral language, one that shaped the discourse of the antiwar movement.
The cold-war threat of nuclear holocaust, combined with the hypermoral rhetoric
in which tensions between the United States and Russia were cast as a cosmic
battle of good versus evil, democracy versus tyranny, set the stage for a
protracted conflict not only over specific policies but, more important, over
the most deeply held American values.

The authors document the dilemma of liberals during the Administration of Lyndon
B. Johnson, who perceived dissent on the war as a threat to social and civil
rights legislation. Forced to swallow guns with their butter, the antiwar
liberals would not open up the political process for a full-scale debate as the
war escalated. As a result, protest was forced outside of political channels -
not because radicals disdained them but because the channels themselves were
blocked. The moral claims of a liberal Government contrasted with the growing
devastation of war only heightened protesters' outrage and alienation.

The moralistic quality of the movement's language further intensified as Richard
Nixon began to withdraw American troops and ''Vietnamize'' the war. In this
period a small minority's penchant for symbolic violent acts increased the
hostility of a public that was itself deeply disenchanted with the war. This
enormous gap between the public's discomfort with the war and its antipathy for
the movement itself remained ''the abiding irony of the antiwar opposition.''

This irony, however, points to some of the cultural meanings and impact of the
antiwar movement that ''An American Ordeal'' is much less successful in
exploring. The antiwar movement brought about a profound cultural transformation
characterized by the deep estrangement of American youth and expressed in the
diverse arenas of black nationalism, women's liberation and counterculture
ferment. The authors, clearly sympathetic to the liberal wing's pragmatic use of
traditional political channels, find the confluence of the antiwar movement with
civil rights and student movements irksome. This ad hoc coalition muddied
protests by blending opposition to this specific war (or to aspects such as
troop escalation or bombing) with domestic critiques about the failures of
American society toward blacks, women, students and the poor. It also meant that
leadership of the antiwar movement tended to be highly fluid. Organizations
frequently shifted their focus of activity and new organizations continually
emerged at the grass roots. By 1970 the antiwar movement had grown to more than
1,200 associations from a few dozen in 1960.

As long-term peace activists and pacifists drew on the energies of an emerging
generation, they also absorbed that generation's struggle to redefine manhood
and womanhood. But the deepening gender crisis is completely omitted from ''An
American Ordeal.'' The problem here is not simply that the leadership focus of
the book leads to an overrepresentation of male leaders (both in the text and in
the accompanying photos). The protest movement itself was an extraordinarily
gendered phenomenon.

Several women's groups continued a long peace movement tradition of criticizing
war from the nurturant perspective of motherhood. But ''An American Ordeal''
offers little sense of the internal dynamics of these groups, most notably
Women's Strike for Peace and Another Mother for Peace, despite detailed
descriptions of leadership battles within SANE, Americans for Democratic Action
and the National Mobilization to End the War in Vietnam. Women's groups had a
longstanding critique of militarism as a distorted expression of male
aggressiveness. This received a new twist in the 60's as young men used the
antiwar movement itself as a vehicle for anxieties about gender and cultural
definitions of manhood. The symbolic act of draft card burning signaled a
rejection of a traditional rite of passage into manhood and opened resisters to
charges of cowardice. These anxieties, combined with the continuing frustration
of a diffuse movement that could never be sure it was having an impact, at least
partly explains the symbolic extremities, apocalyptic expectations and violent
fantasies of many militants. The resulting hyper-machismo of the later New Left,
in turn, heightened the alienation of younger women who, critical of any
approach emphasizing women's roles as mothers and wives, spun off into a
separate women's liberation movement. ''An American Ordeal'' virtually ignores
this dimension of the peace movement.

It is difficult to know how the 60's would have ended without the war. The
antiwar movement extended what we think of as the 60's well into the 70's. In
''An American Ordeal'' we sense the strangeness of a successful movement that
continually felt like failure, a movement that forced an end to a disastrous war
over the course of a decade and ended up defining a generation.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Review

                   Copyright 1990 The New York Times Company

                              250 of 288 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                  June 17, 1990, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

IN SHORT: NONFICTION;
WHAT WENT WRONG, WHAT TO DO

BYLINE: By CORY DEAN

SECTION: Section 7; Page 16, Column 3; Book Review Desk

LENGTH: 319 words


PERIL AND PROMISE: A Commentary on America. By John Chancellor. (Harper & Row,
$17.95.) As John Chancellor, the television commentator, looks at the United
States, he sees a country facing a complex and competitive world with great
power but failing confidence. This loss of faith results, he writes, from
''years of hopes raised and hopes dashed'' - defeat in the ''moral blunder'' of
Vietnam, the Arab oil embargo, Watergate, the hostage crisis, inflation and the
''wanton mismanagement of the nation's finances.'' The result of this moral,
political and financial battering, he writes, was the Reaganism of the 1980's
and its greed, its emphasis on short-term profits, its falling savings and
rising debt, and the feeling that we will be even worse off in the future. But
this country is still No. 1, he writes. It can remain No. 1, and there is no
reason why it shouldn't be. Mr. Chancellor offers several remedies, like
all-year schooling, compulsory national service, Congressional campaign reform,
a Government ''technology policy'' to aid research and development, a means test
for Social Security. None are new; even his most startling idea, the abolition
of Presidential primaries and the return of the nominating process to the
convention floor, has been proposed before. But they are interesting ideas, and
it is disappointing that Mr. Chancellor did not devote more time to them. People
who have been paying attention to current events may find little to engage them.
But the book seems to be aimed at the people who aren't paying attention. It is
written in such simple language and assumes so little knowledge on the part of
the reader that some may find it off-putting. On the other hand, if it's true
that 24 million Americans cannot find their own country on a map, many people
need such a user-friendly book. If they can be induced to read it, they will
find it valuable and interesting.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo: John Chancellor in 1985. (NBC)

TYPE: Review

                   Copyright 1990 The New York Times Company

                              251 of 288 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                  June 18, 1990, Monday, Late Edition - Final

EVOLUTION IN EUROPE;
SECURITY AGENCY DEBATES NEW ROLE: ECONOMIC SPYING

BYLINE: By MICHAEL WINES, Special to The New York Times

SECTION: Section A; Page 1, Column 3; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 1551 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, June 17


Facing the decline of the Soviet military threat, the National Security Agency
is debating plans to shift its global electronic eavesdropping network to other
activities, including spying on world trade and financial transactions,
Government officials and intelligence experts say.

The agency is already considering reducing some of its Soviet operations, but
any further shift would mark a basic change of mission for an organization whose
foremost duty since its formation 38 years ago has been to warn of a Soviet
military strike against Europe or the United States.

The National Security Agency, the largest of the nation's intelligence agencies,
gathers all the intelligence derived from radio signals, telephones and other
electronic communications. It is formally an agency of the Pentagon, but it
coordinates its activities with the Central Intelligence Agency, whose director
reports to the President in the Cabinet.

Some Eavesdropping May Rise

Senior officials of the National Security Agency, led by its director, Vice Adm.
William O. Studeman, began this spring to draft a proposal to redefine its
activities in light of the political and military upheaval in the Soviet Union
and Eastern Europe, Government officials and private experts said.

Officials stressed that the agency must continue to monitor Soviet military and
political developments as long as the Soviet Union remains a nuclear superpower
and maintains the largest military force in Asia. In fact, some eavesdropping
may well increase as political and social instability rises in Russia and its
surrounding republics, they said.

But the officials said the emerging battles for economic primacy among Western
nations and multinational companies - and not military rivalries - offer by far
the most promising prospects for the agency's future activities.

Economic Might, Not Military

Among both senior intelligence officials and those in Congress who oversee their
activities, the Soviet military retreat has given rise to a belief that American
security now rests more in economic strength than in armed might. The temptation
to use espionage as a weapon in the world's trade wars is fast becoming the
hottest issue in intelligence circles.

Officials say the National Security Agency's discussions raise fundamental
questions about the fairness of such tactics and their practicality. Even if the
United States could set aside ethical objections to industrial espionage, there
are legal barriers to disclosing such information and serious questions of which
American companies should receive it - if, in fact, major companies with
factories worldwide and joint ventures abroad can any longer be identified as
American. Spying on Allies? The issue is especially delicate because some of the
most attractive targets of economic espionage could well be companies or
Government agencies of nations militarily allied with the United States, both in
Western Europe and in Asia, notably Japan. Many of those nations are now
believed to spy on American corporations.

''The real issue is do you want United States intelligence to steal the
proprietary secrets of foreign nations,'' a Government official said. ''It's
fundamentally anathema to our way of life. We don't do business this way.''

Industrialized nations, including the United States, routinely collect economic
intelligence on their allies. The National Security Agency gathers data on
financial and stock transactions and foreign government strategies that are
useful in trade negotiations and other Government decisions, like the approval
of foreign purchases of American companies dealing in restricted technologies,
officials said.

There is a consensus among intelligence officials that the agency should gather
more economic data, both to assist Government agencies involved in commerce and
to detect coming economic disruptions that could affect American interests, like
a collapse of financial markets or major banks.

Accidental Data Undistributed

National Security Agency eavesdropping outposts are also said to stumble
routinely across foreign corporate trade secrets and national industrial
strategies that could be of immense value to American companies competing
abroad.

That information is not now sought or distributed within the Government, much
less among private companies. Among the issues being informally discussed by top
intelligence officials are whether the agency and other Government organizations
should make a deliberate effort to collect such information, and who should
benefit from it.

Neither the agency nor other intelligence groups could decide to gather such
specific information on their own. Decisions on the kinds of data that agencies
collect are made by committees of intelligence experts and Government
policy-makers.

Among intelligence officials, there is an issue even more serious than ethics
and practicality in economic espionage: whether such secrets could be shared
without compromising the exotic means by which they were plucked from the
airwaves, or disclosing the particular frequencies or telephone lines from which
they were acquired.

''N.S.A. would go bananas if it collected data that wound up being shared with
G.E.,'' said a former intelligence official who is an expert on economic
intelligence. ''In their business, you don't disclose sources and methods, or
your sources start to dry up.''

Reflections in the Budget

While little is committed to paper so far, officials said, the National Security
Agency's first conclusions could be reflected in its budget for the fiscal year
that begins in October 1991, which is now under review by Congress's committees
on intelligence and the armed services.

Some officials cast the discussions as a belated effort to fend off advocates of
sharp budget reductions.

''We've got an extraordinary investment in technical collection,'' a second
official said. ''This is all so sudden and unpredictable that they don't know
whether to start dismantling things, or what equipment to move, or whether they
need new policies, or even how it will affect them in terms of the legality of
what they do.''

The budget is classified, but its combined military and civilian components are
now believed to exceed $10 billion annually. That could quickly drop by 10
percent or more, mostly through cuts in the military side of the budget, if the
odds against a conventional war continue to lengthen, a Government official
said.

''We have a general idea of where we want to go,'' he said, ''but we're still
defining it.''

Operations Cannot Be Divulged

That official and others interviewed for this article refused to be identified
because of the National Security Agency's longstanding insistence that its
operations not be publicly described, even in general terms. The agency is among
the most secretive of the Government's major intelligence organizations.

It is also one of the most effective, harvesting such an astonishing array of
intercepted telephone calls, radio signals and other electronic traffic that
officials generally agree that it provides the bulk of raw intelligence data.

In recent years, the agency has played roles in thwarting Iran's efforts to mine
the Persian Gulf; tracking down Panama's deposed dictator, Gen. Manuel Antonio
Noriega; exposing illicit sales of chemical-weapons-manufacturing equipment to
Libya, and detecting the smuggling of American technology to Eastern Europe.

Focusing on Third World

The agency has already seized upon the eavesdropping opportunities presented by
the South American narcotics trade, even challenging the United States Coast
Guard and Customs Service for the right to monitor drug-smuggling ships and
planes at sea. At the behest of the Director of Central Intelligence, William H.
Webster, it also has become deeply involved in combating terrorism and the
spread of strategic weapons in the Middle East.

In interviews last week, officials said the agency was likely to seek to
increase those and other third world activities, in part because Africa and
southern Asia are seen as the likeliest sources of future armed conflicts that
would affect American interests.

The Soviet Union, however, remains the agency's bread-and-butter target. Most of
the agency's largest and most expensive outposts in Europe and Asia, as well as
its fleets of satellites, ships and aircraft, exist expressly to detect Soviet
war preparations and changes in military doctrine.

The fates of some of those operations are thrown into doubt by the collapse of
the Warsaw Pact and the withdrawal of some Soviet forces from parts of Eastern
Europe, Vietnam and Afghanistan, officials said.

Presence in Germany to Fall

The agency probably will face growing pressure in this decade to remove ground
stations targeted against Soviet forces in politically sensitive locations like
Japan and the Philippines, they said. And it is certain to reduce its extensive
presence in West Germany, where it maintains five major eavesdropping
installations aimed at the old Warsaw Pact, the Baltic region and the western
Soviet Union.

''I don't think they're survivable in the new world,'' a former senior
intelligence official said of those outposts. Intelligence officials say they
largely agree.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1990 The New York Times Company

                              252 of 288 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                  June 18, 1990, Monday, Late Edition - Final

From 12th St. to Harlem, Lucky's Legacies Vary

BYLINE: By JOHN TIERNEY

SECTION: Section B; Page 1, Column 2; Metropolitan Desk

LENGTH: 1607 words


Brian Lockhart was buried on Friday, and it is probably safe to say that
thousands of people in Greenwich Village miss him. They knew him as Lucky, an
extraordinary beggar.

He wrote poetry about sleeping in the subway and published an essay on
homelessness in a newspaper at Princeton University. A comic strip in The
Village Voice featured him telling his life story while sitting on his milk
crate by the subway entrance at the northeast corner of 12th Street and Seventh
Avenue, across from the hospital where he died at age 42.

Neighbors posted a memorial sign at his spot, and a half-dozen bouquets were
left there. A woman in a suit reacted to the news by sitting on the sidewalk for
two hours and crying. Neighbors, merchants and commuters stopped throughout the
day to reminisce about his smile, his easy wit, his kindness to all, his small
gifts to some of his countless friends.

The View From Harlem

Some neighbors went up to Harlem to a memorial service and met Mr. Lockhart's
relatives, who had not known until his death that he was homeless. They were
stunned by his downtown reputation.

The relatives were intrigued to hear of the street-corner humanitarian who had
published an essay castigating Americans who ''turned their backs on the ones
that need them the most.'' The Brian Lockhart they knew was a man who stole the
rent money from his pregnant wife and did not return to see their son until the
boy was 10 years old. ''It's like we're talking about two different people,''
said his former wife, Adrienne Lockhart. ''To hear that he was such a good,
caring person, wishing everyone a safe trip home, giving presents - and he never
gave his own children anything. Maybe he really did change. Or maybe it's just
easier to be nice to strangers. You're not obligated.''

Their son, Daryle, now 19, looked uneasy when he spoke to the people from
Greenwich Village about his father, whom he had met three times. He said he had
tried repeatedly to find his father since their last encounter in 1986.

''I guess he's free now,'' the son said. ''He doesn't have to be anything for
anyone, and I'm happy if he's happy. I liked him when I saw him. I appreciate
the people from downtown being so nice to him and coming up to the service. But
don't romanticize him.''

Brian Lockhart did many things before he ended up as a beggar. According to
friends, family, official records, and his own accounts, he was a soldier in
Vietnam, a college graduate who made the dean's list, a telephone installer, a
chauffeur, a broker in the diamond district, a pimp and a bank robber. His
longest-running role was as a drug dealer who, as he put it, used his own
product.

He was an only child raised in a middle-class section of Flushing, Queens, by
his widowed mother, Devera, a secretary who was active in the African Methodist
Episcopal Zion Church. After high school, he married a member of the church and
served in Vietnam. He came home in 1969 with a heroin habit.

He soon parted from his pregnant wife, who went on to raise their son in
Bedford-Stuyvesant, get a college degree at night and become a social worker. He
went off to have a daughter with another woman and leave them as well. There
were scrapes with the law. At age 30, he made a new start with his mother's help
by enrolling at Livingstone College in Salisbury, N.C.

'He Wore Suits'

''He was a very bright and likable guy, a big fraternity man,'' said a spokesman
for the college, Wilson Cherry. ''He was older than most other students, and he
dressed a little differently. He wore suits and slicked back his hair.''

After he graduated in 1981 with a degree in accounting, he held jobs, but never
for long. He often stayed at his mother's three-bedroom house in Flushing, which
she bequeathed to him upon her death in 1986. She also asked a minister and
friend, the Rev. Dr. Harold E. Jones, to look after her son.

''She said she knew he was going to lose the house, and he did,'' Dr. Jones
said. ''He couldn't make the mortgage payments. He got some money when it was
sold, and he went through that. He bought some cars, and he always had his
little tramps and his drugs. He would go clean every now and then -he would go
to a rehabilitation program or go cold turkey - but it never lasted.''

Mr. Lockhart's last home was an apartment that Dr. Jones provided above his
church at 229 Lenox Avenue in Harlem. There are two versions of what drove him
out last year.

'Five Kids Hit Me'

One is Mr. Lockhart's account in The Village Voice's comic strip ''Stan Mack's
Real Life Funnies (All Dialogue Guaranteed Overheard).'' In one of the three
strips chronicling his life, Mr. Lockhart tells how he took up crack after his
mother's death, kicked the habit and then was mugged.

''Five kids hit me in an alley, shot me under the heart and took everything,''
he says. ''While I was in the hospital, my apartment and all my valuables went
up in flames. I've been living in a subway tunnel.''

The other version is from Dr. Jones. The minister said that Mr. Lockhart was
mugged and shot, but that the apartment was intact when he got out of the
hospital. Dr. Jones said that the fire occurred later, on March 24 of last year,
and that it was started by Mr. Lockhart.

''Lucky told me he'd fallen asleep smoking a cigarette,'' Dr. Jones said. A
spokesman for the Fire Department said firefighters found vials and other items
indicating the apartment was being used as a crack den.

''I told Lucky to come and see me so I could get him another apartment, but he
never did,'' Dr. Jones said. ''He may have been afraid people were looking for
him here. He had kept cashing his mother's pension checks for two years after
her death, and they found out. He owed $18,000, I think.''

Poems and Essay

Mr. Lockhart started sleeping on subway plaforms and train stations, and last
fall he began begging all day and evening on 12th Street. He took to writing in
a notebook as he sat there. A friend in the neighborhood typed the poems, which
had titles like ''Walking Alone,'' ''Winter Chill'' and ''Lonely Man.''

In his essay ''The United States of Homelessness,'' published in The Nassau
Weekly, a student newspaper at Princeton, he asked the reader to imagine that
''your family and friends have all turned their back on you and it is the middle
of November.'' He described homeless drug addicts: ''Somewhere something in
their life snapped and went to hopelessness, failure and self-destruction.''

For him, that somewhere was apparently Vietnam. Dr. Jones, who knew Mr. Lockhart
all his life, said he had been a model youth who came home a directionless man.
Mr. Mack drew a similar conclusion and titled one comic strip ''Born on the
Fourth of July, Too.''

''He talked a lot about the awful things he saw there,'' Mr. Mack said. ''I'd
say his problems were Vietnam, drugs, being black and his personality, in that
order. It was puzzling to see him without a job, because he was intelligent, he
looked strong and he had an amazing ability to connect with people. It was a
certain laid-back charisma. If he'd been white, he probably would have been a
successful salesman who did cocaine.''

Dr. Jones saw that charm, too. ''I was very fond of him,'' the minister said.
''That was why I put up with him. For all the things he did, he was always
courteous, and he always promised he'd do better the next time. His problem was
that he was not stouthearted.''

'We Are Not to Judge'

Mr. Lockhart listed Dr. Jones as his next of kin when he went to St. Vincent's
Hospital on June 6. He still had a wound in his head, which he attributed to an
attack some nights earlier by a man with a stick in Pennsylvania Station. His
immediate complaint was asthma. He was treated that morning, according to the
hospital, and remained all day, until he died at 7:19 P.M. Dr. Jones said he was
told the death was due to cardiac arrest.

Dr. Jones presided at the memorial service on Wednesday evening in Walters
Memorial African Methodist Episcopal Zion Church, in the same building where Mr.
Lockhart's last home had burned. Dr. Jones called Mr. Lockhart ''a beautiful,
respectful person'' and reminded the listeners, ''God tells us we are not to
judge one another.''

A eulogy was delivered by Sandy Stillman, a writer and computer consultant in
Greenwich Village. He recalled Mr. Lockhart joking about having the city's most
expensive alarm clock, costing $180,000: ''It takes six transit cops to wake me
up.'' He told how Mr. Lockhart, after nagging him to wear a hat on cold days,
bought him a wool cap.

''His ability to be so considerate and to have such good manners, when his own
situation was so difficult, was amazing,'' Mr. Stillman said. ''He was an easy
guy to respect. Despite the fact that he was homeless, he was able to make the
people he spoke to feel like he cared about them.''

After the service, several relatives stood on Lenox Avenue and muttered about
Vietnam veterans being in vogue downtown. They said the truly moving aspect of
Mr. Lockhart's death was his children's initial reaction, before the Veterans
Administration agreed to pay the $1,400 in burial costs. The two college
students had been trying to borrow the money to keep him out of a potter's
field.

The son and daughter, Tara Lockhart, stood on the sidewalk and said they did not
know what had gone wrong in their father's life. What puzzled and hurt them the
most, they said, was the thought of him begging from strangers and sleeping in a
subway station when they and other relatives would have been willing to give him
a bed.

''He could have called,'' his son said.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo: Brian Lockhart at the corner of 12th Street and Seventh Avenue
in March 1990. (Josh Stillman)

                   Copyright 1990 The New York Times Company

                              253 of 288 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                  June 18, 1990, Monday, Late Edition - Final

Indignantly, Marcos Defends Her Name

BYLINE: By CRAIG WOLFF

SECTION: Section B; Page 1, Column 2; Metropolitan Desk

LENGTH: 1272 words


Smiling as if no one has said a bad word about her lately, Imelda Marcos entered
the room, held out her palm and said, ''Here I am.'' She lowered herself into a
soft armchair as she shook her head. A trace of glowing afternoon sunlight
settled on her from a window off Second Avenue, and she said without so much as
a question to prod her:

''Am I the famous criminal, the racketeer? And also, let's not forget, the big
spender? The woman who owns thousands of pairs of shoes? It's so ridiculous. I
shouldn't even be here. I am just a wife, isn't that right?'' Not a word was
heard in response. Not from an aide who sat on the other side of the room
staring down and not from a man who was tiptoeing about, setting out lunch. Even
her lawyer kept his hands over his mouth. Her words fell around them like a
decree.  A spring day near the end of her trial in New York found Mrs. Marcos
drawing on a wellspring of emotions and showing a number of faces. She wept
several times. She laughed easily at other moments. She preached mightily about
the injustice that she says is being done to her almost daily at the United
States Court House on Foley Square, and she responded specifically to many of
the charges she has heard there. She seemed especially aware of her reputation
as one of the world's most reviled women, and she was eager, it seemed, to
combat that with each remark.

The trial resumed last Tuesday after a recess because of Mrs. Marcos's health
problems; the prosecution is expected to rest tomorrow.

Mrs. Marcos, widow of Ferdinand E. Marcos, the former Philippine dictator, is
charged with stealing more than $200 million from the Philippine Treasury and
then, with her husband, diverting the money through foreign and secret channels,
and moving by defrauding two American banks to invest in New York in areas like
jewelry, art masterpieces and, most notably, four skyscrapers in Manhattan.

Witnesses have testified that Mr. Marcos had systematically accepted huge
kickbacks on nearly all Government contracts. The money ended up in accounts in
Hong Kong and Switzerland. Ultimately some was used to buy the buildings here.

In two recent interviews, Mrs. Marcos expanded on the basic strategy that her
lead lawyer, Gerry Spence, has put forth in the courtroom, that although she
might have spent part of her husband's fortune, she did not really know how he
had gained his wealth.

In other words, she said, she feels compelled to defend ''my husband's honor''
and at the same time convince the jury that she should be seen as separate from
her husband's activities.

'I Am the Stolen One'

Mrs. Marcos said the steady flow of testimony against Mr. Marcos was largely
responsible for her high blood pressure and had helped lead to her collapse,
coughing up blood, in court two weeks ago.

''Day in, day out, one witness after another,'' she said on her return from a
three-day stay in a hospital. ''Unbelieveable. And they're all wrong. They're
talking about the difference between Heaven and Hell. They say I stole, but I am
the stolen one.

''It's not only difficult to know what President Marcos was doing, it's
impossible. Because no matter how close you are to a man and how well you know
him, you will never be able to fathom his principles, his commitments, his
obsessions.''

Speaking from one of the six apartments that Mrs. Marcos, her lawyers and the
rest of her entourage occupy at 47th Street and Second Avenue, Mrs. Marcos said
she had switched her diet from meat and fried foods to bland foods.

''I'm eating a lot of oatmeal,'' she said. Since her illness she has gone
boating on the Hudson and dancing at a nightclub. But, she said, her typical day
is more serene.

Pleas to Presidents

On returning from court in the late afternoon she confers with her lawyers and
then participates in a prayer session with her friends. Then, she said, they
have ''a talking party.''

Before Mrs. Marcos sat down, she pointed to a tabloid headline that she had
framed and presented as a gift to Mr. Spence. It read: ''It's Shoetime.'' She
mentioned another that showed her picture with the headline, ''Oink.''

''In life you must have a sense of humor,'' she said. ''A pig is fat and ugly,
but at least it is very sensitive. Yes, I have become a cartoon character, so
what chance have I got?''

She was asked why former President Ronald Reagan and President Bush had not
answered her pleas for help. Mr. Reagan provided the Marcoses with refuge in
Hawaii in 1986, after their ouster from the Philippines. Mrs. Marcos said Mr.
Bush had encouraged her to invest in the United States.

''They won't help because they have been terrorized by the media,'' she said.

Each day, Mrs. Marcos goes to court in a black mourning dress. Two times she has
left the courtroom in tears; she now wears a heart-rate monitor.

Marcos's 'Bachelor House'

Many friends, relatives and employees, including maids and cooks, with whom she
says she has the prayer meetings, sit on the left side of the spectators'
section. On the right are supporters of the Aquino Government.

As the hostess of a four-course luncheon, Mrs. Marcos brought out pictures that
she said were of Mr. Marcos's ''bachelor house'' before they were married. She
said it had 11 rooms, 4 pianos and a swimming pool. But the pictures showed a
house that had been clearly ransacked and almost stripped, a result, she said,
of a Government search for gold.

Crying, she took off a glittering ring that she said was her engagement ring.
''This is the man who is the thief,'' she said. ''He gave me this 35 years ago.
And look at his house. They say he stole all his money. He was a rich man when I
met him.''

The prosecution has detailed how Mr. Marcos took huge commissions and bribes on
Government contracts and funneled the money to secret accounts in Hong Kong and
Switzerland. Mrs. Marcos said those were not bribes, but rather examples of
''priming.''

'It's So Petty'

''The idea was to get money out of the country to have it in a safe place,'' she
said. ''Marcos primed the electric company and the pharmaceutical company and
the agricultural company. Then he used his own money and money from the private
sector. It was definitely necessary to take the money out of the country,
because we needed a place to keep it in confidentially and securely. Don't leave
it in one basket. We're next door to Vietnam. At least this way there will be
something left for the people outside.

''I get so tired listening to $1 million here, $1 million there. It's so petty,
because it was part of a national and global scheme. We were running a
government, and they're accusing me of robbing.''

Several witnesses have indicated in their testimony that Mrs. Marcos had been
involved in decisions to buy and manage the Manhattan buildings. When she was
asked about her role, Mr. Spence interrupted and said, ''She's not on trial
here.''

''All I know,'' she said, ''is the buildings were all part of a general
policy.''

About her reputation as an ostentatious spender, Mrs. Marcos said most of the
jewelry had been given to her as presents or bought by her as gifts for
Government officials.

Mr. Bush, she said, had advised the Marcoses to invest in the United States,
adding, ''Everything we did, we did with the full knowledge of the C.I.A. and
the U.S. Government.''

She was being tried here, she said, as a favor to the Philippine Government,
because the Aquino Administration feared her return.

''I don't want freedom or even justice,'' she said. ''If this were a jury of my
peers they would understand this. All I want is to go home.''

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo: ''Am I the famous criminal, the racketeer?'' asked Imelda
Marcos, whose trial has resumed. ''And also, let's not forget, the big spender?
The woman who owns thousands of pairs of shoes? It's so ridiculous.'' (Fred R.
Conrad/The New York Times) (pg. B5)

                   Copyright 1990 The New York Times Company

                              254 of 288 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                  June 18, 1990, Monday, Late Edition - Final

COMMENCEMENTS;
U.C.L.A. Hears Soviet 'Messenger of Peace'

SECTION: Section B; Page 9, Column 4; National Desk

LENGTH: 479 words


The Soviet space scientist Roald Z. Sagdeyev, the architect I. M. Pei and the
astronaut Anna L. Fisher were among those honored this weekend at 12 college and
school graduation ceremonies in the 71st commencement at the University of
California at Los Angeles.

Each was awarded the U.C.L.A. Medal yesterday in ceremonies at the College of
Letters and Science, the university's largest college.

Walter J. Hass, president of the Council on Library Resources, received the
medal Saturday at the commencement for the Graduate School of Library and
Information Services. The medal is the the university's highest award.

Saying he was ''a messenger heralding the end of the cold war,'' Mr. Sagdeyev, a
member of the newly formed Congress of People's Deputies, urged graduates not to
''sell out to short-term goals'' but to work over the long term to resolve the
world's problems, particularly environmental degradation.

Ecological and Nuclear Survival

The primary goal in the aftermath of the cold war, he said, is to ''place
ecological survival at the same level as nuclear survival.''

Mr. Sagdeyev, who helped shape the Soviet space program as director of the
Institute for Space Research in Moscow, is a close adviser to President Mikhail
S. Gorbachev.

Among Mr. Pei's best-known works are the pyramid entrance to the Louvre in
Paris, the East Building of the National Gallery of Art in Washington and the
Bank of China in Hong Kong.

Dr. Fisher, a U.C.L.A. graduate, was a mission specialist on the November 1984
flight of the space shuttle Discovery in which two disabled satellites were
retrieved and two were deployed. She was the fourth American woman in space.

The university granted degrees to more than 8,000 students. Nearly 500 Ph.D.'s
were granted.

Stanford University

Speaking at Stanford University's 99th commencement yesterday, Marian Wright
Edelman, president of the Children's Defense Fund, urged graduates ''to help
redefine success in the America of the 1990's.''

Ms. Edelman, who founded the Washington-based advocacy group, said the nation,
battered by racism, drug abuse, dishonesty and corruption, had entered a ''new
era of struggle.''

''The battles will not be as dramatic as Gettysburg or Vietnam, but they will
shape our place in the 21st Century,'' she told nearly 3,600 graduates gathered
at Stanford Stadium.

''The bombs poised to blow up the American dream emanate from no enemy
without,'' she said. ''They are ticking away within ourselves, our families, our
neighborhoods and cities.''

Calling this year's graduates ''the veterans of the Battle of Western Culture,''
the university's president, Donald Kennedy, urged students to reject the
''outlandish demands'' of the professional world and work to resolve the
problems of ''environmental quality, population growth, profound maldistribution
of world resources.''

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1990 The New York Times Company

                              255 of 288 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                  June 18, 1990, Monday, Late Edition - Final
                              Correction Appended

Books of The Times;
The View From Above: New Yorker Covers

BYLINE: By JOHN RUSSELL

SECTION: Section C; Page 15, Column 1; Cultural Desk

LENGTH: 941 words


As an index to the mores, the daydreams and the taken-for-granted assumptions of
well-to-do Manhattanites from 1925 to 1989, this collection of covers from The
New Yorker would be hard to beat. At a certain level of prosperity and
self-assurance, everything is there. We glimpse the minor misadventures of
marriage, the loose cannons of white-tie hospitality, the well-behaved wedding
parties on the shaven lawn and the late but decorous nights on the town. We also
glimpse finals day at the pony club, the tag sale that breaks nobody's heart,
tentative tourism in foreign parts, the graduation day when nobody flunked, the
dog-walking doormen in safe neighborhoods and the punctual march of the
metropolitan seasons.

Idiosyncratic perceptions make their mark, too. There is the apoplectic New
Yorker who, in the sweltering August of 1930, watered the plants in his window
box with a soda syphon. There is the gigantic dirigible that nosed its way
through the skyscrapers in May of that same year. There was the little boy who
thought it funny, as late as November 1941, to wear a Hitler mask on Halloween.
There was the whistle stop that, as recently as 1952, was mandatory for
Presidential candidates, no matter how small the station or how sparse the
crowd. There was the arrival in 1983 of the sushi bar as an indispensable
element in Manhattan life, and in 1984 there was a first acknowledgment of the
existence of Kennedy International Airport.

Other, graver matters are mostly left to the inside of the magazine, where they
receive majestic and often courageous treatment. If there was a Depression
before World War II, it didn't make it to the New Yorker cover. Nor did the New
Deal. World War II is touched upon often, but lightly. The same could be said of
the postwar era. If your concern is with crime, with drugs, with civil rights,
with the feminist movement, with the war in Vietnam or with Watergate or with
the role of the ethnic minority in our society, you should turn straight to the
inside of the magazine. As for the summer of 1968, it was a summer like any
other on the cover of The New Yorker.

In that respect, there is about The New Yorker a take-it-or-leave-it attitude
that this reader finds entirely congenial. A magazine cover is there to make us
welcome. A house in which our host and hostess pinned the heavy news of the week
on the front door before we even got inside is not one to which we would hurry
back. With a magazine, the same applies.  The covers (3,328 of them, by my
count) are all reproduced in color (12 to a big fat page, with one or two writ
large every month). To a remarkable degree, and although they are the work of
many hands (129, by my count), they speak for a specific magazine in an
unmistakable city. Their general tone is of light comedy - wry, debonair and not
seldom self-deflating. They have, moreover, a local constituency. No one could
say that they speak for all the boroughs of New York.

This was, and is still, of set purpose. On the very first cover of The New
Yorker, in February 1925, the reader saw the head and shoulders of an archetypal
but entirely anachronistic New Yorker, one Eustace Tilley. The hat, the
hairstyle, the tall narrow neckcloth and the vestigial wing collar came from way
back in time. So did the air of unlimited leisure with which he quizzed a pale
pink butterfly.

The veteran dandy (the work, by the way, of Rea Irvin, the magazine's first and
longtime art editor) could have been ridiculous. But he set a tone - that of an
alert, judicious, amused and experienced student of the world around him - that
has characterized the New Yorker cover ever since. And when he makes his annual
reappearance, as will happen any day now, he looks exactly right.

There is, however, no self-evident ''house style'' about a magazine that has
published 103 covers by Peter Arno, 60 by Charles Addams and 71 by Saul
Steinberg, not to mention 72 by Helen Hokinson and 213 by George Getz (first
featured 51 years ago, and still in business).

Some of them dated from, and at least one of them typified, a world in which
there was always a butler to open the front door, a valet to pick up the young
master's clothes and a ladies' maid to turn down the conjugal bed. (Even when
the young lady of the house joined the Army in World War II, her maid was
waiting with a dance dress on evenings when she could change out of uniform.)
Remembering what delicate fun was made of these mores on the covers in question,
and remembering also the adroit changes of tone that have occurred in more
recent years, we may agree with John Updike in his introduction that on the
terrain where art and commerce overlap there has never been anything like the
New Yorker cover. Given that, it is incomprehensible to this critic that the
cover of The New Yorker should now be routinely sabotaged by the application to
its upper left corner of advertising matter.

This ad matter is misaligned. It flaps, lopsided. Clumsy attempts to coordinate
its color with the color of the drawing make it even more offensive. The only
way to see the cover as it is meant to be seen is to tear off the needless
intrusion and throw it away.

The object of all is to tell the potential customer about the specials of the
week. The maneuver is an insult to the cover artist. It is an insult to New
Yorker readers, who are perfectly capable of finding out for themselves what is
in the magazine. From the noble size of this book, and from the pride with which
they send New Yorker art material on tour, we may assume that the present
management is proud of its covers. Why don't they let them alone?

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

CORRECTION-DATE: June 20, 1990, Wednesday, Late Edition - Final

CORRECTION:

The Books of The Times column on Monday, about ''The Complete Book of Covers
From the New Yorker: 1925-1989,'' misidentified an artist in the collection. He
is Arthur Getz, not George Getz.

GRAPHIC: Photo: Eustace Tilley, who appears annually on the New Yorker cover.

TYPE: Review

                   Copyright 1990 The New York Times Company

                              256 of 288 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 June 20, 1990, Wednesday, Late Edition - Final

If Communism Is Waning, Asia Defies the Trend

BYLINE: By BARBARA CROSSETTE, Special to The New York Times

SECTION: Section A; Page 10, Column 1; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 827 words

DATELINE: NEW DELHI, June 15


About the same time that Mikhail S. Gorbachev was ending his visit to the United
States and voters in several Eastern European countries were heading into
multiparty elections, the Communist Party of India was issuing a statement that
began, ''The U.S. imperialists have intensified their aggression against Cuba.''

This month, the Communist Party of India-Marxist, the largest and most
influential leftist party in the country, issued a 33-page indictment of Soviet
change and of the overthrow or renaming of Eastern European parties. It defended
Stalin and branded European Communism a ''deviation.''

In Nepal, parties of the left have begun unity talks as a prelude to making a
move for power in voting next year. In Vietnam, a roundup of dissidents is under
way, and in China there was the silent anniversary of the crackdown on the
democracy movement in June 1989.

Communist and other leftist parties in Asia have not only bucked the trend that
has swept their counterparts from power in most of Europe, they have continued
to grow in strength and to attract new followers, particularly in South Asia,
where poverty is stark and development slow.

New parties of the left are appearing in India, where a peasant-based Indian
People's Front entered Parliament for the first time last year, and in Nepal,
where new and sometimes radical groups with shadowy leaderships have been
emerging from underground since multiparty democracy was restored in April.

The Old Icons Go Up

While pictures and statues of Marx, Lenin, Engels and Stalin come down
elsewhere, they are going up here.

''In Asia, we still have feudalism to fight,'' a Nepalese journalist working in
the Philippines said. In Katmandu, leftist leaders say no other political
organization is bold enough to offer real change or well enough organized to
bring it about.

In India, leftists say they can play a major role in combating the growth of
religious fundamentalism while battling the evils of caste and class. They avoid
debate on the collapse of Communism elsewhere, saying the problems of European
socialism are not necessarily relevant to them.

''The masses of people in these countries are obviously suffering from so many
very severe problems, what would be the alternative to socialism?'' Indrajit
Gupta, general secretary of the Communist Party of India, the smaller of the two
main leftist parties, asked in an interview last month.

''The alternative of private enterprise and capitalism, I don't think would wash
here,'' he said, sitting under a portrait of Ho Chi Minh. ''

Urban and Intellectual

Mr. Gupta, who is 71 years old, joined the Communist movement at Cambridge
University in the 1940's and after returning to India concentrated on building
bases among the disadvantaged.

His only regret, he said in another interview nearly two years ago, was that
Indian Communism has remained an urban, intellectual phenomenon. Its voters have
been drawn from the most literate constituencies. But they have joined through
choice, and Mr. Gupta sees this as an advantage.

''The leaderships of the Communists in Eastern Europe never made their own
revolutions, and that was a big handicap,'' he said, comparing the course of
European socialism with many Asian examples. ''Power was handed to them on a
plate by the Soviet Army.''

In Hanoi in April, Le Mai, a Deputy Foreign Minister, argued similarly, saying
that the Vietnamese Communist Party was a home-grown nationalist movement that
brought the country independence and unity. But he ruled out putting it to the
test of a vote, saying the economic rebuilding of the country took precedence.

Communists in Big Roles

He and other Vietnamese also repeated a theme heard frequently in Southeast
Asia: that Asian societies are different, preferring consensus and living more
comfortably with one-party states. Vietnamese Communists point to Prime Minister
Lee Kuan Yew of Singapore as an ardent capitalist with a closed political
system.

Indian Communists are in an unusual position in Asia. They head state
governments in West Bengal, which includes Calcutta, and Kerala. At the national
level, they support the centrist Government of Prime Minister V. P. Singh
without joining his coalition.

Their important role in national politics has given them additional strength at
local and state level, particularly in West Bengal. The state's Chief Minister,
Jyoti Basu, a leader of the Communist Party of India-Marxist, has become one of
Prime Minister Singh's advisers.

Mr. Basu's decision before elections in November to cooperate with the
Hindu-based Bharatiya Janata Party in fielding candidates so as not to dilute
the opposition vote played a major part in the defeat of the former Prime
Minister, Rajiv Gandhi, and his Congress Party.

He continues to play a stabilizing role, while his state reaps the development
and investment rewards that it was denied while the Congress Party was in power.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1990 The New York Times Company

                              257 of 288 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 June 20, 1990, Wednesday, Late Edition - Final

A New India Inquiry Is Weighed in Death Of Axis Ally in '45

BYLINE: By BARBARA CROSSETTE, Special to The New York Times

SECTION: Section A; Page 10, Column 1; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 377 words

DATELINE: NEW DELHI, June 15


The Indian Government is considering a new investigation into the disappearance
45 years ago of the country's most enigmatic nationalist hero, Subhas Chandra
Bose.

Mr. Bose, leader of the Indian National Army, a pro-independence movement that
collaborated with the Japanese and Germans against the British in World War II,
was reported to have died of burns in a plane crash near Taipei on his way to
Tokyo on Aug. 18, 1945.

Many Indians never believed that. There have been recurrent accounts of his
being seen in the Soviet Union after that date. Members of Mr. Bose's family are
among those who question the official version of his death.

Prime Minister V. P. Singh has asked the Indian Foreign Ministry to look into a
suggestion by a Member of Parliament, Samar Guha of Calcutta, that an
examination of once-secret documents now available in the Soviet Union and in
Britain, the United States and Japan, could solve the mystery.

Political Beliefs Disputed

The dispute over the veracity of the plane crash story erupted again after years
of lying dormant when an Indian group began planning to bring the ashes
identified by the Japanese as those of Mr. Bose from a temple in Japan to India
for burial.

Mr. Bose - a Bengali known popularly as Netaji, or respected leader -is regarded
by many as a fascist sympathizer whose alliance with the Axis powers endangered
Indians fighting for Britain.

Others believe that he was pro-Communist, and was seeking to install a leftist
government here after capturing the nationalist movement, as Ho Chi Minh did in
Vietnam and leftists tried unsuccessfully to do in Burma before all three
countries gained independence in the late 1940's.

But whatever his real political beliefs, Mr. Bose remains a popular hero,
particularly among Bengalis and people of the Indian Northeast, where his
movement was based. At one point, Mr. Bose established a Provisional Government
of Free India, which was recognized by the Axis powers as well as Thailand,
which cooperated with the Japanese in Southeast Asia.

Although he was at first in sympathy with the nonviolent independence movement
of Mohandas K. Gandhi, Mr. Bose ultimately broke with the Mahatma and was
expelled from the Indian National Congress movement.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1990 The New York Times Company

                              258 of 288 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 June 20, 1990, Wednesday, Late Edition - Final

War Is the Word for the Bolivian Drug Fight

BYLINE: By SHIRLEY CHRISTIAN, Special to The New York Times

SECTION: Section A; Page 11, Column 1; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 840 words

DATELINE: CHIMORE, Bolivia


As dawn broke over the dense Chapare jungle one recent day, American drug agents
wearing camouflage uniforms and carrying M-16 rifles lifted off in two
helicopters with their Bolivian counterparts for an operation that had many of
the characteristics of guerrilla warfare.

Such signs abound of the militarization of the fight against cocaine in South
America. The coca fields of Bolivia are the southernmost point in a struggle
that stretches into Peru and Colombia and spills over into other countries.

The helicopters, carrying four agents of the Drug Enforcement Administration and
six officers of Bolivia's drug police, swung north along the Chapare River to
link up with a Bolivian-American ground force in an effort to capture wholesale
buyers of coca paste, the damp, flour-like substance that is the first step in
turning coca leaves into cocaine.

The plan, based on a tip from a paid informant, was to corner the traffickers
after they had made a purchase of paste from processors and were about to move
across the river to a cache point. From there, the paste would have gone by
clandestine flight to final processing laboratories in the Beni region to the
north or in Colombia.

The Buyers Slip Away

The buyers had already crossed the river when the force arrived, and by the time
the agents and the police had commandeered a boat to cross the river, they
caught just two low-level buyers with 95 pounds of paste. They had hoped for a
much larger capture and important buyers.

The operation was the 51st in 24 days for the 14 Drug Enforcement Administration
and Border Patrol agents serving three months of temporary duty at Chimore, the
main base for anti-drug operations in Bolivia. The Americans are part of a force
that rotates into Bolivia from desk jobs in Washington and undercover
assignments in Miami and Los Angeles, the California-Mexico border and
elsewhere.

Before becoming part of the pool of agents to serve here, most undergo 10 weeks
of Army Special Forces training, usually at Fort Benning, Ga. The program has
been adapted to the drug agency's needs and includes intensive language training
and 10 days in the swamps of Eglin Air Force Base in Florida.

''The only thing different from Vietnam is that the accent is on contact here -
we want to get the people who are involved in a deal - while there the accent
was on the objective,'' said the former Marine officer in charge of the group at
Chimore.

Hunting the Wholesalers

After his spotter plane had landed, he explained that the focus here had shifted
to capturing important wholesalers of drug paste and laboratory operators and
away from the farmers and others who run the so-called stomping pits where paste
is produced. For that reason, capturing people who can provide information
further up the line is a priority.

Don Ferrarone, the head of Drug Enforcement Administration activities in Bolivia
and the only agent who allowed himself to be quoted by name, said the change in
strategy was meant to win over the small farmers who grow coca in hopes they
will switch crops or collaborate in identifying wholesalers.

Like the agent in charge at Chimore, Mr. Ferrarone, who operates from the
embassy in La Paz, has run up against parallels with Vietnam. He pulled from his
bookshelf a well-marked copy of Neil Sheehan's ''A Bright, Shining Lie,'' and
cited the examples it offered of the difficulty in controlling corruption by
Vietnamese officers.

A similar problem has plagued the drug fight in Bolivia. Drug experts say the
standard reason that drug police officers take assignments in the inhospitable
Chapare is the opportunity they offer for payoffs. Mr. Ferrarone claimed to be
making progress on that front, with corrupt officers rotated out.

More Violence Is Seen

Despite the signs of readiness for combat, violence has been rare in the
anti-drug crusade in Bolivia, in part because the custom of laboratory operators
and traffickers here - distinct from those in Peru and Colombia -has been not to
use violence. So captures are usually made with little resistance.

But drug experts say that is changing slightly, in part because non-Bolivians,
especially Colombians and Brazilians, are becoming involved in laboratory
operations in Bolivia.

Nevertheless, the agent in charge here said a carefully planned roadblock - to
take a major haul from a paste wholesaler - failed the day before the river
operation because a pickup truck carrying the paste barreled through it with a
dozen peasants in the back. The agents and the police could not open fire and
risk killing the riders.

American officials do not say exactly how many Drug Enforcement Administration
agents work in Bolivia, but the total is understood to be at least several
dozen. In addition to Chimore, they work in nearby Villa Tunari, in the
departmental capitals of Cochabamba, Trinidad and Santa Cruz, and in La Paz. A
dozen Army advisers help train the 600-member Bolivian drug police force, and
two others work with Bolivian helicopter pilots.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Map: Chimore, Bolivia

                   Copyright 1990 The New York Times Company

                              259 of 288 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 June 20, 1990, Wednesday, Late Edition - Final

Herbicides Linked to Cancer in Military Dogs

BYLINE: AP

SECTION: Section A; Page 18, Column 1; National Desk

LENGTH: 528 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, June 19


Military dogs that served in Vietnam and were exposed to the same chemical
sprays as American soldiers developed almost twice as many tumors of the
testicles as military dogs that served elsewhere, a study has found.

Howard M. Hayes, who helped write the study being published Wednesday in The
Journal of the National Cancer Institute, said the development of testicular
cancer among the dogs may predict the development of such tumors among
infantrymen who served in Vietnam.

''The dog is a sentinel model for man,'' said Dr. Hayes, a researcher at the
National Cancer Institute.

Dr. Hayes and his colleagues examined autopsy records for dogs that served with
American troops in Vietnam from 1968 to 1973 as well as records of dogs that
served in Vietnam and died elsewhere. The records were compared with medical
histories of military dogs that served in the United States, Japan, Korea and
Thailand.

Higher Incidence of Tumors

Dr. Hayes said the dogs that served in Vietnam had 80 percent more testis tumors
of all kinds than did dogs that served only in the United States. They also had
90 percent more seminomas, malignant tumors of the testis.

Dogs that served in Korea, Japan and Thailand had fewer of both types of tumors
than did those that served only in the United States.

To verify the risks, Dr. Hayes said his group examined records of 96 male dogs
that served in Vietnam and died elsewhere from 1974 to 1978 and compared them
with records of dogs that served only in the United States and died in the same
period.

''We observed the 96 Vietnam veteran military working dogs to have significant
excess risk for seminoma, which supported the findings in the earlier period,''
the report said.

Additionally, the study showed that dogs that served in Vietnam were 1.7 to 2
times more likely to be diagnosed with some type of testicular dysfunction than
were dogs that served only in the United States.

German Shepherds Used in Study

Dr. Hayes said about 99 percent of the military dogs in the study were German
shepherds, a breed with a predisposition to testicular tumors.

Dogs in Vietnam, Dr. Hayes said, served with infantry troops and were exposed to
the same chemical sprays, like Agent Orange, as were the soldiers. But unlike
most of the humans, the dogs' tours in Vietnam were not limited to one year.

Dr. Hayes also said the dogs in Vietnam were treated several times with
tetracycline, an antibiotic used to control a tick-borne parasitic disease,
which ''may have contributed to the increased risk of testicular problems.''

Veterans groups have contended for years that soldiers who served in Vietnam
have had more cancers and other ailments as a result of their exposure to
chemical sprays.

The Department of Veterans Affairs announced this year that it would compensate
Vietnam veterans who have non-Hodgkin's lymphoma or soft-tissue sarcoma, two
cancers associated with chemicals in Agent Orange.

Adm. Elmo R. Zumwalt Jr., a special adviser to Veterans Secretary Edward J.
Derwinski, said there was no compensation to Vietnam veterans for development of
testicular cancers, but that it might now be considered.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1990 The New York Times Company

                              260 of 288 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 June 20, 1990, Wednesday, Late Edition - Final

The Editorial Notebook;
Flagging Interest

BYLINE: By John P. MacKenzie

SECTION: Section A; Page 24, Column 1; Editorial Desk

LENGTH: 434 words


Flag burning isn't what it used to be; it has lost its provocative quality.
That's the complaint of Justice John Paul Stevens, in his dissent in the 5-to-4
decision last week that struck down the Federal flag law. It's an odd but
telling lament.

Justice Stevens was on to something that is increasingly evident in Congress.
The public hasn't protested the decision in anything like the numbers implied by
its previous outrage. That doesn't mean that legislators who oppose a
constitutional amendment are home free. Many fear demagogic 30-second television
attacks in their fall campaigns. But the news so far is the lack of groundswell.

''A formerly dramatic expression of protest is now rather commonplace,'' Justice
Stevens said. He couldn't have meant that flag burnings were numerous or even
growing, but that when observed, flag burnings don't excite people so much
anymore. ''In today's marketplace of ideas, the public burning of a Vietnam
draft card is probably less provocative than lighting a cigarette,'' he writes.
''Tomorrow flag burning may produce a similar reaction.''

Justice Stevens and his fellow dissenters rue what they deem the flag's
diminished symbolic value. They blame events of the past three decades,
presumably including Vietnam, for altering ''the country's image in the eyes of
numerous Americans.'' This is essentially a defeatist vision. A more likely
explanation is that Americans still revere the flag but don't feel threatened by
the tiny, scabrous lot of flag burners. Particularly after a year of politicking
over the issue, the explanation for the relative calm may be that the public is
getting wise to flag demagoguery.

People may now have become as aware as Justice Stevens that the White House and
Congress have too many ''leaders who seem to advocate compulsory worship of the
flag'' or ''who seem to manipulate the symbol of national purpose into a pretext
for partisan disputes about meaner ends.''

In other words, it's not the flag that people have lost interest in; only flag
burning. When you've said it's a reprehensible act, you've said it all. When a
politician says we have to smudge the Bill of Rights with an amendment to
protect the flag, he's said too much.

The Supreme Court's five-justice majority ruled that flag burning is highly
expressive conduct that, in a nonviolent setting, is protected by the First
Amendment. The four dissenters disagreed, but even they deplored the demagoguery
and doubted that flag burning amounts to much anymore anyway. Taken together,
that's a pretty flabby basis for rushing to amend the Bill of Rights.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Editorial

                   Copyright 1990 The New York Times Company

                              261 of 288 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 June 21, 1990, Thursday, Late Edition - Final

Ina Balin, 52, Dies; Actress Adopted Vietnamese Girls

BYLINE: By ELEANOR BLAU

SECTION: Section B; Page 7, Column 4; Cultural Desk

LENGTH: 401 words


Ina Balin, a film and stage actress whose adoption of three Vietnamese orphans
was dramatized in a 1980 television movie in which she played herself, died
yesterday at the Yale-New Haven Hospital. She was 52 years old and lived in
Westport, Conn.

A spokesman for the hospital said Ms. Balin died of complications of chronic
lung disease.

Ms. Balin became associated with a Saigon orphanage, An Lac, in 1970, when she
visited it while touring with a U.S.O. show.

Five years later, in the final days of the Vietnam War, she and an another
American, Betty Tisdale, helped evacuate children from the orphanage to the
United States, and Ms. Balin, who was unmarried, adopted three girls. Two were
infants; the other was a 16-year-old who was hidden aboard an evacuation plane,
the actress said, because she was half black and so faced a dismal future in
South Vietnam.

''Adopting those children was the best thing I've ever done in my whole life,''
the Brooklyn-born actress told an interviewer shortly before her story was told
on CBS in ''The Children of An Lac.'' ''It gives you a whole other perspective
on life. It gets you involved with someone other than yourself, because children
truly need you.''

Praised in Broadway Debut

Ms. Balin won critical praise for her Broadway debut in 1957 in ''Compulsion'';
Brooks Atkinson of The New York Times said her portrayal of a convict's friend
was ''tenderly moving.'' In 1959, she appeared in ''A Majority of One'' as the
daughter of a housewife played by Gertrude Berg.

That year Ms. Balin also made her screen debut as Anthony Quinn's daughter in
''The Black Orchid.'' Her other films included ''From the Terrace'' (1960),
''The Young Doctors'' (1961), ''The Comancheros'' (1961), ''The Patsy'' (1964),
''The Greatest Story Every Told'' (1965), ''Charro!'' (1969) and ''The
Projectionist'' (1971).

Ms. Balin, who traveled widely, was also a published photographer and was the
co-owner of the Balin-Traube Art Gallery in New York, which operated on East
74th Street for three years in the early 1960's.

She is survived by her father, Sam Rosenberg of Hallandale, Fla; her daughters,
Ba-Nhi Mai and Kim Thuy, both of Westport, and Nguyet Baty of Berlin; a brother,
Richard Balin of Los Angeles, and two grandchildren.

A memorial service is scheduled for tomorrow at 11 A.M. at the Spear Funeral
Home, 39 South Benson Road, Fairfield, Conn.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo: Ina Balin

TYPE: Obituary

                   Copyright 1990 The New York Times Company

                              262 of 288 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                  June 22, 1990, Friday, Late Edition - Final

Bennett Defends Plan to Fight Drugs in Peru

BYLINE: By PHILIP SHENON, Special to The New York Times

SECTION: Section A; Page 7, Column 1; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 562 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, June 21


The national drug policy director, William J. Bennett, insisted today that
American military aid to Peru, including the use of American military trainers
in coca-producing regions of the country, would not create ''another Vietnam.''

In a speech intended to answer critics who have suggested that the United States
is becoming entangled in an unwinnable guerrilla war in the Andes, Mr. Bennett
said, ''This is not an American invasion, it is not an escalating military
intervention.''

''It is a serious attempt to allow some of the crucial institutions of a free
country - its Government, its courts, its police - to function,'' he said,
rejecting any analogy between American military efforts now in Peru and the
early days of the Vietnam War.

Mr. Bennett appeared to concede today that American soldiers and other
Government officials will risk death as they help Peru fight the Shining Path,
the leftist guerrilla group controlling large parts of the country and said to
protect coca growers and traffickers.

''This is a dangerous enemy and we cannot expect to fight this battle
unscathed,'' Mr. Bennett warned in his address here to the Center for Strategic
and International Studies. ''We have already lost Americans in fighting this
battle in foreign countries. If we are not prepared to face these risks in the
future, then we should not undertake to assist our allies.''

Mr. Bennett's remarks drew a sharp response from Congressional opponents of the
Andean drug policy.

''I think Bennett is very misinformed about the terrible dangers that we face in
Peru,'' said Representative Peter H. Kostmayer, a Pennsylvania Democrat who
today accused the Bush Administration of ''saber rattling.''

''We're talking here about the serious possibility of American involvement in a
long, protracted ground war against a savage insurgency in Latin America,'' he
said in an interview after Mr. Bennett's speech.

On Wednesday, the State Department's chief narcotics specialist, Melvyn
Levitsky, told Congress that millions of dollars in military aid to Peru would
have to be used in part to fight the Shining Path because of what he said was
the guerrilla group's involvement in cocaine trafficking.

According to American estimates, more than 60 percent of the world's illegal
coca is grown in Peru.

Today, Mr. Bennett echoed the State Department argument and also used his speech
to attack lawmakers and news organizations that have criticized the
Administration's plans.

''Some of the more hyperbolic criticism has been particularly reckless,'' he
said. ''If our efforts are characterized as another Vietnam, an American
invasion, or involvement in a foreign war, then we risk crippling a series of
strengthened relationships that our President and the Presidents of the Andean
region have recently forged.

''Our goal is to help Peru take on the very forces that aid and abet the cocaine
trade and threaten the nation's security. We don't want to do it for them -
we've made that clear.''

He insisted that American military trainers would not be involved in combat
against the Shining Path, but would instead work with the armed forces and the
police to make them more effective in controlling drug trafficking.

The newly elected president of Peru, Alberto Fujimori, has not said if he will
accept the military aid and trainers offered by the United States.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1990 The New York Times Company

                              263 of 288 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 June 23, 1990, Saturday, Late Edition - Final

News Summary

SECTION: Section 1; Page 2, Column 5; Metropolitan Desk

LENGTH: 1353 words


International    2-5

Ottawa's plan for Quebec collapsed. The Canadian Government conceded that a long
and divisive effort to confer a special constitutional status on Quebec had
failed.    Page 1

A global relief effort for Iran began as the stunned nation started to grasp the
magnitude of what appeared to be the country's worst earthquake. Thousands of
people, dead and alive, were dug from the rubble.    1

Rules simplifying French spelling have been recommended by the Government
following the approval of the French Academy, the group of 40 intellectual
''immortals'' that has for centuries been the guardians of the French language.
    1

President Gorbachev's reform plan would be bolstered under a proposal by the
West German Government to guarantee a bank credit of five billion Deutsche marks
($3 billion) for the Soviet Union.    1

Strict limits on Germany's military and provisions for a staged withdrawal of
all foreign troops from a united Germany were among the proposals unexpectedly
announced by the Soviet Union.    4

NATO may offer Moscow a proposal for a specific limit for the future German army
as part of the conventional arms reduction treaty now being considered in
Vienna, Administration officials said.    5

West Berlin journal: A symbol of the Cold War is removed    4

A doctrinaire Leninist is leading in the race to become head of the Soviet
Union's newest and largest wing of the Communist Party. The front-runner, Ivan
Polozkov, has criticized President Gorbachev's reforms.    5

Soviets said to pull nuclear arms from some ethnic regions    4

Peace talks in Liberia moved slowly. There were indications that the rebel
forces are poised to advance on Monrovia unless major political concessions are
offered soon.    3

A political purge in China has fizzled. A year after the Communist Party
announced that members who had been involved in the democracy movement would be
ousted, virtually everyone has managed to remain.    3

National    6-10, 24

The northern spotted owl was formally declared a threatened species, clearing
the way for protection of the forest in which the owls live, and setting in
motion a plan that could bring further economic trouble to timber towns in the
Pacific Northwest.    1

President Bush entered the battle over his Administration's handling of the
savings and loan crisis by announcing a plan to send ''teams of razor-sharp
prosecutors and auditors'' to pursue and speed investigations into savings and
loan fraud.    1

''Robin HUD'' drew a prison term. Marilyn Louise Harrell, a former real estate
agent who said she was stealing from the Government to give to the poor, faces
almost four years in prison and may have to pay $600,000 in restitution.    6

Patronage will just be more discreet because of a Supreme Court ruling that the
Constitution prevents the use of partisan political considerations as the basis
for hiring, promoting or transferring most public employees, politicians said.
    6

Lawmakers who blocked a measure amending the Constitution to bar flag
desecration said their decisions were based on a belief that the public mood on
the issue had shifted and on nagging personal concerns over tampering with the
First Amendment.    6

In Barry trial, one tells of incident in drug inquiry    7

Enormous growth disclosed in U.S. list of barred aliens    24

The maximum amount of radiation allowed by the Government for nuclear power
plant workers, medical personnel and others exposed in their work should be cut
drastically, an international commission said.    7

The president of Mills College quit, five weeks after a student strike forced
the trustees of the women's college in Berkeley, Calif., to rescind a decision
to begin admitting men as undergraduates.    7

A new drug against AIDS that is being tested in unconventional clinical trials
is showing good results, the leader of the experiment announced at an AIDS
conference. But his report and the trials themselves were criticized by others
at the meeting.    10

Cancer experts endorse less-radical breast surgery form    7

Nelson Mandela pressed his call for continued economic sanctions as a way to
force change in South Africa in an address at the United Nations, and perhaps
more importantly, at a private meeting with major American business executives
and investors.    8

Winnie Mandela accepted tributes across New York City. She spoke of her
sufferings, vowed to continue her fight against apartheid and reassured those
worried about the effects of the demanding tour on her husband.    9

Pretoria arrests 11 whites tied to plot to kill Mandela    8

TV Review: Making a South African into a hometown hero    9

The defiant freed fist collects a few dollars    9

Reporter's Notebook: A slogan sows confusion    8

Regional    25-27

The zodiac gunman's four victims may have been stalked and not selected at
random as the police had originally thought, the New York City Police
Department's Chief of Detectives said.    25

A 1-year-old girl was buried on Long Island, five days after a Brooklyn woman
seeking to adopt her reportedly shook her, struck her and dropped her on the
floor because she was crying too much.    25

Changes in the adoption laws that could shorten the time to adopt children who
have been abandoned or neglected by their biological parents are being
negotiated by Governor Cuomo and legislative leaders.    27

Shelter finds popularity by doing good invisibly    26

The indictments of 12 men accused of rigging painting contracts spotlights a
wider problem in the city's construction industry: the secret pacts between the
Mafia, union officials and corrupt contractors, authorities say.     25

Restrictions on spending await both the troubled urban school systems in New
Jersey that are gaining millions of more dollars under the state's revised
school-financing formula and the wealthy suburban districts facing sharp
cutbacks in aid.    25

Catholics disapprove of excommunication threat    26

The defense rests in Vento trial    27

M.T.A. keeps token clerks, but cuts trains and painters    27

Business Digest    31

Sports

The major football conferences, lured by larger television market shares, are
raiding other conferences and courting independent schools for stronger teams,
setting the stage for regional college football monopolies by the middle of the
1990's.    1

Baseball: Viola wins 10th    43

Yanks win in 15th inning    43

Expos gain on Pirates    45

Basketball: Thompson stays at Georgetown    45

Column: Rhoden on college sports    43

Golf: McCallister leads Buick Classic    43

Soccer: Second round begins    45

Consumer's World    48

Questions on accuracy of labs

San Pellegrino water recalled

Coping with car stereo theft

Help for old or ailing pets

Guidepost

Arts/Entertainment

A tribute to Milt Hinton    11

Brooklyn Museum plans cuts    11

Met Opera manager resigns    11

Theater: ''Swim Visit''    12

Book: Two views of Korean War    15

TV: Good ratings for ''Ring''    46

Obituaries    29

Paul Friedlander, retired travel editor of The Times

Editorials/Letters/Op-Ed

Editorials    22

Make nuclear weapons safer

Assault on Legal Services

Furry trout, other creations

Topics: Pride of the Yankees

Letters    22

Flora Lewis: Nonproliferate peace    23

Russell Baker: Two summer places    23

Jann S. Wenner: Drug war - a new Vietnam?    23

Michael C. Burda: The wild, wild East    23

Galway Kinnell: Oatmeal    23

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Summary

                   Copyright 1990 The New York Times Company

                              264 of 288 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 June 23, 1990, Saturday, Late Edition - Final

For Flag Vote, History Won Over Political Risk

BYLINE: By SUSAN F. RASKY, Special to The New York Times

SECTION: Section 1; Page 6, Column 1; National Desk

LENGTH: 1077 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, June 22


Representative Mary Rose Oakar of Ohio reread the Bill of Rights and wondered
why she had not done so sooner. Representative Glenn Poshard of Illinois
revisited some of the sacred shrines of American history. Representative Peter
Hoagland of Nebraska consulted his old law school friends and veterans' groups.

These lawmakers and other wavering Democrats who provided the critical votes to
block a constitutional amendment barring flag desecration said today that their
decisions had been based on a belief that the public mood on the issue had
shifted and on nagging personal concerns over tampering with the First
Amendment.

Even though some Democrats acknowledged the political risk in opposing the
amendment, several said that by the time the vote came, they simply could not
acquiesce to altering the Constitution.

Political Damage Unknown

''I don't know what the political damage will be,'' said Representative
Hoagland, who has a serious Republican challenge this fall. ''When you vote for
something like this, it goes away and nobody pays attention. When you vote
against it, you have to spend a lot of time and energy explaining why.''

Mr. Hoagland, a First Amendment lawyer, supported a constitutional amendment
last year to protect the flag but said he had had doubts ever since. Despite
strong warnings from his staff that he would be in political jeopardy if he
voted against the amendment, he decided to do so anyway.

In the end, Mr. Hoagland said, his decision to vote against the amendment
resulted from a struggle with his conscience. ''I didn't want my tombstone
inscription to be that I supported an amendment to weaken the Constitution.''
Mr. Hoagland spoke in a telephone interview from Omaha, where he had just
concluded a news conference to explain his vote.

Late Night Decisions

For some Democrats, like Representative Oakar and Representative Tim Valentine
of North Carolina, the moment of truth did not come until the night before the
Thursday vote.

''I know it sounds corny,'' Ms. Oaker said, ''but I stayed up and read a
biography of Patrick Henry and the Bill of Rights.''

She said that when she got a phone call that night from the House Speaker,
Thomas S. Foley, she told him to leave her alone and give her time to think.

''It was a cultural thing for me,'' she said. ''My father was born on the Fourth
of July; he was a flag waver, a World War II veteran who taught us how to fold
it and display it. If my constituents see some guy on television burning the
flag, they go psycho. I was really going to vote for that amendment.''

Political Reality of District

Mr. Valentine, who last year sought a constitutional change to protect the flag
and who was one of the co-sponsors of this year's amendment, said that support
was dictated in part by the political reality in his conservative district. ''As
we went along I was going to vote for it but hoping in my heart that it would
not pass,'' he said.

Like Ms. Oakar, he decided to go against the amendment because of a recognition
that his constituents were not exercised enough over the flag issue to justify
his tampering with the First Amendment.

''Without any question,'' he said, ''there was not as much clamor or as much
interest as there was a year ago.''

Fear of a Backlash

Representative Richard J. Durbin of Illinois, another Democrat who agonized over
his decision to reject the amendment, said he and his staff braced for the worst
when his hometown newspaper ran a front-page story several days before the vote
saying he was leaning against the amendment. But to his surprise, the deluge of
mail he had expected did not come.

''I got a total of 32 letters and phone calls on this subject,'' he said. ''Last
year it was the first question at every town meeting.''

Mr. Durbin credited Mr. Foley with refocusing the flag debate on the
constitutional question and with not making the vote a test of party loyalty.

''I think Bob Dole and some of the other Republicans made a serious error in
politicizing it,'' Mr. Durbin said, referring to the Senate Republican leader
who has led the campaign for the amendment.

Mr. Dole today assailed the House for rejecting the amendment but predicted that
it would probably be defeated in the Senate as well when it comes to a vote
there next week. The Senate vote is purely perfunctory since approval by a
two-thirds majority is needed from both houses of Congress before constitutional
amendments can be submitted to the states for ratification.

Help From House Leadership

Wavering Democrats also had some help from the House leadership, which for
months supplied them with national polling data and editorial commentary showing
that support for a constitutional amendment was far from overwhelming.

Represenative David E. Bonior of Michigan, the deputy Democratic whip, who is a
Vietnam veteran, coordinated the effort despite the fact that he faces a tough
race at home, where the flag vote is likely to be used against him.

Mr. Bonior and others working against the amendment arranged to have veterans
serving in Congress make appearances on behalf of Democrats in difficult
districts. Mr. Bonior's group also coordinated efforts with People for the
American Way, a civil-liberties and anti-censorship organization in Washington.
The organization broadcast television advertisements against the amendment in
New York, Los Angeles and Washington and has supplied scripts for radio and
television ads to members who may need them in the fall election campaign.

Some Face Little Threat

For all the concern about voter reaction, some of the conservative Democrats who
decided at the last minute to oppose the amendment, face little threat at the
polls this fall. Representative Charles W. Stenholm of Texas for example, is
running unopposed, and Mr. Valentine and Mr. Durbin face only token Republican
opposition. But Mr. Valentine said the flag issue was like a virus, something
that could re-emerge to plague him at any time.

Several lawmakers insisted that when they were faced with the choice of amending
the Bill of Rights, politics seemed secondary.

Representative Poshard, who last year co-sponsored a constitutional amendment on
the flag, agonized for a year and made up his mind last week after taking his
family to visit Independence Hall in Philadelphia and the Gettysburg
battlefield. Abraham Lincoln, he said, never mentioned the flag in his famous
address.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1990 The New York Times Company

                              265 of 288 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 June 23, 1990, Saturday, Late Edition - Final

Books of The Times;
2 Views of Korean War, One Lofty, One Muddy

BYLINE: By Herbert Mitgang

SECTION: Section 1; Page 15, Column 1; Cultural Desk

LENGTH: 951 words



The Coldest War
A Memoir of Korea
By James Brady
Illustrated. 248 pages. Orion Books/Crown Publishers.
$19.95.
Drawing the Line
The Korean War, 1950-1953
By Richard Whelan
Illustrated. 428 pages. Little, Brown & Company. $24.95.

Overshadowed by World War II and later by the Vietnam War, the Korean War has
come to be known as a forgotten war. It began 40 years ago Monday, when on a
Sunday morning troops of Soviet-dominated North Korea crossed the 38th Parallel
and invaded American-supported South Korea. The United Nations denounced the
aggression and the Truman Administration decided to defend the nominally
democratic South Korean Government, at an eventual cost of some 33,000 American
lives between 1950 and 1953. The invasion marked more than a civil war between
the people of a divided country; in a larger sense, it signaled a break between
the two great power blocs that had emerged from World War II.

At the outset, President Harry S. Truman called the defense of South Korea by
the United Nations forces (mainly American) simply a ''police action.'' But to
the soldiers and marines who fought the North Koreans and then the Chinese in
those bitter hills, it certainly resembled a conventional killing war. Among the
marines was a new 22-year-old second lieutenant, James Brady, who had joined the
Reserves in college to avoid the draft and soon afterward found himself bound
for Korea.

In ''The Coldest War,'' Mr. Brady has written a superb personal memoir of the
way it was. It wasn't anything like the amusing anti-military television series
''M*A*S*H,'' not by a long shot. What distinguishes Mr. Brady's book is its
clarity and modesty; there is no heroic flag-waving here.

Like all honest reporting about the reality of combat in any war, it leaves an
antiwar aftertaste. He writes: ''For all the firefights, for the little swagger
I now permitted myself, I knew how raw I still was, as a soldier, as a man. I
wondered whether anyone ever became really good at war. An unnatural act,
killing, and trying to kill.''

Mr. Brady was a platoon leader in a rifle company in the First Marine Division,
a position with a traditionally high casualty rate. He and his men patrolled
almost every night, setting up ambushes, trying to make contact with the enemy,
shivering in below-zero weather, living in the shadows behind barbed wire.

''Now it was the cold, rather than the enemy, that hurt us,'' writes Mr. Brady,
who later became a novelist and journalist. Sometimes walking along dangerous
mountain trails in daytime, his eyes slitted against the bright sun coming off
the snow, he would smile to himself, thinking of his mother's admonition at
home: ''Don't forget your rubbers. It looks like rain.'' But his was mostly a
nighttime war.

Despite the heavy weapons and tanks and aircraft, he discovered that Korea
wasn't a remote push-button war; it was more like Flanders in World War I or the
Wilderness campaign in the Civil War. There were jets and warships, but Dog
Company didn't see them very often. Korea was mostly fought by infantrymen with
M-1 rifles, machine guns, hand grenades, mortars and mines. Life existed in
sandbagged bunkers; but sometimes death by artillery fire even struck there.

Coming back from one patrol when his platoon had grenades rolled down on them,
he stopped at an aid station. When he took off his pants, shrapnel fell out. ''I
don't know how anyone who hasn't been shot at up close in a real firefight can
possibly understand how good you feel afterward,'' he writes. ''Later, I was
sure, I would mourn the dead and the damaged. But not now. If you were not truly
happy at a moment like this when you had just come down off the line walking,
perhaps you never would be.''

''The Coldest War'' ends eloquently: ''I knew I would never go back to Korea,
never sign up for an old soldiers' tour. I didn't want to see the hills again or
feel the cold or hear the wind out of Siberia, moaning. I didn't want to disturb
the dead.''

The diplomatic and political origins of the Korean War are not forgotten by
Richard Whelan in ''Drawing the Line.'' Why, five years after victory in World
War II, did President Truman and his advisers decide to fight a war on the Asian
mainland? The author, a historian, says the United States had no more strategic
interest in Korea than it later had in Vietnam. His provocative book sees the
Korean War in the context of the foreign and domestic aspects of the cold war:

''American intervention in Korea was primarily symbolic in intention; it was
meant to demonstrate to the world America's willingness and ability to aid
friends and allies in their struggle to resist Soviet domination. It was a
matter of credibility and prestige. It was a matter of timing in relation to
events elsewhere. And it was a matter of Truman's demonstrating to the nation
and to the world that he was as determined to halt the spread of Communism as
was any Republican.''

''Drawing the Line'' recalls the details about the conflict and its
repercussions: Gen. Douglas MacArthur's belligerent actions that provoked the
Chinese to enter the war; his removal from command by President Truman for
exceeding his authority and playing politics; President Truman's own diplomatic
mistakes; Dwight D. Eisenhower's political pledge as the Republican nominee for
President in 1952, ''I shall go to Korea,'' implying that he could end the war.

Like so much about the Korean War, the author's conclusion that it ''resolved
nothing'' is debatable. Regrettably, the war did prove that a United Nations
peacekeeping role for the world remained an elusive dream. Advance
Publicationsd(Crown Publishers)Time Warnerd(Little, Brown)

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photos: James Brady (Orion Books/Crown); Richard Whelan (Little, Brown)

TYPE: Review

                   Copyright 1990 The New York Times Company

                              266 of 288 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                  June 24, 1990, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

WAR MOVIES;
On the Home Front

SECTION: Section 2; Page 3, Column 1; Arts and Leisure Desk

LENGTH: 242 words


To the Editor:

Thomas Bird's analysis of American war films [''Man and Boy Confront the Images
of War,'' May 27] contends that Vietnam veterans were the first to be depicted
by Hollywood as needing tranquilizers like Thorazine. ''I don't remember seeing
[such representations] in any World War II movie,'' Mr. Bird writes, citing only
''Let There Be Light,'' a 1946 documentary withheld from release for 30 years,
as the one film from World War II truthful enough to show ''shell-shocked
veterans.''

Mr. Bird's view seems to me remarkably short-sighted - typical of the Vietnam
veteran who feels that because he lost his war he was the first ex-serviceman to
be depicted on the screen in a less than heroic light. Apparently, Mr. Bird has
never seen such films as ''I'll Be Seeing You'' (1944), with Joseph Cotten
emotionally traumatized by battle on Guadalcanal; ''Teresa'' (1951), with John
Ericson running wild-eyed to Rod Steiger's psychiatric haven, or ''Shadow in the
Sky'' (1951), with Ralph Meeker as an ex-Marine who becomes hysterical every
time it rains.

I could cite approximately 100 more films, all of them featuring as their
central protagonist a World War II veteran suffering from what we now term
post-traumatic stress disorder. That's because my dissertation (in progress) is
entitled ''Coming Home From 'The Good War': World War II Veterans as Depicted in
American Film and Fiction.''

JAMES DEUTSCH
Washington

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Letter

                   Copyright 1990 The New York Times Company

                              267 of 288 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                  June 24, 1990, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

MUSIC VIEW;
HAS THE CLOCK RUN OUT FOR EARLY MUSIC?

BYLINE: By DONAL HENAHAN

SECTION: Section 2; Page 23, Column 1; Arts and Leisure Desk

LENGTH: 1041 words


In the late 1940's, the coincident arrival of two technological advances,
high-fidelity sound and the LP record, created a synergetic wave that engulfed
every aspect of music. It changed how, why and when we listen to music. The
flood of recorded works, new and old, forced millions of listeners to realize
that musical history did not begin with Bach and end with Brahms. Older music
had been pursued by a few connoisseurs for centuries before this confluence of
20th-century technologies - Baron von Swieten introducing Mozart to the
contrapuntal wonders of Bach and Handel is a familiar example. But early music
as a popular cause is only about 40 years old, which apparently is not too soon
to experience a midlife crisis.

Such a conclusion, at any rate, is easily drawn from an article by Thomas
Forrest Kelly in the spring issue of Historical Performance, the journal of
Early Music America. Mr. Kelly, who is president of Early Music America as well
as chairman of the historical performance program at the Oberlin College
Conservatory, believes it may be time ''to think of retiring the early-music
movement,'' which has reached many of its goals but has also succeeded in
setting itself aside from mainstream music. As it has matured, the movement has
struggled to detach itself from the horns of several philosophical and practical
dilemmas, among them the thorny issue of ''authenticity.'' A rising chorus of
complaints from its own musicologically sophisticated adherents who understand
that historical authenticity is an impossibility has taken the sheen off that
word.

Even a composer as recently dead as Mahler (1911) sabotages any effort to label
performances of his works as ''authentic'' or ''definitive.'' Norman Lebrecht,
in the June issue of Musical Times, describes how Mahler in conducting his own
music fiddled obsessively with the instrumentation and changed interpretations.
Perhaps Mahler's neuroticism made him an extreme example, but in greater or
lesser degree the same must be true of any composer's music in any era. Mr.
Lebrecht particularly deplores the notion that deviations among performances may
be ''averaged out to produce a happy medium.'' He contends that ''there are
numerous Mahler [performance] traditions, often contradicting one another.''

What can be most usefully determined by scholarship are certain general
characteristics of an era's musical style, as these overriding ideas were bent
to the purposes of individual performers. There is the ever-lurking danger of
forcing a few facts into large conclusions, such as the belief, once popular
among performers, that trills in Baroque music always started on the upper note
and on the beat. That is not ''authenticity'' but historical fiction.

Still, the ideal of fidelity to musical history now exerts an appeal over a
large, heterogeneous public, which has embraced the idea that early music sounds
best when played on ''original instruments'' (most often, modern copies). In
fact, as the movement has succeeded in interesting mainstream listeners and many
professional musicians in its search for the Grail of historical plausiblity, if
not truth, some of the thrill has gone for early-music militants. Increasingly,
they find it harder and harder to tell who is us and who is them.

In effect, therefore, Mr. Kelly proposes a solution similar to the one an
adviser during the Vietnam War urged on President Lyndon Johnson: declare
victory and get out. ''In what may be the last years of acoustic music,'' he
suggests, ''we might do well to embrace our brethren in a common effort to take
music, and its performance, seriously.'' He does not suggest that the
early-music movement be abolished tomorrow, but he does ''hope our continuing
efforts will be an aspect of music (not early music), of performance (not
historical performance) and of American musical life in its broadest sense.''
Confronted as we are by the all-devouring maw of electronic sound machines and
other dehumanizing elements in musical life, the ''Gotterdammerung'' overtones
in Mr. Kelly's editorial are understandable. Acoustical music may indeed be in
its final moments, soon fated to be thought of, if at all, as a quaint but
bypassed phenomenon like the castrato or the unlip-synced song. As that bad
dream threatens to become reality, new alliances among scholars, musicians and
listeners become inevitable. Many debates will lose their point. Lions may lie
down with lambs. Admirers of Roger Norrington or Christopher Hogwood might
detect previously unsuspected merits in the acoustically plush performances of a
Stokowski, a Segovia or a Beecham. For that to happen, however, one-issue
enthusiasts would have to abandon the air of naive righteousness that has caused
some professional musicians to regard the early-music movement as a kind of
Children's Crusade even while conceding its artistic and commercial impact. If
the Children's Crusade comparison seems overly harsh, consider an editorial
comment in the same issue of Historical Performance, by its senior editor, Paul
C. Echols, who looks back at the early-music movement in this country and sees
parallels with rise of rock music and the ''political and countercultural
ferment of the 1960's.'' The early-music movement grew, he recalls, out of
efforts of small collegiate groups who were looking for an alternative music.
''They took up the lute instead of the guitar, and they heard not only the call
of Bob Dylan but also that of Josquin and Monteverdi.'' Times indeed have
changed. The summer workshop that once attracted mainly musical novices has
given way to the businesslike ''institute,'' the collegium musicum of old has
turned into the ''historical performance ensemble.'' There is a wistful tone in
Mr. Echols's comment that ''the amateurism of those early years has given way to
the professionalism of the present.'' He hopes ''the sectarianism of the
movement - a defensive mechanism left over from our days as a fringe group -
will evaporate, but that the thrill of discovery and the search for humanistic
goals will remain.'' That thrill and that search are what gave authenticity to
the early-music movement in its youth and no doubt will see it through the
midlife crisis.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1990 The New York Times Company

                              268 of 288 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                  June 24, 1990, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

VIETNAM VETERANS MEMORIAL

SECTION: Section 6; Page 10, Column 4; Magazine Desk

LENGTH: 170 words


When I read ''Voices at the Wall'' (May 27), I thought that my father, Tad
Yoshizawa, a retired lieutenant colonel in the United States Air Force, might
have contributed to the poignant reflections in Michael Norman's article. I was
wrong, of course. But I would like to contribute his experience now. I should
begin by saying that my father is a man of few words and even fewer stories of
this nature.

Last year, he went to see the Vietnam Veterans Memorial and to look for the
names of Harry Coates and ''Duncan Smiley'' - two of his buddies who had given
their lives in Vietnam. He located the name of Harry Coates and carefully made a
rubbing of the raised letters on the wall. He spent nearly an hour trying to
find Duncan's name, checking variations in spellings, but finally had to give
up. As he walked away, still following the wall, he stopped, inexplicably, and
looked up. There, among the hundreds of names, he saw the one he was searching
for: Duncan Smyley.

CYD YOSHIZAWA
  New York, N.Y.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Letter

                   Copyright 1990 The New York Times Company

                              269 of 288 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                  June 24, 1990, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

Giap Remembers

BYLINE: By Stanley Karnow; Stanley Karnow is the author of ''Vietnam: A
History.'' He recently won the Pulitzer Prize in history for ''In Our Image:
America's Empire in the Philippines'' (Random House).

SECTION: Section 6; Page 22, Column 2; Magazine Desk

LENGTH: 4549 words


WE MET AT THE FORMER FRENCH COLONIAL governor's palace in Hanoi, an ornate
mansion set in a spacious garden ablaze with hibiscus and bougainvillea, where
senior Vietnamese officials receive guests. A short man with smooth skin, white
hair, narrow eyes and a spry gait, he wore a simple olive uniform, the four
stars on its collar the only sign of his rank. Smiling broadly, he grasped me
with soft, almost feminine hands and then, to my astonishment, bussed my cheeks
in traditional French style.

Despite his Asian traits, this elfin figure might have been a courtly old
Frenchman. But here was Gen. Vo Nguyen Giap, the Vietnamese Communist commander,
the peer of Grant, Lee, Rommel and MacArthur in the pantheon of military
leaders.

A bold strategist, skilled logician and tireless organizer, Giap fought for more
than 30 years, building a handful of ragtag guerrillas into one of the world's
most effective armies. He surmounted stupendous odds to crush the French, but
his crowning achievement was to vanquish America's overwhelmingly superior
forces in Vietnam - the only defeat the United States has sustained in its
history.

I covered the two wars - which in many respects were phases of the same war -
the first indirectly from Paris and the second as a correspondent in Vietnam. My
reporting and subsequent research for a book brought me into contact with senior
soldiers from the opposing sides. Giap was unique, having been both a policy
maker and a field officer. I had studied his career, and sought to see him on an
earlier trip to Hanoi. But only on this recent return did he grant me an
interview.

The French once dubbed Giap the ''snow-covered volcano'' - a glacial exterior
concealing a volatile temperament. Now approaching 80, he seems to have mellowed
with age. But he still displays the intellectual vigor and fierce determination
that propelled him to victory - and have made him a legend. Giap attributes his
success to innate genius rather than to any formal training as a soldier. As he
laughingly told me, ''I was a self-taught general.'' A DAY AFTER OUR FIRST
ENCOUNTER IJU drove to Giap's private residence, a handsome French colonial
villa, its parlor lined with a polyglot assortment of volumes and decorated with
busts and portraits of Marx, Lenin and Ho Chi Minh, the deified leader of modern
Vietnam. His wife, a buxom, cheerful woman, served fruit as he played the
paterfamilias, proudly introducing his eldest daughter, an eminent nuclear
physicist, and cuddling his grandchildren in his lap. He spoke flawless French
slightly seasoned by a tonal Vietnamese inflection. Commenting on my fluency in
French, he remarked, ''I am glad to see that you are cosmopolitan'' - as if he
felt that we shared a bond as products of France's FITGgrande mission
civilisatrice. FNMGLike many Vietnamese nationalists of his generation, Giap had
embraced French culture while struggling against French colonialism.

But as he began to talk seriously, he exploded in a torrent of words. Endowed
with a prodigious memory, he recalled the names of old comrades or detailed
events dating back decades. He was often didactic, a vestige of his youth as a
schoolteacher, and he lapsed into political bromides that evoked his
revolutionary past. At times he sounded ironic - as he did when he cited Gen.
William C. Westmoreland's ''considerable military knowledge,'' then proceeded to
list what he viewed as the American commander's blunders in FITG(Continued on
Page 36) FNMGVietnam. And, like generals everywhere, he glossed over his
setbacks. He admitted that, yes, ''there were difficult moments when we wondered
how we could go on.'' Yet, he thundered, ''We were never pessimistic. Never!
Never! Never!''

Giap's men did indeed show phenomenal tenacity during the war, confounding
United States strategists who assumed that sheer might would crack their morale.
Westmoreland, pointing to the grim ''body count'' of enemy dead, constantly
claimed that the Communists were about to collapse. Following the war, still
perplexed by his failure, Westmoreland said, ''Any American commander who took
the same vast losses as Giap would have been sacked overnight.''

But Giap was not an American among strange people in a faraway land. His troops
and their civilian supporters were fighting on their own soil, convinced that
their sacrifices would erode the patience of their foes and, over time, bring
Vietnam under Communist control. He had used this strategy against France, and
he was confident that it would work against the United States.

''We were not strong enough to drive out a half-million American troops, but
that wasn't our aim,'' he told me. ''Our intention was to break the will of the
American Government to continue the war. Westmoreland was wrong to expect that
his superior firepower would grind us down. If we had focused on the balance of
forces, we would have been defeated in two hours. We were waging a people's war
- FITGa la maniere vietnamienne. FNMGAmerica's sophisticated arms, electronic
devices and all the rest were to no avail in the end. In war there are the two
factors - human beings and weapons. Ultimately, though, human begins are the
decisive factor. Human beings! Human beings!'' How long was he prepared to
fight? ''Another twenty years, even a hundred years, as long as it took to win,
regardless of cost,'' Giap replied instantly. What, in fact, had been the cost?
''We still don't know,'' he said, refusing, despite my persistence, to hazard a
guess. But one of his aides confided to me that at least a million of their
troops perished, the majority of them in the American war. As for the civilian
toll, he said, ''We haven't the faintest idea.''

Listening to these horrendous statistics recalled to me the Americans who
observed during the war that Asians have little regard for human life. But,
judging from the carnage of two World Wars, the West is hardly a model of
compassion. Moreover, Giap maintains, the Communists would have paid any price
for victory because they were dedicated to a cause that reflects Vietnam's
national heritage - a legacy that has also fueled its fierce martial spirit.

''Throughout our history,'' he intoned, ''our profoundest ideology, the
pervasive feeling of our people, has been patriotism.'' I knew what he meant. A
battlefield for 4,000 years, Vietnam is awash in stories of real or mythical
warriors who resisted foreign invaders, mainly Chinese. Its struggles forged a
sense of national identity that is still alive in poetry and folk art, and in
rural pagodas where children burn joss sticks before the statues of fabled
heroes and heroines. THE FRENCH HADJU conquered Vietnam by the early 20th
century, but their authority was recurrently challenged by uprisings, which they
often quelled brutally. Giap was nurtured in this climate of rebellion. The
elder of two sons in a family of five children, he was born in 1911 in the Quang
Binh Province village of An Xa, just above the line that would divide Vietnam 43
years later. The region of rice fields and jungles, set against a horizon of
hazy mountains, had only been recently ''pacified'' by the French, and the
exploits of its local partisans were still fresh memories.

At the village kindergarten Giap was taught elementary French, but at home his
parents spoke only Vietnamese and, as he put it, ''they ingrained patriotism in
me.'' His father, a scholarly peasant, manifested his nationalism by teaching
written Vietnamese in Chinese ideographs. From him Giap learned to read his
first book, a child's history of Vietnam: ''I discovered our forebears, our
martyrs, our duty to expunge the disgrace of past humiliations.''

His voice softened as he recalled the day he left home for primary school. ''My
mama and I were separating for the first time, and we both wept.'' In 1924, he
went to the old imperial capital of Hue to attend the prestigious Quoc Hoc
academy, whose alumni included Ho Chi Minh and Ngo Din Diem, later the
anti-Communist president of South Vietnam. There, barely 13, he began his
political education. Students met secretly to discuss anticolonial articles -
particularly those by a mysterious expatriate, Nguyen Ai Quoc, ''Nguyen the
Patriot,'' later known as Ho Chi Minh. But Giap was especially inspired by Phan
Boi Chau, an early nationalist whom the French had put under house arrest in
Hue. He imitated Chau's exhortations for me: ''The cock is crowing! Arise, arise
and prepare for action!''

Thus aroused, the youths protested openly against a French ban on nationalist
activities. The protest fizzled, and Giap was expelled from school. ''We now
wondered what to do next,'' he recalled. ''Nobody knew. We lacked direction.''

He found his gospel after he was hired to assist a Vietnamese teacher who owned
an illicit collection of Marx's works in French. ''I spent my nights reading
them, and my eyes opened,'' he said. ''Marxism promised revolution, an end to
oppression, the happiness of mankind. It echoed the appeals of Ho Chi Minh, who
had written that downtrodden peoples should join the proletariat of all
countries to gain their liberation. Nationalism made me a Marxist, as it did so
many Vietnamese intellectuals and students.''

Still he clung to the Confucian ethic of his father. ''Marxism also seemed to me
to coincide with the ideals of our ancient society,'' he added, ''when the
emperor and his subjects lived in harmony. It was a utopian dream.''

By 1930, the global depression had hit Vietnam, and peasant unrest spread
through the country, spurring radicals to rebel against the French, who
summarily executed hundreds in reprisal. Foreseeing further revolts, Ho hastily
founded the Indochinese Communist Party.

Now a professional agitator, Giap was arrested and sentenced to three years in
prison, but a sympathetic French official released him earlier. He went to
Hanoi, graduated from a French school, the Lycee Albert Sarraut, then obtained a
law degree at the University of Hanoi, another French institution.

To earn a living, he taught at a private school, where his courses included
Vietnamese history - ''to imbue my students with patriotism,'' he told me. He
also lectured on the French Revolution ''to propagate the ideals of liberty,
equality and fraternity.'' When I asked him to name his French hero, he snapped,
''Robespierre!'' ''But he was the architect of the Terror,'' I remonstrated.
''Robespierre!'' he repeated. ''Robespierre fought to the end for the people.''
And Napoleon? ''Bonaparte, yes. He was a revolutionary. Napoleon, no. He
betrayed the people.''

In 1936, Socialists and Communists formed a Popular Front government in Paris,
and tensions in Vietnam eased. Giap had by then joined the Communist Party,
which could now legally publish newspapers in French and Vietnamese, and he
wrote articles in both languages. He married Minh Khai, a Communist militant,
and they had a daughter. The physicist I met at his home in Hanoi was the child
grown up.

Giap avidly read Ho's writings as they reached Vietnam. ''I tried to imagine
this man,'' he said. ''I looked forward to meeting him some day.'' His chance
came in early 1940.

Ho, then in China, decided to reinforce his movement in Vietnam, and he summoned
Giap and Pham Van Dong, the future Vietnamese Prime Minister. Left behind,
Giap's wife was arrested. She died in prison following the execution of her
sister, also a Communist, by a French firing squad. Giap was distraught when he
learned of their deaths three years afterward. He subsequently married Dang Bich
Ha, his present wife, the daughter of a professor.

In Kunming, the Yunnan Province capital, Giap met Ho, a frail figure with a
wispy beard, who then called himself Vuong. Giap was disappointed. ''Here was
this legend,'' he told me, ''but he was just a man, like any other man.''

Ho ordered him to Yenan, in north China, where the Chinese Communists conducted
courses on guerrilla warfare. Balking, Giap said, ''I wield a pen, not a
sword.'' But he went nevertheless, wearing an oversized Chinese army uniform. En
route, he received a telegram from Ho, countermanding the order. France had
fallen to the Germans, and the situation in Vietnam was about to change
completely. The moment had come, Ho said, to return to Vietnam.

Early in 1941, Ho set foot in his homeland for the first time in more than 30
years. He established his sanctuary in a cave near Pac Bo, a remote village
nestled in an eerie landscape of limestone hills. There, joined by Giap and
others, he founded the Vietnam Doc Lap Dong Minh, the Vietnam Independence
League - Vietminh for short. From its name he borrowed his most famous alias, Ho
Chi Minh - roughly Bringer of Light.

''Political action should precede military action,'' Ho asserted. Giap and his
comrades started by recruiting the poor, alienated hill tribes of the region.
They trekked through the mountains, creating cells of five men and women, who in
turn converted other villagers to the cause. The cells multiplied swiftly -
testimony to Giap's organizational skill.

Meanwhile, Giap began to form guerrilla bands to guard the political cadres. He
assumed a FITGnom de guerreFNMG, Van, but he had no military experience. Except
for a dud Chinese shell, he had never handled a lethal device - not even a gun.
His partisans possessed only knives and a few old flintlocks. Once they did
acquire a grenade, but he could not figure out how to detonate it. He also tried
in vain to polish his ragged ranks. Sounding like a drill sergeant as he told me
the story, he said: ''We didn't even know how to march in French - FITGun, deux,
un, deuxFNMG. So I translated the numbers into Vietnamese - FITGmot, hai, mot,
haiFNMG.''

He recalls that time as harrowing. Hunted by French patrols, Giap's bands
retreated into the jungle, where they suffered from diseases, and subsisted on
bark and roots. Learning as he went along, Giap taught his soldiers to wade
through streams or move during rainstorms to deter pursuit, to store supplies,
to communicate secretly, and to ferret out informers. Despite his constant fear
of failure, the movement grew.

Still he remained an intellectual, writing theoretical articles for his
followers. Once, after scanning them, Ho sniffed, ''No peasant will understand
this stuff.''

The Japanese had invaded Vietnam after entering World War II, and the Vietminh
guerrillas resisted them as well as the French - thereby enhancing their
nationalist image. By 1944 Ho was certain that America would win the war and
back him. Not only had President Franklin D. Roosevelt denounced French
colonialism, but the Office of Strategic Services, the precursor of the Central
Intelligence Agency, was also then helping the Vietminh in exchange for
information on Japanese troop deployments. Ho, calculating that a show of
strength would boost his movement, ordered Giap to form larger ''armed
propaganda teams'' and to attack isolated French garrisons.

Giap assembled a team of 34 guerrillas, among them three women. Resembling
ordinary peasants in their conic hats and indigo pajamas, they attacked two tiny
French posts on Christmas Eve, 1944, killing their French officers and seizing
their arsenals. The skirmishes are commemorated to this day as the birth of the
Vietnamese army. Beaming as he recalled these episodes, Giap said: ''Recently I
read an old French report on the engagements. It stated that our troops were
brave and disciplined - and that their leader displayed a mastery of guerrilla
tactics. FITGQuel compliment!FNMG''

The victory swelled Ho's ranks. In September 1945, following Japan's surrender,
he declared the independence of Vietnam. Named commander of the Vietminh armed
forces, Giap assumed the rank of general. Ho also appointed him Minister of
Interior, a position Giap reportedly used to liquidate a number of non-Communist
nationalist parties - and, some sources allege, even his Communist rivals.
Unlike Ho, who wore an ascetic cotton tunic and rubber-tire sandals, Giap
affected a white suit, striped tie and fedora, perhaps to advertise his Western
tastes.

Ho offered to remain affiliated with France, but the French rebuffed his
compromise, and war broke out in 1946. Giap preserved his teams and built up
popular sympathy. By late 1949, the Chinese Communists had conquered China and
begun to send him heavy weapons, which enabled him to enlarge his guerrilla
bands into battalions, regiments and ultimately divisions. Giap opened the path
into Vietnam for Chinese arms shipments by destroying the French border posts in
a series of lightning attacks.

Stunned, France sent out its most distinguished general: Jean de Lattre de
Tassigny. Giap gallantly announced that the Vietminh now faced ''an adversary
worthy of its steel.'' But de Lattre died of cancer amid plans for an ambitious
French offensive. Both sides sparred for the next three years as Gen. Henri
Navarre, now the French commander, forecast victory in a statement that would be
his unofficial epitaph: ''We see it clearly - like light at the end of the
tunnel.''

By 1953 Ho was considering negotiations with France. But he knew he had to win
on the battlefield to win at the conference table. The arena would be Dien Bien
Phu, which was to equal Waterloo and Gettysburg among the great battles of
history.

''At first I had no idea where - or even whether - the battle would take
place,'' he recalled. Then, a veteran recounting his war, he reconstructed the
scene by moving the cups and saucers around the coffee table in front of us.

Navarre, ordered to defend nearby Laos, chose the site by placing his best
battalions at Dien Bien Phu, a distant valley not far from the Laotian border in
northwest Vietnam - never imagining that Giap would fight there. He misjudged
badly.

Giap brought a huge force into the area. His troops marched for weeks, carrying
supplies on bicycles and their backs through jungles and over mountains. But no
task was tougher than deploying the cannon that China had furnished them.
Relying on sheer muscle, they dragged the howitzers up the hills above the
French positions. ''It was difficult, FITGn'est-ce pas, FNMGvery difficult,''
Giap recollected, adding that only truly ''motivated'' men could have performed
such a feat.

He planned to launch his attack on Jan. 25, 1954, and at first heeded his
Chinese military advisers, who proposed ''human wave'' assaults of the kind
their forces had staged against the Americans in Korea. But, after a sleepless
night, he concluded that it would be suicidal to hurl his troops against the
deeply entrenched French, with their tanks and aircraft. His tone rose
dramatically as he told me: ''Suddenly I postponed the operation. My staff was
confused, but no matter. I was in command, and I demanded absolute obedience -
FITGsans discussion, sans explicationFNMG!''

Giap rescheduled the attack for March, and directed his men to creep toward the
French through a maze of tunnels as his cannon pounded them from the heights
above the valley. The battle dragged on for nearly two months and, one by one,
the French positions fell.

At the time, President Dwight D. Eisenhower weighed and rejected the idea of
United States air strikes. What if he had intervened? ''We would have had
problems,'' Giap allowed, ''but the outcome would have been the same. The
battlefield was too big for effective bombing.''

The French surrendered on May 7, the day an international conference met in
Geneva to seek an end to the war. The Vietminh failed to transform the
battlefield victory into a full diplomatic victory. Under Soviet and Chinese
pressure, its negotiators accepted a divided Vietnam pending a nationwide
election to be held in 1956. Giap would only say that ''we could have gained
more.'' But Pham Van Dong, then the chief Vietminh delegate, had earlier told
me: ''We were betrayed.''

With American approval, South Vietnam's President Diem reneged on the election
and arrested thousands of southern Vietminh militants, executing many without
trial. The Communist regime in Hanoi procrastinated. ''Perhaps we should have
acted sooner,'' Giap said, ''but our people were tired after a long war, and
they might not have responded to a call for yet another armed struggle. We would
wait.''

In 1957, however, Hanoi ordered its surviving southern activistsJU to form armed
teams, supplying them with weapons and cadres through the so-called Ho Chi Minh
Trail. Soon, again under Hanoi's direction, the teams started to attack Diem's
officials. Posing as a homegrown insurgency, the Vietcong surfaced in 1960, in
the guise of the National Liberation Front of South Vietnam. But it too was
invented by Hanoi.

I PRESUMED THAT GIAP MUSTJU have been frustrated, after years of fighting the
French, to be beginning another war against the Americans and their South
Vietnamese clients. But, as he tells it, his zeal never waned as he resumed the
same slow process of rebuilding the forces in the south.

Initially stumped after President John F. Kennedy sent aid and advisers to
Vietnam, the Communists quickly regained their momentum and were soon routing
Diem's army. Their strength also increased as numbers of peasants, alienated by
Diem's rigidity, joined their camp.

Late in 1963, acting with American complicity, Diem's own generals staged a coup
against him. His assassination dismayed the Hanoi regime. The new junta in
Saigon promised reforms, prompting many Vietcong supporters to switch sides. Nor
did it seem likely that President Lyndon B. Johnson, who had succeeded Kennedy,
would withdraw from Vietnam. Giap, now seeing a protracted struggle ahead,
concluded that he would eventually have to commit his own regular forces to the
war. By the end of 1964, the first northern regiment was operating in the south.

The large Communist units gravely threatened the Saigon regime, which was now
tottering amid internecine rivalries. Early in 1965, alarmed by the situation,
Johnson unleashed air attacks against North Vietnam and sent United States
combat troops to Vietnam. Surprisingly, Giap displayed a measure of sympathy for
Johnson's predicament. ''Of course he would have been wiser not to escalate the
war,'' he mused. ''But throughout history, even the most intelligent leaders
have not always been masters of their fate.''

By late 1967, however, Giap also faced a hard choice. The half-million United
States troops then in Vietnam were chewing up his forces, and his hopes of an
early victory seemed dim. But, as he wrote at the time, the Americans were
stretched ''as taut as a bowstring'' and could not defend the entire country. He
also detected growing antiwar feeling in the United States and rising unrest in
South Vietnam's urban areas. Thus he gambled on a campaign that would break the
deadlock. Later known as the Tet offensive of 1968, it would be a coordinated
assault against South Vietnam's cities.

''For us, FITGvous savez, FNMGthere is never a single strategy,'' Giap
explained. ''Ours is always a synthesis, simultaneously military, political and
diplomatic - which is why, quite clearly, the offensive had multiple objectives.
We foresaw uprisings in the cities. But above all, we wanted to show the
Americans that we were not exhausted, that we could attack their arsenals,
communications, elite units, even their headquarters, the brains behind the war.
And we wanted to project the war into the homes of America's families, because
we knew that most of them had nothing against us. In short, we sought a decisive
victory that would persuade America to renounce the war.''

Giap prefaced the drive in late 1967 with a diversion, striking a string of
American garrisons in the Vietnamese highlands. Johnson, who viewed Giap's siege
of Khe Sanh as a replay of his showdown against the French, pledged Westmoreland
to hold the base - saying, ''I don't want any damn Dinbinphoo.'' The Communist
troops, bombed by B-52's, took ghastly losses. But Giap had lured the American
forces away from the populated coast.

On the night of Jan. 31, 1968, the Lunar New Year, some 70,000 Communist
soldiers attacked South Vietnam's cities. A suicide squad stormed into the
United States Embassy compound in Saigon, and American troops fought for weeks
to rescue Hue. The televised scenes shocked the American public, which was
already souring on the war. His ratings plummeting as antiwar sentiment spread,
Johnson abandoned the race for re-election. Vietnam, coupled with civil rights
protests, threw America into turmoil.

Looking back, Giap maintains that Tet was a ''victory'' that showed ''our
discipline, strength and ardor.'' But, he admits, it was not ''decisive.''
Another seven years of war lay ahead and, he concedes, they were ''difficult.''
Still, he added with typical bravado, ''no obstacle, nothing the Americans could
do, would stop us in the long run.'' This was a reality, he emphasized, that
Westmoreland failed to perceive. ''He was a cultivated soldier who had read many
military texts,'' Giap said. ''Yet he committed an error following the Tet
offensive, when he requested another 206,000 troops. He could have put in
300,000, even 400,000 more men. It would have made no difference.''

But the aftermath of Tet was bleak for the Communists. According to one of
Giap's aides, their casualties during the drive had been ''devastating.''
American bombing of the South Vietnamese countryside further crippled their
forces as their peasant supporters fled to urban refugee camps. They were also
ravaged by the Phoenix program, devised by the C.I.A. to destroy their rural
sanctuaries. The Communist structure retreated to Cambodia, where it was again
uprooted by President Richard M. Nixon's incursion in 1970.

As Nixon withdrew United States troops, however, Giap had only to wait until he
faced the inept Saigon army. The climax, he figured, would involve big units.
Early in 1972, he staged a massive offensive intended to improve Hanoi's hand
for the final negotiations. It failed as American aircraft crushed his
divisions. But Nixon, eager for peace before the United States Presidential
election in November, compromised on a cease-fire. Signed in January 1973, it
would gradually erode. The Communists rolled into Saigon two years later.

''I was delirious with joy,'' Giap said. ''I flew there immediately, and
inspected the South Vietnamese army's headquarters, with its modern American
equipment. It had all been useless. The human factor had been decisive!''

A typical retired general, Giap now devotes much of his time to revisiting
battlefields and addressing veterans. ''If I had not become a soldier,'' he
reflects, ''I probably would have remained a teacher, maybe of philosophy or
history. Someone recently asked me whether, when I first formed our army, I ever
imagined I would fight the Americans. FITGQuelle question! FNMGDid the
Americans, back then, ever imagine that they would one day fight us?''

He gripped my hand as we parted, saying: ''Remember, I am a general who fought
for peace. I wanted peace - but not peace at any price.'' With that he walked
off briskly, leaving me to contemplate the cemeteries, the war monuments and the
unhealed memories in France, America and Vietnam, and the terrible price their
peoples paid.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photos:; Cover photo: Gen. Vo Nguyen Giap (Photograpg by Lori
Grinker/Contact for The New York Times);Photos: In 1945, Ho Chi Minh, left, and
Vo Nguyen Giap autographed this picture for a major in the Office of Strategic
Services (Maj. Allison K. Thomas); In 1952, General Giap wore a white suit as
commander of the Vietminh army (UPI/Bettmann Newsphotos) (pg. 22); In Ho Chi
Minh City last year, General Giap welcomed troops returning from Cambodia (Lori
Grinker/Contact); The general with his soldiers in September 1968, half a year
after the success of the Tet offensive (Pictorial Parade) (pg. 23)

                   Copyright 1990 The New York Times Company

                              270 of 288 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                  June 24, 1990, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

BEST SELLERS: June 24, 1990

SECTION: Section 7; Page 30, Column 2; Book Review Desk

LENGTH: 1478 words




$

          Weeks
This Last    On
Week Week  List Fiction

 1      2   2    THE BURDEN OF PROOF, by Scott Turow.
                 (Farrar, Straus & Giroux, $22.95.) An attorney
                 tries to unravel the mystery of his wife's death
                 while defending his wheeler-dealer brother-in-law.

 2            1  MESSAGE FROM NAM, by Danielle Steel.
                 (Delacorte, $21.95.) A woman journalist's coming
                 of age in the years between the assassination of
                 John F. Kennedy and the fall of Saigon.

 3      2   18   OH, THE PLACES YOU'LL GO! by Dr. Seuss.
                 (Random House, $12.95.) The problems of finding
                 your way through life; in verse and pictures.

 4      4   7    THE STAND, by Stephen King. (Doubleday,
                 $24.95.) Doomsday brings horrors to America; the
                 uncut version of a novel first published in 1978.

 5      3   10   SEPTEMBER, by Rosamunde Pilcher. (Dunne/St.
                 Martin's, $22.95.) Guests from many parts of the
                 world encounter their often unexpected destinies
                 during a get-together in a small Scottish town.

 6      5   7    DRAGON, by Clive Cussler. (Simon & Schuster,
                 $21.95.) In 1993, Dirk Pitt moves fast to save
                 America from a Japanese extremist.

 7      8   15   THE BOURNE ULTIMATUM, by Robert Ludlum.
                 (Random House, $21.95.) Jason Bourne plans to
                 infiltrate the ruthless Medusa Brigade.

 8      6   7    AN INCONVENIENT WOMAN, by Dominick
                 Dunne. (Crown, $19.95.) Manners, morals and
                 murder in Los Angeles's high society.

 9      7   6    THE GOLDEN ORANGE, by Joseph Wambaugh.
                 (Perigord/Morrow, $19.95.) Murder and chicanery
                 amid Orange County's yachts and mansions.

10     12   4    THE OUTLAWS OF MESQUITE, by Louis
                 L'Amour. (Bantam, $16.95.) Eight short stories
                 about the American frontier.

11     14   43   CLEAR AND PRESENT DANGER, by Tom
                 Clancy. (Putnam, $21.95.) The C.I.A.'s Jack Ryan
                 fights Colombian drug lords.

12      9   7    FAMILY PICTURES, by Sue Miller. (Harper &
                 Row, $19.95.) The good and bad times of a large
                 Chicago clan during the past 40 years.

13 *          1  SULLIVAN'S STING, by Lawrence Sanders.
                 (Putnam, $19.95.) The ordeals of a female cop
                 assigned to track down a Florida con man.

14 *   10   10   SKINNY LEGS AND ALL, by Tom Robbins.
                 (Bantam, $19.95.) The horror and humor of the
                 upcoming apocalypse are played out at a
                 restaurant near the United Nations.

15     11   9    THE GOLD COAST, by Nelson DeMille. (Warner,
                 $19.95.) How life changes for an old WASP family
                 when the head of a crime family becomes its
                 neighbor on Long Island's North Shore.

          Weeks
This Last    On
Week Week  List Nonfiction

 1      1   11   MEN AT WORK, by George F. Will. (Macmillan,
                 $19.95.) The political pundit and baseball buff
                 describes the craft of the game as practiced by
                 three players and a manager.

 2      2   4    DAVE BARRY TURNS 40, by Dave Barry. (Crown,
                 $16.95.) Reflections on the crises of middle age by
                 the syndicated humorist.

 3      3   3    DON'T SHOOT, IT'S ONLY ME, by Bob Hope with
                 Melville Shavelson. (Putnam, $19.95.) The
                 comedian reminisces about more than 50 years in
                 show business.

 4      5   22   MEGATRENDS 2000, by John Naisbitt and
                 Patricia Aburdene. (Morrow, $21.95.)
                 Prognostications about political, economic and
                 social developments in the next decade.

 5     14   3    FATHER, SON & CO., by Thomas J. Watson Jr. and
                 Peter Petre. (Bantam, $22.95.) The autobiography
                 of the man who succeeded his father as head of
                 I.B.M.

 6      7   40   IT WAS ON FIRE WHEN I LAY DOWN ON IT, by
                 Robert Fulghum. (Villard, $17.95.) A new collection
                 of inspirational essays.

 7      4   22   BARBARIANS AT THE GATE, by Bryan
                 Burrough and John Helyar. (Harper & Row,
                 $22.95.) The 1988 battle for control of RJR Nabisco.

 8      6   85   ALL I REALLY NEED TO KNOW I LEARNED IN
                 KINDERGARTEN, by Robert Fulghum. (Villard,
                 $17.95.) Inspirational essays.

 9            1  PERIL AND PROMISE, by John Chancellor.
                 (Harper & Row, $17.95.) Observations about
                 contemporary America by a television newscaster.

10     13   20   HEAD FIRST, by Norman Cousins. (Dutton,
                 $19.95.) How the brain affects the body's endocrine
                 and immune systems.

11 *    9   33
          LIAR'
            S
          POKER
          , by
          Micha
           el
          Lewis
            .
          (Nort
           on,
          $19.9
           5.)
          Wall
          Stree
           t's
          tumul
          tuous
          1980'
          s, as
          witne
          ssed
          by a
          young
          bond
          trade
           r.

12 *   10   8    LEGACIES, by Bette Bao Lord. (Knopf, $19.95.)
                 Reflections on the Chinese experience during the
                 past quarter-century by a writer who was born in
                 China, raised in America.

13           13  MEANS OF ASCENT, by Robert A. Caro. (Knopf,
                 $24.95.) Lyndon Johnson's seven-year pursuit of a
                 seat in the Senate, won in 1948 by 87 votes.

14 *    8   9    IN THE ARENA, by Richard Nixon. (Simon &
                 Schuster, $21.95.) The 37th President reflects on his
                 public career and private life.

15 *   12   2    THE SEARCH FOR MODERN CHINA, by
                 Jonathan D. Spence. (Norton, $29.95.) Four
                 centuries of Chinese history.

          Weeks
This Last    On
Week Week  List Advice, How-to and Miscellaneous

 1      1  181   WEBSTER'S NINTH NEW COLLEGIATE
                 DICTIONARY. (Merriam-Webster, $16.95.) A
                 standard reference work, revised and updated.

 2 *    3   71   WEALTH WITHOUT RISK, by Charles J. Givens.
                 (Simon & Schuster, $19.95.) A Florida
                 entrepreneur's advice about how to make a
                 personal fortune.

 3      2   28   THE GREAT WALDO SEARCH, by Martin
                 Handford. (Little, Brown, $10.95.) A book of
                 illustrations in which the game is to find a
                 ubiquitous chap named Waldo.

 4      4   25   WEBSTER'S NEW WORLD DICTIONARY.
                 (Simon & Schuster, $17.95.) The Third College
                 Edition of a standard work, revised in 1988.

 5      5   18   BEWARE THE NAKED MAN WHO OFFERS
                 YOU HIS SHIRT, by Harvey Mackay. (Morrow,
                 $19.95.) Advice on how to get ahead in business.


 These listings are based on computer-processed sales figures from 3,000
bookstores and from representative wholesalers with more than 28,000 other
retail outlets, including variety stores and supermarkets. The figures are
statistically adjusted to represent sales in all such outlets across the United
States.

 *An asterisk before a book's title indicates that its sales, weighted to
reflect the book-selling industry nationally, are barely distinguishable from
those of the book above.

AND BEAR IN MIND
(Editors' choices of other recent books of particular interest)

MEMOIRS, by Andrei Sakharov. (Knopf, $29.95.) Not so much a reflection on his
life as an annotated record of it, this account tells how an essentially shy and
securely privileged Soviet scholar became an unbreakable witness for
intellectual freedom.

DISTURBING THE PEACE: A Conversation With Karel Hvizdala, by Vaclav Havel.
(Knopf, $19.95.) Autobiography, political philosophy, history and esthetics, all
displaying the qualities that projected the author into the presidency of
Czechoslovakia.

WILDLIFE, by Richard Ford. (Atlantic Monthly, $18.95.) Mr. Ford's fourth novel,
which concerns a 16-year-old boy, his parents and his mother's casual lover,
holds at its heart a nostalgia for the true perfection of the way things used to
be, before ruin set in.

GORBACHEV: Heretic in the Kremlin, by Dusko Doder and Louise Branson. (Viking,
$24.95.) A narrative interpretation that does not pretend to yield a final
reading of the Soviet leader but provides a guide to the roller-coaster
volatility of the last five years.

WHAT WE HAD, by James Chace. (Summit, $17.95.) This memoir of childhood and
youth by a former editor of Foreign Affairs and The Times Book Review focuses
lyrically on a town (Fall River, Mass.) and a family both in decline in the
1930's and 40's.

HEMINGWAY'S SUITCASE, by MacDonald Harris. (Simon & Schuster, $18.95.) Big
chunks of previously unknown writing by Hemingway may have shown up in the hands
of a vanity-press novelist in this exhilarating fiction about writing fiction.

THE LIFE AND DEATH OF A DRUID PRINCE: The Story of Lindow Man, an Archaeological
Sensation, by Anne Ross and Don Robins. (Summit, $19.95.) A fascinating
argument, even if fetched a bit far, about a 2,000-year-old corpse found in
England in 1984.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: LIST

                   Copyright 1990 The New York Times Company

                              271 of 288 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                  June 24, 1990, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

WORLD ECONOMY: THE PROPHET OF BOOM

BYLINE: By ADAM SMITH; Adam Smith, a pseudonym for George J. W. Goodman, is the
host of ''Adam Smith's Money World'' on PBS.

SECTION: Section 7; Page 1, Column 1; Book Review Desk

LENGTH: 1851 words



THE COMING GLOBAL BOOM
How to Benefit Now
From Tomorrow's Dynamic World Economy.
By Charles R. Morris.
267 pp. New York: Bantam Books. $19.95.

Why is the economic news always bad? One of my favorite headlines (from The
Washington Post) says, ''U.S. Economy Adds 400,000 Jobs: Report Spurs Fears.''
Fears? Sure: if the economy is heating up enough to add all those jobs, then at
some point the Federal Reserve Board will have to cool it off by raising
interest rates, and then jobs will be lost and bad days will come. Economic news
is bad because most news is bad. We concentrate on the one house that burns down
rather than the one thousand that have just been built. Further, you sound wiser
predicting calamity. If calamity doesn't turn up, it can always be just over the
horizon, and you can't be accused of the optimism or guilelessness of a
cheerleader.

Charles R. Morris is not afraid of optimism. He is a former banker and present
entrepreneur who has the gift of a clear eye and the ability to make sense of
the jargon and statistics that cloud our daily life. A decade ago he published
''The Cost of Good Intentions,'' a brilliant account of what the liberal leaders
of New York City thought they were doing and the financial reality of what
really happened. That book established Mr. Morris as a maverick voice, a
contrarian writer without the support (or the limitations) of any particular
constituency, a kind of public affairs paladin who could chew abstractions and
statistics.

In ''The Coming Global Boom'' he has once again set himself up as contrarian
critic, and has published a bullish argument in lively form. Mavericks like to
be alone, but this time he may have more company than he likes. Mr. Morris
argues that the world and the United States are on the threshold of a long-run
economic boom. ''The mainstream consensus,'' he writes, ''has been predicting a
major economic collapse for at least five years.'' That's because the mainstream
is dominated by mathematical modelers who are as wrong as were the ''body
counters'' in Vietnam. The contemporary body counters are looking at the wrong
items, trying to fit Promethean trends into their Procrustean computers, and
missing what's going on outside their windows.

What's happening outside the windows is that the globalization of business is
producing worldwide efficiencies, and businesses are engineering a new drive to
quality. Detroit, for example, has to live up to the Japanese. Consumer demands
escalate, and so do the advanced technologies to meet the demands.

What about the bad news - the budget deficit, say? ''It is difficult to point
definitely to any ill effects from recent deficits,'' writes Mr. Morris. ''And,
in any case, American government deficits - state, local, and federal - are
declining rapidly as a percent of GNP, as are government deficits in the rest of
the industrialized world.'' This, as I said, is the bullish case, sometimes
advanced by Administration drumbeaters in Washington. ''What about the future?
There can be almost no doubt that, sometime around 1995 or so, the current
federal budget deficits will disappear.'' That statement counts the Social
Security surplus, though, and there is considerable movement in Washington to
take the Social Security surplus out of the budget, the better to reveal the
''real'' budget deficit.

What about that other deficit, the trade deficit? We buy all those Toyotas from
Japan, and then try to sell them rice, and come up short, no? No. Sure, says Mr.
Morris, American car buyers switched to Japanese models, because they offered
quality and Detroit didn't. But we have a trade surplus with many countries, and
our exports are doing fine. Moreover, the computer modelers, in calculating
trade balances, have it wrong when they compare what foreigners own here and
what we own abroad. Both are counted at cost, and our investments abroad are
older. Value them both at the current market, and we're still in good shape. And
the Japanese are under pressure to loosen up - take the weekends off and buy
more from us.

How about American productivity? Our work force, Mr. Morris points out, is still
more productive than the Japanese - though they are improving faster at the
moment. They have had some dramatic triumphs in semiconductors and other process
manufacturing; we still lead in software. But all the industrialized countries
are getting more productive as they invest more in capital equipment and try to
compete worldwide. American managers - there are some instructive stories here -
are sober and determined, having had their lunch eaten by the Japanese in the
1980's. Xerox, for example, invented photocopying as we know it, then lost much
of the market to the Japanese, and now has won much of it back.

Demography gives us a big boost into the new industrial golden age. The baby
boomers had dragged down our productivity. There are so many of them, and they
entered the work force at the same time, and inexperience always damages
productivity. Now they've been at work awhile and their oars are in the water.
The baby boomers had also been a consuming generation, and they indulged
themselves with a long adolescence. Now they are married, with children of their
own, and like all middle-aged married folk they will save more, and the low
savings rate of the United States will start to go up. Good news, Mr. Morris
declares. Lower inflation, lower interest rates, the basis of a boom.

Further good news: the real estate bust. (That's right, bad news is good news.)
House prices have risen faster than inflation for two decades, until everyone
thought that houses were not just a place to live but a sure-fire investment.
But the post-boomer generation is smaller in number, and with fewer first-time
home buyers, the boomers don't find ready purchasers for their houses when
they're ready to move on. House prices may not actually fall, but the bonanza
days are over. That's good, says Mr. Morris. The boomers have to stay in their
houses and pay down the mortgages, and as they do so they will shift funds from
real estate into bank accounts, stocks and bonds, ''vast resources for
productive industrial investment.'' In fact, between the shrinking deficits and
the boomers' savings, so much Government debt will be paid down that there will
be a shortage of Government bonds! ''The recent alarm over budget deficits is
one of the best illustrations I can think of for the general rule that the
conventional wisdom is usually not only wrong but, more often than not, is
totally wrong,'' writes Mr. Morris, in outlining the coming shortage of
Government debt.

Well, we added a trillion dollars in Government debt in the last 10 years, so a
shortage in Government bonds is pretty far down on my worry list. Congress has
got the hang of printing bonds, and if the boomers really save so much that they
buy up the Government debt, I bet Congress will print some more and think of
something to do with the money. For starters, it has been growling about
education for a decade, and our high school seniors test 15th out of 15 among
advanced industrial nations in overall academic achievement, not a good omen for
the knowledge-intensive 1990's.

Mr. Morris is a perceptive writer, and his books are a pleasure to read. And we
have had a slew of doom books about deficits and debts - some of them with
apocalyptic metaphors, like hurricanes coming. So far, no financial hurricanes.
But the debt levels are real, especially if the boomers don't save so much that
they pay down the Government debt. Maybe the metaphors should have been less
apocalyptic - predictions, say, of a low-grade virus coming, or a toothache,
instead of a hurricane. There is certainly no lack of academic economists
outlining the doom to come, and I cheerfully prescribe this readable book as an
antidote.

But Mr. Morris's thesis has been overtaken by events. The collapse of Communism
with all its implications, including the return of Eastern Europe to the
European community and the study of market economies by the Soviet Union - these
dramatic developments are barely mentioned. It sounds like this book has been
sitting at the publisher for a year, and what's been going on makes the
bond-house arguments of lower interest rates seem very tame. Mr. Morris begins
his book with the sentence ''Pessimism is the new cottage industry in America.''
Pessimism? The Dow Jones average recently hit a new high. So have most of the
other markets of the world. ''Europhoria'' has swept the Continent. The
President's ratings are at an incredible peak, and the consumer polls don't show
much discontent. Optimism no longer seems radical. In fact, a true Morris-type
maverick might look in the other direction. Maybe to that aphoristic pitcher of
yesteryear, Satchel Paige, who once advised: ''Don't look back. Something may be
gaining on you.''

PERVERSE WORRY IS GOOD FOR US

Talk about optimism! Charles R. Morris thinks the New York Mets can still win
the National League pennant race ''if they can get Dwight Gooden back on track
and find a decent catcher. A decent catcher is at least as important to the Mets
as the savings rate is to the United States economy,'' he said in a telephone
interview from his Manhattan office at Devonshire Partners, the investment
analysts. (Let the record show that the day after the interview, the Mets'
newest catcher, Orlando Mercado, hit a home run. But the team remained in fourth
place.) In part, everyone else's pessimism feeds Mr. Morris's optimism about the
world economy: ''This perverse worry has kept the economy on track by preventing
the buildup of inventories that has destabilized economies in the past.''

Given the chance to update ''The Coming Global Boom'' (written as the first
pieces were being chipped away from the Berlin Wall and the savings-and-loan
bailout looked like it would cost only $50 billion), Mr. Morris agreed that the
backwardness of Eastern Europe could be a drag on the world economy. ''But there
should also be the release of an enormous entrepreneurial energy, which will be
pure gain.''

And Mr. Morris seems little concerned that the Government may find the bill for
savings-and-loan losses rising to $500 billion, 10 times higher than estimated a
few months ago. ''Those losses have already happened,'' he said, ''in Texas and
Oklahoma, in the empty office buildings, with construction workers out of work.
The amount of available capital is unchanged,'' since the money is going back to
small depositors whose savings were wiped out. By contrast, ''if the Government
were to put $150 billion or $300 billion of new money into road construction, it
would certainly have an inflationary impact as cement supplies dried up and
Caterpillar raised prices for its Big Yellows.''

Indeed, if anything, Mr. Morris is more optimistic than he was a year ago. ''I
was very much concerned that there was going to be an all-out trade war,'' he
said, but with more ''reasonableness'' on all sides, ''the danger of a trade war
has become much less.''

BARTH HEALEY

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Drawng (pg. 1); graph: combined governemnt deficits as % of GNP,
1954-1988 (From ''The Coming Global Boom'') (pg. 25)

TYPE: Review

                   Copyright 1990 The New York Times Company

                              272 of 288 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                  June 24, 1990, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

A DISCORDANT INTIMACY

BYLINE: By ALAN BRINKLEY; Alan Brinkley is a professor of history at the City
University of New York Graduate School.

SECTION: Section 7; Page 24, Column 2; Book Review Desk

LENGTH: 1191 words



BLOOD, CLASS, AND NOSTALGIA
Anglo-American Ironies.
By Christopher Hitchens.
398 pp. New York:
Farrar, Straus & Giroux. $22.95.

Winston Churchill, visiting Washington in May 1943, sent President Franklin D.
Roosevelt an extraordinary memorandum about the postwar world. It was a proposal
for something like a merger of the United States and Britain. Citizens of each
country would be able to ''settle and trade with freedom and equal rights in the
territories of the other.'' There might be a common passport, even ''some common
form of citizenship.'' Roosevelt, who was not always averse to bizarre schemes
for global reorganization, showed no interest in this one. But to Christopher
Hitchens, the proposal is redolent of what Walter Lippmann once called the
''discordant intimacy'' that has characterized the relationship between the
United States and Britain for more than a century.

Mr. Hitchens should be well equipped to discuss this special relationship. He is
one of its byproducts. A native of England and a graduate of Balliol College,
Oxford, he has lived for many years in the United States, writing for British
and American publications about British and American public life. His generally
left-wing political commentary in The Nation, Harper's Magazine and elsewhere is
often exceptionally intelligent, witty and acidic. But Mr. Hitchens is not at
his best in this ambitious book. He falls back too often on extended analyses of
obvious literary and political figures (Rudyard Kipling, Henry James, Henry
Adams, Winston Churchill, Theodore and Franklin Roosevelt) without creating a
coherent framework for his discussion. He rambles and repeats himself. Much of
this book is as diffuse and shapeless as the complicated subject it addresses.

Even so, ''Blood, Class, and Nostalgia'' offers some interesting, if
controversial, assessments of what has become known since World War II as the
special relationship. Principal among them is Mr. Hitchens's contention that
Britain has consistently dominated the relationship - not only in the 19th and
early 20th centuries, when the United States was a junior partner in the
business of establishing British-American hegemony in much of the world, but
more recently, when the United States has clearly been the stronger nation.
Having lost its own empire, Britain has managed to remain an important world
power largely through its ability to influence the United States.

Mr. Hitchens overstates his case at times. British diplomacy and propaganda -
and the formidable influence of Churchill - undoubtedly helped shape American
policy toward both world wars and may have hastened (and, in the case of World
War I, perhaps even caused) American intervention. But Churchill did not play
the central role in the shaping of America's cold war foreign policy, as this
book suggests; nor was Britain as important a factor as Mr. Hitchens implies in
encouraging American involvement in Vietnam. American globalism since 1945, he
says, has been a kind of imperial receivership, in which the United States has
assumed burdens of empire Britain could no longer carry. But the idea of a
receivership both exaggerates the British role in the postwar world and slights
America's autonomous motives for moving into a position of international
leadership.

More persuasive is Mr. Hitchens's witty and occasionally savage dissection of
the Anglophilia that pervades so much of American high culture, and of the
British skill at exploiting it. The day may have passed when impoverished
English nobles had their pick of wealthy American heiresses eager to marry for a
title. But a covetous fascination with things British and the conspicuous (if
often contrived) aura of wisdom and tradition they seem to convey - Churchill,
the royal family, the English country house, Oxford and Cambridge - continues to
pervade American upper-class life. Mr. Hitchens identifies a network of
institutions through which British intellectuals and politicians exercise
influence in the United States: the Rhodes scholarships, the Council on Foreign
Relations (which has always championed the special relationship), the
British-American conference center at Ditchley Park in Oxfordshire and, of
course, the fabled British intelligence services. In every case, he suggests,
the British derive much more from the relationship than the Americans.

Mr. Hitchens is less interested in chronicling the other, and perhaps more
important, part of the British-American relationship: the tidal wave of American
popular culture that has inundated Britain (and much of the rest of the world)
in the last 50 years. His concern is primarily with the transmission of ideas
and influence among elites. And despite his occasionally exaggerated claims, he
is certainly correct that through much of this century Britain has retained a
hold on American intellectual life quite out of proportion to its actual power.
He is also correct in noting how much of that influence has been in the service
of an imperial ethos. Britain has tried to bequeath to America its own sense of
privilege and entitlement in world affairs. And the United States, if largely
for reasons of its own, has at times been an apt pupil.

In the end, as the author writes, Britain and America ''were not destined to be
the lords of humankind.'' Britain may imagine itself a new Greece to America's
Rome, but as Mr. Hitchens argues, ''the time when [the world] could have been
governed as an Anglo-American condominium is long past.'' America's fascination
with Britain has always drawn from a mixture of myth and nostalgia. Britain's
interest in the United States, which Mr. Hitchens suggests has always been
largely pragmatic, may now begin to do the same.

THE CHURCHILL CULT

How and why is it that the name and prestige of Sir Winston Churchill are so
easily appropriated by Americans . . . who are generally identified with
privilege and conservatism? . . . The figure of the grand old man is the summa
of ''special relationship'' politics and economics. Invested with the awesome
grandeur and integrity of the 1940 resistance to Hitler, and gifted as few
before or since with the power to make historic phrases, Churchill is morally
irrefragable in American discourse, and can be quoted even more safely than
Lincoln. . . . Given the universality of his standing and appeal, Churchill is
an icon of which jealous use is made by the political and military conservatives
to whom the ''special relationship'' is a potent source of reinforcement. But he
also occupies an unrivaled place in the common stock of reference, ranging from
the mock-heroic to the downright kitsch. . . . In the public realm, there is an
almost unappeasable demand for Churchillian invocation. The decline of direct
Soviet-American confrontation has slightly lessened the intensity of the Munich
analogy, which is the most salient form in which Churchillism lives on. But any
issue of principle, or any confrontation with a lesser power than Russia, can
also bring the ''lessons of Munich'' tripping off a speaker's tongue.

From ''Blood, Class, and Nostalgia.''

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Review

                   Copyright 1990 The New York Times Company

                              273 of 288 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                  June 24, 1990, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

CRIME

BYLINE: By MARILYN STASIO

SECTION: Section 7; Page 22, Column 2; Book Review Desk

LENGTH: 1159 words


You wouldn't want to be in Peter Scattergood's loafers, despite their snazzy
shine.

The 31-year-old assistant district attorney has been handed a sensational double
murder case involving the Mayor of Philadelphia in Colin Harrison's BREAK AND
ENTER (Crown, $17.95), but the poor guy is too distraught to concentrate. His
wife has just walked out; his mother has cancer; the brother of a
soon-to-be-convicted murderer is muttering threats on his life; and he's up to
his fancy razor cut in major bills. An earnest and intelligent man of Quaker
upbringing (who loves his work because in court ''you were allowed to fight''),
Scattergood struggles to build a just case against the probable killer of the
Mayor's nephew and the young man's girlfriend. But in his guilt and panic over
losing his wife, he behaves so recklessly as to betray both the law and his own
moral principles.

In this intensely felt first novel, Mr. Harrison heroically balances the
philosophical drama of a man's crisis of faith with the puzzle-narrative of a
legal whodunit. The author's style veers from the wild to the woolly, with
occasional flashes of the amazing, as in the hero's appraisal of a veteran
attorney's perfectionism as ''the by-product of a mind that worked like a man
painting a white room white who never believes he has finished.'' The vitality
of such thought and such language is often feverish, but never dull.

*  *  *

''Crazy people lived in this land,'' says the Nevada private eye Jack Ross in
THE DESERT LOOK (Mysterious Press, $17.95). ''I felt right at home.'' Besides
being crazy, the desert rats in Bernard Schopen's atmospheric mysteries always
have wonderful, bizarre tales to share with a good listener like Ross. The
detective gets an earful here when he sets out to investigate the death of his
mother, a Las Vegas showgirl who 30 years earlier was killed in a barroom brawl
after she supposedly heisted a bundle of casino money and fled into the desert.
In trying to clear her name, Ross wanders from the fleshpots of Vegas to
desolate camps in the desert, collecting narrative scraps of lies and
half-truths from the kind of people you wouldn't trust to hold your watch while
you wash your hands.

Among these mesmerizing, if untrustworthy, yarn spinners are some wild, flashy
women. But the author's heart and literary skills are quickened primarily by
''aging solitary males . . . trapped in a tangle of other lives and yet
isolated, unattached.'' The ones with the vacant ''desert look.'' Even as the
thread of Mr. Schopen's twisted generational saga keeps getting buried in the
particles of his sandstorm prose, the voices of these haunted men carry a long
way in the thin, dry air.

*  *  *

Women and their unfathomable ways have always intrigued Frank Clemons, a New
York private eye who began brooding on the feminine mystique in Thomas H. Cook's
''Sacrificial Ground,'' when, as a detective with the Atlanta police, he became
obsessed with a female murder victim. In NIGHT SECRETS (Putnam, $19.95), Clemons
hasn't lost his Southern accent or his tendency to romanticize women as
creatures of mystery.

True, the detective doesn't seem all that carried away with his well-paying day
job, tracking the nervous young wife of an affluent businessman. One can't
really fault him on that. Despite her twitchy behavior, the woman is a pallid
character, and only a hopeless romantic like Clemons would fail to see what
monkey business she's up to. He is enthralled, however, by the woman on his
night case, a mysterious gypsy who has been arrested for a savage murder she may
not have committed.

Mr. Cook tries to draw us into Clemons's woozy state of mind with luscious
descriptions of this enigmatic beauty and dark hints of her true mission on
earth. But aside from her many baleful looks and hissed threats at the hero, the
woman is no great shakes as a conversationalist and the level of their
communication remains fairly primitive. As always, the author's gritty cityscape
maintains its melancholy charm; but he has written elsewhere with truer feeling
about the inhabitants of these lonely streets.

*  *  *

Catherine Sayler runs such a squeaky-clean private investigations operation in
San Francisco that sexist slobs like Mike Hammer and Sam Spade probably wouldn't
be allowed in the door, even if they wiped their feet. The heroine of Linda
Grant's BLIND TRUST (Scribners, $18.95) avoids messy murders, specializing
instead in white-collar crimes of industrial espionage or bank fraud - like the
case she takes on here for a bank vice president who suspects that an absent
underling is planning to fiddle with the computer system and make off with $5
million in cash.

Catherine delegates the research to her quota-perfect staff - two women, a black
man, two (female, part-time) college students, two (male, freelance) film makers
and an Asian legal counselor - and heads for the missing executive's hometown of
Modesto. Here she is joined by her boyfriend, an ideally supportive lover who
also cooks. There are likewise no flies on Catherine. She takes her vitamins,
teaches aikido and on a walk in the woods ponders the greenhouse effect.

Despite the plausible procedures and decent fieldwork performed by Catherine and
her busy little helpers, all this righteousness throws a dull wash on the
characters and their profession. And then there's the dialogue. ''You three were
in Vietnam together,'' Catherine says to some garage mechanics. ''It must have
been pretty rough.'' Try that line on Sam Spade, he'd kick the door in.

*  *  *

The ironic title of Robert Irvine's GONE TO GLORY (Thomas Dunne/St. Martin's,
$16.95), the third in an unusual series set in the territory that remains of
Brigham Young's once vast Mormon empire, refers to an abandoned coal-mining town
where a renegade sect of the Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints has
taken refuge. A place of Stygian gloom, its homes reduced to charred rubble from
sulfurous fires burning below the ground, this eerie sanctuary inspires the
bleakest sort of humor from Moroni Traveler, a Salt Lake City sleuth pointedly
named for an angel.

''A man shouldn't go to Glory on an empty stomach,'' says he, on his way up a
9,000-foot mountain to find out why someone would kill for this bit of hell.
Especially someone like old Pepper Dalton, a local sports legend who wants to
sell his stake in Glory so that he can buy a moth-eaten baseball club and bring
it back to . . . well, glory.

Aged men like Pepper and his would-be team manager, Hap Kilgore, are a weakness
with Mr. Irvine's detective, who lives with his father and maintains an abiding
interest in the paternalistic church he has renounced but not shaken. ''You
can't mess with religion,'' Traveler's dad warns him, ''not in this state.'' He
doesn't listen, of course, this angelic cynic who is as fascinated with the
dreams of old men as we are with him.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Drawing

TYPE: Review

                   Copyright 1990 The New York Times Company

                              274 of 288 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                  June 24, 1990, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

A New Effort For Holocaust Memorial

BYLINE: By JAMES FERON

SECTION: Section 12WC; Page 1, Column 5; Westchester Weekly Desk

LENGTH: 1616 words

DATELINE: WHITE PLAINS


A PLAN has begun to take shape for building a memorial here to the victims of
the Holocaust, to ''document the past as a commitment to their memory,'' as
Stefan Weinburg, a concentration camp survivor put it.

Mr. Weinburg was one of the nine people appointed last week by County Executive
Andrew P. O'Rourke to the Westchester County Holocaust Committee, ''an
interfaith group that will plan and coordinate the construction of a memorial
sculpture in the park-like setting outside the County Office Building.''

The memorial, a 12-foot-high bronze work by Rita Rapaport Wolfe, a painter and
sculptor from Scarsdale whose husband, Leon L. Wolfe, survived six years in Nazi
concentration camps, depicts gates, ''perhaps of remembrance,'' Mrs. Wolfe said.

The memorial is to be circled by benches ''for people to sit and find some
rest,'' Mr. O'Rourke said.

''This is something we have tried for many years to get done in Westchester
County,'' Mr. O'Rourke said. ''Both myself and my predecessor, Al DelBello,
committed this county to finding a place for an appropriate piece of public art
to memorialize the devastation of the Holocaust.''

An earlier attempt to create a monument to the more than six million Jews who
were systematically exterminated by Germans in World War II collapsed three
years ago, because of financial and engineering problems.

That proposed memorial, two black granite triangles next to a reflecting pool,
would have been too heavy for the site, a small plot of county property near the
public library that is actually the roof of a garage. Engineers said it would
have plunged through.

The former Holocaust committee, headed by Martin S. Berger, a builder and land
developer, returned the $100,000 that had been raised for the project. The
concept seemed to have disappeared until a new group headed by Irwin Weiner,
chairman of Irwin Weiner Sports Enterprises - a firm representing sports figures
- and head of a foundation that supports medical research, approached Mr.
O'Rourke with a new plan.

''I said it should be done with everybody involved, all religions, because
everyone should learn what happened in the Holocaust to insure that it never
happens again,'' Mr. Weiner said. ''Mr. O'Rourke had reservations because the
last commission didn't work out.''

Mr. Wolfe said ''it took a lot of guts on the County Executive's part to revive
the commission that was stillborn five years ago,'' but Mr. O'Rourke was
evidently convinced that this effort would be different. Mr. Weiner assured him
that ''we will not let you down; we will deliver.''

Given a 'Finite Period of Time'

His first task as chairman of the Holocaust Committee, he said, will be to
establish a foundation ''so that people who give money will have a tax
deduction.'' He said temporary approval would take four or five weeks, with
final approval expected in four or five months.

Mr. Weiner, who said he expected to raise $400,000 to $500,000 for the memorial,
has been given a one-year deadline, ''a finite period of time,'' Mr. O'Rourke
said, ''that worked well with the police memorial and the Vietnam vets
memorial,'' both established on county-owned land.

Last week's announcement included the possibility of a Holocaust museum: plans
for it would follow the establishment of the memorial, according to members of
the committee. Mr. Weinburg, who was born in Cracow, Poland, and who lived
through four camps including Buchenwald, one of the most notorious, said, ''The
number of survivors is steadily declining, but the commitment to remember must
go on.''

That was the point made by Mr. O'Rourke, who seemed deeply touched by the
experiences of the survivors and by his own recent trip to Israel, where he saw
''a newly created memorial to the 1.5 million children killed in the
Holocaust.''

''I believe in public art with a purpose,'' he said. ''Thanks to this committee,
we are in a position to put together a piece of public art that stands for
something that should be dear to every human being - that truly outrageous
things are done, and there is a need for society to remember what has happened,
lest it be repeated.

''This memorial will not only honor the memory of individuals who were killed in
the Holocaust, but will stand as a permanent reminder to all people of the
importance of respecting each and every human being for their individual rights
and differences.

''We are a county that will not stand for pipe bombs at synagogues or the
desecration of any church of any denomination. Government must take a stand. It
must be out in front saying, 'These are important things.' A statue to a man or
woman speaks of their service to the community; a Holocaust memorial has a
larger message, that people can live in harmony and this need not ever happen
again.''

The Symbolism of Gates

Mrs. Wolfe, who designed the proposed memorial, said that ''gates are very
symbolic - gates of remembrance, gates to the concentration camps, gates of Hell
or gates to Heaven.'' The gates are supported by posts that resemble the Hebrew
letter vov, the sixth letter - ''the six days of creation, or the six million.''
she said.

Her husband said they met five years ago at the Judaica Museum on the campus of
the Hebrew Home for the Aged in Riverdale, where Mr. Wolfe has been curator
since its founding almost 10 years ago.

Born in Cracow, as was Mr. Weinburg, his fellow committee member, Mr. Wolfe said
he had just graduated from Jagiellonian University in 1939 when Germany invaded
Poland. ''We witnessed the deportation of the faculty to the camps,'' he said.
''It was Nazi policy to eliminate the Polish intelligentsia along with the Jews
and others.''

He said he tried to flee to the east with some of his 10 brothers but returned
''because the roads were being bombed by the Nazis.''

''I was lucky because I was also an officer in the Polish Army,'' he said. ''If
I'd made it to Russia I probably would have ended up in Katyn,'' the forest
grave of tens of thousands of Polish officers killed by their Soviet captors.

Mr. Wolfe, the youngest in his family and the only survivor, was assigned to a
German concentration camp outside Cracow, finding housing for people, mostly
Jews, who were being expelled from nearby towns and villages. He was eventually
imprisoned after escaping and being caught, and sent to Gross-Rosen, a German
camp in Lower Silesia.

Freed by the Red Army

''It was one of the cruelest, and least known, of the camps,'' he said. He
survived it, however, and spent the rest of the war in a camp that provided
labor for a factory in a German town, Langenbielau. He was freed by the Red Army
in May 1945.

Mr. Wolfe said he had returned to Poland with his children from an earlier
marriage last summer. ''The first camp I was in is now a huge meadow outside
Cracow. There is a modest monument on the site of what used to be Execution
Hill.''

The 74-year-old survivor said he ''could never have imagined being appointed to
serve on a Holocaust commission.''

Mr. Weinburg, who is 67 and semi-retired as head of Amhac, a heating and air
conditioning business in Eastchester, shares the post of vice chairman of the
Holocaust Commission with Edward Doyle, president of the Teamsters Local 465.
Mr. Doyle was at a labor convention when the committee was introduced by Mr.
O'Rourke last week.

Mr. Weinburg said that he did not known Mr. Wolfe although he, too was a native
of Cracow and both were in the same camp, Gross-Rosen, at one time during the
war. Mr. Weinburg's experience began in Plaszow, outside Cracow, where 80,000
prisoners died. He said he did not stay long, moving to Gross-Rosen ahead of the
advancing Red Army.

Escape and Into Hiding

After three weeks he was transferred again, this time for nine weeks, to
Buchenwald in Germany's Black Forest region. From there he went to a camp
providing workers for a German factory making gears for planes and V-2 rockets.

His most vivid memories came after escaping from a forced march ahead of Allied
armies that were coming from the west in February of 1945. ''We were about 600
prisoners,'' Mr. Weinburg said. ''Two of us ran away and hid during the night in
a hayloft. A Czech found us and hid with us, then a dozen others came, but there
was no room so they hid elsewhere.

''The S.S. and the farmer with a pitchfork searched for us, found a few and beat
them. Finally the German officer announced that whoever comes out will not be
punished. Twelve prisoners came out and were killed immediately. Then the
officer left, and so did the farmer, after resuming the search on his own.''

''I met an escapee, one of the first three, in Florida recently. His name is
Strauss and he lives in a suburb of Minneapolis.'' Mr. Weinburg said that Mr.
Strauss ''wanted to leave the barn when the officer said we would not be beaten
but I said, 'Shut up,' '' and we lived through it.''

Mr. Weinburg said he met his wife, Anna Unger, in the Plaszow camp, where she
had been transferred from Auschwitz.

Interest in a Museum

Mr. Weinburg said that ''after building the memorial I am very interested in
building a museum in Westchester, so that schoolchildren can learn what
happened.''

As Mr. Wolfe put it, ''We should provide a place where young people can gather
and meet and draw the proper lesson.''

He said that he cannot forget one moment soon after the war started, with the
Germany Army occupying Cracow. ''It was a wedding party leaving a church, with
the bride and groom looking their best. They were executed, the entire wedding
party, in our presence''

''Nobody was immune,'' Mr. Wolfe said. ''It was not a Jewish tragedy; it was a
universal tragedy.''

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1990 The New York Times Company

                              275 of 288 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                  June 24, 1990, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

Reports From Phnom Penh Indicate New Instability

BYLINE: By STEVEN ERLANGER, Special to The New York Times

SECTION: Section 1; Part 1, Page 4, Column 1; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 537 words

DATELINE: KUALA LUMPUR, Malaysia, June 21


With the Cambodian Government this week announcing a failed coup attempt and
dismissing an outspoken editor, there is a new period of instability in Phnom
Penh that can only benefit the Khmer Rouge guerrillas, Asian diplomats and
political analysts say.

While these difficulties may make the Phnom Penh Government and its Vietnamese
backers more willing to compromise to reach a settlement, they will also make
the Khmer Rouge, which is gaining ground in the rainy season, even less
interested in a settlement or a cease-fire.

Some diplomats and analysts doubted Phnom Penh's report of a coup attempt,
seeing it as a justification for the arrests of a Cabinet minister and up to 40
other senior officials and army officers at the end of May.

Those arrested include Ung Phan, the Minister of Transport, Communications and
Posts; his planning chief, Nou Saing Khan; the deputy director of the European
and American bureau of the Foreign Ministry, Kan Man; Col. On Sum, of the
Defense Ministry's research department, and Thun Saray, acting director of the
Institute of Sociology. According to the diplomats and Sidney Jones, the
executive director of the human-rights organization Asia Watch, who was in Phnom
Penh at the time, the arrests followed an attempt to form a non-Communist
political party, the Liberal Social Democratic Party.

Vietnam, Cambodia's chief supporter, has dismissed the idea of a multiparty
system. The Communist Party's General Secretary, Nguyen Van Linh, has repeatedly
said the circumstances in Vietnam are different from those in Eastern Europe,
the Soviet Union or China.

Vietnam, too, has been undergoing a crackdown this spring, with reports of
hundreds of people arrested, especially in the south. The Vietnamese have
expelled a Mennonite teacher of English for using Western newspapers in her
classes and accused some of those working for joint ventures with foreign
companies of being spies.

Last year, the Cambodian Prime Minister, Hun Sen, dropped much of the Communist
ideology that marked the Party of Revolutionary Cambodia, which was set up on
the Vietnamese model when Hanoi's forces drove out the Khmer Rouge in January
1979.

Mr. Hun Sen and his Government have introduced an essentially free-market
system, restored Buddhism as the state religion and recognized private property,
enterprise and investment. But as in Vietnam, the party has retained its
monopoly on power and its Leninist structure. Mr. Hun Sen has spoken previously
of Cambodia's inevitably embracing a multiparty system, but only in the context
of a settlement and new elections in which the three-party Cambodian opposition
could also run.

Some political analysts and diplomats, interviewed by telephone and at a
conference on Asian-Pacific security in Kuala Lumpur, suggested that Mr. Hun
Sen's position could be under threat from a coalition of older, more doctrinaire
officials.

Mr. Ung Phan, the Cabinet minister who was arrested, is said to be close to Mr.
Hun Sen, as is the editor just dismissed, Khieu Kanharith.

Mr. Khieu Kanharith was the editor of the semiofficial weekly newspaper
Kampuchea, and only six months ago had been offered the post of Government
spokesman, which he declined.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1990 The New York Times Company

                              276 of 288 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                  June 24, 1990, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

20 Years Later, a Photograph Brings Vindication

BYLINE: Special to The New York Times

SECTION: Section 1; Part 1, Page 18, Column 3; National Desk

LENGTH: 969 words

DATELINE: BOSTON, June 23


On a January night 20 years ago, a Northeastern University physics student named
Malcolm Emory stopped on his way home from the library at an anti-Vietnam War
rally nearby. In moments, Mr. Emory was on the ground, his head bleeding and his
hands cuffed behind his back. His supposed crime: assault and battery on a
police officer.

In court, Mr. Emory contended that he had been holding a stack of books when the
police jumped him. The arresting officer said the student had thrown a stone at
him and was holding another when he fell and hit his head on a bench. On the
basis of the officer's testimony, Mr. Emory was convicted on the felony charge
of assaulting an officer and stripped of a Government scholarship. He dropped
out of school and instead of becoming a physicist, he took up welding.

Last month, after Mr. Emory discovered an old photograph from the demonstration
in the archives of The Boston Globe, the Suffolk County district attorney's
office dismissed the 20-year-old charge. In the picture, Mr. Emory is being
dragged off by the police. Spilling from his arms is a stack of books.

A New Scholarship

Now Northeastern has awarded the 39-year-old Mr. Emory a full scholarship to
finish the course work he abandoned in 1970. ''His tenacity and strength in the
face of adversity have paid off,'' said John A. Curry, the president of
Northeastern.

Chances of becoming a physics researcher are slim, Mr. Emory said. But what is
more important is that the photograph has ended the wondering and wandering that
began 20 years ago.

''Even if you try to forget this kind of thing, it is always there,'' Mr. Emory
said. ''But after I had seen the picture, I felt like this was the start of
getting this whole thing straightened out.''

Mr. Emory said the trouble began with his curiosity about the crowd of 1,500
gathered outside the Northeastern library that January night. ''I was from a
little town,'' said the Ledyard, Conn., native. ''I hadn't lived in a big city.
This was a living-in-a-big-city type of thing.''

Caught in Fleeing Crowd

When the Boston police charged into the crowd, Mr. Emory said, he was caught
amid a wave of fleeing students, then thrown down and clubbed by the police. He
was sent to the hospital for stitches in his head and arm, cuts that the
arresting officer, Vincent Logan, said occurred when Mr. Emory struck a nearby
bench.

The trial in Suffolk County Superior Court that May pitted Mr. Emory's testimony
against that of Officer Logan. The physics student was convicted, given a
six-month suspended sentence and put on three years' probation, which
disqualified him from his Government scholarship, his job at the Navy's
underwater sound lab in Rhode Island and his Government security clearance.

''For the first four or five years, I thought, 'Something is going to happen.
The guy is either going to break down or his conscience would bother him,' ''
Mr. Emory said. ''But nothing happened. At that point I tried to force myself to
just forget it and get on with my life. I realized I wasn't going to do any
physics and I needed to learn a vocational craft.''

Trained in Welding

When his probation ended, Mr. Emory went to West Virginia, where he became a
welder, then later to California and Texas, to learn underwater welding.

But in 1985, hope of vindication appeared. On a visit to Boston from Texas, Mr.
Emory went to the Boston Public Library to look up news accounts of the 1970
demonstration.

There. in a front-page photograph, he spotted his face in the crowd.

''I looked at the pictures and recognized myself in the pictures, but you
couldn't really see anything,'' he said. ''I saw there was one picture and I
thought 'Maybe, maybe there are others.' ''

But finding other photographs of the rally presented a problem. According to The
Boston Globe policy, unpublished prints are not to be released without a
subpoena. The rule, said a former newsroom counsel, S. J. Micciche, was adopted
in the 1960's because law-enforcement agencies wanted to use news photos to
prosecute anti-war demonstrators.

'A Real Catch-22'

But without a photograph to offer as new evidence, Mr. Emory and his lawyers
could not seek a new trial, which they needed to get a subpoena to get a
photograph.

''It was a real Catch-22,'' said Lisa Stern Taylor, Mr. Emory's lawyer. ''So I
explained the situation to Mr. Micciche and he finally agreed to let us look
through the photographs.''

One print showed Mr. Emory being dragged off by police officers, clutching his
books with both hands. ''When I saw that picture, I felt there was a great
weight off my shoulders,'' Mr. Emory said.

A New Trial Ordered

Although the Suffolk Superior Court judge ordered a new trial, the district
attorney's office last month decided to drop the case.

''What you have is a picture that strikingly corroborates the testimony of Mr.
Emory and strkingly contradicts the testimony of the arresting officer,'' said
David Mark, an assistant district attorney.

''It is still conceivable that Mr. Emory could have thrown'' the stone , he
said. ''But looking at the picture and reading over the officer's testimony, we
had no interest in pursuing this case further.''

Although he recently told a local television station that he stands by his
story, Mr. Logan, who retired from the Boston police force in 1988, had no
further comment, his wife said.

As for Mr. Emory, who took classes at Northeastern last year while working in a
machine shop, the clean slate and the scholarship for this fall seem to have
resuscitated some dreams.

''I had given up hope on ever having that thing overturned,'' he said. ''But
when I heard they had dropped the case, I called my mom and I told her. I said,
'It's all right, Ma. I no longer have any charges against me.' ''

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo: A photograph discovered by Malcolm Emory in the archives of The
Boston Globe showing him being dragged away by police officers has helped clear
him of charges that he assaulted a police officer when he stopped at an anti-
Vietnam War rally on his way home from the library at Northeastern University in
Boston 20 years ago.

                   Copyright 1990 The New York Times Company

                              277 of 288 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                  June 25, 1990, Monday, Late Edition - Final

Flag Vote: The Effects Back Home

BYLINE: By DIRK JOHNSON, Special to The New York Times

SECTION: Section A; Page 12, Column 1; National Desk

LENGTH: 1034 words

DATELINE: MURRAY, Neb., June 23


On the floor of Congress two days earlier, Representative Peter Hoagland had
voted against an amendment to the Constitution that would outlaw burning the
American flag.

Now he stood with the members of Veterans of Foreign Wars Post 10652 in a warm,
dimly lighted banquet room in this tiny Nebraska town. Weeks ago, the veterans
had asked the Democratic Congressman here to help present a folded flag to the
family of Cpl. Ronald Bradley of the Army, declared missing in action in the
Korean War in 1953.

Some veterans at the Saturday night gathering here returned Mr. Hoagland's
smiles with hard stares. One man folded his arms deliberately rather than
applaud his introduction. Another became so angry that he left the room when the
Congressman rose to speak.

Afterward, the daughter of the lost soldier came forth to deliver her views to
the Congressman, who won his seat in 1988 with 51 percent of the vote and faces
tough opposition for re-election.

''I support you,'' said Rhonda McAuliffe, 36 years old, who was born two months
after her father was last seen.

''My father died for the freedoms the flag represents,'' she said. ''Our nation
is strong enough to withstand the flag burners. We don't need to change the
Constitution. Outlawing flag burning, that's what the Communists do.''

Prepared to Face the Music

Relief swept the face of the Congressman, who had come home this weekend
prepared to face the music with a constituency that polls have showed
overwhelmingly supported the amendment.

''There was no political down side to voting for the amendment,'' Mr. Hoagland,
a tall, rail-thin 48-year-old, said in an interview during a twilight drive from
Omaha across 30 miles of bumpy country roads to the V.F.W. banquet here. ''But a
vote like this one is closely associated with self-respect. ''In the past, there
have been a few times that I have tilted more toward political considerations
than I should have,'' he added. ''And I lived to regret it.''

The Congressman is opposed in the November election by Ally Milder, a
35-year-old conservative Republican who has already depicted Mr. Hoagland as
being too liberal for the Second Congressional District, made up largely of the
descendants of Western ranch hands and European immigrant laborers. For 40 of
the 46 years preceding Mr. Hoagland's victory in 1988, this district had elected
Republicans.

Mr. Hoagland's advisers had strongly urged him to vote for the amendment,
conjuring visions of television advertisements portraying him as a friend of
flag burners.

''This could cost us the election,'' Mr. Hoagland said an aide warned darkly.
''Is it really that important to you?'' 'We Disagree'

After the vote on Thursday, Mr. Hoagland returned home with a mission, like many
others who voted against the measure, to rally support for his view that the
decision was not just on protecting the flag, but rather was on the sanctity of
the Constitution.

In what he termed a ''pre-emptive press conference,'' Mr. Hoagland stood flanked
by three Vietnam veterans who supported his stand, and warned of the ''slippery
slope'' of tinkering with the Bill of Rights.

Later Saturday, during a children's parade in an Omaha neighborhood, an angry
spectator called Mr. Hoagland to his side. He thrust a twisted flag pin toward
the Congressman.

''It's broken,'' the man said heatedly, ''just like the Congress.''

When Mr. Hoagland tried to explain his position, the man shot back, ''We
disagree.''

The flag issue introduces a new element to a race that already features rather
unusual political profiles.

Mr. Hoagland comes from an old-line Republican family of prosperous Omaha
business people.

''I'm the first lawyer and Democrat in the family,'' he said, ''and my mother
said she doesn't know which is worse.''

Miss Milder comes from a working-class Jewish family in Omaha that often sided
with the Democratic Party.

But it remains unclear what effect the flag issue will have on the race. Walking
through an arts festival near the Douglass County courthouse, Mr. Hoagland was
approached by a dozen people who congratulated him on his stand. None expressed
opposition.

''I appreciated your vote on the flag,'' said Granville Welch, a 49-year-old Air
Force veteran. ''It took a lot of courage.''

Indeed, one woman chastised Mr. Hoagland for his earlier vote in support of an
anti-flag burning law, which was later struck down by the Supreme Court.

''I want to live in a country where you can burn the flag if you want,'' said
Kathy Ford, a 35-year-old lawyer.

While Mr. Hoagland was generally cheered by the reaction, he cautioned against
reading too much into it. He noted that supporters were more likely to raise the
issue with him than were detractors, ''especially in this part of the country,
where people want to be nice to you.''

Peril at Polls Affected Votes

Analysts say the flag issue will require some deft touches by politicians like
Mr. Hoagland, but they do not expect the issue, by itself, to mean the
difference in many elections.

Still, lawmakers representing marginally Democratic districts seemed to approach
the issue more cautiously than those with safer seats. Of the 21 representatives
who won their most recent elections with less than 55 percent of the vote, just
7, including Mr. Hoagland, voted against the amendment. The safer Democrats
reversed that proportion, opposing it by 153 to 81.

''In isolation, I don't think the flag issue is going to swing an election,''
said Charles E. Cook, Washington analyst of House and Senate races, ''but if it
is perceived as part of a pattern of being out of touch with the people back
home, then it could do damage.''

One voter here, Dan Szgda, a 33-year-old engineer, for example, said the flag
issue ''is not a major thing.'' But he added, ''If there are many other things
like that, I'll be voting against him.''

That is precisely the strategy of Miss Milder, the Republcan. ''This is just the
latest example demonstrating how out of step he is with the people of eastern
Nebraska,'' Miss Milder said.

She said she had not decided whether to use political ads focusing on Mr.
Hoagland's flag vote. ''Let's see how the summer goes.''

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo: Representative Peter Hoagland, left, after presenting a flag to
relatives of Cpl. Ronald Bradley, who was declared missing in action in the
Korean War in 1953. From the right were Corporal Bradley's father, David;
daughter, Rhonda McAuliffe; granddaughter, Laura Hoschar, and wife, Florence.
(Tom Plambeck for The New York Times)

                   Copyright 1990 The New York Times Company

                              278 of 288 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                  June 25, 1990, Monday, Late Edition - Final

The Korean War, 40 Years Later;
The Right Decision

BYLINE: By McGeorge Bundy; McGeorge Bundy was special assistant for national
security to President John F. Kennedy.

SECTION: Section A; Page 17, Column 2; Editorial Desk

LENGTH: 691 words

DATELINE: MANCHESTER, Mass.


Today marks the 40th anniversary of Kim Il Sung's attack on South Korea, after
which the cold war turned hot for Americans.

Within a week American air, sea and ground forces had been committed. Over the
next three years, in a conflict that came to engage us with China too, almost
six million Americans served and 54,000 died. Harry Truman's quick decision to
fight against the North Koreans belongs in our national memory.

There were American mistakes before and after that decision, but I share the
prevailing American judgment, both at the time and in later years, that the
decision was right.

South Korea was kept out of the hands of a ferocious totalitarian. More
important, there was a timely reinforcement of anti-Communist strength,
especially in Europe. This would have been much less likely if North Korea had
been allowed a quick and uncontested success. Truman's prompt response to the
attack helped to make a reality of the American-led defense of the West that had
been only a matter of political alliance and secret planning papers before June
25.

We often forget that without the Korean War, General Eisenhower might never have
been called from the presidency of Columbia University to be NATO's first
commander. And the cold war we now call won might well have been lost long
since.

It is traditional and correct to salute Harry Truman for the courage and speed
of this basic decision. But it is well also to remember his Administration's
mistakes. There was a failure to make plain ahead of time that such aggression
would indeed be resisted. There was also a mistaken assumption, when the
aggression came, that it must be the product of Stalin's own master plan for
worldwide Communist conquest.

We later learned from Khrushchev's memoirs that, far from initiating the attack,
Stalin only slowly consented to Kim Il Sung's overconfident plan for a campaign
that would be over before the Americans could react. Khrushchev's version has
been reinforced by other Soviet witnesses in the years of glasnost.

Thus, along with the needed stimulus to allied defenses, there came a mistaken
intensification of the belief that all Communist actions everywhere were part of
a single, implacably aggressive, worldwide war against freedom itself.

The defense of the free world was indeed strengthened by Truman's basic choice
to fight in Korea. But by misunderstanding the causes of that war, our
Government also strengthened men like Joseph McCarthy. Even more important, this
view of the Communist menace as monolithic played a major role in our
progressive overcommitment in Vietnam. However, as one who had a part in much
later and larger decisions about Vietnam, I have no intention of suggesting that
it was all the fault of earlier Administrations.

I believe that there were other mistakes: that it was right to decide to fight,
but wrong not to share that decision with a ready and willing Congress; that it
was right to fire Gen. Douglas MacArthur, but wrong not to control him or fire
him sooner; that it was right to go somewhat beyond the 38th Parallel, but wrong
to approach the Yalu River in the face of Chinese warnings; that it was right
not to use the bomb, but wrong not to be steadily clear about that choice.

Many South Koreans blame Truman for more - for allowing their country to be
divided in the first place, or for failing to impose its unification later. Both
criticisms neglect the realities of power on the spot, but they have a claim on
our attention.

Yet on this anniversary, it is wrong to focus on particular criticisms. The
Korean War, like all wars, remains a treasury of choices for historians to
review, and we shall be debating its lessons for generations. What deserves our
respectful attention is that Harry Truman's basic decision, with its human cost,
especially to us and to the South Koreans, was right.

Despite all their differences, South Koreans and Americans have remained
friends. As the waning of the cold war brings near the prospect of constructive
change in North Korea, that friendship can have great impact on the prospect for
peace and freedom in a newly united Korea.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Op-Ed

                   Copyright 1990 The New York Times Company

                              279 of 288 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                  June 26, 1990, Tuesday, Late Edition - Final

Limelight Nothing New For Sheriff in Rap Case

BYLINE: By JAMES LeMOYNE, Special to The New York Times

SECTION: Section A; Page 12, Column 4; National Desk

LENGTH: 2889 words

DATELINE: FORT LAUDERDALE, Fla., June 21


The rest of the country may have first heard of Sheriff Nick Navarro when he set
off a national debate on obscenity laws and freedom of speech by pressing a case
against the music of the rap group 2 Live Crew.

But in South Florida, the sheriff was already renowned as a law officer who
threw a long shadow and had little patience for those who crossed him.

He has ruffled criminals, defense lawyers and judges with tactics ranging from
imaginative undercover operations to such unorthodox steps as putting prisoners
in tents to ease overcrowded jails and manufacturing crack at police
headquarters for undercover sales to suspected dealers.

In 30 years of police work, Mr. Navarro says he has shot men and been shot
himself in the line of duty. A Cuban immigrant who worked his way up to being
the elected sheriff of one of the rowdiest and most affluent counties in South
Florida, he has often provoked controversy while demonstrating a keen political
knack for finding the limelight and filling it.

''He is a consummate smoothie,'' said B. J. Cummins, the head of the Defense
Attorneys Association of Broward County. ''He is P. T. Barnum with a Cuban
accent.''

'A Policeman Doing His Job'

Mr. Navarro dismissed such piquant descriptions in an interview in his simple
office here and avowed with seeming earnestness that he is ''just a policeman
doing his job.''

He says the controversy over his successful effort to have 2 Live Crew's
sexually explicit record album ''As Nasty as They Wanna Be'' declared the first
legally obscene record in America is a nuisance that has kept him from other
important matters.

But somehow the ''aw shucks'' sheriff with signed photographs of Ronald Reagan,
George Bush, Bob Hope and Al Pacino on his wall is not quite convincing when he
says he is surprised by the stir he has caused.

While listing the seemingly inescapable demands of his office, he mentioned that
he managed to fly to New York this month to appear on the television talk show
''Geraldo'' with the leader of 2 Live Crew, Luther Campbell.

And in Broward County, where he has easily been elected sheriff twice and has
every chance of being re-elected in 1992 as the Republican candidate if he wants
to run, Mr. Navarro has the reputation of easily finding the television cameras.


'Seen as a Publicity Hound'

''He is not liked by a lot of county leaders because he is seen as a publicity
hound,'' said Bruce Rogow, the lead defense lawyer for 2 Live Crew who describes
himself as a longtime friend of Mr. Navarro. ''But he is a good politician who
is genuinely popular in the county.''

Sheriff Navarro replies to such comments by saying: ''I have no desire for
politics. This is the only office I want.''

He left Cuba as a young college student in 1950 and came to the United States to
live with a sister. He was drafted into the Army and fought in the Korean War.
In 1958, he says, he moved to Florida and joined the Miami police force as a
beat patrolman.

After a few years he was selected as a Miami-based Federal narcotics agent, a
job that he says involved him in undercover operations in New York, France,
Lebanon and Latin America.

Now 60 years old and graying, Sheriff Navarro sounds a little wistful for the
bad old days when he would first pose as a drug dealer, only to pull his pistol
and slap handcuffs on the surprised sellers. In 1964, he says, a heroin dealer
who figured out he was an undercover officer put a .25-caliber pistol to his
stomach and pulled the trigger. The cartridge, he said, was a dud.

''I was born that day,'' Mr. Navarro said, going on to explain that he tackled
the dealer and arrested him. A year later, Mr. Navarro says, he was shot in the
leg in a drug raid in the Bronx.

He Heads a 1,100-Man Force

He returned as a police officer to Broward County and rose to head the county's
organized crime divison. He was first elected sheriff in 1984. He handles an
annual budget of more than $175 million and heads a force of about 1,100 police
officers who patrol 28 cities in a county of 1.3 million people.

But it would appear that few cases have raised as much dust for the sheriff as
his effort to have the 2 Live Crew album declared obscene under Florida law. Mr.
Navarro contends he had no choice but to ''enforce the law'' once a Federal
judge here found that the album was ''probably obscene.''

But only when pushed did he acknowledge that his office took the initiative of
asking a judge to rule whether the rap album was obscene, even though, he
conceded, no resident of Broward County had complained about it.

When asked, the sheriff said he was not sure that the songs by the black rap
group are more obscene than sexually explicit works by other performers, like
the white comedian Andrew Dice Clay.

And Mr. Navarro did not mention, until asked to comment on it, that the judge
who heard the case reprimanded the sheriff for the unconstitutional act of prior
restraint because his detectives warned record store owners that they might be
arrested if they sold the rap album, even though it had not yet been found
legally obscene.

Sheriff Called a Racist

Mr. Campbell, whom the sheriff ordered arrested for singing in his county just
days after the album was ruled obscene, said in an interview that he considers
Mr. Navarro to be a racist who is out of control.

Mr. Navarro called the charges ''a big lie,'' and added: ''I have been hard on
criminals all my life - of all races and all colors. If a judge says something
is obscene under the law and you come and sing it in Broward county, yes sir,
you're going to be arrested.''

He said he is awaiting an appellate court ruling on the legality of the
obscenity finding. In the meantime, he is preparing for the trial in which Mr.
Campbell and his fellow rappers could get a year in jail and a $1,000 fine for
singing salacious songs in Broward County.

Mr. Rogow, the lawyer for 2 Live Crew, takes a lighter view of the confrontation
between the ghetto-born black rappers and the Cuban immigrant sheriff.

''Nick Navarro and Luther Campbell are the same people - they are guys who in
their own ways have challenged the established order,'' he said, making an
observation that might well surprise both his clients and the sheriff.

''Wait and see,'' Mr. Rogow insisted when challenged in his interpretation.
''Ultimately, Nick will do a rap on MTV video with Luther - it's a lovely
ending.'' 6th-Grade Graduation: Tears and Dreams By SARA RIMER At 9:15 A.M.,
Robert Pelka's 34 sixth graders, 19 boys and 15 girls, began gathering in the
sweltering cafeteria of Public School 94 for graduation.

The girls were transformed, with hair swept off their foreheads and
sophisticated satin dresses. They suddenly seemed years beyond the boys, 11- and
12-year-olds decked out in suits and ties.

Karima Raimundi, the valedictorian and Student Council president, and
Christopher Alvarez, the salutatorian, nervously went over their speeches on
index cards.

In a circle of her friends, Latoya Hunter, the class writer, was remembering how
she had been the new girl, from Jamaica just three years ago.

Latoya and her classmates lined up with the entire sixth grade, 185 students, by
height. Luis Pena, 5 foot 6, looked across the crowded cafeteria for his best
friend since kindergarten, 4-foot-8-inch Hector Esteves.

The sixth graders were wildly emotional. ''I'll be so unhappy when I graduate,''
Luis Pena had just written to Mr. Pelka.

They were also excited, and terrified, about junior high. Graduation, last
Thursday, was one of many final events leading up to tomorrow - the last day of
school. For Class 6-407, leaving will be hard. They have been together, many of
them, since kindergarten and first grade. Mr. Pelka has been their teacher since
fifth grade.

They know all about the severe overcrowding and lack of essential resources that
make life difficult for everyone at P.S. 94. ''We don't have a gym,'' Karima
said. ''We don't have a library. Sometimes the water fountains don't even
work.''

But still Karima and Luis and the others feel a fierce attachment for P.S. 94.
Luis said, ''I'm so happy I was a part of the school.''

Mr. Pelka, 42, is staying behind. In the cafeteria last week, he was perspiring
and miserable in his navy blue suit. ''I got up at 4:30 A.M. and started ironing
my shirt,'' he said. ''I felt like I was going to a funeral.''

The sixth graders prepared to file into an auditorium packed with parents. The
principal, Sheldon Salzberg, with a white carnation on his lapel, issued one
last command: ''Show your pride. Look beautiful.''

Class 6-407 is ranked at the top of the school. The entire class had worked with
the gifted and talented program's teacher, Harriet Sassoon. They had always been
the brightest students.

At graduation, their third-grade teacher, Carol Chodos, looked on proudly.
''They were like sponges,'' she said. ''They soaked up everything. I could leave
the room, and it didn't matter. Karima would be the teacher. She was always the
leader.''

In fifth grade, the parents were delighted with Mr. Pelka. Chris Alvarez's
mother, Sandra Alvarez, recalled: ''We fought for Mr. Pelka to keep going with
them to sixth grade. We felt Mr. Pelka should polish them off for junior high.''

Mr. Pelka, who renounced a career in corporate public relations 10 years ago,
wanted to do more than teach percentages and ancient civilizations. He set out
to help his students become better human beings.

He asked them to imagine they were in foster care, or handicapped or homeless -
and to write about it. He showed them films on those subjects.

His students say that one of the things they will most remember about sixth
grade is their weekly dance with the handicapped children in Irene Fried's
special-education class.

Some of Mr. Pelka's students were having terrible difficulties at home. Mr.
Pelka talked about his own father, who he said had always put him down. He said
he could never have made it without his mother, Jeanne Pelka.

His students, who couldn't always be angels, warned: Don't get Mr. Pelka angry.
When they misbehaved, they ended up writing about that, too.

Dimitrios Tyler wrote last winter: ''I am sorry for being a stubborn and
complicated boy.''

Popping Flashbulbs And Parents' Tears The sixth graders entered the auditorium
blinking before dozens of flash cameras.

Daquan Butler's mother, Priscilla Butler, in a yellow dress, was watching her
first child graduate from elementary school.

A month or so ago, with the big day approaching, Daquan had declared: ''This
means I'm becoming a man now.''

''I told him, 'Oh, no, it doesn't!' '' Mrs. Butler, who is 37, recalled.
Daquan's father, Grealy Butler, couldn't make it to graduation. He drives an
18-wheeler, and he was on his regular run to Boston.

In August, it will be a year since the death of Jose Lopez's father, Jose Lopez
Sr., at age 45. Jose's mother, Maria Lopez, a teacher at an intermediate school,
was there for the graduation of her third and last child. In the familiar
auditorium, she said, she felt the presence of her husband.

Luis Pena's father and mother, Carlos and Evelyn Pena, were both there. Mr.
Pena, who came from Peru 17 years ago and went to work in a refrigerator
factory, said afterward that he was moved by the tears of Mr. Pelka. Mr. Pena,
46, had once hoped to become a teacher himself.

''I was in the university in my country,'' he recalled that evening. ''My father
got sick. There were 12 of us in the family. I had to leave to go to work.''

The band, with Luis Pena on drums, opened the ceremony with ''The Star-Spangled
Banner.''

The first speaker was Chris Alvarez, the son of a tow truck driver, a boy who is
aiming for the Bronx High School of Science.

Chris thanked the parents for their love. He said he had been honored to belong
to the family of P.S. 94. In the audience, his mother was showing off a snapshot
of a dark-haired, dark-eyed baby: ''Chris at six months!''

Mr. Salzberg followed Chris. To the parents, he made his annual plea: ''Let your
children be children a while longer.''

Just as their teachers had always predicted, Chris and his classmates were
called up to the stage for one award after another.

Ying Li, born in Canton, whose desk was always crammed with books, from ''Black
Boy'' to ''Light in August,'' won for outstanding achievement in reading and,
along with Sherree Boyce, in science.

The school safety award went to David Cheng, who was there early every morning
to oversee the monitors. David, from Hong Kong, was one of the shortest boys in
the class last year. Now he is the tallest. Mr. Pelka has been even more amazed
by how David, a noodge in fifth grade, has grown up.

David had to. After school, he helps out at his mother's Chinese takeout
restaurant. He also acts as his mother's translator - at parent-teacher
conferences, and at the recent negotiations over the purchase of another
restaurant. His mother had to work through her son's graduation.

Latoya Hunter won for best writer, as everyone knew she would.

Her classmates like to quote from Latoya's stories about children who overcome
adversity. ''She doesn't just write, 'She kissed her,' '' said Karian Myrie,
referring to the reunion of a girl with her grandmother in one story. ''She
writes, 'She gently planted a kiss on her cheek.' ''

In a four-page account of her journey from St. Ann, a bauxite mining town in
Jamaica, Latoya described her awkward first encounter with a hot dog.

''When I think back to third grade,'' she wrote, ''one of the first things to
run through my mind was me sitting at the lunch table by myself eating my hot
dog. I look around and realize everyone else was biting into their hot dog
differently. I was biting into mine from the top, horizontally.''

War, Curried Goat And Other Lessons During the ceremony, Luis Pena found himself
reviewing his school years, from meeting Hector in kindergarten to his
introduction to Picasso from his fourth-grade teacher, Ernestine Brown.

''She read us a book about how he made the picture 'The Harlequin,' '' Luis
recalled. ''My father took me to the Metropolitan Museum of Art to see it. It
was a very amazing picture - all those different, brilliant colors.''

Luis, the class scientist, also remembered learning from his classmates. Gerald
Smith told him about curried goat birthday dinners in his native Jamaica.
Jennifer Hwang, from Korea, lent him a Korean dictionary when he expressed an
interest in her language. Shy Mai Nguyen, who had fled Vietnam as one of the
boat people, confided that her grandfather had died in the war.

''I've learned the Vietnam War was one of the worst wars,'' Luis said.

Karima Raimundi, in a pink satin dress sewn by her grandmother, made the last
speech. She urged her classmates not to drop out or take drugs, to protect the
environment and to fight against racism.

Karima, 12, was in her element recently as principal for a day. She fired
questions at Mr. Salzberg: Why is the school so overcrowded? Why are the lunches
so bad? Why don't we have a gym?

Karima lives with her mother, a secretary who is also a student at Bronx
Community College. Her father is a pharmacist at Montefiore Hospital. Karima
wants to be a pediatrician.  Mr. Pelka's last assignment was for the students to
write about each other. Karima's classmates overwhelmingly named her as a future
President.

Their own plans are also big. Nicky Gennis intends to pitch for the Yankees.
Marcus Brooks declared recently: ''I don't want to be a doctor. I will be a
doctor. I will be the best doctor in the world.''

Marcus, Nicky, Karima and most of their classmates will be moving on together to
an accelerated two-year program at Junior High 80, in the neighborhood. The
parents say they worry about the junior high.

Gibbi George, a sixth grader, from India, also worries. ''I heard they beat up
freshmen on freshmen day.''

Other students are dispersing. Ying Li won a scholarship to the intensely
selective Riverdale Country School. Luis Pena will be in a gifted science
program at I.S. 141 in Riverdale. His best friend, Hector, will be moving to
Florida on July 15. Hector's parents, who are giving up their jobs as bank
clerks, hope Florida will be a safer place for their children. Karian Myrie is
moving to New Jersey.

Surprised to See The Boys Crying After all the sixth graders had claimed their
diplomas, Mr. Pelka's students and their parents presented him with an engraved
plaque: ''To the most outstanding teacher who has influenced and enriched our
lives.''

They gave him a blue leather album containing sentimental letters from each
student. Latoya Hunter said she was surprised to see the boys crying.

It was all too much for Mr. Pelka. ''These children would have made it with any
teacher,'' he said. ''I've never been so honored in my life.'' He was unable to
say more.

The teacher had made his feelings clear in his comments on the final report
cards.

Nicky Gennis: ''A joy in every way. Sparkling personality. Wow! What a terrific
kid!'' Chris Alvarez: ''A treasure, a joy.'' For Latoya Hunter, Mr. Pelka had
run out of words. Each marking period he had praised her ''incredible writing
talent.'' This time, he wrote simply: ''The world is waiting for Latoya!''
Please don't kill kicker.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo: Sheriff Nick Navarro of Broward County, in South Florida, who
says his successful effort to have a 2 Live Crew album declared the first
legally obscene record in America is a nuisance that has kept him from other
important matters. (Susan Greenwood for The New York Times)

                   Copyright 1990 The New York Times Company

                              280 of 288 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                  June 26, 1990, Tuesday, Late Edition - Final

Freedom for Two Chinese

SECTION: Section A; Page 22, Column 1; Editorial Desk

LENGTH: 320 words


Yes, the stories are true enough about Middle Kingdom feelings of superiority
and indifference to the outside world. But China's leaders worry plenty about
the ostracism they brought on themselves last year by ordering the army to fire
on students demonstrating for democracy. And worry they should. Foreign lending,
investment and tourism are sharply down and critical trade relationships are in
jeopardy.

That explains Beijing's good-will gesture yesterday. China's two best-known
democratic captives, Fang Lizhi and his wife, Li Shuxian, were allowed to leave
the sanctuary of the U.S. Embassy and travel to Britain. Early next month the
major Western nations will hold their annual economic summit meeting in Houston,
and Chinese leaders want to be seen in a relatively benign light. Freedom for
these two champions of democracy indicates that Beijing may be getting the idea
of how to change China's international reputation.

To call the release of Mr. Fang and Ms. Li a good-will gesture is not to
minimize its significance. For three years the two of them have launched telling
darts of truth at the Communist Party's retrogressive leaders.

But it is equally important to keep this welcome step in proper perspective.
China is no longer the attractive, reform-minded country it was from 1979 to
1989. It is now the most important of the handful of hard-line Communist
holdouts, together with Vietnam, North Korea and Cuba.

The West does well to maintain active diplomatic contacts with Beijing, and to
encourage trade ties with the Chinese people. But the Bush Administration needs
to be clear that the romantic era of photo ops in the Forbidden City and of
geopolitical China cards is over.

Today's main goal is to protect prominent survivors like Mr. Fang and Ms. Li and
to sustain the hundreds of millions of ordinary Chinese until the day when they
again have a chance to help create a happier future.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Editorial

                   Copyright 1990 The New York Times Company

                              281 of 288 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                  June 26, 1990, Tuesday, Late Edition - Final

Our Towns;
A Bumpy Road And Open Hearts For Young Love

BYLINE: By MICHAEL WINERIP

SECTION: Section B; Page 1, Column 1; Metropolitan Desk

LENGTH: 782 words

DATELINE: RIVERHEAD, L.I.


Garrit and Lelia Lydecker tried everything to stop their bright 17-year-old
Rachel from marrying so young, but the high school junior would not bend and on
Dec. 30, 1988, before a town justice, Rachel wed Rick Quick, 19, a hospital van
driver.

The best man wore a string tie. ''He was better dressed than me,'' said Rick,
who wore jeans and a sweater. Rick's money went for Rachel's ring.

Her parents did not go. Rachel's father, an art director in regional theater,
only recently resumed speaking to Rachel in full sentences. ''He had to work,''
said Rachel. ''My mother told me she didn't want to come alone. For me, the big
thing was they consented.''

''A friend told me I had to go,'' said Mrs. Lydecker, ''but I could not bring
myself to do it.'' She did pay for the wedding dress. ''Oh God, Rachel looked so
pretty in that dress,'' said Mrs. Lydecker. ''I don't mean to condescend, but
she looked so cute.'' After, there was a small party. Rachel's brother rode his
bike to buy a Carvel ice cream cake, carrying it home in his backpack - the
wedding cake.

The parents expected trouble from teen-age love, but never anticipated how quick
it would hit. Rachel and Rick lived above a restaurant. Days after the wedding,
the building caught fire. They were asleep and just escaped. The police drove
them to the Lydeckers', opened the car door for them to get out, then quickly
left. ''The police treated them like nothing because they were kids living in a
place like that,'' Mrs. Lydecker said. ''They were freezing, wet, wrapped in
blankets in their underwear. Rachel was crying, Rick was crying. My heart
opened. I just wanted to absorb them.''

They all lived together while the apartment was fixed.

The first sign that Rachel would surprise people was her junior grades. Working
30 hours a week at a part-time job, she still got B's. Senior year she raised it
to A-. ''I had something to prove to me and everybody else,'' Rachel said.

''If anything, I was going to do better than before. Being responsible for my
own actions, my own school work, my own house, relaxed me.''

The Lydeckers are artistic. Rachel found photography. If you knew her life, it
was spooky to see her photos; they looked like they had been produced by someone
with grown-up eyes. Her black and white prints caught the beauty of ordinary
things. Her father's fishing lures hanging from a porch window; a clam basket
that cast a meshed shadow on the snow.

''The photos took my breath away,'' said her mother, but her father was the
test. He is brutally honest and had never felt Rachel's drawings special. Seeing
the photos, he said: ''The camera suits her well. Her photos impress me.'' For
months he couldn't figure what was in Rachel's head. Suddenly he had evidence
that this girl was older than he'd thought.

Her photo teacher at Riverside High, Elizabeth Richard, gave Rachel 100 for the
quarter just completed. ''Rachel sees what others don't,'' Mrs. Richard said.
Rachel entered Long Island University's photo scholarship contest and won.

In May Suffolk County gave awards to students who'd made heroic comebacks and
there, beside people in wheelchairs and a girl who'd sailed from Vietnam alone,
was Rachel, the happily married high school senior.

Sunday she graduated. She will attend college this fall. She's never been closer
to her parents. ''Rachel's the most interesting woman I know,'' Mrs. Lydecker
said. ''I'm fascinated by our new relationship. My husband says Rachel went from
15 to 30 in a leap.'' Mr. Lydecker said, ''I still ask myself what things she
lost by getting married so early.'' But she added: ''I wish the world was
populated with Rachels. It would be a nicer world.''

This is not to say Rachel and Rick live happily ever after. They barely make the
$500-a-month rent. ''We're holding off the telephone bill,'' Rachel said. 'They
won't take it out if you pay a little,'' Rick said.

And there are things you find out when you marry a person. Rachel: ''Rick
watches so much baseball.'' Rick: ''She hates baseball.'' Rachel: ''I don't.''
Rick: ''Every time I put on baseball, you get in bed and read.'' Rachel: ''I'm
just reading.''

But Rachel doesn't despair. ''Because I'm with Rick,'' she said. ''We spend all
our free time together. We have so much fun.'' They read books aloud together.
There are times Rick can't believe he has Rachel. ''I'm still waiting for the
shoe to drop and for her to leave,'' he said.

She does appreciate her parents more. ''Whatchya got to eat?'' she asked during
a recent visit. ''I'm taking these,'' Rachel said, pulling her head out of the
refrigerator. ''One thing about my mother. She has the best food in her
refrigerator.''

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo: Rachel Quick (The New York Times)

                   Copyright 1990 The New York Times Company

                              282 of 288 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                  June 26, 1990, Tuesday, Late Edition - Final

6th-Grade Graduation: Tears and Dreams

BYLINE:  By SARA RIMER

SECTION: Section B; Page 1, Column 2; Metropolitan Desk

LENGTH: 1966 words


At 9:15 A.M., Robert Pelka's 34 sixth graders, 19 boys and 15 girls, began
gathering in the sweltering cafeteria of Public School 94 for graduation.

The girls were transformed, with hair swept off their foreheads and
sophisticated satin dresses. They suddenly seemed years beyond the boys, 11- and
12-year-olds in suits and ties.

Karima Raimundi, the valedictorian and Student Council president, and
Christopher Alvarez, the salutatorian, nervously went over their speeches on
index cards.

In a circle of her friends, Latoya Hunter, the class writer, was remembering how
she had been the new girl, from Jamaica just three years ago.

Latoya and her classmates lined up with the entire sixth grade, 185 students, by
height. Luis Pena, 5 foot 6, looked across the crowded cafeteria for his best
friend since kindergarten, 4-foot-8-inch Hector Esteves.

The sixth graders were wildly emotional. ''I'll be so unhappy when I graduate,''
Luis Pena had just written to Mr. Pelka.

They were also excited, and terrified, about junior high. Graduation, last
Thursday, was one of many final events leading up to tomorrow - the last day of
school. For Class 6-407, leaving will be hard. They have been together, many of
them, since kindergarten and first grade. Mr. Pelka has been their teacher since
fifth grade.

They know all about the severe overcrowding and lack of essential resources that
make life difficult for everyone at P.S. 94. ''We don't have a gym,'' Karima
said. ''We don't have a library. Sometimes the water fountains don't even
work.''

But still Karima and Luis and the others feel a fierce attachment for P.S. 94.
Luis said, ''I'm so happy I was a part of the school.''

Mr. Pelka, 42, is staying behind. In the cafeteria last week, he was perspiring
and miserable in his navy blue suit. ''I got up at 4:30 A.M. and started ironing
my shirt,'' he said. ''I felt like I was going to a funeral.''

The sixth graders prepared to file into an auditorium packed with parents. The
principal, Sheldon Salzberg, with a white carnation on his lapel, issued one
last command: ''Show your pride. Look beautiful.''

Class 6-407 is ranked at the top of the school. The entire class had worked with
the gifted and talented program's teacher, Harriet Sassoon. They had always been
the brightest students.

At graduation, their third-grade teacher, Carol Chodos, looked on proudly.
''They were like sponges,'' she said. ''They soaked up everything. I could leave
the room, and it didn't matter. Karima would be the teacher. She was always the
leader.''

In fifth grade, the parents were delighted with Mr. Pelka. Chris Alvarez's
mother, Sandra Alvarez, recalled: ''We fought for Mr. Pelka to keep going with
them to sixth grade. We felt Mr. Pelka should polish them off for junior high.''

Mr. Pelka, who renounced a career in corporate public relations 10 years ago,
wanted to do more than teach percentages and ancient civilizations. He set out
to help his students become better human beings.

He asked them to imagine they were in foster care, or handicapped or homeless -
and to write about it. He showed them films on those subjects.

His students say that one of the things they will most remember about sixth
grade is their weekly dance with the handicapped children in Irene Fried's
special education class.

Some of Mr. Pelka's students were having terrible difficulties at home. Mr.
Pelka talked about his own father, who he said had always put him down. He said
he could never have made it without his mother, Jeanne Pelka.

His students, who couldn't always be angels, warned: Don't get Mr. Pelka angry.
When they misbehaved, they ended up writing about that, too.

Dimitrios Tyler wrote last winter: ''I am sorry for being a stubborn and
complicated boy.''

Popping Flashbulbs And Parents' Tears

The sixth graders entered the auditorium blinking before dozens of flash
cameras.

Daquan Butler's mother, Priscilla Butler, in a yellow dress, was watching her
first child graduate from elementary school.

A month or so ago, with the big day approaching, Daquan had declared: ''This
means I'm becoming a man now.''

''I told him, 'Oh, no, it doesn't!' '' Mrs. Butler, who is 37, recalled.
Daquan's father, Grealy Butler, couldn't make it to graduation. He drives an
18-wheeler, and he was on his regular run to Boston.

In August, it will be a year since the death of Jose Lopez's father, Jose Lopez
Sr., at age 45. Jose's mother, Maria Lopez, a teacher at an intermediate school,
was there for the graduation of her third and last child. In the familiar
auditorium, she said, she felt the presence of her husband.

Luis Pena's father and mother, Carlos and Evelyn Pena, were both there. Mr.
Pena, who came from Peru 17 years ago and went to work in a refrigerator
factory, said afterward that he was moved by the tears of Mr. Pelka. Mr. Pena,
46, had once hoped to become a teacher himself.

''I was in the university in my country,'' he recalled that evening. ''My father
got sick. There were 12 of us in the family. I had to leave to go to work.''

The band, with Luis Pena on drums, opened the ceremony with ''The Star-Spangled
Banner.''

The first speaker was Chris Alvarez, the son of a tow truck driver, a boy who is
aiming for the Bronx High School of Science.

Chris thanked the parents for their love. He said he had been honored to belong
to the family of P.S. 94. In the audience, his mother was showing off a snapshot
of a dark-haired, dark-eyed baby: ''Chris at six months!''

Mr. Salzberg followed Chris. To the parents, he made his annual plea: ''Let your
children be children a while longer.''

Just as their teachers had always predicted, Chris and his classmates were
called up to the stage for one award after another.

Ying Li, born in Canton, whose desk was always crammed with books, from ''Black
Boy'' to ''Light in August,'' won for outstanding achievement in reading and,
along with Sherree Boyce, in science.

The school safety award went to David Cheng, who was there early every morning
to oversee the monitors. David, from Hong Kong, was one of the shortest boys in
the class last year. Now he is the tallest. Mr. Pelka has been even more amazed
by how David, a noodge in fifth grade, has grown up.

David had to. After school, he helps out at his mother's Chinese takeout
restaurant. He also acts as his mother's translator - at parent-teacher
conferences, and at the recent negotiations over the purchase of another
restaurant. His mother had to work through her son's graduation.

Latoya Hunter won for best writer, as everyone knew she would.

Her classmates like to quote from Latoya's stories about children who overcome
adversity. ''She doesn't just write, 'She kissed her,' '' said Karian Myrie,
referring to the reunion of a girl with her grandmother in one story. ''She
writes, 'She gently planted a kiss on her cheek.' ''

In a four-page account of her journey from St. Ann, a bauxite mining town in
Jamaica, Latoya described her awkward first encounter with a hot dog.

''When I think back to third grade,'' she wrote, ''one of the first things to
run through my mind was me sitting at the lunch table by myself eating my hot
dog. I look around and realize everyone else was biting into their hot dog
differently. I was biting into mine from the top, horizontally.''

War, Curried Goat And Other Lessons

During the ceremony, Luis Pena found himself reviewing his school years, from
meeting Hector in kindergarten to his introduction to Picasso from his
fourth-grade teacher, Ernestine Brown.

''She read us a book about how he made the picture 'The Harlequin,' '' Luis
recalled. ''My father took me to the Metropolitan Museum of Art to see it. It
was a very amazing picture - all those different, brilliant colors.''

Luis, the class scientist, also remembered learning from his classmates. Gerald
Smith told him about curried goat birthday dinners in his native Jamaica.
Jennifer Hwang, from Korea, lent him a Korean dictionary when he expressed an
interest in her language. Shy Mai Nguyen, who had fled Vietnam as one of the
boat people, confided that her grandfather had died in the war.

''I've learned the Vietnam War was one of the worst wars,'' Luis said.

Karima Raimundi, in a pink satin dress sewn by her grandmother, made the last
speech. She urged her classmates not to drop out or take drugs, to protect the
environment and to fight against racism.

Karima, 12, was in her element recently as principal for a day. She fired
questions at Mr. Salzberg: Why is the school so overcrowded? Why are the lunches
so bad? Why don't we have a gym?

Karima lives with her mother, a secretary who is also a student at Bronx
Community College. Her father is a pharmacist at Montefiore Hospital. Karima
wants to be a pediatrician.  Mr. Pelka's last assignment was for the students to
write about each other. Karima's classmates overwhelmingly named her as a future
President.

Their own plans are also big. Nicky Gennis intends to pitch for the Yankees.
Marcus Brooks declared recently: ''I don't want to be a doctor. I will be a
doctor. I will be the best doctor in the world.''

Marcus, Nicky, Karima and most of their classmates will be moving on together to
an accelerated two-year program at Junior High 80, in the neighborhood. The
parents say they worry about the junior high.

Gibbi George, a sixth grader, from India, also worries. ''I heard they beat up
freshmen on freshmen day.''

Other students are dispersing. Ying Li won a scholarship to the intensely
selective Riverdale Country School. Luis Pena will be in a gifted science
program at I.S. 141 in Riverdale. His best friend, Hector, will be moving to
Florida on July 15. Hector's parents, who are giving up their jobs as bank
clerks, hope Florida will be a safer place for their children. Karian Myrie is
moving to New Jersey.

Surprised to See The Boys Crying

After all the sixth graders had claimed their diplomas, Mr. Pelka's students and
their parents presented him with an engraved plaque: ''To the most outstanding
teacher who has influenced and enriched our lives.''

They gave him a blue leather album containing sentimental letters from each
student. Latoya Hunter said she was surprised to see the boys crying.

It was all too much for Mr. Pelka. ''These children would have made it with any
teacher,'' he said. ''I've never been so honored in my life.'' He was unable to
say more.

The teacher had made his feelings clear in his comments on the final report
cards.

Nicky Gennis: ''A joy in every way. Sparkling personality. Wow! What a terrific
kid!'' Chris Alvarez: ''A treasure, a joy.'' For Latoya Hunter, Mr. Pelka had
run out of words. Each marking period he had praised her ''incredible writing
talent.'' This time, he wrote simply: ''The world is waiting for Latoya!''

The Series So Far

The most recent article in this series about P.S. 94 appeared on June 19. It
described the remedial reading class of Louise Warren.

Previous articles in the series, which began March 12, have looked at a troubled
sixth grader for whom the school provides a small, but temporary, refuge; a
class of second graders classified as ''slow learners''; the north Bronx
neighborhood surrounding P.S. 94; Barbara Williams, a security guard who has
become the matriarch of the school; the unlikely friendship between a third
grader with Down syndrome and a sixth grader with a history of academic and
emotional difficulties at school; and Eneniver Gilbert Capers, the school's
truant officer.

The series has also described a third-grade class that had to cope with four
teachers in five months, and the daunting obstacles that P.S. 94 shares with so
many New York City public schools - from overcrowding to the chaos of many of
its students' lives.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

SERIES: P.S. 94; Education Against the Odds - A periodic visit to one New York
City elementary school.

GRAPHIC: Photos: Karima Raimundi, left, valedictorian of the sixth grade
graduating class at Public School 94 in the Bronx, with a classmate, Sherree
Boyce, before commencement. In her speech she urged her classmates not to drop
out of school or take drugs.; Robert Pelka with his students from class 6-407 at
P.S. 94, including Gerald Smith, right, after the students gave him a plaque as
'the most outstanding teacher.' (pg. B1); Robert Pelka talking to some of his
sixth-grade students about their schoolwork. With him were, from left, David
Cheng, Sherree Boyce, Karima Raimundi, Ying Li, Ramon Reyes and Nicky Gennis.
(Sara Krulwich/The New York Times) (pg. B4)

TYPE: Series

                   Copyright 1990 The New York Times Company

                              283 of 288 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                  June 26, 1990, Tuesday, Late Edition - Final

The Struggle to Revise Hospital Reimbursements

BYLINE: By KEVIN SACK, Special to The New York Times

SECTION: Section B; Page 3, Column 2; Metropolitan Desk

LENGTH: 881 words

DATELINE: ALBANY, June 25


Few people in Albany truly understand, or want to understand, the complex
formula that regulates the financing of New York's struggling hospitals.

But buried beneath the technocratic lingo about diagnostic related groups and
service intensity weights lies a critical debate about how the state should use
its significant regulatory power to speed the evolution of its crippled
health-care system.

To that end, legislative negotiators have been struggling to devise a new
hospital reimbursement formula to replace the one that expires at the end of the
year.

The current reimbursement formula, which controls the rates hospitals are paid
by Medicaid, Blue Cross/Blue Shield and private insurers, has contributed to
hospital deficits estimated at more than $1 billion last year. In its three-year
lifetime, it has done little to offset the fiscal burdens caused by AIDS, crack,
a severe nursing shortage and increasing labor costs.

Carrot and Stick

In recent years, New York State has used its hospital reimbursement formula as
both a carrot and a stick to prod the state's medical institutions into shifting
the delivery of primary and preventive care from crowded hospital emergency
rooms to outpatient clinics. But if the red ink and chaotic conditions at many
New York hospitals is any indication, the health-care system is not changing
quickly enough.

The State Health Commissioner, Dr. David Axelrod, concedes that ''there have
been more failures than successes'' in the state's effort to redesign the
health-care system.

''We have depended on the willingness of the institutions to initiate what we
perceive to be in their interests without having a lot of governmental
intervention,'' he said. ''But I don't think the incentives have been sufficient
to force the change in behavior.''

Few lawmakers, or even hospital executives, say they disagree with Dr. Axelrod's
vision of a decentralized health-care system in which primary and preventive
care is provided in the community by family physicians and storefront clinics.

But many in Albany believe the Commissioner's vision is utopian. They argue that
the hospital system has been bleeding to death while Dr. Axelrod battles to
change it. And with the Bush Administration pushing for substantial cuts in
Medicare financing, they warn that the system could collapse without immediate
help.

''We can't stop investing in hospitals while waiting for paradise,'' the
Assembly Speaker, Mel Miller, said earlier this year. ''Paradise is still
lost.''

When translated into the nitty-gritty of legislative negotiation, the debate
outlined by Dr. Axelrod and Mr. Miller has become an issue of dollars.

With the Legislature expected to adjourn early next week, negotiators must reach
an agreement on how much money should be used to bail out the hospitals with an
infusion of inpatient dollars and how much should be used as an incentive for
the hospitals to expand outpatient services.

The negotiators, mostly aides to Mr. Miller and the Senate majority leader,
Ralph J. Marino, already know how much money will be spent on the reimbursement
system. The question is where it will go.

Included in this year's budget is $13 million for a new reimbursement formula
that will cover the last quarter of the state's fiscal year. Because that money
determines how much is spent by the Federal and local governments on Medicaid
financing, and because it determines reimbursement rates paid by private
insurers, the $13 million actually translates into an annual infusion of about
$500 million.

Making Technical Adjustments

That money comes in addition to $500 million the hospitals will receive from a
normal inflationary adjustment.

The state can direct that money where it wants by making technical adjustments
in the reimbursement formula. For instance, it can compensate hospitals that
have the most challenging caseloads of AIDS patients or the most difficulty
recruiting nurses. To encourage hospitals to provide more outpatient care, it
can raise the inadequate $60-a-visit reimbursement cap for trips by Medicaid
recipients to outpatient clinics.

Because less than half of New York's hospitals lost money last year, those on
all sides of the reimbursement debate believe the money should be directed to
the hospitals in the worst condition, rather than distributed equally across the
board.

Dr. Axelrod and Gov. Mario M. Cuomo have led the charge for significant
increases in outpatient rates, suggesting that the $13 million be divided by
allocating $7 million for inpatient services and $6 million for outpatient
services. Both houses of the Legislature prefer a formula that directs more
money to inpatient services.

Because hospital employees and patients form vital constituent groups in most
legislative districts, their political influence can be great. The state's
hospital associations have mounted sophisticated lobbying campaigns and have
supplied much of the technical know-how to the negotiators. Health-care workers
pitched in two weeks ago by staging the largest rally in Albany since the
Vietnam War.

The business community has used newspaper advertisements and mailings to argue
that the bulk of the money should go to outpatient services, which would lessen
the cost to private insurers.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1990 The New York Times Company

                              284 of 288 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 June 27, 1990, Wednesday, Late Edition - Final

CHRONICLE

BYLINE: By Susan Heller Anderson

SECTION: Section B; Page 4, Column 6; Style Desk

LENGTH: 145 words


JOHN SHERMAN COOPER was the honored guest Monday night at the American Film
Institute in Washington for a screening of ''Gentleman From Kentucky,'' a
Kentucky Educational Television documentary profiling the 50-year career of the
89-year-old former United States Senator, Ambassador and Presidential adviser.

''Kentucky is known for its thoroughbreds in politicians,'' Senator EDWARD M.
KENNEDY told the gathering of 200, which included KATHARINE GRAHAM, SARGENT and
EUNICE SHRIVER and former Senators EUGENE J. McCARTHY and CHARLES PERCY as well
as a number of Kentucky legislators. ''They gave us Henry Clay in the 19th
century and John Sherman Cooper in the 20th century.''

Mr. Kennedy went on to speak of Mr. Cooper's outspokenness against McCarthyism,
his early efforts to end racial discrimination and his fight to disengage the
United States from Vietnam.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1990 The New York Times Company

                              285 of 288 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 June 28, 1990, Thursday, Late Edition - Final
                              Correction Appended

Today's Youth Cares Less For Worries of the World

BYLINE: By MICHAEL ORESKES, Special to The New York Times

SECTION: Section A; Page 1, Column 2; National Desk

LENGTH: 1746 words

DATELINE: COLUMBUS, Ohio, June 27


John Karras, 28 years old, was in a card shop the other day as the radio, which
provides the soundtrack for his generation, offered a report on the dead and
missing in the floods that had just flashed through southeastern Ohio.

The cashier, a man a bit younger than Mr. Karras, looked up at the radio and
said: ''I wish they'd stop talking about it. I'm sick of hearing about it.''

Mr. Karras, a doctoral student in education at Ohio State, recalled this
incident to illustrate what he sees as a ''pervasive'' attitude among the
members of his generation toward the larger world: the typical young person
doesn't want to hear about it ''unless it's knocking on my door.''

Studies Find Indifference

The findings of two national studies concur. The studies, one released today and
the other late last year, paint a portrait of a generation of young adults, from
18 to 29 years of age, who are indifferent toward public affairs. It is a
generation that, as the Times Mirror Center for the People and the Press put it
in a report released today, ''knows less, cares less, votes less and is less
critical of its leaders and institutions than young people in the past.''

Caught in the backwash of the baby boom, whose culture and attitudes still
dominate American discourse, members of the ''baby bust'' seem almost to be
rebelling against rebellion. Anyone who was hoping that the energy of this new
generation would snap the nation out of its political lethargy, as young people
helped awaken the nation from the quiescent 1950's, will probably be
disappointed.

''My teacher told me: 'Always question authority,' '' said Paul Grugin, 22, one
of two dozen young people interviewed this week by The New York Times in this
mid-size city in the middle of the country. ''You can question authority,'' he
added, but in doing so, ''you can burden authority.''

So, he said, let the authorities make their decisions: ''Let them authoritate.''

The indifference of this genera-tion - to politics, to government, even to news
about the outside world - is beginning to affect American politics and society,
the reports suggest, helping to explain such seemingly disparate trends as the
decline in voting, the rise of tabloid television and the effectiveness of
negative advertising.

A National Plague

While apathy and alienation have become a national plague, the disengagement
seems to run deeper among young Americans, those 18 to 29, setting them clearly
apart from earlier generations.

No one has yet offered a full explanation for why this should be so. The lack of
mobilizing issues is part of the answer, as are the decline of the family and
the rise of television.

Young people themselves mention the weakness of their civics education, and they
talk incessantly of stress - their preoccupation with getting jobs or grades and
their concern about personal threats like AIDS and drugs. ''There are a lot more
pressures on them than there were on us,'' said 48-year-old Ron Zeller, who
talked about the differences along with his 22-year-old daughter, Susan, and his
18-year-old son, John.

The study by Times Mirror, a public opinion research center supported by the
company that owns The Los Angeles Times, Newsday and other news organizations,
looked at 50 years of public opinion data and concluded, ''Over most of the past
five decades, younger members of the public have been at least as well informed
as older people. In 1990 that is no longer the case.''

'A Citizenship Crisis'

This concern was echoed in a second report, prepared last year by People for the
American Way, a liberal lobby and research organization, which concluded that
there is ''a citizenship crisis'' in which ''America's youth are alarmingly
ill-prepared to keep democracy alive in the 1990's and beyond.''

Susan Zeller, who is about to enter Case Western law school, agreed. ''I don't
think many people my age group are very concerned,'' she said. ''They're only
concerned about issues that affect them. When the drinking age went up, quite a
few people were upset.''

The decline in voting is one illustration of how what seems to be a general
problem is, in fact, most heavily concentrated among the young. Surveys by the
census bureau show that since 1972 almost all of the decline in voting has been
among those under 45, and that the sharpest drop is among those between 18 and
25. Among the elderly, voting has risen, according to the census bureau surveys.

Older people, more settled than the young, have always participated more in
elections. But the gap has widened substantially. In 1972, half of those between
18 and 24 said they voted, as did 71 percent of those 45 to 64, a gap of 21
percentage points. In 1988, 36 percent of the 18- to 24-year-olds and 68 percent
of the 45- to 64-year-olds said they voted, a gap of 32 percentage points.

Avoiding Controversy

Shonda Wolfe, 24, who has waited tables since dropping out of college, said she
had voted only once, when she was 18 and still living at home. ''I guess my mom
was there to push me,'' she said.

Now, she said, she does not pay much attention to politics or to the news. ''I
try to avoid it - all the controversy,'' she said. ''It just doesn't interest me
at this point in my life. I'd rather be outside doing something, taking a
walk.''

Young people have always had to worry about getting started in life, beginning a
career and a family. But this young generation, for whom Vietnam is a history
lesson and Watergate a blurry childhood memory, seems to have adopted the
cynicism of parents and older siblings without going through the activism and
disappointments that produced that cynicism.

Not one of the young people interviewed in Columbus, at the Street Scene
Restaurant and the Short North Tavern, had a good word to say about politics or
politicians. But unlike older people, who often express anger about news about
sloth or corruption in government, these young people seem to be reporting it as
a well-known fact. ''Most politicians are liars,'' said Deborah Roberts, a
29-year-old secretary.

Flawed View of Citizenship

People for the American Way, in its report, noted that young people seemed to
have a half-formed understanding of citizenship, stressing rights but ignoring
responsibilities. The national study, on young people's attitudes about public
affairs, was based on a poll of young people supplemented by in-depth
discussions with small groups.

When asked to define citizenship, Shonda Wolfe said it meant the right not to be
harassed by the police. She cited as an intrusion on her rights the security
guards' insistence at a concert that she and her boyfriend stop turning on their
cigarette lighters.

Nancy Radcliffe-Spurgeon, 24, a student at Ohio State, said she thought that
many of the attitudes of her generation were based on feeling safe. ''It's easy
to isolate yourself when you think things are going pretty well for you, so you
don't rock the boat,'' she said.

Occasionally, someone in an interview would mention voting. None of the young
people, when asked about citizenship, included in their definition of good
citizenship running for office, attending a community board meeting, studying an
issue, signing a petition, writing a letter to the governor or going to a rally.

These young people are aware that some of their attitudes are a product of
different times. Young people protesting the war in Vietnam were engaged by an
issue that affected them, and one that the rest of the country accepted as being
of central importance. ''When people your age were our age, there was a lot more
strife,'' Jeff Brodeur, a 22-year-old senior at Ohio State, told a 36-year-old
visitor.

Interest in Some Issues

Certain issues do get their attention, almost always involving government
interference in personal freedoms. They generally favor access to abortion, and
a few of the young people were upset by efforts to cut off Federal funds for art
work deemed obscene.

Their concern about the arts was not surprising because in the interviews the
young people showed that their main contact with the larger world was through
culture. Mr. Brodeur, for example, said he first became aware of apartheid in
South Africa through the song ''Biko,'' written by Peter Gabriel about Steve
Biko, a prominent anti-apartheid leader in South Africa in the 1970's.

But Mr. Brodeur's research seems more the exception than the rule. Andrew Kohut,
director of surveys for Times Mirror, said there was a new generation gap, in
which those under 30 were separated by their lack of knowledge and interest from
those over 30.

People in their 30's and 40's are disenchanted with the world, but remain aware,
said Mr. Kohut. But those under 30, he said, ''are not so much disillusioned as
disinterested.''

The Times Mirror analysis was based on its own public opinion polling as well as
comparisons with polling conducted by other organizations over the past 50
years.

Deborah Roberts, the secretary, says she still reads newspapers, sort of.
''There's more bad news on the front page,'' she said, explaining why she skips
over it. ''I like to go to the local news; it's the fun news.''

Attitudes Affect News Media

Attitudes like this are having a considerable effect on the news media, Mr.
Kohut said. The number of people who read newspapers is declining, in general,
but that number has plunged among the young. And not simply because they have
turned to television, according to surveys. Viewing of traditional television
news by the young is also shown to be down, although they do watch the new types
of shows that concentrate on scandal and celebrity.

''The generation gap in news and information is playing out in politics in very
significant ways,'' Mr. Kohut added.

''The 30-second commercial spot is a particularly appropriate medium for the MTV
generation,'' he continued.

''At the conclusion of the 1988 campaign, Times Mirror's research showed that
young voters, who began the campaign knowing less than older voters, were every
bit as likely to recall advertised political themes such as pollution in Boston
Harbor, Willie Horton and the flag.

''Sound bites and symbolism, the principal fuel of modern political campaigns,
are well suited to young voters who know less and have limited interest in
politics and public policy. Their limited appetites and aptitudes are shaping
the practice of politics and the nature of our democracy.''

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

CORRECTION-DATE: June 29, 1990, Friday, Late Edition - Final

CORRECTION:

A caption yesterday in a picture grouping with an article about the apathy of
young people toward public affairs misattributed a quotation in some copies,
about news coverage of the Ohio flash flood. The statement was not made by John
Karras; he was quoting another young man.

GRAPHIC: Graphs of the percentage of eligible voters in each age group who said
that they voted; percentage of people in each age group who got information from
each source of news at some point in the previous day. (The New York Times);
photos: Susan Zeller; Shonda Wolfe; nancy Radcliffe-Spurgeon; Jeff Brodeur; John
Karras (Photographs by Kevin J. Fitzsimons) (pg. D21)

                   Copyright 1990 The New York Times Company

                              286 of 288 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 June 28, 1990, Thursday, Late Edition - Final

House Approves More Assistance for East Europe

BYLINE: By ERIC SCHMITT, Special to The New York Times

SECTION: Section A; Page 6, Column 1; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 528 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, June 27


The House of Representatives approved a $15.6 billion foreign aid package today
that would reduce United States military assistance to its allies for the 1991
fiscal year and would increase spending on the emerging democracies in Eastern
Europe.

The vote was 308 to 117. The bill now advances to the Senate.

The legislation, reflecting the easing of East-West tensions, provides $4.6
billion for foreign military assistance for the fiscal year beginning Oct. 1.
That is $213 million less than current spending levels, and $412 million less
than what the Administration had requested.

In a belt-tightening gesture more symbolic than substantive, lawmakers approved
by voice vote an amendment to cut foreign aid across the board by 2 percent. The
measure, however, exempted many of the largest components of the bill, including
$3 billion in aid to Israel, and yielded reductions totaling about $140 million.

The debate today centered on assistance to the guerrilla alliance in Cambodia
and aid to international family planning organizations in Romania.

In a major battle that injected a domestic political dispute into the
international arena, lawmakers approved $1.5 million for voluntary family
planning in Romania. Lawmakers did not question the need for family planning in
Romania, just which organizations would deliver it.

Abortion opponents defeated an amendment that would have earmarked the family
planning aid for two organizations that critics said advocate abortions, the
International Planned Parenthood Federation and the United Nations Fund for
Population Activities.

Supporters of the amendment, who emphasized that the bill prohibited any money
for abortions, argued that Planned Parenthood and the United Nations agency were
the only family planning organizations now operating in Romania. Under the
Government of President Nicolae Ceausescu, who was overthrown six months ago,
abortions were subject to heavy penalties and birth control aids were available
only on the black market.

Opponents of the measure said that a coalition of health organizations created
by the Agency for International Development could deliver that assistance.

In another hotly contested issue, lawmakers approved an amendment offered by
Representative Stephen J. Solarz, Democrat of Brooklyn, to send $7 million in
''non-lethal'' aid to the coalition fighting the Vietnam-backed Cambodian
Government.

Mr. Solarz argued that the measure prohibited any direct or indirect aid to the
Khmer Rouge, the most powerful faction in the three-party coalition, and was the
best way to insure that United States can influence a political settlement.

Opponents of the measure contend that assistance to the coalition's two other
members, non-Communist groups led by Prince Sihanouk and Son Sann, ultimately
supports the Khmer Rouge, and could lead to the re-emergence of the brutal
regime that was responsible for the deaths of more than one million Cambodians
in the 1970's.

Contrary to expectations, a floor fight over military aid to El Salvador did not
materialize, reflecting the fact that discussions are continuing between the
Administration and House leaders.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1990 The New York Times Company

                              287 of 288 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 June 28, 1990, Thursday, Late Edition - Final

THE MEDIA BUSINESS: ADVERTISING;
Military Newspapers Flourish

BYLINE: By Kim Foltz

SECTION: Section D; Page 19, Column 1; Financial Desk

LENGTH: 730 words


At a time when many newspapers are facing a slump in advertising, Army Times and
its sister publications, Navy Times and Air Force Times, are doing well.

Advertisers like the publications, which are owned by The Times Journal Company,
a newspaper publisher in Springfield, Va., because they are an easy way to reach
an attractive market. The publications issued by the military, like Stars and
Stripes and Army magazine, do not accept advertising.

''It's a classic case of niche marketing,'' said Charlie Rutman, a group media
director at Backer Spielvogel Bates. ''These newspapers reach young consumers
with a high amount of disposable income and who are not as easily reached by
other media.''

The average household income for military personnel is $47,400, said Nat
Kornfeld, the vice president for advertising for Army Times, which will
celebrate its 50th anniversary in September. Members of the armed forces have a
greater percentage of disposable income than do civilians because much of their
living expenses, like food, housing and medical costs, are paid for by the
military services.

The weekly newspapers provide a rundown of who is being transferred, who is
getting promoted and sometimes even report blunders the military may have made.

''It is the bible of what is happening in the military,'' said Robert Sims, a
former Assistant Secretary of Defense for public affairs who is now a senior
vice president at the National Geographic Society. ''The publications give
military personnel all the information they need to know about how the armed
services affects their lives.''

The close ties that Army Times maintains with the military allows it to report
on information important to military personnel several weeks before the armed
forces makes the news official, said James Doyle, the editorial director for the
Army Times publishing division of the Times Journal Company. ''Because of all of
the red tape involved in anything the military does, it uses us as a quick
conduit for information,'' he said.

The three publications are the only non-military publications reporting
exclusively on the armed forces. Readership has been growing, and now stands at
a combined paid circulation of 312,000, although circulation peaked during the
Vietnam War years, at 400,000.

Analysts said the publications are particularly attractive to advertisers
selling products like automobiles, liquor and insurance, which are popular with
the military market.

The American Telephone and Telegraph Company has been using Army Times for five
years to advertise special services like its long-distance calling card for
miltary personnel.

''It's ideal for selling products geared to the active-duty military market
because its reach is greater and it is more economically efficient than using
regular consumer publications,'' said Deanna Kenny, the military market manager
for A.T.&T.

Since 1975, the number of advertising pages for the three papers has risen
nearly 30 percent, to a total of 6,002 pages last year. In comparison, Business
Week, which ranks No.1 in ad pages for consumer publications measured by the
Publishers' Information Bureau, had 4,914 ad pages last year.

Advertising revenue has been increasing at an even faster clip: during the same
period, revenues more than doubled to $24.4 million in 1989.

Analysts said advertisers were also attracted to Army Times because of its high
credibility with readers.

Its tough reporting on the military makes it clear that it is not ''in the
pocket of the Pentagon,'' said Mr. Rutman of Backer Spielvogel Bates. ''If
readers find a publication credible, then they often find the advertising
equally credible. That's important in developing brand loyalty.''

Army Times was the first to report a number of important stories concerning the
military. It was the first to report, for example, that the Army had charged an
American soldier with the murder of a Panamanian prisoner during the United
States invasion of Panama, said Mr. Doyle of Army Times.

Of course, Army Times and the military have had disputes about stories. ''They
have asked us not to run stories, but even when the military has threatened to
take the papers off the newsstands we haven't bowed to the pressure,'' said
Henry Belber, the president of The Times Journal. ''If we didn't fight for our
readers rights, we'd lose our legitimacy.''

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo: Army Times has been described as ''the bible of what is
happening in the military.''

                   Copyright 1990 The New York Times Company

                              288 of 288 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                  June 29, 1990, Friday, Late Edition - Final

The Cost of Soviet Disintegration . . .

BYLINE: By William H. Luers; William H. Luers, president of the Metropolitan
Museum of Art, was Ambassador to Czechoslovakia.

SECTION: Section A; Page 25, Column 1; Editorial Desk

LENGTH: 806 words


The Soviet empire, heir to the Great Russian Empire, is finished
-psychologically, politically, ideologically and socially. It remains for the
Soviet Government and the many nations it encompasses to work out the details.

The end of empire could with time promote a renaissance in Russia, transforming
it into a less insular and anachronistic participant in the world community. But
whether or not Mikhail Gorbachev manages to hold together some form of
confederation with some of the republics, the problems ahead, as this vast
contiguous empire dissolves, are awesome:

* Who will control the vastly dispersed nuclear and chemical weapons in the
Soviet Union, and will any of these weapons become hostages in the
decolonization process?

* Which borders will be challenged as the Baltic states become independent, as
Moldavia decides between Romania and Russia, as the Western Ukraine eyes Poland,
and as the Chinese, Iranians, Turks and Islamic fundamentalists become factors
in the independence movements in the Transcaucasus, Central Asia and the Soviet
Far East?

* Will fundamentalist and ethnic radicals so influence national groups in places
like Soviet Georgia or Uzbekistan that peacekeeping forces will be required?

* How will the new Russian Republic - apart from whatever larger confederation
that comes into existence - deal with the dozens of non-Russian peoples within
its borders -the Tartars, the Chechen-Ingush and the Yakuts in Siberia?

* How will landlocked, isolated nations, historically dependent on Moscow,
become sovereign and economically viable states, if they should choose
independence? And what expectation will there be of help from Western states and
international financial institutions?

* How will the potential flood of refugees from the residue of the Soviet empire
affect nationalist sentiments in Western Europe. Will illegal migration cause
Europe's liberal democracies to erect strong police and political barriers?

* Will the new Russian nation be so humiliated and desperate as to succumb to
some new conservative, despotic form of rule? Could Russia in the 1990's evolve
psychologically and politically like Germany in the 1920's and 1930's?

Not all the prospects are this troubling. The end of Communist rule will relieve
these nations of the ideological and bureaucratic straitjackets that have
retarded their development. New forms of international cooperation might well be
possible. For example, the assertive Russian Republic might actually return the
Northern Islands to Japan, thus enabling new levels of cooperation between Japan
and Russia. Cuba, Vietnam, Ethiopia and others will finally become almost
irrelevant to a non-Communist Russia and have to seek cooperation elsewhere,
perhaps by changing their systems.

The U.S. cannot walk away from these issues. And in contending with them, it
will face three dilemmas.

First, the more support Washington gives to the forces of democratization and
decentralization, the more it weakens the central Soviet Government - the one
body with which we can negotiate arms reductions and discuss the risky politics
of nationalist change. Despite his problems, Mikhail Gorbachev is the one leader
ready for a rapid reduction of Soviet nuclear and conventional forces and
internal democratization. Yet, helping him could alienate democratic and
nationalist leaders elsewhere in the Soviet empire. The second and related
dilemma is whether we should promote pluralism and self-determination even
though this could lead to dangerous Balkanization and nationalist excesses.
Opposition to empires has been a central part of U.S. policy in this century.
And yet, many of the new nations that would emerge - in Russia, Central Asia,
Georgia and the Ukraine - could be rife with racial hatred and abuse.

Our third dilemma is how to reconcile our desire for a new Europe encompassing a
united Germany with a smaller and less-secure Russian state. By helping Mr.
Gorbachev, we encourage the orderly transfer of sovereignty to the other
republics and we get his agreement to a unified Germany associated with NATO.
But the process could result in further deterioration of and deep divisions
within Russia itself. And this could unwittingly promote future paranoia and
insecurity in nuclear-armed Russia, thereby setting the stage for the future
insecurity of Europe.

The key to managing these dilemmas is to work toward a democratic and
economically healthy Russia, one that does not feel threatened by the new Europe
in which it must ultimately find a home. And we should pursue this goal with or
without Mr. Gorbachev.

By focusing on this larger goal, it will be easier for us to support the
independence of nations in the Soviet empire and to further associate ourselves
with the forces of democratization and decentralization.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Op-Ed

                   Copyright 1990 The New York Times Company
