
                               1 of 281 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 April 1, 1992, Wednesday, Late Edition - Final

BUSINESS PEOPLE;
Avon Picks Executive For a Top Sales Post

BYLINE: By ADAM BRYANT

SECTION: Section D; Page 4; Column 5; Financial Desk

LENGTH: 377 words


Avon Products Inc. yesterday named Walker Lewis president of its domestic direct
selling business and executive vice president of the company.

Mr. Lewis fills the position vacated in February by E. V. Goings, who left
because of differences in the company strategy.

Mr. Lewis was chairman and chief executive of Mercer Management Consulting, a
division of the Mercer Group ofMarsh & McLennan. He had been advising Avon for
the last three years on corporate strategy, company marketing, field sales and
sales-support operations.

Mr. Lewis, 47 years old, said his goal was to increase the annual growth of the
United States business to double-digit rates and match the gains Avon is
experiencing in many of its 100 foreign markets, including Latin America. The
United States arm of Avon accounts for roughly a third of its sales, but that
share has been shrinking steadily as its foreign business expands.

Mr. Lewis said one strategy was to increase spending on marketing cosmetic,
jewelry and gift products. The company's advertising and research and
development efforts waned in recent years as Avon officials turned to fighting
off takeover bids. He said increased marketing and new products would invigorate
Avon's 500,000 door-to-door salespeople in the United States.

The company has also started a catalogue mailing program designed to support its
sales force by reaching the so-called stranded customer' who is not near a sales
representative. Avon expects the catalogue will provide sales of up to $25
million in 1992. The company earned $135.7 million on revenue of $3.59 billion
last year.

Mr. Lewis graduated from Harvard University in 1967, and spent a year in Vietnam
and South America on a Harvard Corning Traveling Fellowship. In 1968, he joined
the faculty of Ohio University as assistant to the university's executive vice
president.

In 1971, he joined the Boston Consulting Group, and two years later founded
Strategic Planning Associates. He sold the company in 1989 to Marsh & McLennan,
which merged Strategic Planning with Temple, Barker & Sloane to form Mercer
Management Consulting. Mercer did not announce a replacement for Mr. Lewis
yesterday.

Mr. Lewis lives in Greenwich, Conn., with his wife and three children.

NAME: Walker Lewis

LOAD-DATE: April 1, 1992

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo: Walker Lewis, Avon Products Inc. (Pach Brothers)

TYPE: Biography

                   Copyright 1992 The New York Times Company


                               2 of 281 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 April 2, 1992, Thursday, Late Edition - Final

Tracking the Elusive Student in Crown Heights;
A Truant Officer for the 90's Uses Persistence and Persuasion, and Attendance
Rises

BYLINE: By MARY B. W. TABOR

SECTION: Section B; Page 1; Column 2; Metropolitan Desk

LENGTH: 1221 words


With jazz tunes wafting softly from his radio, the man in the blue van cruised
the streets of Crown Heights, his dreadlocked head turning slowly as he scanned
the sidewalks and empty lots in search of loitering youths.

His eyes locked on four teen-agers shuffling toward a corner market. The van
slowed. "You guys going to school?" he called out an open window. They ducked
their heads. "Don't hide like that," he cajoled. "Go on now."

Rounding the corner of Union Street and Franklin Avenue, he spotted six more
youths near the back entrance of Prospect Heights High School, where large metal
doors stand locked after first period to help secure the school's 2,000 students
from the violence of the streets that surround them.

"You've got six people standing out here in the cold," he said into his
walkie-talkie. "And you are going to lose them if you don't get them inside
fast." He jumped out of the van and walked briskly toward the youths. "How's
your mom?" he asked one tall boy, who grabbed the man's hand with familiarity.
"I really want to see you out on that basketball court," he said to another. Two
minutes later, the door opened and the six students slipped inside.

Thus begins another morning for Richard Green -- community worker, youth leader
and truant officer, 90's-style, for Prospect Heights High School, a troubled
school in Crown Heights that has long struggled with chronic attendance and
dropout problems.

Mr. Green, director of the nearby Crown Heights Youth Collective, is a striking
example of the new approaches that schools in New York City and around the
nation are taking to draw their troubled students back to the classroom.

For years, schools relied on strict agents of discipline to retrieve students
from the streets. But as the problems facing urban youths have become more
complex, so has the task of getting them back.

No longer enforcer for a few, Mr. Green must be a pied piper and broker of hope
for many.

Students from the growing number of single-parent homes often require home
visits. Young drug sellers need legitimate jobs. Non-English speakers need
language training. Pregnant students need prenatal counseling and day care.

Then there is the increasingly difficult job of convincing these youths,
surrounded by violence and poverty, not to give up on school altogether. One in
five students in New York City's public schools will drop out before graduating
-- a rate mirrored in other major urban centers across the country.

In New York, these new dropout-prevention programs fall under the rubric of
Project Achieve, which gives Prospect Heights and 31 other high schools with
high dropout rates money for extra teachers, counselors and customized
dropout-prevention programs. In the last three years, daily attendance at
Prospect Heights, made up mostly of students from Haiti and Jamaica, has climbed
from about 79 percent to 84 percent. The number of students who have been out of
school for more than a month straight is now 153 -- half of what it was in 1987.
And youths' attitudes about school seem to be improving overall, says the
principal, Jerry Cioffi. About 92 percent of the school's students graduated
last year.

Mr. Green and his staff of youth counselors also work for George W. Wingate High
on Kingston Avenue in Crown Heights. On a cold or rainy day, Mr. Green will find
at least a dozen would-be truants during his three-hour street sweeps. On warmer
days, when he walks the beat and when students are likelier to stay outside, he
may round up 50 or more.

This year with help from a $896,600 state grant, Prospect Heights has hired
Goodwill Industries to develop individual guidance plans for the students. New
York University is providing tutors. The Haitian Community Council is bringing
in cultural programs, and Mr. Green and his Youth Collective are sweeping the
streets and doing other dropout counseling to try to save those who have all but
given up on school.

Hopelessness and Frustration

To watch Mr. Green, a lanky, 44-year-old Vietnam veteran, work the Crown Heights
neighborhood where he has lived since 1958, is to witness the work of a warrior
in the battle to defeat the hopelessness and frustration that many youths here
feel.

Many of the teen-agers he sees on the streets have stayed out of school more
than a semester. Some have been held back repeatedly and have given up. Others
are struggling with language and education barriers. Three of four students in
this year's freshman class entered Prospect Heights reading below the
ninth-grade level. Four of five were not up to speed in math.

So even with the extra services that the school is providing, administrators say
they are lucky if half the dropouts come back and graduate.

Still, Mr. Green says the best tool in his work is letting the truants know that
he knows them and that he cares.

Those who know Mr. Green say his influence with the youths stems not just from
his work at the high school. The Youth Collective, which he helped found in
1978, serves about 6,000 young people each year with services ranging from
prenatal assistance to job training.

Helping Shawn

And last year, during racial tension between Lubavitch Jews and blacks after the
death of Gavin Cato, a 7-year-old boy who was struck by a Lubavitch's car, Mr.
Green and Dr. David Lazerson, an administrator at North Shore Hebrew Academy,
formed an interracial basketball team and youth group made up of black and
Lubavitch teen-agers.

Mr. Green carries this reputation as an advocate, peacemaker and friend into the
streets.

"Shawn, Shawn, don't try it," he calls out his window to a tall youth ducking in
the doorway of an apartment building. "Shawn, come here."

The youth shoves his hands into the pockets of his black jacket and walks to the
van. "What are you doing out of the building?" Mr. Green asks quietly. "You
don't want to go to your classes? What would you rather do?"

"Tech work," Shawn replies.

"How about if I could get you into Westinghouse," says Mr. Green, referring to
George Westinghouse High School, which offers courses in technical drawing and
other programs related to manufacturing.

Shawn nods.

"O.K., anything to get you off these streets," Mr. Green says. "It's getting
wild out here, and it's just a matter of time until something happens to you.
Let me talk to the principal."

Many of those he gets back into school will stay only a little while, Mr. Green
admits. The recidivism rate is at least 50 percent, he says.

But the victories have been sweet.

When he walks into Prospect Heights, Chrystal Broderick, 15, runs over and gives
Mr. Green a big hug. "I'm so glad to see you in school," he says to her. After
she stayed out of school for a semester, she explains, Mr. Green got her back in
school.

"I had a little bit of problems with my mother, and I was hanging out with the
wrong crowd" she said. Her mother finally took her to talk with Mr. Green at the
Youth Collective, she said, and with his help and appeals, she returned to
school.

"I've been doing good," she says, "passing my tests" -- a statement backed by
Mr. Cioffi. "Mr. Green put some sense in my head. He talked to me and made me
realize I had to go back to school and get my education. Besides, I was tired of
watching TV. I want to be something."


LOAD-DATE: April 2, 1992

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo: Richard Green, a truant officer who is a pied piper and a broker
of hope, talking to students at Prospect Heights High School in Brooklyn. (Dith
Pran/The New York Times)

                   Copyright 1992 The New York Times Company


                               3 of 281 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 April 2, 1992, Thursday, Late Edition - Final

Dinkins Names New Chief of Hospitals

BYLINE: By CALVIN SIMS

SECTION: Section B; Page 3; Column 4; Metropolitan Desk

LENGTH: 883 words


Mayor David N. Dinkins yesterday nominated Dr. Billy E. Jones, the city's Mental
Health Commissioner, to be president of New York City's Health and Hospitals
Corporation.

The announcement came a week after a mayoral search committee said that it could
not find a suitable candidate for the post, mainly because applicants said that
the current salary of $129,000 was too low. Mr. Dinkins said he had recommended
that the hospital corporation pay Dr. Jones $150,000; he makes $110,000 as
Mental Health Commissioner.

At a news conference in the Bronx, where he has set up his office for the week,
Mayor Dinkins said that the search committee had interviewed more than 170
people for the city's top hospital job. Aides to Mr. Dinkins said some
applicants had indicated that they expected to be paid a minimum of $200,000.
Members of the search committee declined to say how much the city had been
willing to pay, nor would they identify applicants.

Public health-care administrators can be hard to recruit because top physicians
and health managers often must take a big pay cut when they go from private to
public employment.

If approved by the corporation's board at its meeting April 7, Dr. Jones, 53
years old, will succeed Dr. J. Emilio Carrillo, who resigned under pressure in
October after questions were raised about his personal finances. Dr. James R.
Dumpson, the corporation's chairman, has been acting president.

Dr. Jones is generally regarded as a competent physician and administrator. But
some politicians and health-care officials yesterday suggested that he appeared
to have won the nomination by default, underscoring the increasing pressure on
Mayor Dinkins to fill vacancies in his administration as he moves closer to the
1993 election.

The Mayor dismissed such notions. "It would be inaccurate and certainly unfair
to Dr. Jones for anyone to leave this chamber under the assumption that the
search committee could not find a qualified person and therefore I chose Dr.
Jones," Mr. Dinkins said. "That is not accurate."

It remains unclear exactly when Dr. Jones became a serious candidate for the job
and why he was not officially interviewed by the search committee, even though
Dr. Jones said that he went before the committee to answer questions about the
delivery of health care in New York City.

Candidate's Reluctance

Cesar A. Perales, Deputy Mayor for Health and Human Services, to whom Dr. Jones
will report, said yesterday that several members of the hospital corporation
board were impressed with Dr. Jones's performance as Mental Health Commissioner
and wanted him to become a candidate for president, but that Dr. Jones had
resisted because he was enjoying his current job.

In appointing Dr. Jones, who is black, Mr. Dinkins appears to be trying once
again to strike a balance in the racial makeup of his top health commissioners:
Mr. Perales is Hispanic and the Health Commissioner, Dr. Margaret A. Hamburg,
has a white and a black parent.

The Mayor's appointment of Dr. Carrillo was seen as way to appease the
Association of Hispanic Mental Health Professionals, who wanted Mr. Dinkins to
appoint a Hispanic psychiatrist, Dr. Luis R. Marcos, as Mental Health
Commissioner in 1990. When Dr. Carrillo stepped down, Mr. Dinkins named Mr.
Perales, and black community leaders later put pressure on the Mayor to find a
black to head the hospitals corporation.

Dr. Jones declined yesterday to say what his priorities would be as head of the
hospitals corporation but acknowledged some formidable challenges, including the
spread of tuberculosis, AIDS and drug abuse, declining budgets, rising Medicaid
costs and deadlocked negotiations between the city's public hospitals and their
private affiliates. The city's hospitals have also come under fire for a series
of recent incidents in which they were accused of giving inadequate care to
patients, some of whom died.

Doctors Union Pleased

Dr. Donald C. Meyer, executive director of the Doctors Council, which represents
3,300 doctors at municipal and private hospitals, said yesterday that the union
was pleased that the Mayor had nominated a permanent president but that it was
too early to assess how Dr. Jones would perform in the job.

Kenneth E. Raske, president of the Greater New York Hospital Association, which
represents 131 private and voluntary health institutions, praised the nomination
of Dr. Jones, whom he described as a "a competent and hard-working
administrator."

Dr. Jones is a former medical director of Lincoln Hospital in the Bronx and was
an Army psychiatrist in Vietnam. At the Department of Mental Health, Mental
Retardation and Alcoholism Services, Dr. Jones was praised for his management of
more than 750 mental health and alcoholism programs run by the city and private
agencies and hospitals.

As medical director at Lincoln, Dr. Jones was paid $175,000 a year and received
an additional $10,000 from his private practice in Manhattan. As Commissioner he
has retained a handful of patients, who he said yesterday earn him little if any
money today. Dr. Jones also teaches at the Medical College of the City
University of New York, with a salary of $22,500. Dr. Jones said yesterday that
he would not accept any new patients but would continue to teach.


NAME: Billy E. Jones

LOAD-DATE: April 2, 1992

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo: Dr. Billy E. Jones after his nomination yesterday as the city's
Mental Health Commissioner. (Chester Higgins Jr./The New York Times)

TYPE: Biography

                   Copyright 1992 The New York Times Company


                               4 of 281 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 April 2, 1992, Thursday, Late Edition - Final

ON THE ROAD WITH: Jacques Barzaghi;
What's That Glimmering Behind Jerry Brown?

BYLINE: By ALESSANDRA STANLEY

SECTION: Section C; Page 1; Column 5; Home Desk

LENGTH: 1687 words


DON QUIXOTE had Sancho Panza and Richard Nixon had Bebe Rebozo. Jerry Brown, who
on any given day of his campaign can seem idealistic or just plain tricky, has
Jacques Barzaghi.

People joke that Edmund G. Brown Jr. is Governor Moonbeam, but it is Mr.
Barzaghi who, behind the scenes, puts the frost on the California Flake.
Anywhere Mr. Brown goes in his quest for the Democratic nomination for
President, his longtime adviser and confidant is sure to be found -- and
noticed. He does not travel incognito.

The lean and intense Mr. Barzaghi (the name is pronounced bar-ZAH-ghee) wears --
always -- a black beret, a black jacket, black chinos, black boots and austere
wire-rim glasses. Beneath the beret, his head is shaved. His is the kind of
urban guerrilla chic that may remind some of the Gauloise-smoking Left Bank
beatniks in the 1957 musical "Funny Face." Or Dieter, the black-clad,
angst-ridden, German neo-expressionist talk-show host on the "Sprockets" skit on
"Saturday Night Live."

After a long day of trying to keep Mr. Brown on schedule, Mr. Barzaghi took a
dinner break at Mike's American Bar and Grill, an archly decorated hangout not
far from the Brown headquarters in Times Square that Mr. Barzaghi found "very
French." After ordering grilled vegetables and nonalcoholic beer, he spoke
langorously, his beret still firmly clamped on his head.

The French-born former film maker speaks with a piquant French accent, and is
given to gnomic, vaguely existential utterances that neatly match his clothes.
("We are not disorganized. Our campaign transcends understanding.")

Mr. Barzaghi, who has been at Mr. Brown's side since the early 1970's,
accompanying him everywhere from Rotary banquets to extended retreats in Zen
monasteries in California and Japan, has been described by former colleagues as
Mr. Brown's alter ego, his soul mate, his Svengali, his best friend and, more
sourly, his only friend.

B. T. Collins, a Republican State Assemblyman in California who was chief of
staff in 1976 to Mr. Brown when he was Governor, had a more prosaic view of the
Barzaghi-Brown relationship. "He is Jerry Brown's Mike Deaver," Mr. Collins
said, referring to Ronald Reagan's longtime aide. "His first and only concern is
the Governor's well-being."

In California, Mr. Barzaghi worked hard to let Jerry be Jerry, introducing Sufi
choirs to the Governor's prayer breakfasts, encouraging Mr. Brown to eschew the
Governor's mansion and sleep on the floor of a modest apartment. One Barzaghi
story, often repeated, has it that he was assigned to report on conditions in
the California penal system. After touring a state prison, he was asked what he
thought. He replied, it is said, "We are all prisoners."

On the campaign trail, Mr. Barzaghi functions as a kind of funky Zen version of
Mr. Reagan's master impresario, Mr. Deaver. During speeches, he crouches in
front of the platform, studying the candidate's every move, shaking his head in
warning when Mr. Brown digresses from his assigned topic and giving the "cut"
sign, dragging a finger across his throat, when Mr. Brown talks too long.

Mr. Barzaghi said it hurt him when reporters referred to him as a "mystery man,"
but his mystique is based partly on his shadowy past; even his closest
colleagues know his personal history only sketchily.

Mr. Barzaghi, who said he spent his 20's studying Cahiers du Cinema and
deconstructing the films of Jean-Luc Godard and Francois Truffaut with a
stopwatch, likened his campaign chores to New Wave film making. "Basically, what
I am doing now, there is no difference," he said. "I watch Jerry; I take notes;
I keep track of time."

He gave a philosophical shrug: "There is not much difference."

Mr. Barzaghi, 53 years old, said that besides working on "Alphaville" with
Jean-Luc Godard, he fought in the French Army during the Algerian war, and lived
for three years in the 1980's in a solar-powered hut in an Australian rain
forest, until he grew disenchanted. ("Too much rain.") He said he had been
married three times and has six children. He delivered his first child himself
at home, an experience he described as "godlike." He named one son Akira, after
his favorite film director, Akira Kurosawa. But he admires some American films.
He said he has seen "Apocalypse Now" 10 times.

Mr. Barzaghi said his latest incarnation, as a political strategist, took even
him by surprise. "I thought once upon a time that films would be my vocation,"
he said. "Now politics, or my concern for a certain way of life, has gotten the
best of me." He said Chinese medicine was one of his ruling passions, and that
he had one other all-consuming pursuit: "What interests me most is personal
growth."

The way he describes the Brown campaign, it is less a pursuit of political
advancement than Mr. Brown's latest exercise in personal growth, an extension of
Zen meditation and travels with Mother Teresa in Calcutta.

"What really makes Jerry tick, what really makes him run, is the sense of the
suffering he is experiencing," Mr. Barzaghi said. "It's really real for him."

As for himself: "I can get so mad, everywhere we go. The level of suffering, it
is too much." Mr. Brown and his entourage stay with supporters, and on at least
one occasion have spent the night in a shelter for the homeless, instead of in
hotels. "We are every day, every day in it, in that misery," Mr. Barzaghi said.

He expressed contempt for Mr. Brown's rival, Gov. Bill Clinton of Arkansas.
("The groom on top of the wedding cake. He looks like he sleeps with a
hairnet."). But he said he greatly admired his opposite number in the Clinton
campaign, James Carville, calling him "brilliant, very funny -- so messy. He is
very real." Mr. Carville, a Cajun who is Mr. Clinton's top strategist, wears
jeans and a lot of attitude. He returned the compliment: "The nice thing about
having Jacques around is that I am always the second-weirdest person on the
trail."

Mr. Barzaghi said he was born in Beausoleil, a small town in southern France,
"on the wrong side of the tracks from Monaco." His father was an officer in the
French merchant marine and was in the French Resistance during World War II.

Mr. Barzaghi said he joined the merchant marine himself at age 17, then later
the French Army, taking basic training alongside the French Foreign Legion in
North Africa. He said that though he fought anti-colonial guerrillas in 1958 and
1959, he never suffered post-Algerian traumatic stress syndrome. "I enjoyed
every minute," he said of his combat experiences. "I had a very good time."
Pressed for war stories, he said: "Physical danger is not something I go away
from. Ignorance scares me more."

After Algeria, he went to Paris, fell in love with an actress and fell into
acting, landing the role of Raskolnikov in a stage performance of "Crime and
Punishment." He said he felt wounded when his thick Marseilles accent made
audiences laugh. When a French movie version was made, Mr. Barzaghi said, the
director gave someone else the lead role but kept him in the cast, "creating for
me the role of a mute."

Mr. Barzaghi soon discovered that what he really wanted to do was direct. His
first wife, Tania Constantine, is the daugther of the American actor Eddie
Constantine, a Godard star and French cult figure who helped him get a job with
Mr. Godard. Years later, Mr. Barzaghi introduced the actor to Mr. Brown. Mr.
Constantine, who now lives in Germany and said he was a Brown supporter, had an
ex-father-in-law's view of Mr. Barzaghi. "I never knew what Jerry saw in him,"
he said, "but he must have something."

Mr. Barzaghi said that contrary to the suspicions of the American Government,
which stalled his effort to become a naturalized citizen until Mr. Brown
intervened on his behalf, he was not a Maoist revolutionary in the 1968 student
uprising in Paris.  "The place to go was the streets and the Sorbonne," he said.
"Godard, Truffaut, everyone was at the Sorbonne." Mr. Barzaghi confessed that
after a day at the barricades, he would spend his nights partying in trendy
discotheques like Castel.

He moved to California with his first wife in 1968 and dabbled in film making
and writing. He met Mr. Brown, then the California Secretary of State, at a
party in Laurel Canyon, but did not recognize him. Mr. Barzaghi sternly lectured
the tall stranger dressed in jeans and a cowboy shirt about the plight of the
Navajo. His lack of deference, he said, "was the key to connecting" to Mr.
Brown.

"I didn't know his father was a governor, or that he was was a secretary of
state," he said. "I treated him without a filter: just me talking to him, the
way he wanted to be treated." He joined Mr. Brown's staff.After his boss became
Governor, Mr. Barzaghi told staff members that there was no difference between a
governor and a shoemaker.

"Jacques is someone who has the ability to see past the normal boundaries," said
Jodie Evans, a longtime Brown aide who spoke glowingly of Mr. Barzaghi's warmth
and creativity. "His boundaries are way out there."

Mr. Collins, the State Assemblyman and former chief of staff, said that on
important matters, he went through Mr. Barzaghi to get to the Governor. "He
would listen to Jacques," Mr. Collins said. "He wouldn't listen to me."

Mr. Collins, who described himself as a "oddball right-wing Republican and
Vietnam vet," said he respected Mr. Barzaghi's acuity. "He really gets into the
mind of people," he said. But he added that he had little patience with the
mystical Barzaghi approach to governance.

"I used to call him Pinhead," Mr. Collins said. "He didn't understand that
government works by regulation. He thought it worked through the existentialism
of the Governor's ideas: 'I read; I believe; therefore I am.' "

He added, "Give me a break."

Mr. Barzaghi said he was delighted by the way Mr. Brown's insurgent campaign has
taken off, but disliked having to tailor his creativity to the exacting pattern
of a political campaign. "I love discipline, square lines, all neat and
everything in its place," he said. "But I can see the beauty in chaos."

NAME: Jacques Barzaghi

LOAD-DATE: April 2, 1992

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photos: Home for Jacques Barzaghi, the longtime adviser, confidant and
friend to Edmund G. Brown Jr., is wherever Mr. Brown is. (Jim Estrin/The New
York Times) (pg. C1); Urban guerrilla chic: Jacques Barzaghi may remind some of
a cinematic version of a Gauloise-smoking Left Bank beatnik. (Jim Estrin/The New
York Times) (pg. C14)



TYPE: Biography

                   Copyright 1992 The New York Times Company


                               5 of 281 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                  April 3, 1992, Friday, Late Edition - Final

Cambodia Rivals Take Vital Steps Toward Peace

BYLINE: By HENRY KAMM,  Special to The New York Times

SECTION: Section A; Page 5; Column 1; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 654 words

DATELINE: PHNOM PENH, Cambodia, April 2


The four political groups that divide this country continue to speak of one
another with undiminished hatred, but, under international pressure, they took
two vital steps this week to fulfill their reluctant commitment to peace and
reconciliation.

Since Monday, daily truck convoys have been crossing into western Cambodia from
Thailand, beginning the resettlement of about 370,000 Cambodians who, starting
in 1979, had gone to live in huge camps for displaced people on the border.

They have depended for their survival on international handouts and Thailand's
uncertain tolerance of their presence and have endured pressure and violence
from the political factions that seek to claim them for their causes.

The repatriation began without incident. And the four factions have issued a
statement reaffirming that refugees will be free to choose where they settle and
will not be persecuted or discriminated against for having fled Cambodia or for
any political activity since then, said Yasushi Akashi, the United Nations
special representative here, in an interview today.

Those are vital guarantees, because a refugee's choice of destination is also a
choice of political authority. Cambodia remains divided into areas controlled by
one of the four groups, which in the past have exacted the submission of all who
live there.

Government Holds Most Land

About 80 percent of the area and total population, estimated at more than 8
million by the United Nations, is controlled by the Government of Prime Minister
Hun Sen. The Government rules the State of Cambodia, which was a Communist
"people's republic" for a decade. It was installed by Vietnam after the
Vietnamese invaded Cambodia and overthrew Prime Minister Pol Pot. Mr. Pol Pot
continues to dominate the government of Democratic Kampuchea, which controls the
second-largest area of the country and derives its support largely from China
and Thailand.

During his rule, from 1975 to 1979, more than a million Cambodians were killed.

The two smaller factions represented on the governing Supreme National Council
are the Khmer People's National Liberation Front, led by Son Sann, a former
Prime Minister, and the forces loyal to Prince Norodom Sihanouk, leader of the
council and a former ruler of the country.

Officially, the two larger groups have forsworn Communism, but the pronouncement
has found little credence among Cambodians or foreigners. Although the small
factions are suspicious of each other, they are united by their status as
non-Communists.

All members of the Supreme Council agreed at a meeting Wednesday to sign an
international covenant guaranteeing normal political and civil rights and
another spelling out the economic, social and cultural freedom of all citizens,
the United Nations official said.

That is regarded as a major advance in a country that under the Khmer Rouge was
considered the world's worst abuser of human rights and that under the successor
Government was liberalized only to the level of a dogmatically Communist
society.

Mr. Akashi compared the role of his organization, the United Nations
Transitional Authority in Cambodia, which has rapidly made a mark on politics
here, with the role played by the United States in instilling democracy in his
native Japan after World War II.

"We have no illusions that we can instill all the guarantees and safeguards," he
said. "We try to plant the seeds of democracy and human rights, which we hope
will flourish after we leave."

Mr. Akashi said that in a country with no tradition of safeguarding human
rights, the covenants were "an important embodiment" of the principles of the
Universal Declaration of Human Rights.

"We have to hold the Cambodians to their implementation in the form of laws," he
said.

The covenants are to be signed here later this month, when Secretary General
Boutros Boutros-Ghali of the United Nations is to pay a visit.

LOAD-DATE: April 3, 1992

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1992 The New York Times Company


                               6 of 281 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                  April 5, 1992, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

C.I.A. on Campus, Sans Trench Coat

BYLINE: By Elaine Sciolino

SECTION: Section 4A; Page 34; Column 3; Education Life Supplement

LENGTH: 1629 words


"Trench coat not required," reads the color brochure of helpful hints for
college students in preparation for their employment at the Central Intelligence
Agency. The brochure does advise, however, bringing linens and kitchen utensils
to the minimally furnished C.I.A. apartments, saving receipts for reimbursement,
making advance contact with roommates and being prepared to pay the first
month's rent and groceries until the first paychecks arrive.

Subsidizing Students

Since 1961, when the first C.I.A. student aid program was created, the agency
has employed students for a few months at a time and subsidized their tuition
and fees -- 500 students this year with a budget of $1.6 million. While some
colleges and universities ban all C.I.A. activities on campus -- from research
projects and recruiting to C.I.A. officials teaching during their sabbaticals --
others encourage their students to take advantage of these little-known
activities, especially in an environment of soaring tuitions and shrinking
financial aid.

No longer does the agency need cadres of political analysts steeped in
Kremlinology or arms control specialists who can count missile warheads. In
recent years its goal has been to recruit first-rate minority students as well
as graduates in newly desirable fields -- engineers to develop intelligence
collection systems, bankers to carry out financial investigations, physicists to
analyze the proliferation of weapons of mass destruction and linguists to
understand better what people are saying.

Even the newly organized K.G.B. has begun to follow the C.I.A.'s lead. In a
speech at the prestigious Moscow State Institute for International Relations
earlier last month, Yevgeny Primakov, the head of the K.G.B.'s foreign
intelligence service, openly urged students to join. He said he was particularly
interested in "physicists, chemists and other professionals," including those
with economic backgrounds.

The C.I.A. has not done well in achieving its recruiting goals, at least in
hiring and promoting minorities, some of whom are skeptical of joining an
organization that in the past has conducted coups and assassination attempts in
the developing world. And freshly minted M.B.A.'s or bankers can generally get
better-paying jobs in the private sector. The student aid programs, typically
involving three- or six-month tours that students may scatter throughout their
college careers, are designed to woo job candidates before they decide to work
somewhere else.

"We've seen the need to get to the student population at an earlier date," said
Paula A. Montgomery, chief of the C.I.A.'s requirements and recruitment
division. "It's our chance to get them interested in working for the agency."

More Are Interested

Agency officials say the ploy is working, that more students are interested than
ever before. But it is hard to judge whether that interest results from
financial need or from a new regard for a once-stigmatized organization.

"It's my impression that there is a great deal more appreciation of intelligence
and the role of the C.I.A. among students and faculty than in the past," said
Michael A. Turner, the agency's coordinator for academic affairs.

But during his Senate confirmation hearings last fall, Robert M. Gates, now
Director of Central Intelligence, acknowledged that the agency needed to explain
itself better to the American public, describing an atmosphere in which "the
most outrageous allegations are taken seriously, when the honor and integrity of
thousands of patriotic public servants are suspect merely by virtue of where
they work." To this end, he has begun a campaign of "openness," which includes
closer cooperation with academia.

For students, C.I.A. programs offer help with college or graduate school
finances and a firsthand look into how the secret world of intelligence works.

"When I heard those three letters -- C.I.A. -- from my counselor and realized I
could work there, it set off a little spark, and I said, 'Wow,' " said one
22-year-old man, a junior from Georgia Tech who has spent a total of almost two
years working for the agency. "I haven't found a place I would rather work."

The students -- whom the C.I.A. in an exception to its usual practice allowed to
be interviewed on condition that their names not be used -- say they are treated
like regular staff members. One political science major worked on the emergency
task force during last summer's abortive coup in Moscow, while a biology major
helped draft research papers on chemical and biological weapons and the AIDS
epidemic, which the agency has begun to view as a national security problem,
particularly in the developing world. Business majors have helped prepare,
negotiate and administer contracts with private American companies that do
business with the C.I.A. Accounting majors have traveled with senior officials
to help audit field stations abroad.

One electrical engineering major works in the agency's division of science and
technology, where he helps develop technological devices for covert operators in
the field. "You know how when James Bond needs something he goes to Q-branch?"
he asked. "That's the kind of place I work in. Some people in the agency call it
the toy shop." When asked if he enjoyed his job, he replied, "Oh, gosh, yes.
Toys are a fun thing."

Presenting a Dilemma

For some students, the decision to accept C.I.A. money was a dilemma in some
ways comparable to that faced by students reluctant to accept Pentagon-financed
graduate fellowships in the late 1960's because of the Vietnam War. Students who
have worked for the C.I.A. are prevented by law from joining the Peace Corps,
for example, because the agency connection could damage the corps's credibility
in some regions or put its workers at risk of retaliation from anti-C.I.A.
elements.

"You have to look at what you lose," said a 22-year-old senior from the
University of South Carolina, a woman who plans to attend law school in the
fall. "You have to ask yourself, 'Is this going to ruin my career 20 years down
the road?' "

The stigma is so strong on many campuses that some students do not tell their
friends where they work. One 23-year-old Harvard senior in political science is
on her second tour at the agency -- "where I've always wanted to work," she
said. But, she added, "I don't tell a lot of people, hardly anyone at school.
Part of the problem is that the public doesn't really know what we do. If people
start to criticize the C.I.A. and they don't know I work here, I just keep my
mouth shut. I can't change their minds."

Some students who have shared the news with classmates have been subjected to
criticism or ridicule. "At first they asked: 'What do you do? Stand in corners?
Go undercover? Do you carry a gun? Promise me you won't look into my tax
records.' Stuff like that," said one student who had told his fraternity
brothers.

In return for its largess, the C.I.A. requires students who receive direct
grants for tuition and fees to sign a contract agreeing to work for the agency
after graduation.

The Undergraduate Scholar Program, for example, a program legislated by Congress
primarily for financially needy minority and disabled students, gives students
up to $15,000 a year in tuition and fees and a salary of between $14,000 and
$18,000 for three months of full-time work in the summers. After graduation,
students must work for the agency for four years. If they decline to do so, they
must return the outright grants -- but not the hefty salaries.

Under the Undergraduate Student Trainee Program, students alternate a semester
of school with one of work. Students typically work six months a year, for which
they receive between $7,000 and $10,500 depending on their position --
substantially less than the scholars' program. The agency also administers a
work-study program for graduate students and a separate, summer work program for
minorities.

Students who apply to the program face a rigorous screening process that lasts
several months and involves a security check and lengthy polygraph test.

"The polygraph was horrible," said one student. "You do break down and come out
as a liar on everything. After the first day I called my parents and said, 'It's
over. Now what am I going to be?' But the second time they rephrased the
questions and eventually, after eight hours, I passed."

One out of six applicants is accepted. Students need only a high school grade
point average of 2.75 and a combined score of 900 on the Scholastic Aptitude
Test for college admission to apply for the minority scholar program, and a
college grade point average of 2.75 for the trainee program.

Getting the Best?

C.I.A. administrators are sensitive to criticism that with such low
requirements, they may not be attracting the best. Ms. Montgomery emphasized
that students chosen for the programs have higher scores, but added, "Our
concern is that if you go too high, you'll overlook someone with motivation,
energy and interest. That can make up for a lot of things."

And they are pleased that 60 percent of program participants seek employment
with the C.I.A. after graduation. But some students have decided not to apply
for direct grants either because they would have no control over what they do
after graduation or because they do not want to work full time for the agency.

"I don't mind being obligated to the agency, but there would be no guarantee
they would offer me the kind of job I would want, especially with all the budget
cutbacks here," said the Harvard political science major.

Another student put it more bluntly, saying, "I just want to make the money
while I'm working here, but I have no obligation to come back."

LOAD-DATE: April 5, 1992

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Drawings

                   Copyright 1992 The New York Times Company


                               7 of 281 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                  April 5, 1992, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

PHOTOGRAPHY VIEW;
Photographs As Weapons of War And Politics

BYLINE: By Vicki Goldberg;  Vicki Goldberg is the author of "The Power of
Photography: How Photographs Changed Our Lives."

SECTION: Section 2; Page 39; Column 1; Arts & Leisure Desk

LENGTH: 1570 words

DATELINE: HOUSTON


In the communications era, control of the making and distribution of images is a
key to power. Photographic evidence can be put to many uses, and the publication
of pictures is often a political decision or at least one with political
consequences. Consider the Chinese belatedly pulling the plug on Western
television broadcasts in 1989, or American censorship in Panama and during the
Persian Gulf War, amateur videocam surveillance of police actions in Eastern
Europe before Communism's fall (or for that matter in Los Angeles last year).

At the Houston Fotofest, the largest international photography festival in this
country (held once every two years and closing today), three shows of material
never seen here before -- from El Salvador, the Netherlands and Czechoslovakia
-- stunningly illustrate the life-and-death struggle between citizen and
government over image and document. "In the Eye of the Beholder: The Secret
Archive, El Salvador 1980-1991" is a selection from 80,000 negatives made for
the armed opposition movement and neither published nor shown before this year;
they constitute a mammoth and secret record of resistance.

For 12 years, as this archive grew, it was constantly moved about for safety's
sake, usually landing beyond El Salvador's borders beneath some brave soul's
mattress. The jungle is not a great place for a darkroom, and most of these
images have been printed for the first time. The photographers are anonymous to
protect themselves and their families, but there is talk that they may soon feel
safe enough to take their names back.

Almost none of them were professionals; some had never handled a camera. More
sophisticated journalism did come out of this war, but degrees of brilliance are
simply not an issue here. Photography of this order cuts through the net of
esthetics with the sharpness of its emotional power; the document is unique and
uncommonly moving.

The cease-fire took effect on Feb. 1; on Feb. 7, 100 photographs went on view at
the Photographic Resource Center in Boston (these travel to Toronto in May), and
a month later, this smaller show opened in Houston. Katy Lyle, the curator, says
the exhibition will probably go to El Salvador, bringing that country a view
from behind the lines of a war in which 75,000 people were killed or
disappeared.

There are pictures here of the closing of the university by the military; the
massacre at Archbishop Romero's funeral in 1980; parachute demonstrations at the
National Stadium by United States Army officers with American flags flying from
their chutes; people being captured in the street or bleeding to death on the
curb; a "photo opportunity" the Government served up for the international press
-- a bound and blindfolded prisoner with the word "terrorist" written across his
bare chest.

Since only a very few of the photographs were published, and only clandestinely,
during the conflict, their power was more potential than actual. But even that
potential came as a revelation to this poor, predominantly agrarian land, where
until the mid-1970's almost no one took photographs and newspaper photography
concentrated on middle-class social events or stiff-as-a-board official
pictures. Mario Cesar Marti, the director of the archive, recently said: "We
discovered from the beginning that images have considerable power. It was a
great lesson, and perhaps, a great vision, this thought of using the image as a
weapon."

In Europe and America the camera gained a reputation for being more dangerous
than a gun as long ago as World War I, and provincials like us in the Northern
Hemisphere assume everyone else got the message. Because we are so aware of Nazi
photographic propaganda and pictures from Vietnam that helped redirect public
opinion, it comes as a surprise that the rest of the world has not always been
equally conscious of the subversive force of images. The lesson about
photographic power, learned by the Salvadorans in extremis, enabled them to
record the liberation movement in their own terms, from the inside, forging an
unauthorized history that might otherwise have slipped through the cracks.

The founders of the archive are convinced that no liberation movement has ever
been so thoroughly documented from beginning to end. In addition to negatives,
there are thousands of hours of film and video, plus audio tapes of a dozen
years' worth of underground broadcasts by Radio Venceremos.

Among the photographs on view are pictures of ordinary life: farmers at work, a
Miss Salvador contest, political rallies, displaced people. The archive was
meant not solely to register a protest but also to create a social document.
Katy Lyle says the project demonstrates a people's "powerful will to remain
visible in a war waged largely through disappearances"; a memory bank has been
compiled for those who lived through the decade and those as yet unborn.

Fotofest also mounted an earlier, equally stirring document of resistance -- or
of oppression, depending on how you look at it -- "The Illegal Camera: The
Netherlands, 1940-1945." Pictures taken during the German Occupation were
exhibited in Holland two weeks after Liberation and published during the late
40's. Since then, individual photographs have often illustrated histories, but
the evidence has seldom been seen together and never exhibited as a group
outside the country. Many images in the exhibition have never been shown
anywhere.

The Germans did not entirely prohibit photography, but some subjects were
obviously dangerous, and photographic materials and equipment were almost
nonexistent. The need to document history, especially at its more evil moments,
must be extremely strong. Citizens took pictures through holes in windows or hid
cameras under their coats and in their shopping bags.

The resulting images, some by professionals, some not, are straightforward,
occasionally crude, and wholly chilling. Street signs say "Judenstrasse"; park
and cafe signs say "Forbidden for Jews." The Germans requisition cars, bikes and
horses to ship home, round up enforced labor, and loot shops and houses after
evacuating a town. People hide under floorboards and cupboards. Artists secretly
forge identity papers.

During the "hunger winter" of 1944-45, when starvation was rampant,
photographers took pictures of mothers and children too weak to leave their
beds, corpses that could not be buried for want of coffins, a man robbing an old
woman of the scrap wood she had just gathered to heat her home. Some of these
pictures reached the Allies and reportedly influenced the decision to send food
aid late in the war -- proof, if any is needed, of the photograph's power to
persuade.

Such photographs -- and the efforts of two curators (Flip Bool and Veronica
Henning, a historian) to collate and preserve them -- offer the swiftest
possible history lesson. Most Americans know the war in Holland through Anne
Frank's landmark diary, but few know as much about the suffering of the general
population; once seen, it will not be forgotten.

If esthetics are not the finest test for clandestine wartime photographs,
esthetic matters are still threatening to totalitarian governments (and
apparently to our own, to judge by recent events). Another exhibition at
Fotofest surveys the photocollages of Karel Teige (1900-1951), a leading Czech
artist and theorist. Teige was critical of both fascism and Stalinism, and his
work has not been seen much in his native country for some years, though he was
a major influence on its art, architecture, literature, book design, theater and
music.  (Americans got a brief glimpse of his work in the 1990 "Czech Modernism"
show, organized by the Museum of Fine Arts in Houston.) Teige was not a
photographer; his collages are concocted of illustrations appropriated from
popular culture and a few master photographers.

In the mid-30's, Teige wholeheartedly adopted the Surrealist obsession with the
female body as fetish and as object to be manipulated. He invented creatures
composed of female parts: a pair of breasts growing on a slim stalk of flesh in
the middle of a lake, or legs and breasts combined in a manner genetics would
not condone. He delighted in disparities of scale, as when an open baby carriage
reveals most of a female torso crammed inside or a ship's guns fire at mammoth
legs in the sky. Nature and culture, human and nonhuman ceaselessly intersect:
oars and flowers grow eyes, and water stares at us; women are partly made of
stone.

Neither Teige's themes nor his means were new -- Prague was in close touch with
avant-garde movements in Paris -- but his voice had its own timbre. After the
Nazis declared Surrealism decadent he was not heard from much. The Germans would
never have taken these sexual delicacies to their hearts; the postwar Communist
regime was doubtless little more enamored of them. Teige was interrogated in
1951 and died soon after; his effects were confiscated by the police but not
destroyed.

Wendy Watriss, one of the curators, says a small show was put on in Prague in
1968 during the Prague Spring. Then Teige largely disappeared again until the
mid-80's, by which time the outside world had begun to express interest in Czech
modernism.

The world has turned; doors that were open a crack have opened wider; and
Fotofest has cast light on an artist nearly buried under the weight of politics
for many years.

LOAD-DATE: April 5, 1992

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo: A "photo opportunity" the Salvadoran Government served up for
the international press in November 1989. (Panateca/El Salvador Archive/Fotofest
'92)

                   Copyright 1992 The New York Times Company


                               8 of 281 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                  April 5, 1992, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

Cambodia School Tries to Erase Hanoi's Style

BYLINE: By HENRY KAMM,  Special to The New York Times

SECTION: Section 1; Part 1; Page 9; Column 1; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 644 words

DATELINE: PHNOM PENH, Cambodia, April 4


Dean Iv Thong of the Institute of Economic Sciences showed a visitor a pile of
discarded volumes of the works of Karl Marx in Vietnamese in his school's thinly
stocked library and said, "We won't keep what is outmoded and a little behind
the times."

Yet most of the texts in use come from Vietnam, which remains dogmatically
Communist, and 24 professors from Hanoi's Economics Institute form the core of
the faculty at Cambodia's main center of university-level economic education.
They teach in Vietnamese, a language as different from Cambodian as Russian is
from English.

No place typifies more accurately this country's turbulent recent history -- and
the bewildering state of Cambodia's present political orientation and the
mixture of nationalities here -- than this fading, once-handsome colonial
structure that began life as the Lycee Descartes. It was the French-language
high school to which the foreign residents of Phnom Penh and the elite of the
Cambodian, Vietnamese and Chinese inhabitants sent their children.

Under the Khmer Rouge regime from 1975 to 1979, Descartes, as it is still
called, was a feared political prison. After the Vietnamese invasion of 1979
overthrew Prime Minister Pol Pot, it became a public school. It was given over
to its present use in 1984.

"We had the help of Vietnamese professors from the beginning," said Dean Iv
Thong.

In fact, he said, until recently the entire faculty was Vietnamese and all
teaching in that language. The first year of the five-year course was devoted
entirely to learning the language of instruction.

The 42-year-old dean was left at an execution pit by the fleeing Khmer Rouge and
liberated by Vietnamese soldiers, who cut the ropes that bound him so tightly
that 13 years later, he says he still has not fully regained the use of his
arms.

He was scornful of Vietnamese teaching, saying it was entirely in the Soviet
style, which Vietnam adopted.

When the effects of Mikhail S. Gorbachev's perestroika reached Vietnam, things
eased, he said.

Perestroika, the name for the changes unleashed by the Soviet leader, not only
loosened Communist economic dogma but, more important, also greatly reduced the
Soviet Union's economic support to Vietnam and Cambodia and caused both to seek
Western help.

Dean Iv Thong said the free-market economy was now the object of his institute's
teaching and Cambodian the language of instruction. But the 40 Cambodians who
are now beginning to teach are the graduates of the Soviet-oriented,
Vietnamese-taught first three classes of the school.

In addition, he said, three French and three Australian teachers are now
offering required courses in their languages to students who entered last year
-- nine hours of French and three of English a week. The dean showed proposed
new syllabuses, one prepared at an Australian University, the other by an
American member of the local office of the United Nations High Commissioner for
Refugees.

Ten graduates have been sent on four-month scholarships to France to convert
their economic thinking from the rigid Marxism they were taught to the
laissez-faire liberalism they are to teach when the next school year opens in
June, a difficult conversion since their knowledge of French is limited and the
ideological distance is wide.

In the library, two teachers pored over Vietnamese textbooks they are
translating into Cambodian for future use.

A professor, whose insistence on not being identified was evidence of the
unchanged atmosphere of political fear, said students seemed pleased by the
changes, particularly the teaching of Western languages, but, as in the past,
kept silent about politics.

One thing has changed now that the inflow of foreign businessmen and
international officials had injected foreign currencies, particularly the
dollar, into the economy, the professor said.

LOAD-DATE: April 5, 1992

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1992 The New York Times Company


                               9 of 281 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                  April 6, 1992, Monday, Late Edition - Final

NEWS SUMMARY

SECTION: Section A; Page 2; Column 5; Metropolitan Desk

LENGTH: 1054 words



International     A3-13

YELTSIN PLEDGES 'CORRECTIONS'

On the eve of an important session of the Russian Parliament, President Yeltsin
demanded strong executive authority and promised measures to soften the
immediate effects of his economic reforms.  A1

BIG VOTE FOR GERMAN RIGHTISTS

Far-right parties scored surprising gains in local elections in two German
states. Politicians from established parties said the results were shocking and
dangerous.  A1

IRAN BOMBS A REBEL BASE IN IRAQ

Iranian jets bombed an Iranian rebel base in Iraq in the most serious attack by
Iran since a truce ended their eight-year war in 1988.  A3

FOES PILLAGE IRAN'S MISSIONS

Opponents of Teheran's Islamic Government invaded Iranian missions in New York,
Ottawa and eight Western European countries, seizing hostages and wrecking
offices in retaliation for predawn Iranian air strikes on a rebel base in Iraq.
A3

WEB OF GRAFT IN SOUTHERN CHINA

A slaying case in Shenzhen offers a window onto the web of corruption in
southern China, the most prosperous part of the country.  A8

MORE FIGHTING IN YUGOSLAVIA

Ethnic clashes intensified across breakaway Bosnia and Herzegovina, a day before
the European Community is expected to recognize the republic's independence.
A12

BRITAIN'S TORIES UNDER SIEGE

Mired in the second severe recession in nearly 13 years of rule by the
Conservatives, British voters seem to be in a mood to teach them a lesson on
Thursday.  A13

ISRAELI RESCINDS RESIGNATION

Foreign Minister David Levy withdrew his resignation in exchange for promises of
a larger slice of power if the Likud party leads the next Israeli Government.
A9

THAIS ASK GENERAL TO LEAD

The military commander who led a coup in Thailand last year was offered the post
of Prime Minister. The civilian nominee was linked to drug trafficking by
Washington.  A8

NEW CONQUEROR IN THE ALPS

From southern France to Slovenia, a debate is raging over how much further man
can go in extracting pleasure and profit from the Alpine habitat before nature
strikes back.  A12

U.S. senators seek stronger pressure on the Burmese junta.  A9
Okata Journal: The issue of protecting whales resurfaces in Japan.  A4

National     A14-17, A20, B8-9

LARGEST MARCH YET ON ABORTION

Half a million people marched in Washington in support of abortion rights,
hoping to sway lawmakers as the Supreme Court considers a Pennsylvania case that
could sharply limit abortions.  A1

Taking outrage and Zabar's bags to the march.  B8

A 1989 decision revitalized the abortion rights movement.  B8

CLINTON FACES NEW QUESTIONS

Even as he assured New Yorkers he could defeat the President in November,
Governor Clinton fended off fresh questions about his forthrightness regarding a
draft induction letter during the Vietnam War.  A1

BROWN PRESSES HIS CAMPAIGN

Mr. Brown pressed his "take back America" message and confronted questions about
his appointment of campaign supporters to judgeships in California 10 years ago.
A1

WHAT DID DONATIONS REAP?

As head of a California pharmaceutical empire, Milan Panic gave liberally to
Democratic politicians. But his conflicts with regulatory agencies raised
questions about the actions of one of those politicians: former Governor Brown.
A17

Riding the rough, conflicted and unpredictable politics of 1992. A16

Listening to the passions, sighs and yearnings of New York.  A15

The Wisconsin campaign has been civil but inconclusive.  A17

Two telling numbers: Clinton, 186; Brown, 19.  A16

DEADLINE FOR STRIKERS

The nation's most bitter labor dispute -- between Caterpillar Inc., the world's
largest manufacturer of construction equipment, and the United Automobile
Workers, one of the country's strongest unions -- is reaching a crossroads.  D1

FINGERPRINTING THE NEEDY

Los Angeles County has installed a fingerprint-identification system for
ferreting out welfare cheats. The fingerprinting has saved the county $5
million, but raised a host of questions about individual rights and government
intrusion.  A14

REGULATING DOCTOR REFERRALS

Florida's Governor is expected to sign a bill prohibiting doctors from referring
patients to clinics in which the doctors have a financial interest. Doctors say
the bill will cause upheaval in the industry.  A20

A DIFFERENT KIND OF CROP: WATER

In a trend that could hasten the rapid urbanization of California, farmers are
loosening their historic grip on water in the West, transferring some of their
supplies to cities and industries -- for a price.  B9

WHEN BATONS CONDUCT VIOLENCE

Reporter's notebook: The star of the Rodney King beating trial has been a
two-foot-long black metal tube, which police officers used to strike Mr. King
more than 50 times.  A14

Metropolitan     Digest, B1

Business     Digest, D1

Sports   C1-10
Baseball: David Cone's intensely scrutinized universe.  C1

Baseball in New York is something different.  C2

Oriole Park at Camden Yards opens today in Baltimore.  C3

Mets open season against St. Louis tonight.  C4
Basketball: New Duke hurdle.  C1

Michigan's Fab Five in the spotlight.  C1

Stanford wins N.C.A.A. women's title.  C6
Columns: Anderson on Torborg and Showalter.  C3

Vecsey on the Final Four C7

Arts/Entertainment C11-18
Brown, Clinton and the arts.  C11
Theater: " 'Tis Pity She's a Whore," at the Public.  C11
Music: "Billy Budd." C11
Word and Image: "Madness by Jonathan Miller." C18

Obituaries   B10-11

WAL-MART FOUNDER DIES

Sam Walton, the most successful merchant of his time, died at the University of
Arkansas Medical Sciences Hospital in Little Rock. He was 74 years old and had
been ill with cancer for some time.  A1
Rixi Marcus, first female grandmaster of bridge.  B11
Gerald L. Klerman, expert on depression and schizophrenia.  B10

Editorials/Op-Ed  A18-19
Editorials A18
Killer asteroids.
Democracy and hypocrisy.
The voters aren't voting.

Letters A18
Leslie H. Gelb: Clinton's promise.  A19
William Safire: Protesting too much.  A19
Roberto Gonzalez Echevarria: The Cuban baseball crisis.  A19
Theodore J. Lowi: Mr. Perot, form a party.  A19

LOAD-DATE: April 6, 1992

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo: A new system to ferret out welfare cheats. (Michael Tweed for
The New York Times) A14

TYPE: Summary

                   Copyright 1992 The New York Times Company


                              10 of 281 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                  April 6, 1992, Monday, Late Edition - Final

THE 1992 CAMPAIGN: Clinton;
Players in Familiar Roles as Vote Nears
Clinton Faces Questions About His Past and Spars With Rival

BYLINE: By GWEN IFILL

SECTION: Section A; Page 1; Column 6; National Desk

LENGTH: 1009 words


Gov. Bill Clinton is hoping to leap another hurdle tomorrow in his quest for the
Democratic Presidential nomination, working to persuade skeptical, alienated New
York voters that he has the most realistic chance of defeating President Bush in
November.

The Arkansas Governor has been frustrated throughout his campaign by receiving
more attention for defending himself against personal accusations than for
discussions of issues he feels strongly about, like health-care policy,
education or economic revival.

But yesterday, while Mr. Clinton again had to deflect questions about his
background, this time concerning his Vietnam-era draft status, he also had a
chance to adopt some of the roles he likes best. In the morning, he courted
black voters at a Brooklyn church with a speech about the virtues of personal
responsibility, and then he sparred with his main opponent, Edmund G. Brown Jr.,
in a raucous television debate.

New-Generation Leader

In his sermon-like speech at Bridge Street African Methodist Episcopal Church in
the Bedford-Stuyvesant section, Mr. Clinton portrayed the new-generation leader,
and urged the congregation to join him in being agents of change in Washington.

"If I am your President, you have responsibilities too," Mr. Clinton said. "No
politician can do anything for a people that are not going to do for
themselves."

He appealed for voters to go to the polls in the primary, which many officials
worry will draw only a light turnout. Politicans in power want voters to believe
"that it doesn't make any difference, so you might as well stay home," he said.

In the debate on WNBC-TV in the morning, Mr. Clinton appealed for a hearing for
his ideas.

"I've got a real plan here, and I'm very proud of it," he said, "A plan to
fundamentally change this country for America's future. I hope you'll give me a
chance to implement that, to put our people first again, to restore the middle
class, to reduce poverty and to bring America together across racial lines."

Calling the United States "a great nation," he said: "We do not deserve what is
happening to us. We can do so much better. Tuesday, I want you to give me a
chance to be the nominee for President and to fight to make this country
everything it ought to be."

The New York vote is crucial for Mr. Clinton. After successes in the South and
industrial Midwest, he suffered a surprising, though narrow, loss to Mr. Brown
in Connecticut two weeks ago. So he needs a strong showing here to regain his
status as the clear Democratic front-runner.

Some polls have shown that voters are not enthusiastic about either of the two
major Democratic candidates. In Mr. Clinton's case, it is because issues like
the new disclosures yesterday concerning his draft status continue to provoke
doubts about his honesty.

Draft Induction Letter

The Associated Press disclosed that Mr. Clinton received a draft induction
letter in 1969 shortly before he sought a deferment by joining a Reserve Officer
Training Corps unit in Arkansas.

Yesterday Mr. Clinton acknowledged that he received the draft letter, but said
that "what happened was entirely routine."

"I can only tell you that there was no deliberate thing on this," he said. "I
have never had anything to hide on this. I have always tried to be up front
about it."

Mr. Clinton yesterday characterized such questions about his character as a
trial by fire that has made him a stronger candidate for the general election.

"You know, if these things are going to be done to you, it's better done now
than later, give people a chance to know you completely," he said in the
television debate. "I think character is important, but character represented by
constancy for change, caring about people, a belief that certain things are
right and wrong and an honest attempt to live by them."

Facts Had Not Changed

He added, "I have seen over and over and over again that I can deal with these
issues that are tough issues if people get to know me as a whole person."

The disclosure about the draft letter was striking because Mr. Clinton had gone
over the subject in painstaking detail just two months ago without mentioning
it.

Throughout the discussion, he maintained that he was at risk to be drafted after
passing a physical examination in February 1969, that he was reclassified after
joining the R.O.T.C., but that he gave up the deferment the following October
because of guilt.

Yesterday he said the facts of his case had not changed. He said that after he
received the induction notice, his Hot Springs, Ark., draft board told him he
should ignore the letter, which was sent to England by surface mail and arrived
after the induction date had passed.

"They said, 'Look, this is a routine deal,' " Mr. Clinton said. " 'We will
extend this. Don't worry about it. You will have to come home this summer and
make some decision.' "

The decision Mr. Clinton made was to join the R.O.T.C. He said yesterday that
the reconstruction of events he provided in February was "my best memory at the
time" and he said the fact that he received an induction letter was not
"relevant to the story."

But Mr. Clinton appeared aware that his failure to mention such a detail at a
time when his draft record had become a major issue in the New Hampshire primary
campaign could be seen as another example of what critics have asserted is a
tendency to cloud his answers on touchy issues.

Mr. Clinton said yesterday that he "never intentionally misled anybody" by
failing to mention the induction notice. "I would have been more than happy to
tell you this if it ever even occurred to me to bring it up," he said.

In spite of yesterday's new questions, Mr. Clinton appeared in good spirits,
especially after the Rev. Fred Lucas prayed for him at church in Brooklyn.

"At this Holy Communion altar, forgive him for his sins and his waywardness,"
Mr. Lucas said as he laid a hand on the candidate's bowed head. "And forgive us
all for our iniquities. Prop him up on every leaning side."

LOAD-DATE: April 6, 1992

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photos: Gov. Bill Clinton at church in Brooklyn yesterday. (Jim
Estrin/The New York Times)

                   Copyright 1992 The New York Times Company


                              11 of 281 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                  April 6, 1992, Monday, Late Edition - Final

THE 1992 CAMPAIGN: Uneasy New York -- Assessment;
Fiery Primary Could Propel Clinton Toward the Nomination, or Burn Him

BYLINE: By ROBIN TONER

SECTION: Section A; Page 16; Column 1; National Desk

LENGTH: 1285 words


Almost no one expected this to be an ordinary election year. There was too much
anger in the public opinion polls, too much cynicism toward the Government, too
much discontent with the way things are. Now, on the eve of the New York
primary, the Democrats are taking the full measure of the rough, conflicted and
unpredictable politics of 1992.

The unrest can be heard in the voices of New Yorkers who talk in the same breath
of their disgust with the politicians and their yearning for a brokered
convention, in which politicians would negotiate to choose a nominee. It is
there in the re-emergence of a Jesse Jackson, an Edmund G. Brown Jr. and a
Patrick J. Caddell, impresarios of discontent sensing the energies of the time.

It is there in Paul E. Tsongas's dance on the sidelines, and in the yearnings
among some Democrats for a white knight, although few can agree on just who that
knight would be. And it is there, most of all, in Gov. Bill Clinton's strange
political journey, which seems destined on some days for the nomination and on
other days for disaster. The next phase of his journey will be decided,
tomorrow, by the voters of New York.

Volatile Chemistry

In a debate yesterday on WNBC-TV, Mr. Clinton, the Governor of Arkansas, and Mr.
Brown, the former Governor of California, squared off on a set of issues that
have produced much of the volatile chemistry of this race. Mr. Clinton, reaching
for the economic populism that served him well in other parts of the country,
hammered Mr. Brown for his support of a flat tax to replace the progressive
income tax, asserting that it would aid the rich, hurt the poor and imperil the
Social Security system.

Mr. Brown pressed his attack on Mr. Clinton as a tribune of the status quo and a
political system that is inherently corrupt. The animosity of the past two weeks
was on full display. "How dare you call me the prince of sleaze?" Mr. Clinton
demanded at one point.

The debate highlighted, as well, the racial and ethnic land mines of this
primary campaign, as Mr. Brown defended his preference for the Rev. Jesse
Jackson as a running mate. That position has generated considerable criticism in
recent days from Jewish leaders, who recall Mr. Jackson's 1984 characterization
of the city as "Hymietown."

"I was up in Harlem yesterday, and I saw the faces of despair," said Mr. Brown,
who is competing vigorously with Mr. Clinton for the black voters of New York.
"I see the Rev. Jackson as a powerful, inspirational leader that could bring
some of these people back who are so alienated."

Mr. Clinton was also forced once again to deal with questions about his draft
status during the Vietnam War following the revelation that he received a draft
notice in 1969. He did not serve in the military.

Turning a Corner?

Clinton campaign officials, who seemed profoundly rattled 10 days ago as they
landed in New York after their loss in Connecticut, are now projecting an air of
guarded optimism. "It turned a corner earlier in the week, and each poll is
looking up, " said Stan Greenberg, Mr. Clinton's poll taker, who declined to
furnish details of the campaign's nightly tracking. "I think we created some
momentum and it's continuing."

Though New York is not the only state with a primary tomorrow -- Kansas and
Wisconsin will also vote -- this state will largely determine Mr. Clinton's
fate. If he wins here, he will be back on course to the nomination, which many
Democratic leaders thought he had virtually wrapped up after he defeated Mr.
Tsongas in Michigan and Illinois.

He will still face considerable jitters from Democratic officeholders and
political professionals, so long as the polls show that much of the electorate
has doubts and reservations about his character. Anxieties are particularly high
on Capitol Hill, where incumbent Democrats are perennially worried about a drag
from their Presidential ticket and where they now, in addition, fear the wrath
of an anti-incumbent year. But the steady accretion of delegates and primary
victories would make Mr. Clinton hard to stop, many Democrats agree.

Ahead lie the Virginia caucuses on April 11-13, followed by the Pennsylvania
primary on April 28. The results in New York, many Democrats say, will be the
biggest factor in the Pennsylvania campaign, although James Carville, the
Clinton strategist, said, "I know enough about Pennsylvania to know you can't go
in there and presume anything."

Mr. Carville has run three previous statewide campaigns in Pennsylvania, two for
Gov. Robert P. Casey and one for Senator Harris Wofford, who scored an upset
victory over former Attorney General Dick Thornburgh last year.

If Mr. Clinton loses in New York, it will almost certainly reopen the talk of
other candidates entering the race and the possibility of a brokered convention.
"His loss would create a vacuum," said Geoffrey Garin, a Democratic poll taker.
"It's not obvious that someone will step into the vacuum, but Clinton would lose
a lot of control at that stage."

Mr. Tsongas continues to flirt with a re-entry. He said yesterday on the ABC
News program "This Week" that he would make his decision on the basis of New
York's results, and would have announcement on Wednesday. Still, one senior
Democratic strategist, who spoke on condition he not be identified, said dryly,
"He did a lot of losing, and people noticed it."

Many voters seem open to brand new candidacies; two-thirds of the likely
Democratic primary voters in last week's national New York Times/CBS News Poll
said they wished they had other candidates from which to choose.  But the
realpolitik of producing those new options, many Democrats worry, would be far
less appealing.

Brokered Convention

A new candidate entering the race after New York would have two days to get on
the ballot in New Jersey; the filing deadline there is 4 P.M. Thursday. But the
candidate would not be able to make the ballot in California, where the deadline
passed last Saturday, and where by midweek counties will begin printing millions
of ballots, according to the Secretary of State's office in Sacramento. The
filing deadlines have passed for every other primary, according to the
Democratic National Committee.

This means, Democrats say, that a new candidate would essentially have to be the
creation of a brokered convention. Ordinarily, a candidate emerges from the
primary season with a nominating majority, or close to it. The last time a
candidate required more than one convention ballot to win the nomination was
1952, when Adlai E. Stevenson prevailed on the third ballot.

The party's 772 superdelegates -- composed of party officials, members of
Congress and other elected officials -- would play a key role in this. Herein
lies the concern of many Democrats about this process in a year when anger at
political insiders is running high.  One Democrat on Capitol Hill said, "People
knew darn well that the last thing people would stand for was a bunch of
Congressional superdelegates saying, 'Here's your nominee.' "

Phil Angelides, the Democratic chairman in California, said, "It would take a
very compelling set of circumstances and a very compelling personality and a
very compelling moment to produce a nominee out of a brokered convention"
without "ever having been subjected to the voters' judgment or the level of
scrutiny to which any other nominee has been subjected."

Clinton campaign officials brush aside all this talk. They cling to the hope
that New York will render such questions moot, although they try not to project
the front-runner's arrogance that can prove dangerous in this political climate.
It has been, after all, that kind of year.

LOAD-DATE: April 6, 1992

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo: Gov. Bill Clinton and Edmund G. Brown Jr. held a debate on
WNBC-TV. Reporters watched the broadcast of the debate at a Manhattan studio.
(Jim Estrin/The New York Times)

TYPE: News Analysis

                   Copyright 1992 The New York Times Company


                              12 of 281 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                  April 6, 1992, Monday, Late Edition - Final

March Was Big. But How Big?

BYLINE: Special to The New York Times

SECTION: Section B; Page 8; Column 1; National Desk

LENGTH: 160 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, April 5


There was unusual agreement about one thing at today's march for abortion
rights: It was the capital's largest abortion rally ever, and one of the largest
rallies ever seen here.

The police assigned to monitor the rally estimated that 500,000 marched on the
Capitol; rally organizers gave an estimate of 700,000.

As with all major demonstrations here, the United States Park Police
photographed the crowd from a helicopter and then superimposed a grid over the
composite photo to estimate the crowd, using a formula based on the number of
people who would fit into a certain number of square feet.

In many cases in the past, the official and unofficial attendance estimates at
marches has varied widely. In 1971, for example, organizers of a rally against
the Vietnam War estimated the crowd at 500,000; the police said 200,000. And in
1987, the Park Service estimated a gay rights rally at 200,000, while organizers
put the turnout at 500,000.

LOAD-DATE: April 6, 1992

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1992 The New York Times Company


                              13 of 281 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                  April 7, 1992, Tuesday, Late Edition - Final

THE 1992 CAMPAIGN: Primaries;
CLINTON AND BROWN MAKE LAST APPEALS FOR NEW YORK VOTE

BYLINE: By ROBIN TONER

SECTION: Section A; Page 1; Column 3; National Desk

LENGTH: 1416 words


Gov. Bill Clinton of Arkansas and former Gov. Edmund G. Brown Jr. of California
made their final impassioned appeals yesterday in a New York primary campaign
that is virtually certain to shape the race for the Democratic nomination as
well as both of their political futures.

Mr. Clinton, battling to regain his status as the party's presumptive nominee,
returned to the central themes of his campaign yesterday, pleading with voters
to set aside any misgivings about his character and give him a chance to lead.

"I have lived a lifetime of commitment and service," he said as he stormed
through New York before heading on to Wisconsin and Kansas, which also hold
primaries today.

Underdog's Rallying Cry

Mr. Brown, hoping to prove that his upset victory in Connecticut two weeks ago
was merely the first rumbling of an angry electorate turning his way, urged New
Yorkers yesterday to "send a powerful message: Get off the dime, Washington! We
want a country that works for all of us."

Echoing the rallying cry of his underdog campaign, the former California
Governor declared: "Take it back, America! Take it back!"

The voting today in New York, with its rich prize of 244 delegates, has come to
be seen as a referendum on Mr. Clinton's long-term viability and his ability to
prevail over several character issues.

Tsongas, and the Draft

The campaign wound down with some crucial unknowns, notably the strength of the
support for former Senator Paul E. Tsongas of Massachusetts, who suspended his
faltering campaign three weeks ago but remains on the ballot. He says he may
return to the contest depending on what happens here today.

Also unclear in these final hours was the effect of the latest round of news
reports about Mr. Clinton's status during the Vietnam War, which critics said
raised new questions about his candor in discussing his draft history.

Mr. Clinton had neglected to disclose that he had received a draft induction
letter shortly before he sought a deferment by joining a Reserve Officer
Training Corps unit in Arkansas. But he insisted again yesterdaythat it was not
a material omission.

For his part, Mr. Brown has hardly emerged unscathed from the past two weeks of
what many saw as a classic New York primary: rough, unpredictable and often
mean. His policy proposals, notably his support for a flat tax to replace the
progressive income tax system, have drawn new scrutiny and fire. And his
anti-politician persona has been tarnished by a new focus on his record as
Governor of California and his long history as a politician.

The New York primary has been driven, in many ways, by the complicated
demographics of this state. Mr. Clinton's campaign advisers hope to base a
winning coalition in part on Jewish and black voters, although Mr. Brown has
fiercely competed for black support here.

In the Democratic Presidential primary four years ago, Jewish voters accounted
for 25 percent of the vote statewide, while blacks accounted for 24 percent, a
turnout that analysts say was swelled by the presence of the Rev. Jesse Jackson
on the ballot.

Mr. Brown's efforts to court Jewish voters were stymied by his embrace of Mr.
Jackson as his choice of running mate. Because of his 1984 characterization of
New York as "Hymietown," Mr. Jackson remains unpopular with many Jewish voters.

Vote for a Loser

In general, Mr. Brown has offered himself as a ready vehicle for those who wish
to send a message and stop Mr. Clinton, whom he described yesterday as "the
anointed one." Emblematic of his strategy, the former California Governor urged
New Yorkers yesterday to vote for Mr. Tsongas if they could not vote for him. He
later explained, "Anybody who's not going to vote for me, please vote for
someone who's not going to win."

Mr. Clinton also campaigned yesterday in Wisconsin, which was considered fertile
ground for Mr. Brown, but politicians and polls reported a competitive race in
recent days. Wisconsin has 82 delegates at stake today, while Kansas has 36.

Mr. Clinton is far and away the leader in delegates, with 1,118, more than half
the 2,145 needed for the nomination. Mr. Brown has 175.

The two men spent their final day in New York in a characteristic style for this
campaign, beginning it with some tough exchanges on television. On the NBC
program "Today," Mr. Brown escalated his attack on Mr. Clinton for golfing at an
Arkansas country club that has no black members, asserting it was "a product of
the old-boy network." Mr. Clinton -- who at one point told Mr. Brown, "Don't
scream, Jerry" -- asserted, "Jerry Brown knows I'm not a racist, he knows that
in the South I've fought for equal opportunity."

The encounter, typical of recent days, suggested the Zen-like wisdom of Mr.
Tsongas's sidelines strategy, which has preserved him from attacks, debates,
negative television advertisements and any requirement to make promises and act
like a politician. As Mr. Brown said, "If you stand on the sideline, you
increasingly look better as the other two candidates get closer to the 15th
round."

After a more subdued encounter on "Donahue," the two men fanned out on their own
final search for votes. Mr. Brown, who spent the entire day in New York, said at
a rally in Albany that his campaign had one goal: "To galvanize the moral energy
to rededicate America to social and economic justice."

He also made a few promises. "I will promise you that before the decade is out I
will move people from one end of Manhattan to Long Island in 20 minutes on a
clean, American-built transportation system," he said.

Mr. Clinton dashed around the country, appearing at an afternoon rally at
Syracuse University before flying to the Midwest. He sought to cast himself as
the authentic candidate of change, and argued that young voters had the power to
"choose a different future than the path we're on."

His campaign began broadcasting new commercials that proudly listed the
newspaper endorsements the Governor has received, as well as a new radio spot
affirming his commitment to abortion rights. For his part, Mr. Brown was
broadcasting a 60-second television commercial in which Carroll O'Connor, the
actor who played Archie Bunker on the longtime television series "All in the
Family," defends Mr. Brown's flat tax proposal.

How Close a Race?

Mr. Brown was asserting yesterday that the race was close, but Stan Greenberg,
the poll taker for the Clinton campaign, seemed to be in the quintessential
political state of guardedly optimistic. Although Mr. Greenberg said that Mr.
Tsongas was gaining in the campaign's Sunday night polling, particularly among
Jewish voters, and would clearly be a factor in the race, he added, "We're
showing good margins for us over Brown."

But a poll released by the consulting group Sawyer-Miller showed a far closer
race. And in separate polling, Lee Miringoff of the Marist Institute said his
incomplete survey had detected a jump for Mr. Tsongas and a large undecided
contingent, particularly among blacks.

Mr. Miringoff predicted that voters' lack of enthusiasm, indecision and
reservations about Mr. Clinton and Mr. Brown could result in a low turnout
today.

Buzzing About Tsongas

The buzz in political circles yesterday was over the Tsongas factor. Some
Democratic party leaders in Nassau and Suffolk counties said they had detected a
Tsongas flurry, with Joe Galante, the executive director of the Nassau County
Democratic Party, noting that Mr. Tsongas had won a straw poll at a meeting of
the Nassau Democratic Committee last Thursday. The editorial page of the Long
Island newspaper Newsday has endorsed Mr. Tsongas.

But Bruce Nyman, supervisor of the City of Long Beach and a co-chairman of Mr.
Clinton's Long Island campaign, said he saw Mr. Clinton solidifying his support.
"I think we've grown stronger among Jewish voters and among people who are
beginning to focus in on Brown," said Mr. Nyman. "They see he is not the savior
of the Democratic Party."

In many ways, the primary still revolved around the persona of Bill Clinton. He
tried with some success in recent days to return the campaign dialogue to the
issues of economics and education, health care and foreign policy, but much of
the news coverage still focused on him.

In Milwaukee last night, Mr. Clinton complained that voters had been told for
years that politicians are hiding "deep, dark secrets." He said he found this
"absolute orgy of obsession with the past" to be sad.

LOAD-DATE: April 7, 1992

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photos: Upstate: Gov. Bill Clinton waded into a sea of students after
speaking at Syracuse University; Downstate: Mr. Clinton posed with Marguerita
Roth, a waitress at the Stage Deli in Manhattan, after he and Edmund G. Brown
Jr. taped a debate on the eve of the New York primary. (Jim Estrin/The New York
Times) (pg. A22)

Table: "Voting in Primaries Past"

                                                                  General
      New   Wisconsin         Kansas            Election
      York

1988  Dem.  Michael Dukakis   Dukakis           Dukakis           Bush
      Rep.  George Bush       Bush              Robert Dole
1984  Dem.  Walter Mondale    Gary Hart         Mondale           Reagan
      Rep.  No Primary        Ronald Reagan     Reagan
1980  Dem.  Edward Kennedy    Jimmy Carter      Carter            Reagan
      Rep.  Ronald Reagan     Reagan            Reagan
1976  Dem.  Henry Jackson     Carter            Carter            Carter
      Rep.  Gerald Ford       Ford              Ford
1972  Dem.  George McGovern   McGovern          McGovern          Nixon
      Rep.  Richard Nixon     Nixon             Nixon

 New York Democrats did not vote directly for a Presidential candidate until
1980; New York Republicans did not until 1988. Before that they both voted for
slates of delegates, often without knowing who the delegates supported.

Until this year, Kansas held presidential caucuses (with the exception of 1980).


Table: "Today's Primaries"

NEW YORK

  Party: Democrats
  Delegates: 244
  Who Can Vote: Only registered Democrats
  Voters: 3,698,715

There is no Republican primary.

Polls close at 9 P.M. Eastern time.

KANSAS

  Party: Democrats
  Delegates: 38
  Who Can Vote: Only those registered in each party
  Voters: 330,562

  Party: Republicans
  Delegates: 30
  Who Can Vote: Only those registered in each party
  Voters: 497,579

Polls close at 8 P.M. Eastern time; 9 P.M. in five western counties

WISCONSIN

  Party: Democrats
  Delegates: 82
  Who Can Vote: Anyone can vote in either primary *
  Voters: Total eligible -- 3,600,000

  Party: Republicans
  Delegates: 35
  Who Can Vote: Anyone can vote in either primary *
  Voters: Total eligible -- 3,600,000

* Voters are given both a Republican ballot and a Democratic ballot but they can
submit only one. Registration is required only for those who live in
municipalities of 5,000 or more and in some smaller communities.

Pols close at 9 P.M. Eastern time

MINNESOTA

  Party: Republicans
  Delegates: 32
  Who Can Vote: All registered voters
  Voters: 3,243,000

There is a Democratic primary, but it will not be used to allot delegates.

Polls close at 9 P.M. Eastern time.


                   Copyright 1992 The New York Times Company


                              14 of 281 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                  April 7, 1992, Tuesday, Late Edition - Final

THE 1992 CAMPAIGN: TV Critic's Notebook;
The Telegenic Hopeful Takes It to the Viewers

BYLINE: By WALTER GOODMAN

SECTION: Section A; Page 24; Column 1; National Desk

LENGTH: 972 words


Like a smiling tourist who has made eye contact with the wrong pedestrian, Bill
Clinton has reason to be relieved to get out of New York City even though he may
be about to win the lottery.

His aggrieved reaction to rude headlines and ruder hecklers suggests he thinks
he has been mugged, but he found a warmer welcome, too. The city must share
credit and blame for his experience with the nature of television campaigning.

If Mr. Clinton's reception was a bit more raucous than that accorded anybody
else running for anything in New York, his own accomplishment as a television
performer invited it. From the start, Mr. Clinton has had all the telegenic
qualities going for him: youth, looks, style, everything a viewer has learned to
expect, enjoy and mistrust on the screen.

As his opponents dropped away along with the early commotion about his
nonservice in Vietnam, he further polished an already shiny television persona.
But it is just the sort of sheen that invites a pie in the eye, the way scrubbed
surfaces cry out for graffiti. Southern charm in particular doesn't travel all
that well in the boroughs. Anyway, Mr. Clinton was heckled around town, and of
course his hecklers won the camera's attention; he was badgered about marijuana;
his draft status came up again; there was some Hillary-baiting; he had to suffer
Phil Donahue.

He had laid himself open to yet other indignities. What comic could resist
taking a shot at a man who said he tried pot once many years ago as a youth but
did not inhale? Mr. Clinton, sharp though he is, does not seem to know when he
is delivering a howler. That may be because today's careful politician deadens
himself to humor. It is dangerous, susceptible to being misunderstood or
understood only too well. Some group is bound to be offended.

A bit of banter with a talk-show host may get by, and Mr. Clinton's mini-Elvis
imitation on the Charlie Rose show on Friday was engaging; but no candidate
wants to risk seeming frivolous. One sound political rule is to stay far away
from wit when the camera is running. What modest wit this primary campaign has
offered departed with Paul E. Tsongas. Not a gag was ventured by either
principal in the Sunday Clinton-Brown encounter.

Given certain much-advertised details of his past, Mr. Clinton has to be
especially careful about kidding around. Faced with Jerry Brown, whose dumping
of tax-code books in a garbage can was immortalized on all channels, he has
extra reason to present an unflaked image. (Mr. Brown handled Mr. Donahue's
proddings about sex much more deftly than Mr. Clinton; the Californian
understood that talk shows are show biz and he was ready to play the game.)

No one can come out looking altogether serious after as much television coverage
as Mr. Clinton has sought and endured in the last few months. His positions in
debates and interviews would make for a presentable Democratic platform, but on
screen, with the minutes racing away, what starts as a reasonable proposition
quickly turns into a slogan. The candidate is obliged to answer every question
instantly and to go as long as he can get away with. Mr. Brown demonstrated
again in Sunday's debate that he gets away with more than most.

Reflection does not play well on television. An admission of uncertainty or a
confession that some problems may be beyond the reach of the White House does
not carry one far in the I-can-do-everything stakes. A pause or a stammer or
even an explanation may be interpreted as doubt or weakness; the politician in
the camera's eye has to talk as fast as he can with none of the ifs and maybes
that hedge in real decisions.

Chances are that even attentive viewers are still hard put to explain exactly
how Mr. Clinton is going to reform America's health-care system or deal with
Japan, yet they must be left with a picture of an energetic young man who is
ready with a plausible phrase at the drop of a question. That is the main point
of an exercise that comes so easily to Mr. Clinton, even with a constant hoarse
throat, that he sometimes goes on just a beat too long -- as when he said he
lost money in a business arrangement that possibly involved his official
position. Such sly diversions have helped earn him those Slick Willie headlines.

The same viewers who had enjoyed seeing Mr. Clinton brought down a bit when he
was riding high may have felt an impulse to cheer last week when he lashed back
at the tabloids, at his hecklers, at Mr. Donahue's obsession with marital
infidelity. An overdog can benefit by becoming the underdog for a little while.
Mr. Clinton drew his highest ratings when he appeared side by side with his wife
on "60 Minutes" to face down charges of infidelity. It was a television moment.

Despite the why-pick-on-a-nice-guy-like-me stuffiness, last week's anger seemed
spontaneous, revealing a not entirely lovable but less programmed side of the
candidate that had already been glimpsed in the off-the-record comments about
Gov. Mario M. Cuomo and the Rev. Jesse Jackson for which he had to apologize.
Mr. Clinton, viewers could be reassured, is not so consistently cool, cordial or
courteous as he seems -- but who is, this side of sanity?

Scrabbling for office is rarely an edifying spectacle, and the need to appeal to
an audience of millions does not improve matters. Television is famous for
resisting substance and rewarding manner. A campaign is a process of constant
self-creation and re-creation, and perhaps after today's vote Mr. Clinton, who
seemed to be under less pressure in his final few New York appearances, will
show more of the sensible strain that has come through in the debates and
interviews. Or perhaps, like other tourists on a frenetic journey, he is himself
by now uncertain of the whereabouts on any given day of the real Bill Clinton.

LOAD-DATE: April 7, 1992

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1992 The New York Times Company


                              15 of 281 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                  April 7, 1992, Tuesday, Late Edition - Final

Vietnam Gas Project

BYLINE: Reuters

SECTION: Section D; Page 21; Column 2; Financial Desk

LENGTH: 103 words

DATELINE: HANOI, Vietnam, April 6


Petro Vietnam, Vietnam's state-owned oil company, said today that it would soon
begin negotiations with Liquigaz/SNC Lavalin of Canada on the construction of a
$300 million natural gas pipeline. A Petro Vietnam official confirmed a local
newspaper report quoting the head of Petro Vietnam, Truong Thien, as saying
Vietnam had chosen the Canadian group to discuss the deal. The pipeline will
carry natural gas from Vietnam's South China Sea oil rigs and bring it onshore.
The gas is currently burned off. The project will include construction of the
pipeline and of a liquefied petroleum gas plant to bottle the gas.

LOAD-DATE: April 7, 1992

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1992 The New York Times Company


                              16 of 281 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 April 8, 1992, Wednesday, Late Edition - Final

The Pulitzer Prizes

SECTION: Section A; Page 1; Column 4; Metropolitan Desk

LOAD-DATE: April 8, 1992

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Chart: "The Pulitzer Prizes"

Arts

Fiction: "A Thousand Acres" by Jane Smiley.

Drama: "The Kentucky Circle" by Robert Schenkkan.

History: "The Fate of Liberty: Abraham Lincoln and Civil Liberties" by Mark E.
Neely Jr.

Biography: "Fortunate Son: The Healing of a Vietnam Vet" by Lewis B. Puller Jr.

Poetry: "Selected Poems" by James Tate.

General Nonfiction: "The Prize: The Epic Quest for Oil, Money and Power" by
Daniel Yergin.

Music: "The Face of the Night, The Heart of the Dark" by Wayne Peterson.

Special Award: "Maus" by Art Spiegelman.

Journalism

Public Service: The Sacramento Bee for "The Sierra in Peril" by Tom Knudson.

Spot News Reporting: New York Newsday staff.

Investigative Reporting: Lorraine Adams and Dan Malone of The Dallas Morning
News.

Explanatory Journalism: Robert S. Capers and Eric Lipton of The Hartford
Courant.

Beat Reporting: Deborah Blum of The Sacramento Bee.

National Reporting: Jeff Taylor and Mike McGraw of The Kansas City Star.

International Reporting: Patrick J. Sloyan of Newsday.

Feature Writing: Howell Raines of The New York Times.

Commentary: Anna Quindlen of The New York Times.

Editorial Writing: Maria Henson of The Lexington Herald-Leader.

Editorial Cartooning: Signe Wilkinson of The Philadelphia Daily News.

Spot News Photography: The Associated Press staff.

Feature Photography: John Kaplan of The Herald (Monterey, Calif.) and The
Pittsburgh Post-Gazette.

Articles are on page B6.

TYPE: List

                   Copyright 1992 The New York Times Company


                              17 of 281 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 April 8, 1992, Wednesday, Late Edition - Final

THE 1992 CAMPAIGN: Clinton;
Buoyed by a New York Victory, Clinton Calls It the Turning Point

BYLINE: By GWEN IFILL

SECTION: Section A; Page 21; Column 3; National Desk

LENGTH: 402 words


When Gov. Bill Clinton waded into the jubilant crowd at his victory party last
night, 100 video screens flashed behind him and the speakers at the Ritz pounded
with the strains of Steve Winwood's rock hit "Roll With It Baby."

After weeks of New York primary campaigning that the candidate said felt "like a
ride on the Coney Island Cyclone," Mr. Clinton is ready to be on a roll.

The Clinton campaign had been hoping for such a party for weeks but had only
begun to count on it during the last few days of a trying New York primary
campaign.

As the potential for a significant victory in New York became more likely in
recent days, campaign strategists and Mr. Clinton himself began to relax
visibly. And as the proportions of the night's victory became clear, Mr. Clinton
and his aides said it was a testament to the strength of his message of economic
revival, personal responsibility and middle-class relief.

"We proved that all kinds of people were aching to come together again," Mr.
Clinton said. "When the vote is in tonight in New York, it will show that
Americans want to be together again, black and Hispanic, Jew and gentile, man
and woman. They're all voting for the same things in life."

Clinton aides breathed their first sighs of relief late last week after their
own surveys of New York voters began to show that their support had solidified
while Mr. Brown's had begun to soften.

"In the future, people will look back upon this week and this campaign as a
turning point, not for Bill Clinton, but for the Democratic Party and for
America," he told his cheering supporters.

Even when Mr. Clinton was forced to deal with new questions in recent days about
his Vietnam draft status and his wife's outspokenness, he and his aides seemed
far removed from the crisis mode with which they had greeted earlier setbacks.

This was partly because the campaign staff had become almost accustomed to
dealing with bad news. It was also partly because of a growing confidence among
Clinton forces that they could use their newly honed survival skills to best
President Bush in the fall.

"It's mathematically impossible for Brown to get the nomination, and it would
take Tsongas about 90 percent of the remaining delegates to win," said George
Stephanopoulos, Mr. Clinton's deputy campaign manager. "So lightning would have
to strike. But we're going to keep our sneakers on, just in case."

LOAD-DATE: April 8, 1992

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo: A woman entering Public School 41 to vote in the New York
Democratic primary yesterday. A survey of voters leaving the polls showed that
nearly a third did not make their decision until the last four days. Two-thirds
of the voters said they wanted other candidates in the race. (Edward Keating/The
New York Times)

                   Copyright 1992 The New York Times Company


                              18 of 281 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 April 8, 1992, Wednesday, Late Edition - Final

'Thousand Acres' Wins Fiction As 21 Pulitzer Prizes Are Given

BYLINE: By ALESSANDRA STANLEY

SECTION: Section B; Page 6; Column 1; Metropolitan Desk

LENGTH: 1200 words


Jane Smiley's "A Thousand Acres," a novel that weaves the plot of "King Lear"
through the story of an Iowa farm woman who was sexually abused by her father,
won the Pulitzer Prize for fiction yesterday. The drama award went to "The
Kentucky Cycle," a six-hour historical epic by Robert Schenkkan, which was never
performed on Broadway.

In journalism, three newspapers -- The New York Times, Newsday, and The
Sacramento Bee -- each took two prizes.

Art Spiegelman won a special award for his "Maus" chronicles, the history of an
Auschwitz survivor told in comic book form. The Pulitzer board members, like
book reviewers and book store owners before them, found the cartoonist's
depiction of Nazi Germany hard to classify.

The award for music was disputed by the three-person nominating jury, which had
recommended someone other than the winner.  This year, for the first time, no
award was given for criticism.

A 76-Year Tradition

The winners of the 76th annual awards, honoring excellence in the fields of
journalism, drama, letters and music, were announced at Columbia University by
President Michael I. Sovern.

In the journalism categories, Anna Quindlen, 39, a columnist for The New York
Times, was lauded for 10 "compelling columns" on "a wide range of personal and
political topics" that included pieces on the Clarence Thomas hearings and the
Gulf War. Ms. Quindlen is the third woman in the history of the Pulitzer Prize
to win an award for commentary, following syndicated columnists Mary McGrory and
Ellen Goodman.

Howell Raines, 49, The Times's Washington editor, was awarded the feature
writing prize for "Grady's Gift," a New York Times Magazine profile of a young
black maid who helped teach Mr. Raines about the reality of racism when he was a
child in the segregated Birmingham of the 1950's.

The public service award went to The Sacramento Bee for reporting by Tom
Knudson, who examined the environmental threats and the damage to the Sierra
Nevada in California. Deborah Blum of The Sacramento Bee won the beat reporting
award for "The Monkey Wars," a series that explored complex ethical issues
surrounding primate research.

Patrick J. Sloyan, a reporter with Newsday, won the international reporting
award for his discovery, shortly after the Persian Gulf War ended, of new
"friendly fire" incidents and of details about American battlefield tactics. The
staff of New York Newsday won the prize for spot news reporting for its coverage
of a midnight subway derailment in Manhattan.

Mark E. Neely Jr. was awarded the history prize for his "The Fate of Liberty:
Abraham Lincoln and Civil Liberties" (Oxford University Press). Lewis B. Puller
Jr. won the prize for biography for his memoir, "Fortunate Son: The Healing of a
Vietnam Vet" (Grove Weidenfeld), and Daniel Yergin, who wrote "The Prize: The
Epic Quest for Oil, Money & Power" (Simon & Schuster), received the prize for
general nonfiction.

The Pulitzer Prize in poetry was won by James Tate for his "Selected Poems"
(Wesleyan University Press).

As the announcement of the 21 prizes ricocheted from newsrooms to living rooms,
winners laughed, wept and tied up their telephones. Mr. Schenkkan said that when
he learned he had won, "I hugged my wife and my child and had a good cry."

Mr. Schenkkan's triumph surprised many theater owners and critics in New York,
many of whom had not seen his play. Mr. Schenkkan said he hoped the prize would
help spur interest in his two-part, six-hour play.

The California-based playwright had not quite absorbed the fact that he had won
a great honor and a prize of $3,000. "You mean there is money, too?" he said.

A Dispute over Music

Jane Smiley, who teaches English at Iowa State University, said her first call
after winning was to the editor in chief of Alfred A. Knopf, Sonny Mehta. Ms.
Smiley said that after she gave him the news, "He told me I was a genius." In
five of the last six years, a Knopf novel has received an award.

There were a few bitter moments amid the rejoicing. The three-person jury that
had recommended the composer Ralph Shapey for the music award sent out an angry
letter of protest upon hearing that the Pulitzer Board had instead selected
Wayne Peterson for his composition, "The Face of the Night, The Heart of the
Dark." The letter called the decision "a lamentable devaluation of this uniquely
important award."

Walter Rugaber, publisher of The Roanoke Times & World-News, who served on the
board's music subcommittee, said he understood that "professionals" disliked
being second-guessed by "'laymen," but added that the board sought to "represent
consumers' interests."

News by Telegram

Ms. Quindlen, whose first novel "Object Lessons," was published last year,
joined the New York Times in 1977. She said that she was notified by telegram, a
message routed through Western Union's Nevada office. "It came from Reno, Nevada
-- at first I thought it was from a friend getting a divorce," she said. As the
excitement spread at home, her 8-year-old son Quin asked, "Is there any money?"

Mr. Raines joined The New York Times in March 1978 as a national correspondent
in Atlanta. He is the author of an oral history of the civil rights movement,
called "My Soul is Rested." Mr. Raines, who was born in Birmingham, said he
called Gradystein Williams Hutchinson, the subject of his magazine story, to
tell her the news.

"What was satisfying about the story," Mr. Raines added, "is that it gave her
children, who grew up in Detroit and New York, a sense of the heroic dimensions
of her own life."

The photography staff of The Associated Press won its second consecutive award
for spot photography, this year for pictures of the attempted coup in the Soviet
Union and the collapse of the Communist regime.

Other Papers Honored

John Kaplan, of Block Newspapers in Toledo, Ohio, won the feature photgraphy
prize for his series about seven 21-year-old Americans.

The investigative reporting award was won by Lorraine Adams and Dan Malone of
The Dallas Morning News, for coverage of police misconduct in Texas. Robert S.
Capers and Eric Lipton of The Hartford Courant won the award for explanatory
journalism, for a series on the flawed Hubble Space Telescope.

The national reporting prize was won by two Kansas City Star reporters, Jeff
Taylor and Mike McGraw, for their examination of the United States Department of
Agriculture.  Maria Henson of the Lexington Herald-Leader won the prize for
editorial writing for her editorials about battered women in Kentucky. Signe
Wilkinson of the Philadelphia Daily News became the first women to win the award
for editorial cartooning.

Maureen Dowd, a national correspondent for The New York Times was a finalist in
national reporting category and Robert Lipsyte, a Times sports columnist, was a
finalist for commentary.

Other finalists included the now defunct Arkansas Gazette, in Little Rock, for
beat reporting on the state's faltering rural health-care system. A weekly, The
Vineyard Gazette, was a finalist in the spot news category for its coverage of
the destruction wreaked by Hurricane Bob on the Massachusetts island of Martha's
Vineyard.

LOAD-DATE: April 8, 1992

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo: The Associated Press won the Pulitzer Prize for spot news
photography with pictures of the collapse of the Soviet Union. One photo, taken
by Alexander Zemlianichenko, depicts people around the toppled statue of Feliks
E. Dzerzhinsky, the K.G.B. founder. (Associated Press)

                   Copyright 1992 The New York Times Company


                              19 of 281 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 April 8, 1992, Wednesday, Late Edition - Final

Chiphou Journal;
In a Cambodia Village, Old Sorrows Are Revisited

BYLINE: By HENRY KAMM,  Special to The New York Times

SECTION: Section A; Page 4; Column 3; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 922 words

DATELINE: CHIPHOU, Cambodia, April 4


This village about 10 miles from the Vietnamese border, on the old French
colonial road linking Phnom Penh and Saigon, has changed beyond recognition, but
it remains the place where the mass disappearances of journalists, victims of
the war in Cambodia, began.

On April 5, 1970, at a Vietnamese Army roadblock about three miles east of here,
six photographers and members of television camera teams were seized and never
seen again.

The next morning, two Americans, Sean Flynn of Time magazine, the son of the
actor Errol Flynn, and Dana Stone of CBS News, parked their motorcycles at a
grocery store on the marketplace of this village and joined three colleagues for
a drink. They laughed when they were cautioned about what the road ahead might
hold, particularly since they wore parts of American Army camouflage uniforms.

The three others left in one car, slowly, ready to turn back at any sign of
danger. Moments later, the two motorcycles roared up behind them, one passing on
the left, the other on the right. Their riders waved. It was the last time their
friends saw Mr. Flynn and Mr. Stone, and the number of the missing, never to
return from that roadblock, rose to eight.

30 Journalists Killed

In the days and weeks after the Communist Vietnamese invasion of Cambodia, which
began almost immediately after the coup that overthrew Prince Norodom Sihanouk
on March 18, 1970, the Government of Prime Minister Lon Nol published no news
about the fighting.

To learn what was happening, reporters left Phnom Penh, the capital, every
morning to see how far they could go on the roads leading east and south, to
judge how much more of Cambodia the North Vietnamese, aided by the precursors of
the Khmer Rouge movement, had bitten off.

Before the war in Indochina was over, more than 30 journalists of many
nationalities had been killed.

Last month the first grave of missing journalists may have been discovered, 34
miles south of Phnom Penh. Four skeletons were sent to a military forensic
laboratory in Hawaii for identification. One is possibly the remains of Welles
Hangen, an NBC News correspondent, formerly of The New York Times. Mr. Hangen,
his French cameraman and Japanese soundman, as well as two Japanese working for
CBS, disappeared in May 1970.

The deaths of the journalists has made little mark on Cambodians, whose own
losses in the war and its aftermath were incalculable. A man in a primitive
coffee shop in the rebuilt village said he had heard of three journalists being
killed on those two days 22 years ago in Chiphou.

Laughingly, he told this correspondent, who shared that drink with Mr. Flynn and
Mr. Stone on their last morning, in the grocery that stood approximately on the
site of the present coffee shop, that the villagers had been scared to death to
see Westerners in Chiphou then. "The Vietcong were all around the village since
the night before," he said, and the villagers feared they would shoot up Chiphou
to capture them.

He pointed across the street and said that had been the site of the old French
fort, which the Vietnamese had set afire. "Pol Pot finished the rest," he added.
"He destroyed everything that was left of Chiphou. What you see now was all
built after 1979."

In that year, Vietnamese troops, who had been the ally of the Khmer Rouge,
invaded Cambodia and overthrew the Government of Prime Minister Pol Pot, the
Khmer Rouge leader.

In 1970 Chiphou was a modest market town, with a large population of Vietnamese.
"They fled to Vietnam because they were afraid of the Khmer Rouge," the man
said, as other villagers agreed.

They laughed in embarrassment when the visitor recalled that in fact the
Vietnamese minority had not fled from the Cambodian Communists but had been
driven out, many of them killed and their property sacked, by the forces of the
American-supported Lon Nol Government and much of the civilian population.

"Yes, there was a massacre," another man acknowledged when they were asked
whether they recalled that in Prasot, a few miles to the west, more than 80
Vietnamese children, men and women had been mowed down by the Lon Nol troops in
April 1970.

Perhaps the people of this war-scarred region can be forgiven for having
confused memories of the many waves of mayhem that has poured over them in their
lifetimes.

Often a Battleground

This region, Svay Rieng Province, has been a major battleground in all the wars
of Indochina -- the French colonial war, the American involvement and the war
between Vietnam and Cambodia. Most of the villages between here and Phnom Penh,
about a hundred miles west, have been altered beyond recognition by the
cumulative efforts of the various land forces that did battle, widespread
American bombing and the destructive frenzy of the Pol Pot regime.

Now, at the cruelest peak of the sweltering dry season, when only those fields
with irrigation show signs of green and promise of harvest, it is hard to tell
which of the deep holes are bomb craters and which dried-up fish ponds.

Not everything has changed. Pagodas are flourishing once more in this land of
deeply felt Buddhism after the war on religion by the Pol Pot regime, followed
by only a restricted revival under the Vietnamese-imposed successor Government.

But fear of government, more or less present under all regimes in Cambodia,
remains alive. None of the men in the coffee shop would give their names. "You
go, I stay here," one said when asked what he feared. "The ship has gone, the
harbor remains."

LOAD-DATE: April 8, 1992

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo: Dana Stone was among the American war correspondents who
disappeared in Cambodia 22 years ago. Last month the first grave of missing
journalists may have been discovered near Phnom Penh. (UPI/Bettmann)

Map of Cambodia showing location of Chiphou.

                   Copyright 1992 The New York Times Company


                              20 of 281 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 April 8, 1992, Wednesday, Late Edition - Final

1992 Pulitzer Prize Winners and Their Works in Journalism and the Arts

SECTION: Section B; Page 6; Column 1; Metropolitan Desk

LENGTH: 2589 words



GENERAL NONFICTION

Daniel Yergin
"The Prize: The Epic Quest for Oil, Money and Power"

Half-historian and half-energy expert, Daniel Yergin seems perfectly cast to
write about the 20th-century addiction to oil, and many reviewers have already
said that his latest work, "The Prize," deserves to become the standard work on
the subject. Mr. Yergin's intention was not to break new ground, but rather to
make sense out of a tremendous amount of hard-to-understand data, hidden forces
and complex personalities. Mr. Yergin mourns the dependency that has so
distorted international relations and harmed the environment. Mr. Yergin is
president of Cambridge Energy Research Associates, an energy consulting firm.

FICTION

Jane Smiley
"A Thousand Acres"

In "A Thousand Acres," Jane Smiley weaves together the themes of farm and
family. In an update of "King Lear," an Iowa farmer decides to divide his land
among his three daughters, unleashing a family tragedy. The family is a rich and
familar territory for Ms. Smiley. She offers intimate, closely observed
portraits of family life in the novella and short stories that make up "The Age
of Grief" (1987), and in "Ordinary Love and Good Will" (1989), which comprises
two novellas. Ms. Smiley was born in Los Angeles and grew up in St. Louis. She
received a bachelor's degree at Vassar College and a Ph.D. in medieval
literature and languages at the University of Iowa. She lives in Ames, Iowa,
where she teaches at Iowa State University.

POETRY

James Tate
"Selected Poems"

James Tate won for "Selected Poems," culled from nine of his previous books. He
first came to prominence at the age of 23 when "The Lost Pilot" won the Yale
Series of Younger Poets Award in 1967. Energetic, surreal and humorous, the
verse has poured out in a torrent ever since in such works as "The Oblivion
Ha-Ha" (1970), "Hints to Pilgrims" (1971), "Absences" (1972), "Hottentot
Ossuary," (1974), "Viper Jazz" (1976), "Riven Doggeries" (1979), "Constant
Defender" (1983), "Reckoner" (1986) and "Distance from Loved Ones" (1990). Mr.
Tate grew up in Kansas City and attended the University of Missouri, Kansas
State College and the University of Iowa.

DRAMA

Robert Schenkkan
"The Kentucky Cycle"

Robert Schenkkan, 39 years old, won for his two-part, 6-hour 40-minute dramatic
work that has been described as miniseries theater. An epic 200-year history of
Kentucky's Cumberland Plateau performed by 20 actors, it traces seven
generations in the lives of three interrelated families. At times intermarrying,
they battle for domination of eastern Kentucky from 1775 to 1975. Mr. Schenkkan
received a B.A. from the University of Texas at Austin, and a master's degree in
theater arts from Cornell. He has worked as an actor and writer on Broadway,
Off-Broadway and in regional theaters.

HISTORY

Mark E. Neely Jr.
"The Fate of Liberty: Abraham Lincoln and Civil Liberties"

Mr. Neely, who is the director of the Lincoln Museum in Fort Wayne, Ind., and
author of "The Abraham Lincoln Encyclopedia," studied over 10,000 cases of the
suspension of the writ of habeas corpus during the Civil War. He brought to
light one of the most troublesome chapters of the Lincoln Administration. "I
guess my conclusion," he said yesterday, "was that we have forgotten what it was
like for all kinds of people to become captives of military power when a war was
being fought on our own soil." He was born in Amarillo, Tex., in 1944 and
graduated from Yale, where he received a doctorate in American history in 1973.

BIOGRAPHY

Lewis B. Puller Jr.
"Fortunate Son: The Healing of a Vietnam Vet"

This book is "a dark and corrosive autobiography," in the words of William
Styron, who reviewed the book for this newspaper. It is the work of a man who,
as an American soldier in Vietnam in 1968, stepped on a land mine and lost both
his legs. Mr. Puller is the son of Gen. Lewis B. (Chesty) Puller, who became the
most decorated Marine in the history of the corps, serving in World War II and
the Korean War. Mr. Puller was born in Camp Lejeune, N.C., and attended local
schools in Tidewater, Va. He served as a combat platoon leader in Vietnam until
he was wounded and evacuated. He was awarded the Silver Star and two Purple
Hearts. Mr. Puller has a law degree from the College of William and Mary. He is
a senior attorney in the Office of the General Counsel of the Department of
Defense.

MUSIC

Wayne Peterson
"The Face of the Night, The Heart of the Dark"

Wayne Peterson, a 64-year-old composer and pianist, lives in San Francisco, but
is currently a visiting professor of composition at Indiana University in
Bloomington. His orchestral work, "The Face of the Night, the Heart of the Dark"
is a two-movement score that lasts about 19 minutes. Mr. Peterson described his
style as "fairly dissonant," but added, "In this particular piece, the lines are
much longer than in previous works I've written, and there is a re-emerging
tonal element." Mr. Peterson studied at the University of Minnesota and the
Royal Academy of Music, in London. He was a professor of music at San Francisco
State University from 1960 until his retirement last year.

PUBLIC SERVICE

Tom Knudson
The Sacramento Bee

Tom Knudson describes the Sierra Nevada, which stretch along 400 miles of
California's eastern border, as "one of North America's most majestic mountain
ranges." But as Mr. Knudson's five-part series, "The Sierra in Peril," pointed
out, those mountains have also been ravaged by air pollution, overdevelopment
and overpopulation. The series, which ran in The Sacramento Bee last June, won
Mr. Knudson his second Pulitzer Prize. Mr. Knudson, 38 years old, joined The Bee
as a staff writer in 1988 and has since covered various topics related to
natural resources. He graduated from Iowa State University in 1980 with a degree
in mass communications and journalism, and worked at The Des Moines Register and
The New York Times. He won the 1985 Pulitzer Prize for national reporting for a
series in The Register about safety and health problems in agriculture.

INVESTIGATIVE REPORTING

Lorraine Adams and Dan Malone
The Dallas Morning News

Lorraine Adams and Dan Malone spent over two years meticulously documenting
civil rights violations by law-enforcement officials throughout Texas. "We had
guns pointed at us and our lives were threatened," Ms. Adams said yesterday
after their 20-part series on police misconduct won a Pulitzer. "We found the
kind of human-rights abuses you would expect to find in a third-world country,"
she added. A prosecutor and a police officer who were among the subjects of the
series have since been indicted, Ms. Adams said. Ms. Adams, 32 years old, who
conceived the series, is a general-assignment reporter at The Morning News,
where she has worked since 1984. Mr. Malone, 37, joined the paper in 1985 and
was named Fort Worth bureau chief in February.

SPOT NEWS REPORTING

New York Newsday

The New York Newsday staff was awarded the prize for spot news reporting for its
coverage of the derailment of a New York City subway in Manhattan on Aug. 28,
1991, in which five people were killed and more than 200 injured. The motorman's
blood was found to contain twice the legal level of alcohol. More than 70 staff
members, including 35 reporters, worked on the paper's first-day coverage,
producing stories that ran to 16 full pages. Don Forst, New York Newsday editor,
said the award was particularly gratifying because the paper had devoted
considerable effort to covering the city transit system, and particularly its
subways, which Mr. Forst called "possibly the most all-encompassing thing in New
York City for most people."

INTERNATIONAL REPORTING

Patrick J. Sloyan
Newsday

Patrick J. Sloyan, senior correspondent for Newsday, was cited for reporting on
the Persian Gulf war, done after the war had ended and the pool system that had
restricted journalists had disintegrated. Among other things, he revealed that
thousands of Iraqi soldiers had been buried alive by American tanks. Mr. Sloyan,
55 years old, served as Newsday's European-Mideast bureau chief from 1981 to
1986, when he became the Washington bureau chief. He graduated from the
University of Maryland in 1963 with a degree in economics. While stationed in
West Germany, he worked as a public information officer for the 10th Infantry
Division and as a reporter for "Hell on Wheels," a newspaper for the Second
Armored Division.

NATIONAL REPORTING

Jeff Taylor and Mike McGraw
The Kansas City Star

Jeff Taylor and Mike McGraw won their prize for their critical examination of
the United States Department of Agriculture in a seven-part series published in
December. Mr. Taylor, 30 years old, who joined The Star in February 1990, said
he had wanted for some time "to look at a government agency, explain how it
works, how big is the bureaucracy, where the money goes -- and the Department of
Agriculture was a natural for this farming area." The project took 16 months, as
the reporters traveled around the country, interviewing farmers and government
employees and waiting for the agency to provide information, Mr. McGraw said.
"We filed 70 requests under the Freedom of Information Act and never got all the
information," said Mr. McGraw, 43, who joined The Star in 1989.

BEAT REPORTING

Deborah Blum
The Sacramento Bee

During her eight years as a science reporter at The Sacramento Bee, Deborah Blum
says she has been both fascinated and troubled at the ethical choices faced by
scientists who experiment on animals. Last November, her four-part series, "The
Monkey Wars," focused on the questions surrounding experimentation on primates.
Ms. Blum, 37 years old, joined The Bee in 1984. She received a bachelor's degree
in journalism from the University of Georgia in 1976. She also holds a master's
degree in science journalism from the University of Wisconsin.

FEATURE WRITING

Howell Raines
The New York Times

Howell Raines, who was born in Alabama in 1943, won for a personal essay, a
reminiscence about his friendship with Grady Hutchinson, his family's black
housekeeper when he was growing up in Birmingham, and an account of their
meeting more than three decades later. He wrote the piece, he said yesterday
after learning of his award, because "I realized that my lifelong interest in
race relations and civil rights had its deepest roots in my relationship with
Grady Hutchinson." Mr. Raines, who is Washington editor and chief of the
Washington bureau of The New York Times, has a long history of writing about
racism and civil rights, dating from the 1960's. "The piece was an homage to
Grady," Mr. Raines said, "for being the first person I heard talk honestly about
racial prejudice, and to my parents for having the kind of home where racism was
not taught."

COMMENTARY

Anna Quindlen
The New York Times

Anna Quindlen's column, "Public & Private," which appears on the Op-Ed page of
The New York Times and is syndicated throughout the country, has been a
twice-weekly argument that public issues have an impact, both philosophical and
visceral, on individual citizens. "I think of a column as having a conversation
with a person that it just so happens I can't see," Ms. Quindlen said yesterday.
"It's nice to know that my end of the conversation was heard." A graduate of
Barnard College, Ms. Quindlen, who is 39 years old, joined The Times as a
general assignment reporter in 1977. She has been a City Hall reporter and the
deputy metropolitan editor. She has also written two other columns for the
paper, "About New York" and "Life in the 30's."

EDITORIAL WRITING

Maria Henson
Lexington (Kentucky) Herald-Leader

Maria Henson, 31 years old, an editorial writer for The Lexington Herald-Leader
in Kentucky, won the award for the more than 30 editorials she wrote from
December 1990 o December 1991 on the problems of battered women in Kentucky. The
series, titled "To Have and to Harm," produced many reforms, including the State
Legislature's recent passage of measures intended to broaden and improve the
legal protections for men and women battered or threatened by their spouses or
companions.

EDITORIAL CARTOONING

Signe Wilkinson
Philadelphia Daily News

Signe Wilkinson is the first woman to win a Pulitzer Prize in this category.
Zachary Stalberg, editor of The Daily News, described her work as "social
comment on contemporary themes." Her cartoons include a wide variety, from date
rape to United States aid to the Kurds. Ms. Wilkinson devoted much comment to
the confirmation hearings on Judge Thomas's nomination to the Supreme Court. Ms.
Wilkinson joined The Daily News as editorial cartoonist in 1985, from the San
Jose Mercury News in California.

FEATURE PHOTOGRAPHY

John Kaplan
Pittsburgh Post-Gazette
The Herald (Monterey, Calif.) for Block Newspapers

John Kaplan, a 32-year-old photojournalist, won the feature photography award
for a series of seven photo essays depicting how 21-year-olds live across the
United States. All the essays, each accompanied by 9 to 12 photos, were
published by The Post-Gazette, and some have been published in other newspapers
of the Block chain, the Toledo Blade in Ohio and The Herald in Monterey, Calif.,
where he is currently based. Mr. Kaplan is founder and director of Media
Alliance, a journalism consulting group in Pittsburgh.

SPOT NEWS PHOTOGRAPHY
The Associated Press staff

For the second straight year, The Associated Press was given the spot news
photography award, this time for its photos of the attempted coup in Russia and
the collapse of the Communist regime. Boris Yurchenko, one of the agency's
photgrphers in Moscow, who turned 55 yesterday, said, "I didn't even know that a
citizen of the former Soviet Union could win the prize." The other Associated
Press photographers cited are Liu Heung-Shing, Olga Shalygin, Alexander
Zemlianichenko and Czarek Sokolowski.

EXPLANATORY JOURNALISM

Robert S. Capers and Eric Lipton
The Hartford Courant

Robert S. Capers and Eric S. Lipton were part of a team of reporters that
discovered in 1990 why a mirror crucial to the Hubble Telescope was flawed. They
followed up that story with this four-part prize-winning series, which used the
bungled telescope to illustrate problems endemic to the American space program.
Mr. Capers, 42 years old, and Mr. Lipton, 26, spent five months reporting the
series, said Lawrence Roberts, the specialty beat editor. Mr. Capers joined The
Courant in 1978 and has served as assistant state editor and specialty beat
editor, among other posts.  Mr. Lipton covers the city of New Britain. "I
believe it's his second job in journalism," Mr. Roberts said. "I told him he
might as well retire."

SPECIAL AWARD

Art Spiegelman
"Maus"

Art Spiegelman won a special Pulitzer award. He is the founder and editor of
Raw, a magazine of avant-garde comics and graphics. He wrote two comic books,
"MAUS I: My Father Bleeds History" and "MAUS II: And Here My Troubles Began,"
which explored the experiences of his father, Vladek, a Holocaust survivor. One
critic said Mr. Spiegelman's portrayal of Jews as mice and the Nazis as cats did
not end up trivializing the event, but served to goad the reader into looking at
the event anew. Mr. Spiegelman lives in SoHo with his wife, Francoise Mouly, and
their daughter.

LOAD-DATE: April 8, 1992

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: List

                   Copyright 1992 The New York Times Company


                              21 of 281 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 April 8, 1992, Wednesday, Late Edition - Final

More Military Retirees Going Into Classrooms

BYLINE: By WILLIAM CELIS 3d

SECTION: Section A; Page 23; Column 1; National Desk; Education Page

LENGTH: 1081 words


When Steve Dexter retired from the Navy last fall, the former captain embarked
on a new career as a sixth-grade teacher in an inner-city school in Portsmouth,
Va.

Although the widely traveled officer can speak firsthand about the cultures of
Egypt, Italy and Greece to his world history class, Mr. Dexter often finds
himself frustrated by the problems of his 22 students, 19 of whom come from
single-parent homes and many of whom are poor.

"I enjoy teaching," said Mr. Dexter, who is nearing the end of his first year.
"But I was not prepared for how tough it is."

As the military shrinks in its largest manpower reduction since the end of
American involvement in Vietnam, a small but growing number of former military
people are pursuing second careers as public school teachers.

'Very Valuable to Us'

Although there are no national data on the number of military people in public
schools, Federal education officials estimate that 2,000 to 3,000 of the 1.2
million people who have left the military since 1987 are now teaching or soon
will be.

"The military is very valuable to us," said Dr. Jay Shotel, special assistant to
the president at George Washington University, and an education professor who in
1985 helped design a teacher training program especially for military personnel.
"We have to make sure they succeed, because they have skills that schools need."

Virtually all these former military personnel possess strong backgrounds in
mathematics and science and fine management and organization skills. Many also
taught young recruits in the armed services, making the transition from the
military to the classroom a logical one, a chief reason many former military
people cite for pursuing second careers in public schools.

Encouraging the Effort

The military has a substantial minority representation, and schools around the
nation are short of teachers from minorities, especially males from minorities.
The service branches and several universities have been making efforts to
encourage more departing military personnel to try teaching, and to help them
with the transition. Last June, the Army began an toll-free line,
1-800-227-LEAD, to provide information about teacher certification, and so far,
13,300 people have called it.

Also, teacher training programs especially aimed at military personnel have been
created at 10 colleges and universities, many of them near military bases. The
oldest is at Old Dominion University in Norfolk, Va., whose four-year-old
program has grown to 400 students from 35 students in its first year.

A major problem in recruiting former soldiers to teaching is that when military
personnel retire their pension is about half of their salary, yet they often
still have families to support. When they pursue teacher certification courses,
they usually do so at the expense of getting another job. Representative Jim
Kolbe, Republican of Arizona, has proposed legislation that would allow retired
military people to continue to receive full pay for one year after they leave so
they can pursue college courses needed for certification.

If a teaching candidate survives the course work and the student teaching,
finding work is not easy. The hiring of teachers in each of the nation's 15,600
school districts is highly decentralized, and some school systems do not hire
until a few weeks before the academic year starts. Legislation proposed by
Senator William V. Roth Jr., Republican of Delaware, would create a nationwide
job bank to match would-be teachers with job openings.

Underlying the bureaucratic hassles are differences between the military and
public school classroom environments. Some former military people have
difficulty bringing their vocabularies down to student level.  Others have
trouble figuring out how to administer discipline without the advantages of
military rank.

"You can give orders to a private, but you can't give orders to a kid with green
hair and an earring," Dr. Shotel said.

Indeed, another problem is the changes in the students over the past three
decades. Dr. Robert McDonald, a professor of curriculum and instruction at Old
Dominion, said of the new teachers, "They say the school they would have liked
to have taught in existed in 1959."

The social problems that many children bring to school have worn down some of
these early teaching recruits. Among them is Mr. Dexter, the Portsmouth teacher,
who retired from the Navy after 26 years as a supplies officer.

Mr. Dexter brings to the classroom the sort of academic skills and life
experiences that education experts say the schools need. When students talk
about the Middle East, South America and other regions, "I have been to all
those places," he said. Many teachers have a hard time talking first hand about
the cultures of these areas that because they have never been there, he said.

Mr. Dexter, who gets advice from his wife, an elementary school teacher, said he
planned to look for another school next fall. "I don't know if I want to do this
inner-city stuff," he said. "I liken teaching to being an ensign in my early
years in the Navy, only I don't have a chief petty officer to take care of me."

Roland Hargett, a retired Air Force senior master sergeant in Columbia, S.C.,
wanted to become a public school teacher to help minority students. "I see
myself as a coach and a motivator," said Mr. Hargett, who is black. "I want to
tell kids that if you prepare yourself and get an education and work hard then
you can do it."

Coaching in Discipline

School districts have generally welcomed these new teachers with enthusiasm. In
San Francisco, Isaac Bristow, a former Navy lieutenant commander, said he has
been supported by other teachers and by his principal, Philip Lum, as he
navigates his new surroundings.

One area in which veteran teachers have helped to coach Mr. Bristow is
discipline. Although he is enrolled in a teacher training program for the
military at San Francisco State University, Mr. Bristow has discovered that
education courses do not really help a new teacher quell a rambunctious class.

"The classroom is not the military, where people have the authority to
discipline," he said. "I can't rely on the authority my rank gave me in the
military."

Mr. Bristow says he is learning, for example, to ask disruptive students "if
they have something to share with the whole class." But sometimes, he said, an
old-fashioned military-style glare does the trick.

LOAD-DATE: April 8, 1992

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo: Many former military personnel are pursuing second careers as
public school teachers. Isaac Bristow, a former Navy lieutenant commander who is
a student teacher in a San Francisco high school, has had trouble maintaining
discipline. "I can't rely on the authority my rank gave me in the military," he
said. (Jim Wilson/The New York Times)

                   Copyright 1992 The New York Times Company


                              22 of 281 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 April 9, 1992, Thursday, Late Edition - Final

Home Video

BYLINE: By Peter M. Nichols

SECTION: Section C; Page 24; Column 4; Cultural Desk; Word and Image Page

LENGTH: 1213 words



Foreseeing Future Viewing

Ask video dealers what they expect to see more of in the future and many say
laser disks. "By the turn of the century we'll be substituting a laser
technology," said Don Rosenberg, the executive vice president of the Video
Software Dealers Association, a trade group.

Disk players are now in less than 1 percent of American television households
(VCR's are in 75 to 80 percent) and no one predicts the rapid abandonment of
tape in favor of new hardware and software. Nevertheless, disks are the
fastest-growing sector of the business and the format could open fresh territory
in years ahead as video stores position themselves to compete with other
delivery systems like cable and pay-per-view television.

"Disk could mean a rebirth of business," Mr. Rosenberg said. With growth in
video rentals softening, stores are turning to sales of movies and other titles.
Because of its durability and superior picture and sound quality, laser disk,
its advocates contend, will become the format of choice for people who buy and
collect.

Disks are priced to sell. New movies on 12-inch disks cost as little as $25 and
some analysts say that 5-inch disks being developed might halve that price. New
movies on cassette vary, but some are priced near $100.

A key element, of course, is the player. "To make disk a real business, the
household level has to get up to about 10 percent," said John Thrasher, a vice
president of Tower Video.

The price of disk players has fallen from the $1,000 level in 1980 to below $500
for some models, but many dealers say these aren't the times to begin selling
players in mass numbers. Many of the machines are "combiplayers" that
accommodate both compact audio disks and video disks. "The prospect of adding
another box is not attractive to most consumers," said David Wallace of Pioneer,
the country's largest manufacturer of disk hardware and software. "The more
multi-purpose the machine, the more palatable it is."


The Black Tradition

With 11 million copies in the stores, Disney's "101 Dalmatians" is the newsmaker
among this week's releases (a film "with a cheery, innocent spirit and a meanie
to remember," wrote Janet Maslin in The New York Times). Another new children's
title of note is "Stories From the Black Tradition" from Children's Circle of
Weston, Conn. Several of the tales, all with African origins, are not animated
but told in iconographic fashion, in which the camera is steady while the
illustrations move in front of it.

Children's Circle uses the iconographic method to illustrate books, among them
the works of Maurice Sendak and other noted authors. "Many examples of better
children's fiction approach the level of fine art," said Morton Schindel, the
company's founder. "That kind of illustration defies the repetitive redrawing of
animation." Information: (800) 543-7843.

New Video Releases

Black Robe

1991. Vidmark. $94.95. 1 hour, 51 minutes. Closed-captioned. R.

Bent on converting the heathen, the Jesuit missionary Father Laforgue (Lothaire
Bluteau) paddles his canoe into Huron country west of the great lake. It's the
17th century, and proselytizing doesn't go easily in the flinty, freezing
wilderness. Bruce Beresford's film may be historically authentic and look
spectacular in its Canadian locations, but it is "no overdecorated, pumped-up
boy's adventure yarn like 'Dances With Wolves' " (Vincent Canby).

Ricochet

1991. HBO. $94.99. Laser disk, $29.98. 1:50. CC. R.

The police officer Nick Styles (Denzel Washington) gets a lift up the career
ladder when he arrests mad-doggish Earl Talbot Blake (John Lithgow) in an
amusement park shootout. That puts Nick on television and leaves Earl stoking
his rage behind bars until he breaks out and goes looking for revenge. Russell
Mulcahy's film may be full of glib tricks, but "Mr. Washington is appealing
enough to get away with anything" (Janet Maslin).

The Rapture

1991. New Line. $89.95. 1:40. CC. R.

Given to sex with strangers as a way to invigorate her life, Sharon (Mimi
Rogers) wakes up one night in the grip of a religious conversion. At first the
transformation leaves her serene, but gradually the fervor of the conversion
leads to destruction. Undoing Sharon's complacency in ways that are
cinematically shocking, Michael Tolkin's film is a "fierce, frightening
exploration of religious faith pushed to the breaking point" (Maslin).

Homicide

1991. SVS. $92.98. LD, $34.95. 1:40. CC. R.

Bobby Gold (Joe Mantegna) is a tough homicide detective who gets into deep
waters when he tries to explore his own Jewishness, which he has always ignored.
When an old Jewish woman is murdered, her well-connected family suspects an
anti-Semitic plot. Assigned to the case, Bobby is drawn into their world as much
to discover his own identity as to solve the crime. At this point David Mamet's
film wanders away from its strength as a police melodrama and, like Bobby,
becomes "a victim of its own imperfectly realized longings" (Canby).

On Any Sunday

1971. Pacific Arts. $39.95. 1:30. No rating.

The acclaimed documentary by Bruce Brown ("The Endless Summer") follows the
world of motorcycle racing from California to Spain and back. Riders are
monosyllabic types, but cameras lashed to the bikes at 100 miles an hour do the
talking. Through sensational motion, Mr. Brown "achieves audience-participation
effects with speed that amounts to marvelous delirium" (Canby).

What's Hot on Disk

Laser disks are generally sold, not rented, and best-seller lists tend to mix
new and older films. "The Rocketeer" and "Boyz N the Hood" are currently at the
top of Billboard's best-seller list for disks, as they are on tape best-renter
lists. Here are some other titles from Billboard's top 25 on disk and their
current positions.


THE GOLDEN AGE OF LOONEY TUNES (No. 6). A five-disk compendium covering 1933 to
1948. MGM/UA, $99.98.

APOCALYPSE NOW (No. 7). Francis Ford Coppola's saga of the Vietnam War, starring
Martin Sheen, Robert Duvall and Marlon Brando. 1979. Paramount. $44.95. 2 hours
30 minutes. R.

THE SILENCE OF THE LAMBS (No. 9). Jonathan Demme's thriller should jump in the
rankings after its Oscar sweep. 1991. Orion. $29.95. 1:58. R.

MANHUNTER (No. 11). A serial killer is wiping out families in Michael Mann's
thriller. 1986. Warner. $39.98. 1:59. R.

REGARDING HENRY (No. 16). Harrison Ford and Annette Bening star in Mike
Nichols's film about an amnesiac. Currently No. 4 on Billboard's best-renter
list for tapes. 1991. Paramount. $34.95. PG-13.

ALIENS (No. 19). James Cameron's film stars Sigourney Weaver as an astronaut who
returns to a planet to battle strange intruders. The second in the series. 1986.
Fox. $99.98 (three disks). 2:17. R.

THE MISSION (No. 22). Robert De Niro and Jeremy Irons star in Roland Joffe's
film about the Jesuits in 18th-century Brazil. 1986. Warner. $39.98. 2:05. PG.

2001: A SPACE ODYSSEY (No. 23). Space travelers go hunting for the origins of a
mysterious monolith in Stanley Kubrick's landmark film. 1968. MGM/UA. $29.98.
2:18. G.

CITY SLICKERS (No. 24). Billy Crystal and Daniel Stern are among the Eastern
dudes who head west to a dude ranch. 1991. New Line. $34.98. 1:47. PG-13.

LOAD-DATE: April 9, 1992

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Graph: "The Growth of Laser Disks" shows sales of video-disk players
and video disks in '90 and '91 (Source: The Laser Disk Association)

TYPE: Review

                   Copyright 1992 The New York Times Company


                              23 of 281 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 April 9, 1992, Thursday, Late Edition - Final

Ruling Frees A Landlord In Contempt Over Threats

BYLINE: By IAN FISHER

SECTION: Section B; Page 3; Column 1; Metropolitan Desk

LENGTH: 753 words


Joseph and Mara Kirsh were landlords accused of dealing harshly with unruly
tenants, as many people on Elizabeth Street in SoHo remembered yesterday. When a
man on the fifth floor complained about some of the building's 130 violations,
the Kirshes roamed the halls with their four snarling pit bulls, tenants said.
Dog feces were found inside the lock of the man's front door.

That was in 1987. Last Friday, after five years of appeals, tenants thought the
case was finally over when Mara Kirsh was sent to Rikers Island -- for 15 days
-- on a 1988 contempt ruling for harassing residents at the Kirshes' six-story
brick building, at 239 Elizabeth Street.

But she was released yesterday, and another legal battle may begin in what
residents say is a bizarre chapter of life on their block, just south of
Houston. A judge in the Appellate Division of State Supreme Court ruled that a
five-judge panel should hear Mrs. Kirsh's request to be freed -- a process that
could reopen her long appeal of the harassment and contempt charges.

One neighbor yesterday called the Kirshes "our celebrities," not because the
burly Mr. Kirsh, with his matted hair and wild beard, or his wife were beloved,
but because they attracted so much notoriety over the years. Residents said that
the building is much improved since a court-appointed administrator took over
management of the building four years ago. Life is certainly calmer.

'It Was Really Bad'

"When you move to New York, you meet weird people, but they were really weird,"
said a tenant, Cesar Vera, a 34-year-old photographer from Mexico City. In 1987,
he said, the building "was really terrible."

"There was no lighting," he said. "There were roaches all over the place, mice.
It was really bad."

The police considered the pair dangerous. In April 1988, tenants tape-recorded
the couple -- through holes in their ceiling -- threatening to blow up the
building and shoot city officials. When the police raided the Kirshes'
apartment, they found more than 60 guns and 20,000 rounds of ammunition. Mr.
Kirsh was charged with weapons possession.

As a result of the raid, Mr. Kirsh, a welder who former neighbors say is
extremely intelligent and was a Navy Seal in Vietnam, spent a little more than a
year in jail. The couple was also forced to move from the building.

Until Mrs. Kirsh's unexpected release late yesterday, officials at the New York
City Department of Housing Preservation and Development said that Mrs. Kirsh's
jailing showed how far the agency would go to prosecute bad landlords.

"This victory is a notice to any landlord that is involved in harassment of
tenants that HPD will not waver in its enforcement efforts," said Valerie Jo
Bradley, an assistant commissioner.

Unfair Pursuit Charged

Ms. Bradley estimated that Mrs. Kirsh is the 10th female landlord to be jailed
in the city's history and one of between six and nine landlords sent to jail
each year, usually for failing to comply with court-ordered improvements to
their property.

But lawyers for Mrs. Kirsh said that city officials have proved nothing except
their willingness to pursue their client unfairly.

They said she has never been tried on the harassment charges or on the
allegation that she violated a court order in trying to block the efforts of
John Wells, a 33-year-old artist who was appointed in March 1988 to manage the
building.

"The tragedy of this case is that there are terrible landlords in this city and
I don't know if these two are those terrible landlords," said Robert Cammer, one
of Mrs. Kirsh's lawyers.

If there is one point of agreement, it is that the case does not lack color.

Neighbors remembered Mr. Kirsh, now living in a midtown motel, as an eccentric,
sending odd notes to neighbors, talking about conspiracy and welding pieces of
metal to the front of his building. Once when someone chained a bicycle to a
post in front of his building, he welded it in place in protest, neighbors said.

Although Mrs. Kirsh's lawyers denied the charge, housing officials said that the
apartment under the Kirshes' care deteriorated dangerously. Water cascaded from
ceilings, walls buckled and selected tenants were left without electricity or
heat, housing officials said.

Mr. Wells, who quit managing the building a year ago, said he spent about
$150,000 in tenants' rent to repair the building, which is still owned by the
Kirshes.

"It's weird," he said. "They are still out there. You never know what they are
planning."


LOAD-DATE: April 9, 1992

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo: John Wells, who was appointed by a court in 1988 to manage the
building at 239 Elizabeth Street, said he spent about $150,000 on repairs. Mr.
Wells, who is no longer the manager, stood in the boiler room (William E.
Sauro/The New York Times)

                   Copyright 1992 The New York Times Company


                              24 of 281 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 April 9, 1992, Thursday, Late Edition - Final

Abroad at Home;
'Time for a Change'

BYLINE: By ANTHONY LEWIS

SECTION: Section A; Page 25; Column 1; Editorial Desk

LENGTH: 700 words

DATELINE: BOSTON


The message coming from the Democratic primaries could not be clearer. It is a
cry of discontent -- of anger -- with things as they are. The voters are saying,
"It is time for a change."

People coming out of the polling booths in New York were asked whether they
agreed with "Jerry Brown's criticisms of the political system"; 70 percent
answered yes. It was a clumsy question, because voters would have very different
understandings of what "Jerry Brown's criticisms" were. But the overwhelming
answer surely showed a high level of discontent.

The question is whether Bill Clinton, the now almost certain Democratic nominee,
can channel that discontent into a constructive and persuasive vision of change
in this country. I think it is going to be the crucial question of the campaign.

Americans are troubled by many things these days: by the way the rich have grown
richer while most people have lost ground, by the arrogance of Congress members
and Presidential aides in their enjoyment of perks, by the sense of falling
behind other countries economically, by fear of illness without adequate health
insurance . . .

A people so troubled may come to think that the whole system is rotten and must
be overthrown. That is what Jerry Brown essentially stands for.

Nihilism can be appealing in painful times. It appealed to many in the late
1960's and early 1970's, when the established politicians had produced -- and
most continued to defend -- the irrational horror of the Vietnam War. But "burn,
baby, burn" was not a solution.

We are not today in an emotional crisis like that of the Vietnam period. But
public disaffection from government is profound. Americans in large numbers
think the system is incapable of solving the problems that are grinding them
down. They see in Washington a Government that barely even pretends to deal with
the hard issues of investment, unemployment, education, health and the rest.

The challenge of leadership is to make people believe again that government can
make a difference. That is what Franklin Roosevelt did in far darker times: He
offered not specifics but hope, and the feeling that someone in Washington was
listening.

Voters are skeptical now, resistant. But they are far from writing off the
system. After all, 70 percent in New York may have said they agreed with
Governor Brown's criticisms of the system, but 70 percent voted for candidates
who argue that government can work: 41 percent for Bill Clinton, 29 for Paul
Tsongas.

Can Governor Clinton offer voters a believable vision of change? Can he persuade
people that we can have effective government again, within the constitutional
system that has kept us free for 200 years?

The answer turns in part on whether the press and television will allow Mr.
Clinton's message to get through. Journalism has seemed lately to be in a
competition to see who can produce the most frivolous, distorted, out-of-context
attack on his "character." But that is another subject.

It is up to Mr. Clinton, in any event, to get a message across. There is no
question of his intelligence or his ability to function in the give-and-take of
politics. Other governors, Republican and Democratic, considered him the most
capable in their ranks.

What remains to be seen is whether he can convince Americans that he offers
hope. He can and should talk about economic growth and medical needs and
political spending and other particulars. But the underlying question is belief
in government.

Few of us are naive enough anymore to think that any President, any government,
can quickly transform our society. The problems are beyond instant solutions.

But government can make a difference. The President of the United States can
face up to the environmental dangers menacing the world, or he can hide from
them. He can try to ameliorate our racial differences, or he can agitate them
for partisan reasons. He can choose as judges men and women of varied
backgrounds and politics, learned in the law, or he can pick judges from a
narrow ideological caste.

If and as Bill Clinton works free of the mudslinging, he will have to make
Americans believe again in the possibilities of government.

LOAD-DATE: April 9, 1992

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Op-Ed

                   Copyright 1992 The New York Times Company


                              25 of 281 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                  April 10, 1992, Friday, Late Edition - Final

Report of Ashe's Illness Raises an Old Issue for Editors

BYLINE: By ALEX S. JONES,  Special to The New York Times

SECTION: Section A; Page 25; Column 3; National Desk

LENGTH: 1093 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, April 9


Arthur Ashe's reluctant admission, under pressure from USA Today, that he has
AIDS has once again raised a persistent question for the nation's news
organizations: When does the public's need for important information
legitimately overrule a person's right to privacy?

On Tuesday, USA Today contacted Mr. Ashe and told him that it had received
information that he had AIDS and asked him if it was true. Mr. Ashe declined to
confirm the report or to deny it. USA today told Mr. Ashe that it would not
publish any allegations that he had AIDS without an on-the-record source for the
information but that it intended to seek independent confirmation of the report.
USA Today did not obtain sufficient confirmation to publish the article in
Wednesday's paper.

Later that day, Mr. Ashe confirmed his illness to a USA Today reporter and then
called a news conference to announce he had the disease. In an emotional
expression of wounded outrage that was repeated on ABC's "Nightline" and NBC's
"Today" show, he also criticized USA Today for pursuing reports that he had AIDS
despite his wishes to keep his illness private.

In a spot check, a half dozen of the nation's newspaper editors, gathered here
for the annual convention of the American Society of Newspaper Editors, said
that Mr. Ashe's prominence would have compelled them to publish the news of his
illness. Only one said he would not have published it.

They said Mr. Ashe's role as a barrier-breaking black tennis star, and his
active involvement in an array of civil rights issues, made him a significant
public figure, though he retired from tennis in 1980. Mr. Ashe is the only black
man to win the United States Open, the Australian Open and Wimbledon and, in
1985, Mr. Ashe became the first black man inducted into the International Tennis
Hall of Fame.

That his disease was acquired immune deficiency syndrome, in itself a subject of
great national importance, only added to the conviction of many editors that
they would have published the news despite Mr. Ashe's wishes that it not be made
public.

Reporting that individuals have AIDS, even in obituaries, has been a sensitive
issue for news organizations because many AIDS victims are homosexual and, in
some cases, did not want their sexual preferences known. Rock Hudson waited
until he was nearly dead to acknowledge that he had AIDS.  Magic Johnson, in
making his disclosure and announcing his retirement from professional
basketball, said he had contracted AIDS from heterosexual intercourse.

Mr. Ashe is the first celebrity to disclose he has contracted AIDS from
something other than sex or drug use. He said he became infected through a blood
transfusion.

The combination of public figure and AIDS persuaded most editors interviewed
that their readers had the right to know of Mr. Ashe's situation.

"I can't imagine knowing that information and keeping it quiet," said Jane
Healy, associate editor of The Orlando Sentinel, adding, "I think a lot of it
comes down to whether there is a real public issue there rather than just
titillating the public."

'Knee-Jerk Reaction'

But there was no unanimity among the editors.

"My knee-jerk, journalistic reaction upon hearing the news was that I would have
published it," said Acel Moore, associate editor of The Philadelphia Inquirer.

But Mr. Moore said he later changed his mind after seeing Mr. Ashe arguing on
television that his tennis career was over and that he had not wanted to expose
his family -- especially his daughter -- to the unwelcome attention that
accompanied the revelation.

Mr. Moore said that he ultimately concluded, "I would have respected his request
for privacy with the condition that I be given exclusivity if at any moment it
was made public."

Mr. Moore said, "He's not as public, and even public people have a right to
their privacy." But he added that had a current tennis star contracted AIDS, his
public stature would have warranted publishing the information, regardless of
his wish for privacy.

Peter S. Prichard, editor of USA Today, said that no other editors at the
convention had told him they would not have published the information.

The so-called yellow press, such as Pulitzer's New York World and Hearst's
Journal-American, routinely dragged the private lives of their political enemies
before the public in the early part of the century.

But until relatively recently, the mainstream press was more decorous and
protective of even the highest public figures when it came to private matters.
Though many in the White House press corps knew that President John F. Kennedy
had a mistress with ties to a major crime figure, the news was never published.

But during coverage of the Vietnam War and Watergate, journalistic taboos
against frank coverage of public figures began to give way. When Gary Hart was
observed spending the night with an apparent girlfriend during the 1988
Presidential campaign, virtually every newspaper in the nation covered the news
extensively.

Similarly, there has been wide coverage of the reputed affair of Gov. Bill
Clinton of Arkansas with Gennifer Flowers, which he has denied.

And The Seattle Times recently published allegations by eight unnamed women that
Senator Brock Adams, a Washington Democrat, had exhibited a pattern of sexual
harassment, with one of them saying he had raped her. Senator denied the
charges, but announced he would drop his campaign for re-election.

But Mr. Ashe argued that he is not a candidate for high public office, and
therefore not subject to the same level of scrutiny.

And many editors said that an incident of adultery by Mr. Ashe would not have
prompted an article. Editors generally regard adultery by a high elected
official to be a reflection on character, and hence appropriate to report. Mr.
Ashe's character is not at issue.

Clear Call for Some

But they said that reporting a deadly illness because of a disease that has
become a national scourge is news when a person of Mr. Ashe's stature is
involved.

For some editors, the decision was clear-cut.

Asked if he would have published the news had he had it first, David Lawrence
Jr., president of the society and publisher of The Miami Herald, responded,
"Absolutely."

But for others the decision was much more difficult and the judgment more
ambivalent.

"It would have been a tough, very close call, but, yes, I probably would have
gone with it" said James R. Mosby Jr., editor of The Kalamazoo Gazette in
Michigan, who said that his wife works with people who have AIDS.

LOAD-DATE: April 10, 1992

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo: In an appearance on NBC's "Today" show with Bryant Gumbel
yesterday, Arthur Ashe spoke again about the pressure he felt to make public his
AIDS diagnosis because of an impending newspaper article. Many editors said his
prominence was so great that the public's right to know carried more weight than
the issue of personal privacy. (Associated Press)

                   Copyright 1992 The New York Times Company


                              26 of 281 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                  April 10, 1992, Friday, Late Edition - Final

Hong Kong Police Faulted in Fatal Refugee Riot

BYLINE: By BARBARA BASLER,  Special to The New York Times

SECTION: Section A; Page 6; Column 1; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 406 words

DATELINE: HONG KONG, April 9


When a riot broke out in a Vietnamese detention camp here in February, the
police fled the scene for more than an hour, leaving men, women and children to
fend for themselves during a brawl that left 24 people dead and 119 injured,
according to findings of an inquiry issued today by the Government.

The High Court justice who conducted the independent investigation, Michael
Kempster, concluded that "the initiative was not swiftly seized or held by the
police" during the clash between northern and southern Vietnamese refugees at
the Shek Kong Detention Center on Feb. 3.

After the police officers pulled out, Vietnamese from the south locked the doors
of a hut where many northern Vietnamese had taken refuge and stuffed burning
blankets through the windows. A fire resulted, killing 24 people, including six
children.

If the police had used their "substantial stock" of tear gas and re-entered the
camp sooner, "the tragedy might well have been averted," the report said.

The riot was by far the most serious disturbance in the Hong Kong detention
camps, which house more than 57,000 Vietnamese boat people who have fled to this
British colony since 1975 in the hope of emigrating to the West. Government
officials say most of them do not qualify as political refugees eligible for
resettlement.

The Hong Kong Government said it accepted the findings of Justice Kemptner's
report but released only excerpts and its own paraphrasing of the document,
along with a long defense of police action. The Government said that releasing
the full report would interfere with criminal prosecutions of the 170 Vietnamese
arrested after the riot.

The Police Commissioner, Li Kwan-ha, said the findings "do not conflict" with
"detailed police investigations." He said the police at Shek Kong "did a
commendable job in very difficult circumstances in seeking to insure that those
in our charge were properly protected."

The findings showed that the police withdrew from the section of the camp where
the riot broke out at 11 P.M. that night and did not re-enter that section until
12:13 A.M. During that time, as they awaited reinforcements, the police failed
to make use of tear gas they had on hand, even though "everyone involved" knew
that "inmates in Section C were at grave risk," the report said.

At the height of the riot, for almost 30 minutes, "no one officer was
effectively in command at Shek Kong," it continued.

LOAD-DATE: April 10, 1992

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1992 The New York Times Company


                              27 of 281 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                  April 10, 1992, Friday, Late Edition - Final

Hanoi Selects French Bank

BYLINE: Reuters

SECTION: Section D; Page 20; Column 3; Financial Desk

LENGTH: 90 words

DATELINE: HANOI, Vietnam, April 10


Banque Indosuez of France said today that it would be the first foreign bank to
get a license to do business in Vietnam.

Officials from Indosuez offices in Hanoi and Ho Chi Minh City, formerly Saigon,
said Cao Sy Kiem, governor of the state bank, would present the license in Hanoi
on Friday.

Standard Chartered of Britain, the Thai Military Bank and four other French
banks -- Banque Nationale de Paris, Credit Lyonnais, Banque Francaise de
Commerce Exterieur and Societe Generale -- have representative offices in
Vietnam.

LOAD-DATE: April 10, 1992

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1992 The New York Times Company


                              28 of 281 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 April 11, 1992, Saturday, Late Edition - Final

Pentagon Report on Persian Gulf War: A Few Surprises and Some Silences

BYLINE: By JOHN H. CUSHMAN Jr.,  Special to The New York Times

SECTION: Section 1; Page 4; Column 1; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 1973 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, April 10


Shortly before the allied offensive in the Persian Gulf war, the United States
command anticipated that coalition casualties might run into tens of thousands
killed and wounded, according to a report on the war issued by the Pentagon
today.

Although the eventual toll never remotely approached that magnitude, a
previously undisclosed order approved by President Bush, revealed in the report,
suggested that casualties could run as high as 10 percent of ground combat
troops. The order shows how seriously the Pentagon viewed the possibility that a
bloody campaign might be required to oust nearly half a million Iraqi troops
from Kuwait, even if a steady air campaign cut Iraq's strength in half before
ground troops moved in.

In December 1990, General Norman Schwarzkopf was given, among his "operational
imperatives" in fighting the war, the order to "accept losses no greater than
the equivalent of three companies per coalition brigade," according to the
report. The orders, while not put in terms of specific figures, translated into
casualties of 10 percent among allied ground forces -- meaning that upwards of
10,000 allied soldiers might be killed or wounded.

The report to Congress, printed in three volumes and more than two months late
in delivery, is the Pentagon's definitive if somewhat defensive version of how
the Persian Gulf war was fought and what lessons have been learned from it.

Upper Limit on Casualties

The disclosure in the report of the casualty ceiling shows an important
development in war planning at a time when the Administration was still seeking
the political consensus to support a military offensive. Perhaps as significant
as the scale of the anticipated casualties, which reflected the belief that
chemical weapons, artillery and land mines could decimate an attacking force, is
the fact that President Bush, Defense Secretary Dick Cheney and Gen. Colin L.
Powell, Chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff, had all agreed on an upper limit
for the price of liberating Kuwait at a time when President Saddam Hussein of
Iraq still apparently planned to fight a defensive war of attrition.

General Schwarzkopf repeatedly mentioned his determination to keep casualties at
a minimum. In fact, an order like the one he was given implies that a commander
who failed to obey it would be replaced.

United States casualties in the war totaled 148 killed in combat, including 35
by friendly fire, and 467 wounded, including 72 by allied fire. In keeping with
the Bush Administration's dictates since the war began, the report issued today
made no mention of Iraqi casualties, either military or civilian.

The report shows that military planners believed that the initial air campaign
would last about 18 days, and that the ground assault would take about two weeks
more. In fact, the air campaign lasted six weeks and the ground offensive lasted
100 hours.

Credits Technology

While the report discusses in some detail shortcomings of various weapons,
notably those needed to eliminate the vast mine fields that Iraq laid on land
and in the sea, it generally attributes the swift allied victory to the use of
high-technology weapons and to the post-Vietnam War tactics of speed and
surprise that the weapons helped make possible.

The report does not include discussions of all the shortcomings identified in
various weapons, because many of the more serious ones are classified. A
separate classified version of the report has also been prepared.

Although the report, written by committees and subjected to prolonged debate
among rival groups within the Pentagon, seeks to hand out credit for the victory
evenhandedly, in the end it seems to give the Air Force first rank among equals
for the decisive role played by air power.

"The decisive character of our victory in the Gulf War is attributable in large
measure to the extraordinary effectiveness of air power," Mr. Cheney said in his
overview of the report. "On the other hand, air power alone could not have
brought the war to so sharp and decisive a conclusion."

But in the report's barrage of facts and analysis, vision and historical
revision, there are oases of silence about some of the war's most troubling
features -- including the lingering question of why it ended with Saddam Hussein
still in power and much of his military crippled but not crushed.

"Unfortunately, Saddam Hussein's brutal treatment of his own people, which long
preceded this war, has survived it," the report states in a reflection of the
Administration's lingering unease over Baghdad's continuing war of nerves
against the victors. "The world will be a better place when Saddam Hussein no
longer misrules Iraq."

No Mention on Ending War

The report does not say one word about the decision on Feb. 27, 1991, to end the
war, an omission that stands in sharp contrast to its extensive discussion of
the secret strategy sessions at the Pentagon, the White House, and in the field
when the details of how the war would be carried out were decided.

The President's decision to stop the war was suprising at the time because it
appeared that General Schwarzkopf wanted to press on. A month after the
cease-fire, General Schwarzkopf told television interviewer David Frost that "my
recommendation had been, you know, continue the march" because the fighting was
about to become a "battle of annihilation."

General Schwarzkopf had been instructed to "destroy" the Iraqi Republican Guard,
Baghdad's best equipped and best trained units, as part of his formal orders
when the allied offensive began on January 17, 1991, today's Pentagon report
confirmed.

But partly because of the timing of the cease-fire, elements of those elite
Iraqi units survived and have been reconstituted.

The report, which accuses Iraq of "widespread and premeditated" war crimes,
offered no comprehensive accounting of the military power of Iraq that survived
its defeat. It acknowledged that the Bush Administration had no strategy for
responding to Iraqi war crimes, adding that such a strategy is needed "to make
clear that a price will be paid for such violations."

The Pentagon report offers a detailed evaluation of these and other points in
the performance of United States forces and weapons in the war, and during
preparations for it:

MILITARY BUILD-UP -- The absence of "fully developed defensive plans between the
United States and Saudi Arabia hindered initial operational planning" after the
invasion of Kuwait in August 1990, the report says. Also, the "initial military
options were limited by the time required to move large forces into the theater"
and United States forces were plagued by a "slow build-up" of armored forces
during September-October 1990 because of a shortage of fast and efficient
transport ships.

The report does not cite the failure of post-war negotiations by Pentagon and
State Department officials to pre-position tanks, artillery and other heavy
forces in Saudi Arabia for use in any future Persian Gulf crisis. Instead, the
report makes the case for increased spending on transport ships, aircraft and
maritime pre-positioning ships.

AIR CAMPAIGN -- High technology weapons and stealth "gave the coalition a
decisive edge," although the bombing campaign against Iraq's nuclear program
suffered from incomplete intelligence. Accurate and up-to-date information on
bomb damage was at times not available. Cruise missiles were used successfully,
it says.

Also, the suppression of Scud missile launchers proved a far more difficult task
than projected, the report says. The lack of precision-guided bombs required
multiple bombing runs with nonprecision weapons, and Iraq's electrical power
grid was more heavily damaged than originally planned.

GROUND CAMPAIGN -- In 100 hours of ground warfare, the Army's 7th Corps and 18th
Corps maneuvered 150 miles and 260 miles respectively across the Saudi, Iraqi
and Kuwaiti deserts, but at times, "logistics units were hard-pressed to keep up
with the rapid pace" of combat. The Army's doctrine for logistics support was
"found wanting" for "high tempo" warfare. Had the campaign not been terminated
when it was, the report says, "maneuver forces would have outrun their fuel and
other support."

Some of the highly touted systems for breaching minefields did not work out well
under fire and the dissemination of intelligence information about Iraqi forces
was constrained by the lack of secure communications for many of the mobile
forces on the front line. Deception, secrecy and the element of surprise were
important in keeping the Iraqi forces fixed in their position and unable to
respond to the flanking manuever that encircled them.

INTELLIGENCE -- United States intelligence agencies were "not prepared to cope
with the volume of intelligence requirements to suport the large scale" military
operation in the Gulf. More than 30 intelligence units within the Defense
Department cranked out reports that produced "a very high level of duplicative,
even contradictory" intelligence. National intelligence coordinated by the
C.I.A. "proved of limited value" to the military. Most military commanders
wanted up-to-date imagery from reconnaissance satellites, over-the-horizon
radars and infrared sensors, but they often could not get it.

FRIENDLY FIRE -- Despite lessons from previous conflicts, 35 of the 146 United
States soldiers killed in action died as a result of fire from allied forces.
Also, of the 467 Americans wounded in action, 72 of these casualties were from
friendly fire. The Pentagon still needs a "system that identifies friendly
vehicles from the air, as well as a ground-to-ground identification system" that
can be used at extended ranges and in reduced visibility or in darkness.

WEAPONS SYSTEMS -- The F-117A Nighthawk Stealth Fighter, a subsonic fighter that
can carry two laser guided bombs, "achieved tactical surprise on the first night
of the war" and was used against all of the highly defended targets hit in
downtown Baghdad. But a "slow and tedious mission planning system" used by the
Air Force for this aircraft hampered and delayed some operations. The on-board
navigation system for the plane was also criticized. Though these planes flew
only 2 percent of the overall bombing missions of the war, they hit 40 percent
of the strategic targets identified in war plans.

Of the 288 Tomahawk sea-launched cruise missiles fired, 282 successfully
achieved "cruise flight" toward their targets, but an accurate assessment of how
well they performed against those targets could not be determined due to
problems with battle damage assessment and "the inability to distinguish missile
damage from damage caused" by bombs and other cruise missiles. The same
incomplete assessment applies to the air-launched cruise missiles fired from
B-52 aircraft.

More than 2,000 Bradley fighting vehicles carried Army infantry units into the
battle, but many crews complained that "vehicle exhaust tended to blow into the
vehicle commander's face." Gunnery accuracy was hampered by poor sighting
systems as well as "detection, recognition and identification of targets."

Regarding helicopters, the report said the Army had to send nearly half of its
fleet of Apaches to the Persian Gulf where their advanced weapon systems were
needed, but the "harsh desert environment, especially sand, adversely affected
aircraft components." Also, the limited radio transmission range of the
helicopter hindered the ability of commanders to communicate with crews flying
at low altitudes or while they were conducting "deep interdiction" missions.

The fleet of UH-60 assault helicopters also suffered from intake of sand into
key systems and "sand blasting" on exposed machinery. In addition, "the aircraft
had insufficient navigational equipment."

LOAD-DATE: April 11, 1992

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photos: The Pentagon has issued a report on how the Persian Gulf war
was fought and what has been learned from it. Soldiers patrolled a checkpoint in
Kuwait near the Iraqi border. American, Kuwaiti and Saudi members of the allied
forces affixing a Saudi flag to a bus during the war. (Photographs by Angel
Franco/The New York Times)

                   Copyright 1992 The New York Times Company


                              29 of 281 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                  April 12, 1992, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

Technology;
A Celebration of Isaac Asimov

BYLINE: By JOHN MARKOFF

SECTION: Section 3; Page 8; Column 1; Financial Desk

LENGTH: 1383 words


I reached the point where I could not bear to read another science fiction novel
one spring day during my freshman year of college. It was the height of the
Vietnam War and science fiction suddenly seemed irrelevant. I remember that
moment now because I had just reread Isaac Asimov's "Foundation" trilogy for the
third time. In fact, in the preceding eight years, I had read little else
besides science fiction.

There were countless trips to the library and an untold number of Ace doubles,
two science fiction novels bound as one, purchased at the local junk store for
10 cents and sold back for 5. There were books by Robert Heinlein, Arthur C.
Clarke and Andre Norton, but above all there was Asimov. His endless stream of
stories about space adventures and robots were far more compelling than anything
television could offer.

Like many others who grew up in the 1950's and 1960's, I came away from his
books with very clear ideas about the potential of science and technology for
solving the world's problems. Asimov left his readers with a sense of the
adventure in technology and inspired many of them to embark on careers as
scientists and engineers. The Asimov subtext was that machines were good and
progress was inevitable. It was comforting reading for the generations that grew
up on the brink of nuclear war.

I began with the Lucky Starr series, then read everything I could get my hands
on. The "Foundation" experience encompassed the epic trilogy describing the rise
and fall of a galactic civilization 10,000 years in the future.

For a teen-ager, it was compelling reading, but by the late 1960's, the Kennedy
brothers had been assassinated, the civil rights marches had taken place and
despite having the world's best technology, America was trapped in Vietnam.
Asimov seemed increasingly disconnected from a world that was falling apart.

Ultimately, in the 80's, I returned to science fiction, intrigued by a new
generation of writers with a much darker vision. Called Cyberpunk, this science
fiction describes the intersection of technology and outlaw culture: modern
dystopias ruled by multinational corporations where each new technology falls
into the hands of opportunists and where there is no clear right and wrong.

Cyberpunk's nihilism may match the real world today more closely than Asimov's
utopian vision. And last week, Asimov died. But I'm sure that in the hearts of
us all -- scientists, engineers, writers and others -- who were deeply
influenced by his work, there dwells an abiding hope that the Asimov vision will
prove to be the correct one.

In any event, Cyberpunk cannot counter the influence that Asimov had on
scientists like Leon Lederman or engineers like Joseph Engelberger. Their
testimony is proof of the power of his ideas.



Joseph F. Engelberger
Pioneer in industrial robotics;
chairman, Transitions Research

Some years behind Isaac Asimov at Columbia University, I followed his "I, Robot"
series avidly. The impact was subliminal at the outset, but became intensely
conscious by 1956, when technology made it possible to build real robots.

In the early 60's, we had a few industrial robots, and some professors sought to
form a learned society, to be called Robotology. I was aghast. The appellation
for our discipline had been coined by Asimov in the 40's: Robotics. I am happy
to say Asimov prevailed.

Over the years we kept in occasional contact. Isaac would not come to evaluate
the industrial robots we were developing nor visit universities involved in
research. He felt that might contaminate the purity of his vision.  But in 1989
he visited our facility, which was developing robots for personal service to
humans, not just factory automatons. He saw we were working on robots to do
menial service chores like commercial cleaning and running errands. He relished
our dream of servants for the aged and infirm.



Leon M. Lederman
Winner, Nobel Prize in Physics;
professor, University of Chicago

For all of us, he was a monument. Many American scientists were drawn to science
via science fiction, and Asimov's writings were read by an entire generation of
scientists who grew up in the 50's and 60's.

More recently I have looked to Asimov as a popularizer of science. There is a
crying need for the popular understanding of modern science. Asimov was
remarkable for his ability to popularize and entertain.

He was a national resource, and there ought to be a national day of mourning for
him. He had a fantastic influence on society.

There was a generation of scientists who are now between 40 and 60 who were
tremendously influenced by his writing. It had adventure and it had science even
though he sometimes did not understand what he was writing about. In a technical
or scientific sense, it was well written and it had a sense of optimism.
Intrinsic to his writing was the notion that there isn't anything that we can't
master. His world view was that we can solve all the problems of the world.




Marvin Minsky
Artificial-intelligence pioneer;
computer science professor, M.I.T.

I first encountered Asimov's ideas some 50 years ago. I was just beginning my
teens and he was only in his early 30's, yet he seemed centuries ahead. I was
entranced by his stories about space and time, but the ideas about robots
affected me most.

After "Runaround" appeared in the March 1942 issue of Astounding, I never
stopped thinking about how minds might work. Surely we'd someday build robots
that think. But how would they think and about what? Surely logic might work for
some purposes, but not for others. And how to build robots with common sense,
intuition, consciousness and emotion? How, for that matter, do brains do those
things?

Isaac Asimov always encouraged his readers to try to see the world as
comprehensible, to despise superstition and moral cowardice, and to think and
speak clearly and simply. He was not falsely modest, but was always honest,
unpretentious and humorous. To me he was among the finest of modern
philosophers.




Vladimir P. Kartsev
Director, Untied Nations Publishing;
ex-head, MIR Publishers, Moscow

When Isaac Asimov passed away, the world lost an unbridled dreamer and at the
same time a sober scientist and analyst. Asimov merged a formidable literary
talent with a deep understanding of science and its meaning. He did this not
only in terms of technological progress, but also in terms of the development of
our own personalities, penetrating a sometimes puzzling and horrifying world of
contemporary science.

I remember coaxing him out to the balcony of his apartment on a high floor of a
skyscraper. I was surprised by his reluctance to look down. This poet of the
skies filled with unknown high-tech galaxies was afraid of heights and avoided
planes. "Perhaps I am too tightly attached to the earth," he said.

He was extremely influential in Russia. Almost everyone in the country has read
him. "I, Robot" was his first book published in Russia. It was a small book, but
hundreds of thousands of copies were printed, and it had a tremendous influence
on our scientists and our intelligentsia.




Gerard Piel
Former president and publisher,
Scientific American magazine

What H. G. Wells did for public appreciation and understanding of science in the
first half of the 20th century, Isaac Asimov did in the second half.

The wonder of his generous -- torrential -- response to the public's
increasingly anxious interest in science was his clarity and integrity. He
leveled with his readers, never condescended and never overheated the story.

He was really beginning to blossom just as we were launching Scientific
American. Science and technology had made a breath taking contribution to
fighting World War II. Asimov and Wells both saw science and the abundance of
the Industrial Revolution as having a lot to do with how the world was going to
move in political and cultural terms.

People were enthralled with the notion of lifting want and toil from human
existence. Isaac Asimov was squarely in that tradition. Moreover, in the 1940's,
science fiction was a respectable intellectual enterprise. Later it went over
into fantasy and became less tied to reality as it is known in the sciences.

NAME: Isaac Asimov

LOAD-DATE: April 12, 1992

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo: Isaac Asimov, 1920-1992 (Kurt Muller); Joseph F. Engelberger
Joyce Dopkeen/The New York Times); Leon M. Lederman (Jack Spratt for The New
York Times); Marvin Minsky (Gloria Rudisch); Vladimir P. Kartsev; Gerard Piel
(Jack Manning/The New York Times

TYPE: Biography

                   Copyright 1992 The New York Times Company


                              30 of 281 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                  April 12, 1992, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

Public & Private;
Journalism 2001

BYLINE: By ANNA QUINDLEN

SECTION: Section 4; Page 21; Column 2; Editorial Desk

LENGTH: 745 words


I feel like one of those cartoon characters who has a little angel on one
shoulder and a little devil on the other. The reporter -- the one some people
would say is carrying the pitchfork -- says one thing, the human being another.
There's a lot of this going around.

The subject is Arthur Ashe; the news is AIDS. This week the gentleman tennis
player became a reluctant symbol. He had known since 1988 that he'd been
infected by a transfusion, but he and his wife and a few close friends kept the
secret for an obvious reason: they feared the shunning. Then someone tipped USA
Today, and USA Today called and asked. Confirm or deny. That's how we do these
things. Mr. Ashe called a press conference and went public.

Welcome to Journalism 2001. Anyone who tries to make readers believe the
questions are simple ones, who automatically invokes freedom of the press and
the public's right to know, is doing a disservice to America's newspapers and
straining the credulity of its people. Naming rape victims.  Outing gay people.
The candidate's sex life. The candidate's drug use. Editors are making decisions
they have never made before, on deadline, with only hours to spare, with
competitors breathing down their necks.

I am disquieted by the Arthur Ashe story. I can't help but feel that in the
medical sense we outed him, a practice that, in the sexual sense, I deplore.
That's the human being talking. The reporter understands: public figure, big
news. An editor argued rather persuasively on television that if Mr. Ashe had
been in a car accident or been hospitalized for cancer, we would have written
about it.

But listening to those arguments was like listening to others I'd heard not so
long ago. We publish the names of victims of muggings, of murder; why not the
names of victims of rape? The answer is that rape is not like other crimes.
There are good arguments to be made that our newspapers shape our mind-set, and
that by withholding the names of rape victims we perpetuate the stigma.  You can
make the same argument about reporting AIDS. But, like rape, perhaps the victims
of this illness deserve some special privacy.

Privacy, privacy. The white light of the press and the closed doors of our homes
are two of the most deeply prized aspects of our lives as Americans. It just so
happens that, just like those two little cartoon characters, they are often in
direct opposition to each other.

Is Arthur Ashe still a public figure, this many years after his days at center
court? If he is, need we know the medical condition of every public figure? If
we are entitled to reveal a reluctant patient, what about a reluctant gay
person? What are the parameters? Mr. Ashe argued eloquently that he was neither
running for office nor running a corporation, and that his health was no one's
concern but his own. At a convention of newspaper editors, my colleagues argued
otherwise.

I don't usually put this many questions in a column, but it's questioning that
is going to serve the press best. Actually, there is no "the press." We are a
collection of men and women, the good, the bad and the nondescript. We know the
dangers of knowing too little: we remember the Kennedy assassination, Watergate,
Vietnam and, more recently, the arid historical record of the Persian Gulf war.

We know about the man who was a member of the American Nazi Party and a leader
of the Ku Klux Klan, who, in the face of a story that he had been born and
raised a Jew, committed suicide. It was a very good story; the hypothetical is
always whether you'd publish it, knowing the aftermath.

We tell people what we think they need to know. We hurt people, sometimes
without reason. Sometimes we are kind. Mr. Ashe described a "silent and generous
conspiracy to assist me in maintaining my privacy" on the part of some
reporters. I would have joined up. This story makes me queasy. Perhaps it is the
disparity between the value of the information conveyed and the magnitude of the
pain inflicted.

But kindness is not the point. Information is the point of the product, and
questioning the point of the process. We are making a lot of this up as we go
along. In the newspaper business we assume certainty; when you spell Steven with
a "v" it is because you know that's how Steven spells it. But we are moving
these days into areas of great uncertainty. Arthur Ashe has already begun to
turn his exposure into education. I hope we manage to do the same.

LOAD-DATE: April 12, 1992

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Op-Ed

                   Copyright 1992 The New York Times Company


                              31 of 281 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                  April 12, 1992, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

Ultimate Insider, Ultimate Outsider

BYLINE: By Joseph Finder;  Joseph Finder, the author of "The Moscow Club," a
novel, and "Red Carpet: The Connection Between the Kremlin and America's Most
Powerful Businessmen," writes frequently about international affairs.

SECTION: Section 7; Page 1; Column 1; Book Review Desk

LENGTH: 2295 words



THE CHAIRMAN
John J. McCloy: The Making of the American Establishment.
By Kai Bird.
Illustrated. 800 pp. New York:
Simon & Schuster. $30.

THE journalist Richard Rovere was once challenged to name the chairman of the
Establishment, that predominantly WASP ruling class that for decades had steered
American domestic and foreign policy. He pondered for a while. "Suddenly the
right name sprang to my lips. 'John J. McCloy,' " Rovere declared. "My God, how
could I have hesitated?"

It was a logical choice: John J. McCloy, the friend and adviser to nine
Presidents, the Wall Street lawyer par excellence, the chairman of the Council
on Foreign Relations (emblematic institution of the Establishment if ever there
was one), the Rockefeller Foundation, the Ford Foundation and the Chase
Manhattan Bank, the president of the World Bank, the virtual dictator of postwar
Germany for three years as commissioner of occupied Germany, a member of the
Warren Commission . . . and the resume goes on and on. Named in C. Wright
Mills's influential 1957 book, "The Power Elite," as part of that group's "inner
core," a lifelong Republican who did his most significant work for Democratic
Presidents, McCloy was the behind-the-scenes power broker, the eminence grise
who for years embodied the American governing class.

A short, stocky, bald, plain man, an unprepossessing figure, McCloy was, by most
accounts, less than brilliant -- and yet, as Dean Acheson observed, he had "an
expansive, happy nature with no littleness, suspicion or jealousy about it," as
well as a knack for working easily with difficult personalities.

John J. McCloy had an extraordinary influence on the course of this century, but
three years after his death at the age of 93 his name has been all but forgotten
by the general public. "The Chairman" by Kai Bird, a contributing editor of The
Nation, is the first biography of the man Harper's Magazine once called "the
most influential private citizen in America." Although McCloy was said to have
feared that this account -- 10 years in the making -- would be hostile, it is
exhaustively researched and remarkably evenhanded.

The great paradox of McCloy's life was that the Establishment's chairman of the
board was in fact born poor -- on the wrong side of the tracks, as he often put
it. His strong-willed mother supported her family as a hairdresser, "doing
heads" of Philadelphia society ladies. She managed to send her son to boarding
school, Amherst College and Harvard Law School. The young McCloy seems to have
been possessed of a genius for knowing which circles to move in. Affable and
diligent, he gained entree to ranks of society from which he would have
otherwise been excluded, in part by becoming a star tennis player.

McCloy, always keenly aware of being an outsider, was fond of relating an
incident from his youth that came to attain an almost totemic resonance. As a
college student, prompted by his mother, he walked up to the door of the
Rockefeller mansion at Seal Harbor, Me., and asked for a job; the butler slammed
the door in his face. Soon after, McCloy somehow managed to secure a position
teaching sailing to the Rockefeller children, including Nelson and David, both
of whom were later central to his career.

He became a well-regarded corporate attorney at several New York law firms and
joined all the right clubs. Recruited to Washington by Franklin D. Roosevelt's
Secretary of War, Henry Stimson, McCloy was eventually appointed Assistant
Secretary of War. Like Woody Allen's Zelig, he seemed to turn up everywhere --
smoking cigars with Churchill amid the ruins of the House of Commons; consulting
with Charles de Gaulle, George Patton and George Marshall; participating in the
discussions over whether to drop the atomic bomb on Japan.

BEFORE then, it had fallen to him to make one of the most difficult decisions of
World War II, certainly one of the most controversial decisions of his career.
As Mr. Bird writes, he was responsible "more than any other individual" for
getting the President to issue the infamous Executive Order 9066, calling for
the resettlement of more than 100,000 Japanese-Americans from the West Coast to
"relocation centers" (or, as Roosevelt more bluntly called them, "concentration
camps"). McCloy justified the decision by proclaiming, "If it is a question of
safety of the country, [or] the Constitution of the United States, why, the
Constitution is just a scrap of paper to me."

Mr. Bird discloses, too, that at least as early as 1943 McCloy was one of the
very few in Washington who had information about Hitler's proposed Final
Solution and who had the power to do something about it. Yet he refused to
believe that the Nazis were systematically exterminating the Jews. (As Mr. Bird
points out, McCloy's skepticism was shared by, among others, Felix Frankfurter
and Walter Lippmann, both Jews.)

As Stimson's liaison to the War Review Board, McCloy opposed a plan to bomb the
railways leading to the death camps, on the ground that it would have diverted
precious resources and would have been useless in any case. Mr. Bird maintains
that it would have saved some 100,000 Jews at Auschwitz from being gassed, and
that McCloy "bears substantial responsibility for this misjudgment." Whether the
bombing would have saved these Jews remains a matter of fierce dispute.

In March 1945 Roosevelt greeted McCloy in the Oval Office with arm extended in a
Nazi salute, saying, "Heil McCloy -- Hochkommissar fur Deutschland." McCloy
declined the position, urging that Roosevelt pick a military man. But when Harry
S. Truman offered him the same job four years later, he finally accepted, thus
entering one of the most controversial periods of his long career.

AS High Commissioner for occupied Germany, McCloy granted clemency to dozens of
Nazi war criminals. He freed, or reduced the sentences of, most of the 20 SS
extermination squad leaders, whose crimes he freely conceded were "historic in
their magnitude and horror." Of the 15 death sentences handed down at the
Nuremberg trials, McCloy carried out a mere five. Of the remaining 74 war
criminals who were sentenced at Nuremberg to prison terms, he let many go free
-- most notoriously the industrialist Alfried Krupp, who had been sentenced at
Nuremberg to 12 years in prison for using concentration camp inmates as slave
labor. Krupp, accompanied by most of his board of directors, walked out of the
Landsberg prison in 1951 to a cheering crowd and a champagne breakfast -- with
his fortune and industrial empire intact.

Much of the world was outraged. "Why," Eleanor Roosevelt wrote to McCloy, "are
we freeing so many Nazis?" The answer, Mr. Bird explains, was far from simple.
For one thing, McCloy faced threats on his own life, and immense pressure from
the German public and even from Pope Pius XII to grant a blanket amnesty -- "a
well-organized conspiracy," McCloy recalled, "to intimidate me."

But the chief reason, according to Mr. Bird, was Realpolitik pure and simple,
the Larger Considerations: the onset of the Korean War had made more important
than ever a pro-American West Germany, rearmed and thus a bulwark against the
Russians. The Truman Administration, and McCloy in particular, did not want to
undermine our staunchest friend, Chancellor Konrad Adenauer of West Germany.
This meant, apparently, appeasing West German public opinion as much as possible
and gaining the support of the most prominent West German industrialists. With
the fate of the West in the balance, what did a few Nazi war criminals matter?

Moreover, Adenauer's men were not reluctant to use blackmail, telling McCloy
that if the Nazis imprisoned in Landsberg were hanged, "Germany as an armed ally
against the East was an illusion." As one I. G. Farben executive whom McCloy
freed remarked acidly, "Now that they have Korea on their hands, the Americans
are a lot more friendly."

After the war, and a quarter-century after the Rockefellers' butler had shut the
door in McCloy's face, Nelson Rockefeller recruited McCloy as a name partner in
the New York law firm of Milbank, Tweed (whose chief client was the Chase Bank).
He was now officially in the Rockefeller fold. In time, the Rockefeller family
made him chairman of Chase, with the implicit understanding that he was to groom
the young David Rockefeller to take over.

Never rich himself, McCloy had become a reliable trouble-shooter for the rich.
"His status in the company of such men of wealth was not that of an equal," Mr.
Bird acutely points out, "but these uncrowned members of the American
aristocracy depended upon his legal talents to insulate their wealth and social
status from the uncertainties of a democratic republic."

By the late 1950's, when Richard Rovere identified him as the chairman of the
Establishment, McCloy was regularly attending intimate stag dinners at the White
House as a member of Dwight D. Eisenhower's "unofficial Cabinet." John F.
Kennedy and Lyndon B. Johnson, both outsiders to the Establishment, recognized
the importance of cultivating the chairman. As President Kennedy's disarmament
adviser, McCloy negotiated the withdrawal of Soviet missiles from Cuba; he was
one of the "Wise Men" recruited by McGeorge Bundy in 1965 to advise President
Johnson on Vietnam policy (but really to secure Eastern Establishment backing
for the war). Johnson, who felt awkward around patrician types, was told by Mr.
Bundy (no stranger to the patriciate himself) that "the key to these people is
McCloy," who "belongs to the class of people who take their orders from
Presidents and nobody else." When McCloy and his friends in the Council on
Foreign Relations refused to side publicly with the President on Vietnam,
Johnson bitterly complained, "The Establishment bastards have bailed out."

Throughout the late 1960's and the 70's, McCloy continued to exert an enormous
influence on American foreign policy. In 1979, when David Rockefeller and Henry
Kissinger began pressing the Carter Administration to admit the deposed Shah of
Iran to the United States for medical treatment (actually, for asylum), they
asked McCloy to orchestrate the extensive lobbying effort. His motivations were
not entirely disinterested: Milbank, Tweed provided legal counsel to the Shah,
who also had billions of dollars on deposit with Chase. Every Christmas, the
Shah sent his friend Jack McCloy five pounds of Beluga caviar.

The reputation of the American ruling elite barely survived the turmoil of the
60's, and late in his life McCloy came to be regarded increasingly as the
Establishment archdemon, the master manipulator. His role in the Japanese
internment and his role in the decision not to bomb Auschwitz were now seen in
the unflattering light of historical revisionism.

Despite the range of John J. McCloy's accomplishments, one suspects that his
name is little known today because he wanted it that way. He realized early on
that the key to his influence was his lack of public visibility, and he ceded
the limelight to the larger egos. Unlike some of his more flamboyant peers --
Stimson, Acheson, Frankfurter, Averell Harriman, Allen Dulles -- he wasn't a
larger-than-life personality; he was, perhaps deliberately, ever the colorless
lawyer. Unlike, say, Walter Lippmann, he was no intellectual. He was the earnest
working-class boy who had, by dint of hard work, tireless public service and a
not inconsiderable gift for schmoozing, managed to make his way into the
Establishment's inner circle.

And it is here that "The Chairman" disappoints. We do not really get a sense of
McCloy as a flesh-and-blood character; we aren't given the opportunity to
explore the tensions, the sociological nuances, of the ultimate insider who was
really the ultimate outsider -- the poor boy, as James Reston has written, who
lived "most of his life among the rich." We see the paradoxes of his life, but
we don't understand the contradictions within the man.

STILL, Mr. Bird's range of sources is quite impressive, including scores of
interviews and hundreds of Government documents that were declassified under the
Freedom of Information Act, and his assessments are judicious. Although "The
Chairman" lacks the telling detail and anecdotal texture of another recent book
that treats McCloy and his circle, "The Wise Men" by Walter Isaacson and Evan
Thomas, it will certainly join the ranks of those accounts essential to a full
understanding of how politics in this century was conducted behind the scenes.

In his last days, his power ebbing, McCloy had become a "jovial gnome," as Henry
Kissinger once called him, with a trying "penchant for anecdotes." At the age of
86 he happily accepted an invitation to testify before a Congressional
commission investigating the wartime internment of the Japanese-Americans,
expecting the deference normally accorded an elder statesman. Instead he was
attacked; when he described the conditions in the camps as "very pleasant," he
was greeted with loud laughter from spectators at the hearing. This man who had
made so many of the crucial decisions of a turbulent century, this symbol of the
American Establishment, was now a relic of a bygone era.

Yet in the light of what we have lived through, at least since Watergate, it has
become fashionable in certain circles to wax nostalgic for the good old days
when our leaders who guided us into the American Century were drawn primarily
from a close-knit social circle imbued with an ethic of public service and
noblesse oblige. The mixed record of John J. McCloy may help temper that
nostalgia, suggesting that perhaps, for all its many virtues, the American
Establishment may have borne within itself the seeds of its own decline and
fall.

NAME: John J. McCloy

LOAD-DATE: April 12, 1992

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photos: John J. McCloy, once called "the most influential private
citizen in America," in 1960. (Elwood P. Johnson/Chase Manhattan Bank) (pg. 1);
Richard Nixon and John J. McCloy in 1985 at McCloy's 90th birthday party. (Chase
Manhattan Archives/From "The Chairman") (pg. 23); John J. McCloy, United States
High Commissioner for Germany, right, with President Harry S. Truman, 1950.
(Associated Press) (pg. 24)


TYPE: Biography; Review

                   Copyright 1992 The New York Times Company


                              32 of 281 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                  April 12, 1992, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

Afterlife of a War

BYLINE: By Todd Gitlin;  Todd Gitlin, a professor of sociology at the University
of California, Berkeley, is the author of "The Sixties: Years of Hope, Days of
Rage."

SECTION: Section 7; Page 9; Column 1; Book Review Desk

LENGTH: 1053 words



M.I.A.
Or Mythmaking in America.
By H. Bruce Franklin.
225 pp. Brooklyn:
Lawrence Hill Books. $17.95.

WHEN President Bush declared last year that "we've kicked the Vietnam syndrome
once and for all" in the sands of the Middle East, he was acknowledging the
staying power of a war that had ostensibly ended 16 years earlier. The
subsequent flap over Gov. Bill Clinton's 1969 letter about his draft status
demonstrates once again that the war in Vietnam and its spinoffs in Laos and
Cambodia are far from a spent force in American life. Wars live on, first as
tragedies, then as myths. H. Bruce Franklin's "M.I.A." casts strong light on the
Indochina war's ghostly and ghastly afterlife.

When so-called primitive people insist on holding a strong belief contrary to
evidence, anthropologists label the belief a myth and ask why people believe it,
who mobilizes it and why. In a similar spirit, Mr. Franklin's meticulously
researched book asks why a majority of Americans, according to public opinion
polls, believe that prisoners of war are still being held in Indochina, and why
many Americans are certain that the United States Government is lying about
them. Why, he asks, if 8,177 Americans are still unaccounted for from the Korean
War and some 78,750 from World War II -- without ever generating rescue
missions, commemorative movies or a wave of paranoia -- should there be a
long-running national obsession with some 2,273 unaccounted-for Americans in
Vietnam?

Mr. Franklin, the John Cotton Dana Professor of English and American Studies at
Rutgers University, begins by casting persuasive doubt as to whether there
remain any prisoners of war or servicemen missing in action abandoned in
Indochina. But "M.I.A." is not, he cautions, a disproof of the undisprovable
(try proving that Elvis isn't alive and well in Katmandu). Rather, he has
written a history and an analysis of a faith. "Because the evidence
overwhelmingly indicates virtually no likelihood that there are any American
prisoners of the Vietnam War still alive in Indochina," he writes, "it is
appropriate to treat the object of this faith as myth."

By 1969, Americans had been captured and lost in the war for six years without
loud outcry from Washington. The change came when Richard M. Nixon took office.
"Throughout President Nixon's first term," Mr. Franklin writes, "the issue of
P.O.W.'s and M.I.A.'s would serve mainly as an indispensable device for
continuing the war, functioning on the domestic front as a potent counterforce
to the antiwar movement while providing an ingenious tool for building
insurmountable roadblocks within the peace talks."

With White House and Congressional backing, many wives and parents of missing
men mobilized. Later, the former leader of one group told Mr. Franklin: "Nixon .
. . just used the P.O.W. issue to prolong the war. Sometimes I feel guilty
because with all our efforts, we killed more men than we saved."

Once the fighting was over, the campaign in behalf of P.O.W.'s and M.I.A.'s had
another political function: to justify the failure of the United States to
comply with promises to aid postwar Vietnam. In 1973, according to Mr. Franklin,
the Vietnamese and Laotian Communists "actually released or accounted for 15
more prisoners than the Defense and State departments had listed as likely
prisoners, even though both agencies had attempted to inflate their figures."
American figures ratcheted upward. The myth had it that only Asian Communist
viciousness could explain the discrepancies in the numbers.

Enter Hollywood's formidable myth-making machinery. Mr. Franklin notes that the
Oscar-winning 1978 movie "The Deer Hunter" featured scenes of Vietnamese
Communists forcing captured American soldiers to play Russian roulette -- which,
for all the atrocities they actually imposed on American prisoners, is one they
had never perpetrated. Then, in 1982, President Ronald Reagan, who had played
the eponymous Korean War hero in the 1954 film "Prisoner of War," reportedly
sanctioned a P.O.W.-seeking raid into Laos by a retired Special Forces officer,
Col. James (Bo) Gritz. In a sort of Hollywood-Washington co-production, Mr.
Franklin writes, Colonel Gritz raised funds from the actor William Shatner, who
got film rights, and from the actor Clint Eastwood, who was assigned to
communicate directly with President Reagan. Colonel Gritz's group failed to turn
up any evidence of P.O.W.'s, but the Reagan Administration persisted in milking
the issue.

In this climate, Hollywood found it had stumbled on a winning formula. "Uncommon
Valor" (1983) proved a surprise success at the box office with a replica of
Colonel Gritz, portrayed by Gene Hackman, bravely pursuing his raids despite the
treachery of civilian Government agents. The cult of the rescue mission bulked
still larger in the comic-strip superhunk bodies of Chuck Norris in "Missing in
Action" (1984) and, of course, Sylvester Stallone in "Rambo: First Blood Part
II" (1985), who grunted, "Do we get to win this time?" Bulging muscles and
hand-held machine guns were the retort to civilian backstabbers. Only in October
1985 -- when the belief in live P.O.W.'s had been, thanks to "Rambo," market
tested -- did the national security adviser, Robert C. McFarlane, become the
first postwar White House official to maintain that "there have to be live
Americans there."

If the current use of the P.O.W. myth is new -- to avert normalization of
relations with Communist Vietnam -- the stuff of the P.O.W. myth is old. As Mr.
Franklin makes clear, citing the literary historian Richard Slotkin's book
"Regeneration Through Violence," the sagas of the 1980's recycle old stories.
The half-Indian John Rambo was the Reagan-era incarnation of a hunter-hero myth
with roots in the 17th century.

For three centuries, up through "America Held Hostage" and beyond, America's
storytellers have told tales of captivity and rescue -- chronicles of embattled
innocence and avenging potency. Still unwilling to come to grips with the
origins and the terrible legacy of the Vietnam War, many Americans comfort
themselves with legends. But as Mr. Franklin's book makes clear, the believers
are themselves held hostage to wishfulness. One reads his account wondering what
is really missing in action in Vietnam.

LOAD-DATE: April 12, 1992

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Review

                   Copyright 1992 The New York Times Company


                              33 of 281 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 April 14, 1992, Tuesday, Late Edition - Final

Review/Theater: Two Trains Running;
August Wilson Reaches the 60's With Witnesses From a Distance

BYLINE: By FRANK RICH

SECTION: Section C; Page 13; Column 4; Cultural Desk; Word and Image Page

LENGTH: 1337 words


In "Two Trains Running," the latest chapter in his decade-by-decade chronicle of
black American life in this century, August Wilson arrives at a destination that
burns almost too brightly in memory to pass for history. "Two Trains Running" is
Mr. Wilson's account of the 1960's, unfurling at that moment when racial
conflict and the Vietnam War were bringing the nation to the brink of
self-immolation.

Yet Mr. Wilson's play, which opened last night at the Walter Kerr Theater, never
speaks of Watts or Vietnam or a march on Washington. The Rev. Dr. Martin Luther
King Jr. is mentioned only once. The garrulous characters, the regulars at a
Pittsburgh ghetto lunch counter in 1969, are witnesses to history too removed
from the front lines to harbor more than the faintest fantasies of justice. They
invest their hopes in playing the numbers, not in distant leaders sowing lofty
dreams of change.

So determined is "Two Trains Running" to avoid red-letter events and
larger-than-life heroes that it is easily Mr. Wilson's most adventurous and
honest attempt to reveal the intimate heart of history. In place of a
protagonist that a Charles Dutton or James Earl Jones might play is a gallery of
ordinary people buffeted by larger forces that they can join or gingerly battle
but cannot begin to promote or control. While such 60's props as a gun and cans
of gasoline do appear in "Two Trains Running," the evening's most violent
dramatic event causes no serious injury and takes place offstage. Even so, a
larger, national tragedy is spreading underfoot.

As might be expected in a work that departs from every Wilson effort except "Joe
Turner's Come and Gone" in its experimental will to demolish the manufactured
confrontations of well-made drama, "Two Trains Running" is not without blind
alleys. And it is compromised by a somewhat bombastic production, staged by the
author's longtime collaborator Lloyd Richards, that sometimes takes off running
in a different direction from the writing. But the play rides high on the
flavorsome talk that is a Wilson staple. The glorious storytelling serves not
merely as picturesque, sometimes touching and often funny theater but as a
penetrating revelation of a world hidden from view to those outside it.

Much of the talk is prompted by two deaths that filter into Memphis Lee's
restaurant, itself doomed to be demolished. The sole waitress, Risa (Cynthia
Martells), grieves for Prophet Samuel, an evangelist whose attainments included
a cache of jewelry, a white Cadillac, a harem and a huge flock that is viewing
his open casket down the street. The one stranger to visit Memphis Lee's, a
newly released convict named Sterling (Larry Fishburne), is latently preoccupied
with the 1965 assassination of Malcolm X, not out of any deep ideological
convictions but because a rally in the fallen radical's name at the local Savoy
Ballroom gives him a pretext to ask Risa for a date.

Though the issue is never articulated, Mr. Wilson's characters are starting to
compare the prophets who offer balms for their poverty and disenfranchisement,
and no two representative prophets could be more different than Malcolm X and
Samuel. But the play's real question may be, as one line poses it, "How we gonna
feel good about ourselves?" The liveliest talkers in "Two Trains Running" are
members of an older generation skeptical of all externally applied panaceas,
secular and religious.

Memphis (Al White), who is negotiating a price for the city's demolition of his
restaurant, is confident he can beat the white man at his own game as long as he
knows the rules. To him, those who argue that "black is beautiful" sound like
"they're trying to convince themselves." Holloway (Roscoe Lee Browne), a retired
house painter turned cracker-barrel philosopher, is not only scathing about
white men who exploit black labor but also about any effort by what he calls
"niggers" to fight back. He sends anyone with a grievance to a mysterious,
unseen prophet, the supposedly 322-year-old Aunt Ester, the neighborhood's
subliminal repository of its buried African identity and a magical universe of
faith and superstitions.

In some of the richest and most hilarious arias, the marvelously dyspeptic Mr.
Browne encapsulates the whole economic history of the United States into an
explosive formula and reminisces scathingly of a grandfather so enthralled by
the plantation mentality he could not wait to die and pick heaven's cotton for a
white God. Even nastier gallows humor is provided by West (Chuck Patterson), an
undertaker whose practical view of death has made him perhaps the community's
keenest social observer and certainly its wealthiest entrepreneur.

As conceived by Mr. Wilson, the monologues, musical in language and packed with
thought and incident, are not digressions; they are the play's very fiber. Such
plot as there is involves the fate of a symbolic mentally unbalanced man named
Hambone (Sullivan Walker) who pointedly "ain't willing to accept whatever the
white man throw at him" and the rising political consciousness and romantic
ardor of Sterling, whose sincere efforts to cobble a post-penitentiary life and
livelihood are constantly frustrated.

Along with the usual Wilson repetitions and the heavy metaphorical use of
Hambone (who is a hammier version of the mentally disturbed Gabriel in
"Fences"), the flaws of "Two Trains Running" include its inability to make more
than a thematic conceit out of its lone woman, Risa, who enigmatically bears
self-inflicted razor scars, and its failure to delve far below Sterling's
surface, despite a searching performance by Mr. Fishburne. Mr. Wilson's
reticence about his two youngest and most crucial characters turns up most
glaringly in the pivotal but underwritten Act II scene that brings them together
to the music of a previously dormant jukebox.

Mr. Fishburne, who greets each of Sterling's defeats with pride and heroic
optimism, and Mr. Browne, an orator of Old Testament fire, are the jewels of the
production. The rest of the cast is at most adequate, with Mr. White's ranting
Memphis, whose longer soliloquies punctuate both acts, inflicting the greatest
damage. The uneven casting is compounded by the harsh, bright lighting, the
flatly realistic set and the slam-bang choreography of a text that needs to
breathe rather than hyperventilate. Instead of looking like a production that
has been polished during its long development process through the country's
resident theaters, "Two Trains Running" sometimes seems the battered survivor of
a conventionally grueling road tour.

The play fascinates anyway and makes its own chilling point. Just as this is the
Wilson work in which the characters are the furthest removed from both Africa
and the Old South (to which the untaken trains of the title lead), so it is also
the Wilson play closest in time to our own. "You take something apart, you
should know how to put it together," says Sterling early on, referring to a
wristwatch he hesitates to dismantle. Rough in finish and unresolved at the
final curtain, "Two Trains Running" captures a racially divided country as it
came apart. That Mr. Wilson's history bleeds so seamlessly into the present is
testimony to the fact that the bringing together of that America is a drama yet
to unfold.

Two Trains Running

By August Wilson; directed by Lloyd Richards; scene design by Tony Fanning;
costumes by Chrisi Karvonides; lighting by Geoff Korf; production stage manager,
Karen L. Carpenter. Presented by Yale Repertory Theater, Stan Wojewodski Jr.,
artistic director; Center Theater Group/Ahmanson Theater, Gordon Davidson,
producing director, and Jujamcyn Theaters, Benjamin Mordecai, executive
producer. At the Walter Kerr Theater, 219 West 48th Street, Manhattan.

Risa . . . Cynthia Martells
Wolf . . . Anthony Chisholm
Memphis . . . Al White
Holloway . . . Roscoe Lee Browne
Hambone . . . Sullivan Walker
Sterling . . . Larry Fishburne
West . . . Chuck Patterson

LOAD-DATE: April 14, 1992

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo: Larry Fishburne, left, and Roscoe Lee Browne in August Wilson's
new play, "Two Trains Running." (Jay Thompson/Jeffrey Richards Associates)

TYPE: Review

                   Copyright 1992 The New York Times Company


                              34 of 281 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 April 16, 1992, Thursday, Late Edition - Final

Peru's Chief: Every Bit the Emperor

BYLINE: By JAMES BROOKE,  Special to The New York Times

SECTION: Section A; Page 3; Column 1; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 675 words

DATELINE: LIMA, Peru, April 15


Alberto K. Fujimori, Peru's pragmatic and business-suited President, has lived
up to his flashy street nickname, the Emperor.

Four months ago, the President shrugged off the crown, telling a Peruvian
business conference, "Even though it might be convenient if there were an
emperor, that emperor won't be me, because I'm very respectful of the
Constitution."

But with the nation's courts and Congress padlocked by presidential decree last
week, Peruvians now have a clearer picture of the obscure university dean who
burst onto the national scene in elections two years ago.

"Fuji's a shy man," Hernando de Soto, an economist who resigned in January as
the President's drug policy adviser, said today. "And like all shy people, by
the time they manifest themselves, they have punched you in the nose."

Former President Alan Garcia may feel that way. Mr. Fujimori's Government
announced today that it had issued arrest warrants for Mr. Garcia and other
leaders of his Aprista party, charging they were responsible for weapons it said
were found in the party's headquarters in a raid on April 5.

Mr. Fujimori, the 53-year-old son of Japanese immigrants, has made a career out
of being underestimated.

In the 1990 presidential election, Mr. Fujimori, a virtually unknown agronomist,
ran a shoestring, word-of-mouth campaign, using a tractor called the
Fuji-mobile. He handily beat Mario Vargas Llosa, the internationally acclaimed
novelist, who ran a multimillion-dollar campaign.

A Slap at Japan

In office, President Fujimori has gored sacred cows.

Roman Catholic Church leaders sputtered when the new President advocated a
national family planning program because he was "tired of seeing children eating
out of garbage cans."

United States officials were furious when Mr. Fujimori, at a regional conference
on drugs in Texas in February, accused the United States Drug Enforcement
Administration of "corruption" and then warned that stationing American military
advisers in Peru could provoke another "Vietnam War." United States officials
have long charged that Peruvian corruption prevents a crackdown on the nation's
coca leaf crop, the world's largest.

In an obvious effort to soothe American feelings, Mr. Fujimori gave the Peruvian
Air Force authority last week to control airports and to shoot down unauthorized
planes in the major drug-growing region.

Last month it was the turn of officials in Japan to fume. On a weeklong visit,
Mr. Fujimori met the Emperor, addressed Parliament in Japanese, visited his
parents' hometown and negotiated a $126 million aid package. On leaving, he told
reporters that the aid money was "insufficient."

But Mr. Fujimori's disregard for the niceties of diplomatic convention and, more
recently, for democratic institutions has kept his public approval ratings high,
generally above 50 percent.

Last month, the President's popularity was shaken at a startling news conference
offered by his wife, Susana Higuchi Fujimori. The First Lady charged that the
President's sister, Rosa Fujimori Aritomi, and his brother, Santiago Fujimori,
had sold clothing donated to Peru by Japanese charities for personal profit.

To explain her action, skeptical Peruvians offer three theories: she sought
revenge against her husband for leaving her behind when he went to Japan; she
sought to curtail influence enjoyed by her in-laws in palace politics, or she
sought to further her ambition to run this year for Mayor of Lima. In a meeting
with a prosecutor, she failed to provide proof of her charges.

With last week's attack on Congress and the courts, Mr. Fujimori soared to the
highest ratings of his 20-month-old presidency -- 70 to 85 percent.

Aware that public opinion can be fickle, Mr. Fujimori has labored from the start
of his Government to build a solid power base among the army. Manipulating
promotions, Vladimiro Montesinos, a cashiered army captain who is the
President's security adviser, has built a corps of commanders who owe their
positions to Mr. Fujimori.

NAME: Alberto K. Fujimori

LOAD-DATE: April 16, 1992

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Biography

                   Copyright 1992 The New York Times Company


                              35 of 281 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 April 16, 1992, Thursday, Late Edition - Final

As Casualty List Grows, G.O.P. Shows Doubts About House Bank Scandal

BYLINE: By CLIFFORD KRAUSS,  Special to The New York Times

SECTION: Section A; Page 17; Column 1; National Desk

LENGTH: 1040 words

DATELINE: SAN DIEGO, April 15


Only a month ago, Republicans proclaimed the House bank scandal as a great
opportunity to retake control of Congress. But now the war cry is beginning to
sound more like a whimper.

The number of Republicans bruised by the affair is growing. And with each new
casualty, tensions grow, too.

The latest Republican casualty is a six-term Representative from San Diego, Bill
Lowery, writer of 300 overdrawn checks totaling $104,000.

Mr. Lowery withdrew from a tough primary race Tuesday because, he said, he was
tired of the "mud-wrestle" that politics had become. Reapportionment had forced
him to run against Representative Randy (Duke) Cunningham, a fighter pilot in
the Vietnam War who had begun a fierce radio campaign attacking Mr. Lowery's
check-writing practices.

Criticizing the Critics

Mr. Lowery's withdrawal follows the decision earlier this month by
Representative Vin Weber of Minnesota, secretary of the House Republican
Conference, to leave Capitol Hill rather than try to explain his 125 overdrawn
checks to his constituents.

Now, normally partisan Republicans like Mr. Lowery and Mr. Weber are criticizing
the partisanship of colleagues who whipped up public outrage over the House bank
scandal.

"Somehow, this belief that you can throw a grenade and control where the
explosion occurs is nonsense," Mr. Lowery said in an interview. "It makes you
wonder why they ran for Congress in the first place."

There may be more explosions on Thursday, when the names of every House member
who has overdrawn his or her account in a 39-month auditing period, and the
number of overdrawn checks they wrote, are scheduled to be made public.

Issue Called a 'Disservice'

Mr. Weber, who was first elected to the House in 1980, said in a telephone
interview that Republican leaders and freshmen lawmakers who pushed the bank
issue had done Congress and the party a disservice because "a campaign devoid of
a substantive agenda is not going to do the country any good."

Mr. Lowery's and Mr. Weber's criticisms might be dismissed as the self-serving
comments of those who have been stung by the bank scandal. But their remarks
have been echoed by Republican lawmakers like Representatives Henry J. Hyde of
Illinois and Jim Leach of Iowa, who do not have check problems to explain.

Much of their pique is directed at a group of junior Republican backbenchers who
were not satisfied when the House Speaker, Thomas S. Foley, announced last fall
that the bank would be closed because of a history of sloppy accounting and lax
rules that allowed members to overdraw their accounts.

Counseled by Representative Newt Gingrich of Georgia, the Republican whip, the
group wanted to publicize the names of scores of lawmakers who had abused their
banking privileges.

According to the plan, far more Democrats than Republicans would suffer --
Democrats hold almost a 100-vote edge in the House -- and the Republicans could
then end more than three decades of Democratic rule over the House.

A subcommittee of the House ethics committee recommended that only a list of the
most egregious check-writing offenders be published, but four Republican members
of the full committee dissented and, with Mr. Gingrich's aggressive support,
eventually won the day. With public opinion on their side, the Republicans
forced the House to vote to disclose the full list.

All but four of the 22 members who were found to be the worst offenders were
Democrats. But some of the most influential Republicans in the House have been
singed by the firestorm.

Among them are Representatives Chalmers P. Wylie of Ohio, with 575 overdrawn
checks; Bill Thomas of California, 119 checks; Duncan Hunter, also of
California, 399 checks, and Mickey Edwards of Oklahoma, 389 checks.

Mr. Edwards, who is chairman of the House Republican Policy Committee, was the
subject of an unusual letter distributed this week by House Republican leaders,
including Mr. Gingrich. The letter urged Mr. Edwards's Republican colleagues to
contribute to the campaign fund of the Oklahoma lawmaker, who is facing heavy
opposition at home from within his own party.

A Silent House Whip

Mr. Gingrich, who railed against the Democratic management of the House bank,
has become much quieter of late after he found that the handful of checks he
thought he had overdrawn is more like 20 or 30.

And back home, the Georgia news media have faulted him for driving around
Washington in a chauffer-driven limousine even as Republicans called for cuts in
Congressional perks.

Mr. Gingrich was uncharacteristically silent during a heated floor debate last
week on alternative plans to change the House management, as the Republican
caucus fumbled its effort to coordinate tactics.

Uncertainty over whether to duck or attack on the House bank issue was
underscored by a recent Republican campaign poll showing that incumbents who
overdrew their accounts four times or more, or signed overdrawn checks amounting
to more than $1,000, may have to find new careers after November.

"That description describes the entire San Diego delegation," Mr. Lowery told
reporters as he withdrew, referring to his three local colleagues, all
Republicans.

Mr. Cunningham responded by saying in an interview that Mr. Lowery's implicit
attack on the ethical standing of his fellow Republicans was an unfair reaction
that he said was "coming from pain and anger."

Divisive and Negative Tone

Mr. Lowery's withdrawal statement expressed the growing frustration many members
now feel about the divisive and negative tone dominating American politics.

"Several of my senior advisers have told me that to win I must fight fire with
fire and run a negative campaign," he said. "Somewhere the cycle of negative
campaigning must end. I am simply not willing to put my family through this
anymore."

Throughout the day, as he consoled disappointed supporters, Mr. Lowery quoted
the Rev. Dr. Martin Luther King Jr. to express his feelings about his decision:
"Free at last. Free at last. Thank God, I'm free at last."

Mr. Lowery's retirement from the House makes him the 54th member to announce his
departure or lose in primaries this year. Only 11 of them are seeking another
office.

LOAD-DATE: April 16, 1992

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1992 The New York Times Company


                              36 of 281 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 April 16, 1992, Thursday, Late Edition - Final

Abroad at Home;
Straight and Narrow

BYLINE: By ANTHONY LEWIS

SECTION: Section A; Page 23; Column 1; Editorial Desk

LENGTH: 695 words

DATELINE: AUBURN, Ala.


One of Dwight Eisenhower's most important contributions as President was his
choice of Federal judges in the South. His nominees played a crucial part in
leading the region away from segregation and lawlessness.

On the Court of Appeals there were Judges John Minor Wisdom of Louisiana and
Elbert P. Tuttle of Georgia among others. On the District Court there was,
notably, Judge Frank M. Johnson Jr. of Alabama, later promoted to the Court of
Appeals. He was widely admired for his courage -- he faced down threats -- and
for his broad-gauged legal wisdom.

Judge Johnson has now taken senior status. In his place President Bush has
nominated Edward E. Carnes of Alabama to the Court of Appeals. It is an
appointment that symbolizes as well as any single thing the difference between
the Republicanism of Dwight Eisenhower and that of George Bush.

Mr. Carnes is an Assistant Attorney General of Alabama. He has spent the last 10
years focused on one subject: executions.

He drafted Alabama's capital punishment law, an unusually rigorous one. It
allows judges to impose the death sentence even when the jury has voted for life
imprisonment. Judges have overridden such jury votes in many cases.

Much of Mr. Carnes's time has been spent opposing efforts, in habeas corpus
proceedings in Federal courts, to set aside death sentences because they were
obtained in violation of the Constitution. For example, he has defended many
convictions of black defendants by juries that were all white because the
prosecutor had improperly stricken all black jurors.

He has played a leading part in lobbying Congress to restrict -- effectively to
end -- the historic right of state prisoners to challenge the constitutionality
of their convictions in Federal courts. This legislation passed the Senate last
year. His part in it brought him to the attention of the Bush Administration and
made him the choice for the Court of Appeals over more experienced candidates,
including judges.

There is no question of Mr. Carnes's skill or intelligence. Supporters and
opponents both have a high regard for his legal ability.

But there are reasons, persuasive ones, to think that Mr. Carnes is not a good
choice for the Court of Appeals, least of all for Frank Johnson's seat.

In case after case he has argued that gross, cruel violations of a defendant's
rights should be ignored because the defendant's lawyer had waived them --
failed to raise the issue at the right time. He has done so, for example, in
some of the cases where prosecutors saw to it that no blacks were on juries.

Horace Dunkins was a mentally retarded black man with an I.Q. of 65 and a mental
age of 10 to 12. His inadequate lawyer never mentioned his retardation to the
jury that sent him to the electric chair. In Federal court Mr. Carnes argued,
successfully, that the issue had not been raised on time.

Herbert Richardson, a black Vietnam veteran, was sentenced to death after the
prosecutor told the jury -- falsely -- that he had been dishonorably discharged
and had been connected with the Black Muslims. Mr. Richardson's court-appointed
lawyer did not even file a brief on appeal. (The lawyer was later disbarred for
other reasons.) Mr. Carnes argued, successfully, that the issue of the
prosecutor's misconduct in lying had been waived.

Most troubling, to me, is what Mr. Carnes told an American Bar Association
committee investigating the quality of defense lawyers in death cases. He said
repeatedly: "Capital defendants do receive excellent legal representation."

That from a man who had won case after case by claiming that lawyers waived
arguments that might have saved their clients from the electric chair. A man who
knew that capital defendants, almost all poor, are usually given inexperienced,
underpaid, uninterested lawyers.

Even put aside the question of Mr. Carnes's sensitivity to constitutional
rights. At best, he would come to the second-highest Federal court with an
extremely narrow perspective on the law. It is a great difference -- a defining
difference -- from the qualities President Eisenhower and his Attorneys General
sought for the United States courts.

LOAD-DATE: April 16, 1992

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Op-Ed

                   Copyright 1992 The New York Times Company


                              37 of 281 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                  April 17, 1992, Friday, Late Edition - Final

A.T.& T. Signs Pact With Hanoi

BYLINE: Reuters

SECTION: Section D; Page 6; Column 5; Financial Desk

LENGTH: 175 words

DATELINE: HANOI, Vietnam, April 16


The American Telephone and Telegraph Company signed an agreement with Vietnam
today on reopening telecommunication links that have been severed since the end
of the Vietnam War.

The memorandum, signed by Vietnam's state telecommunications company, paves the
way for the first link since the South Vietnamese Government fell to Communist
forces from the North in 1975.

"I believe that it is a major step forward for the two countries for the role
that telecommunications will play in further improving relationships between our
two countries and enabling citizens to speak to one another again," said James
Hansen, A.T.& T.'s managing director for Southeast Asia.

Washington cut relations with Hanoi and imposed economic sanctions in 1964. It
extended the measures to a reunified Vietnam in 1975. But in October, the United
States said it was ready to move toward lifting the embargo and resuming
diplomatic ties with Hanoi. It said Monday that it would modify the embargo to
allow A.T.& T. to re-establish telecommunications links.

LOAD-DATE: April 17, 1992

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1992 The New York Times Company


                              38 of 281 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 April 18, 1992, Saturday, Late Edition - Final

House Reformers of '74 Have Own Woes in '92

BYLINE: By CLIFFORD KRAUSS,  Special to The New York Times

SECTION: Section 1; Page 8; Column 5; National Desk

LENGTH: 963 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, April 17


With the Watergate scandal still hanging in the air, Representatives Stephen J.
Solarz, Thomas J. Downey and a slew of freshman Democrats came to Congress 17
years ago to clean it up and turn it inside out.

Now these one-time young reformers are senior members of the House, and many are
finding that their careers are caught up in a new scandal of their own, the
House bank affair. The story of the 26 remaining members of the freshman Class
of 1974 demonstrates that the institution can imperil even the most
reform-minded members.

Their energy and votes helped rework the decaying seniority and committee
systems and end American involvement in the Vietnam War. But their primary
interests were issues, so they stopped short of rearranging an antiquated
internal-administration system, or cutting the perquisites that the American
people eventually found so objectionable.

"Who thought about the bank?" asked Mr. Solarz, the Brooklyn Democrat who wrote
743 overdrafts and overdrew his account beyond his next month's salary 30 out of
39 months audited. The longstanding policy, members say, was not to overdraw the
accounts by more than their next month's salary.

Some Goals Were Pragmatic

"We were interested in reforming the institution to make public policy," Mr.
Solarz said.

At the same time, these members had another, perhaps less noble goal:
modernizing electoral politics. They helped introduce political action
committees and expanded the use of the franking privilege for blanket mailings.
In the end these steps helped contribute to a veneer of slickness that
eventually alienated many constituents and helped turn the House bank affair
into a scandal far larger than it might otherwise have seemed.

Several members of the class now say their experience should serve as a valuable
reminder to the 100 or more freshmen expected to take office next year, in part
because of the current scandals and in part because of reapportionment. As
candidates, they too are running against the institution in which they wish to
serve.

"All reform movements end up as a struggle for power," said Representative Henry
J. Hyde, Republican of Illinois, one of the 92 members of the group elected in
1974. "The purity of motive somehow becomes diminished as the arena loads up
with carcasses."

Suckled by the civil rights and anti-war movements of the 1960's, these graying
men and women now hold some of the most important posts in Congress. Not
surprisingly, they have become more conservative over the years. They also had
some of the worst records at the now-defunct House bank.

Representative William F. Goodling, Republican of Pennsylvania, as well as three
Democrats -- Mr. Solarz, Harold E. Ford of Tennessee and Joseph D. Early of
Massachusetts -- were included on the list of the 22 worst "check abusers"
released by the ethics committee.

Twenty-one of the 26 members of the class who are now serving in the House
overdrew their accounts at least once. Among them are Representatives Henry
Waxman, a California Democrat who is chairman of an Energy and Commerce
Subcommittee on Health and Environment, 434 times; Carroll Hubbard Jr., a
Kentucky Democrat who is chairman of a leading banking subcommittee, 152 times;
Mr. Downey of Long Island, a powerful member of the Ways and Means Committee,
151 times, and Philip R. Sharp, a California Democrat who is chairman of an
Energy and Commerce Subcommittee on Energy and Power, 120 times.

Campaign Bogs Down

Representative Les AuCoin is still believed to have a strong chance to win a
Senate seat, but his campaign has bogged down in the bank affair's swampy
aftermath. The Oregon Democrat overdrew his House bank account 83 times.

Several Democrats in the class said that while their objective in changing the
House was to make it stronger to balance the expanding powers of the Presidency,
the new generation of advocates of change, mostly Republicans, is pushing to
weaken the institution because it is controlled by Democrats.

Referring to the insurgent freshman Republicans who succeeded in publicizing the
House bank scandal, Mr. Downey said: "I'd like to think that the Gang of Seven
will eventually get serious about the problems of the country."

The Things They Wanted

Mr. Downey and others like him knew what they wanted to do when they came to
Congress: prevent future Vietnams and diminish the powers of elderly, mostly
Southern committee chairmen who they believed blocked social change. The
freshmen joined forces with more senior liberals like Representatives Thomas S.
Foley of Washington and David Obey of Wisconsin.

The 75 Democratic freshmen gave the liberal wing of the party enough power to
change the seniority rules, forcing committee chairmen to stand for re-election
before the entire Democratic membership. The young reformers formed their own
caucus and insisted that all chairmen come before them for questioning to win
their votes.

Representative Norman Y. Mineta, Democrat of California, recalled the brouhaha
that was stirred by former Representative F. Edward Hebert, then chairman of the
Armed Services Committee, when he addressed the caucus. When he was questioned
about why he opposed the inclusion of women on his committee, "you could see the
red in his face going up like a thermometer and the hairs on the back of his
head go straight up," Mr. Mineta recalled. "He finally leaned on his knuckles,
and said, 'All right, boys and girls, let me tell you how it's really like
here.' "

Offended, the freshmen forced Mr. Hebert out, and assured the fall of two
chairmen, Wright Patman of the Banking Committee and W. R. Poage of the
Agriculture Committee, as well.

Now, Mr. Mineta jokes, "The longer you're here, the better seniority looks."

LOAD-DATE: April 18, 1992

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photos: "We were interested in reforming the institution to make public
policy," said Representative Stephen J. Solarz, the Brooklyn Democrat who wrote
743 overdrafts. (The New York Times); Carroll Hubbard Jr., a Kentucky Democrat
who is chairman of a leading banking subcommittee, overdrew his account 152
times. (George Tames)

                   Copyright 1992 The New York Times Company


                              39 of 281 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 April 18, 1992, Saturday, Late Edition - Final

The Last Cat's-Paw War

SECTION: Section 1; Page 18; Column 1; Editorial Desk

LENGTH: 412 words


With the collapse this week of a Soviet-installed regime in Kabul, not just a
war but an era has ended. Afghanistan was one of seven devastating cat's-paw
wars, all fought in impoverished third world societies, between belligerents
backed by either Moscow or Washington. As the last of these proxy battles
gutters out, Americans are left wondering whether they should still care.

Consider Afghanistan. Its politics were messy, ethnic and nonaligned until 1978,
when an ultra-leftist faction seized power. A conservative tribal rebellion
followed, and in 1979 Soviet troops poured in to save a Marxist client regime.
Thus began a bloody stalemate that cost two million lives and turned one of
every three Afghans into refugees.

Washington seized the moral high ground by working with Pakistan to smuggle arms
to Afghan "freedom fighters" opposing Soviet occupiers. But what's right in
principle may backfire in practice: too much aid was diverted to anti-Western
zealots who despised democracy.

Hence the likelihood of more bloodshed now that President Najibullah's
Soviet-installed regime has collapsed. Fundamentalists like Gulbuddin Hekmatyar
reject a United Nations plan for holding elections and gird for rule-or-ruin
war. His chief opponent is the formidable guerrilla warlord Ahmad Shah Masoud,
an ethnic Tajik. Since tribal lines cross frontiers, the conflict may spill into
Pakistan and former Soviet Asian republics.

Cat's-paw wars don't begin or end tidily. Recall Vietnam's invasion of Cambodia
(1978); the civil wars that erupted in Angola and Mozambique (1975); the leftist
putsch in Ethiopia (1974); the contra war that followed Nicaragua's revolution
(1979), and El Salvador's civil war, ignited in 1979. In each case, cold war
alliances dissolved and the proxies were left to fend for themselves.

So it was in Afghanistan, where Washington and Moscow agreed two years ago to
cease aiding their respective partners. With the wisdom of hindsight, everyone
now sees that Leonid Brezhnev ruinously overcommitted Soviet resources to
cat's-paw wars. And wincing Americans see that some pet proxies, like Jonas
Savimbi in Angola, were not shining knights.

But Americans can't now ignore these former battlegrounds. Who can decently walk
away from countries like Afghanistan where vast arsenals of U.S. weapons
continue to slay children, women and civilians? Helping battered societies heal
and rebuild is the unaddressed task of the 1990's.

LOAD-DATE: April 18, 1992

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Editorial

                   Copyright 1992 The New York Times Company


                              40 of 281 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 April 18, 1992, Saturday, Late Edition - Final
                              Correction Appended

Hall Beach Journal;
New Order Up North? Eyes Open for Armageddon

BYLINE: By CLYDE H. FARNSWORTH,  Special to The New York Times

SECTION: Section 1; Page 2; Column 1; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 1152 words

DATELINE: HALL BEACH, Northwest Territories


At Fox Main, despite the collapse of the Soviet Union, it's still all systems
go.

Inside a white Kevlar dome, which looks like a jumbo golf ball, the new
24-foot-square antenna of the Fixed Position Search 117 long-range radar
ceaselessly scans for friend and foe in the desolate Arctic sky.

In the electronics room beneath the 60-foot high radar dome, Desmond Kelly, 51
years old, a system maintenance technician from High River, Alberta, is
monitoring the fault indicator tape next to the AN/USQ-69 data terminal set and
a "radiation hardened" disk of software designed to withstand an atomic blast.

There had been a glitch the other night, forcing him to reboot the computer, and
he now wants to make sure that everything is, as he put it, "A-O.K."

In his four years on line at the necklace of sites that comprise the North
American early-warning system, the burly, jovial technician, who spent three
years as a Canadian civilian electronics adviser to United States forces in
Vietnam, recalls only six times, all brief, that the northern radar had similar
glitches.

Yet in today's changed world, do such malfunctions really matter? Indeed, some
wonder whether surveillance activity justified by the cold war is actually worth
the billions of dollars still being spent shoring it up today.

Last year Canada and the United States renewed the early-warning system they had
set up back in the late 1950's for an integrated military command to protect the
skies of the north.

They have together budgeted more than $2.5 billion, not only to upgrade the
network of radar installations but also to build more airfields in northern
Canada to challenge intruders. The United States pays 60 percent and Canada 40
percent of the costs.

Still, to the people at this wind-scourged establishment next to a community of
500 indigenous people on frozen Foxe Basin, the surveillance remains a deadly
serious business.

"Do we really know who's in control of the Soviet Union?" Mr. Kelly said,
opening a steel-vault door to a particularly sensitive part of the
communications and electronics center.

His boss, Richard Bless, 39, the Dutch-born supervisor at Fox Main, said, "Just
because there are fewer burglaries in the neighborhood doesn't mean you throw
away the burglar alarms."

Mr. Kelly and Mr. Bless are two of the 400 people strung out in stations along
Canada's huge northern frontier, an area of land and water bigger than Western
Europe, still watching for the opening salvo of Armageddon.

All the stations report to North Bay, Ontario's Regional Operations Control
Center, known as ROCC, of the North American Aerospace Defense Command, called
Norad.

To Maj. Gen. J. David O'Blenis, commander of the Canadian Norad region, the
surveillance information, despite eased world tensions, is "a prudent investment
at this time and into the foreseeable future."

Russian Bear bombers, some of them capable of carrying terrain-hugging cruise
missiles, periodically test the northern radar defenses and are challenged by
either United States or Canadian fighters. General O'Blenis said that while the
incursions lately have tapered off in Canada's airspace, they continue around
Alaska.

Col. Alexander Taylor, director of the North Wing System office in the Defense
Ministry in Ottawa, called the system "our eyes in the north," adding, "If we
didn't have it we would be blind."

The North Warning System, the new name for the refurbished radar network, as
opposed to the cold-war appellation DEW line, for Distant Early Warning, also
makes it safer for civilians to fly in the north and plays a role in drug
interdiction.

It now provides weather and flight information for civilian pilots and vectors
them to safe harbor when they're in trouble. The military officials also noted
the far north is being used increasingly by Colombian drug runners as a backdoor
route to cities like Montreal and New York.

"We are training our people to look for small aircraft flying long distances at
500 feet in addition to the Russian bombers at 40,000 feet," General O'Blenis
said.

The old 22-station DEW line covered the 5,000-mile width of North America from
Alaska to Greenland and employed more than 25,000 people.

Private Canadian Role

In the new northern warning chain, Fox Main is one of 15 long-range radar
positions that can see out to 200 miles. Eleven of the 15 are in Canada. In
addition, the new system includes 39 unattended short-range radars with a range
of up to 70 miles, of which 36 will be in Canada.

Most of the electronics equipment here runs with little maintenance. It
includes, besides the radar, two satellite communications dishes that transmit
all the radar data directly to North Bay. There it is read by military
specialists, often called "scope dopes" because they spend so much time over the
radar monitors.

Except for unusual glitches like the one seen to by Mr. Kelly the other night,
the radar transmitter, built by the General Electric Company, goes months at a
time without a human in attendance.

The old DEW line had been a largely United States operation, staffed chiefly by
American military personnel. Now Canadians run their part of the North Warning
System, and in line with the privatization trend, individual sites are managed
not by the military but a private Canadian technology service corporation, the
Frontec Company, based in Edmonton, Alberta. It has a $167 million five-year
Canadian defense contract to operate the system, which, according to Kathryn F.
Low, director of corporate communications and business affairs, was recently
extended to 1995.

Hot Rolls, Good Pay

Thanks to new technology, Fox Main, which gets its name from the proximity not
only of Foxe Basin but of the snow prints of Arctic foxes, uses far fewer people
today than it did as one of the old DEW line sites.

Including 10 from the indigenous people's village, the total complement today is
74, down from more than 200 in the 1950's and 1960's. There are 10 women on the
staff.

Workers are well paid, with senior staff members getting salaries approaching
$100,000 a year, all expenses paid. For every nine weeks on, workers are
entitled to three weeks' vacation. For senior staff the arrangement is 12 and
four.

Despite the perks, which include freshly baked pies and hot rolls every day, the
site supervisor, Mr. Bless, who has been in the north for 14 years, said he "is
reaching the point where he has had enough."

The staff members live and work in prefabricated modules that are laid end to
end across the frozen barrenness and resemble a long train. The complex consists
of two such "trains," connected by a covered bridge.

One, the A Train, services the radar and the high-tech communications equipment.
The B Train contains a workout room and sauna.

"Please don't mention the sauna," Mr. Bless said with a smile. "People will get
the wrong idea."

LOAD-DATE: April 18, 1992

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

CORRECTION-DATE: April 23, 1992, Thursday

CORRECTION:

A picture caption on Saturday about a radar station of the North American
early-warning system in Canada's Northwest Territories misattributed a quotation
about the continued need for the system. It was made by Richard Bless,
superviser at the Fox Main station, and not by Desmond Kelly.


GRAPHIC: Photo: "Just because there are fewer burglaries in the neighborhood
doesn't mean you throw away the burglar alarms," said Desmond Kelly, a system
maintenance technician at Fox Main, one of a line of sites that comprise the
North American early-warning system in the Northwest Territories. (Clyde H.
Farnsworth/The New York Times)

Map of Canada showing location of Hall Beach

                   Copyright 1992 The New York Times Company


                              41 of 281 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                  April 19, 1992, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

Farmer Caught in Pornography Trap Feels Vindicated, but at a Cruel Cost

BYLINE: By DIRK JOHNSON,  Special to The New York Times

SECTION: Section 1; Part 1; Page 10; Column 4; National Desk

LENGTH: 1203 words

DATELINE: NEWMAN GROVE, Neb.


The news had swept through this little town like a twister on the Great Plains.
Keith Jacobson, a 56-year-old farmer, had been charged with receiving child
pornography.

In his heart, Mr. Jacobson said later, he believed that he had been framed. But
who would believe him? Deeply ashamed, he secluded himself in his small gray
farmhouse in the cornfields of central Nebraska. When he needed groceries, he
would drive to a town 40 miles away. An uncle would pick up his mail at the post
office.

Now, five years later, Mr. Jacobson, 61, has won vindication from the United
States Supreme Court, which ruled in early April that he had been entrapped by
Federal postal inspectors.

"I knew I wasn't a child pornographer," said Mr. Jacobson, a white-haired
bachelor in suspenders and jeans, sitting in his farmhouse living room a few
days after the verdict. "But when the Government charges you with something like
that, what are people going to think?"

Two-Year Investigation

The agents had pursued him for more than two years before he finally subscribed
to a pornographic magazine, "Boys Who Love Boys." In the raid on his farmhouse,
agents found only the pornography that they had sent him.

While the Court ruling has brought relief to Mr. Jacobson, the personal costs of
the case were enormous. He lost his job as a school bus driver. He sold 40 acres
of his family farm to his sister to pay his legal costs. And now everyone in
this town of 800 people knows that he is gay. "I guess I don't have any privacy
anymore," he said.

Mr. Jacobson was one of 161 men arrested in 1987 by Federal inspectors in the
United States Postal Service's covert investigation, Operation Looking Glass.
The inspectors were operating under the Child Protection Act, which outlaws the
purchase or acceptance of child pornography. The law was intended to break the
underground network of people who make and trade child pornography.

The Supreme Court's majority opinion, written by Justice Byron R. White, said
the Government could not single out an "otherwise law-abiding citizen" and then
"induce commission of the crime."

The dissent in the 5-4 opinion was written by Justice Sandra Day O'Connor, who
said the Court had expanded the entrapment defense by making it harder to show
the required "predisposition" to commit a crime.

Charges Rocked the Town

When the charges were brought, they stunned this conservative town, where the
novel "Jaws" was banned from the school library in the 1970's because it
included curse words. Everyone knew Mr. Jacobson, a veteran of the Korean and
Vietnam Wars who had never caused any problems.

During the darkest days, Mr. Jacobson won the support of his pastor, the Rev.
LeRoy Hobbe. "He's always been an honorable person and we supported him," the
pastor said. Mr. Jacobson, who had been treasurer of the church at the time of
his arrest, has continued to serve in that post.

Velma Price, a woman in her 70's who ran the weekly newspaper, The Newman Grove
Reporter, defended Mr. Jacobson in print. Mrs. Price, now dead, said Mr.
Jacobson fell victim to human curiosity. "Most any of us could be set up for
such a sting," she wrote.

Mr. Jacobson also won the support of the new superintendent of schools. But the
superintendent, Luther Heller, said Mr. Jacobson would not be offered his old
job back.

"We have someone in that capacity now," he said. "If Mr. Jacobson would like to
apply for an opening, he's free to do that."

Mr. Jacobson's lawyer, George Moyer Jr., who persuaded his client to appeal his
conviction, was especially incensed by some of the language used in the
investigators' solicitations. In one case, the sham organization said it stood
for "freedom of choice."

Mr. Jacobson first came to the attention of Government agents in 1984, when they
raided a pornographic distributor and confiscated the subscription list. Mr.
Jacobson had ordered a magazine from the operation that included photographs of
naked boys but did not depict sexual activity. The magazine was legal when Mr.
Jacobson ordered it, but a law passed by Congress a few years later broadened
the definition of pornography to include such a magazine.

Over the course of more than two years, the Government sent a series of sexual
questionnaires to Mr. Jacobson under the names of such non-existent
organizations as Midlands Data Research. One of them stated, "If you believe in
the joys of sex and the complete awareness of those lusty and youthful lads and
lasses" then "we would like to hear from you."

Mr. Jacobson responded to some of the questionnaires, indicating an interest in
"pre-teen sex-homosexual" and "teen-age sexuality" but said he was "opposed to
pedophilia."

After receiving eight solicitations, Mr. Jacobson in 1987 ordered the magazine
"Boys Who Love Boys." He said he did not know the magazine was illegal.

When it arrived at the post office, Mr. Jacobson said, he took it home, looked
through it, found it "distasteful" and put it in a drawer. He went to the town's
cafe for coffee, then returned home to find the local sheriff and four Federal
agents waiting.

"They showed me their badges and said they had a search warrant," Mr. Jacobson
said. "It didn't seem real to me. It seemed like some kind of a terrible dream."

Daniel L. Mihalko, a postal inspector who supervised the investigation, said the
agents "would have been remiss" not to pursue the case of "a man who was around
children daily" in his job as a school bus driver. Mr. Mihalko expressed
disappointment with the Court's ruling.

He said the undercover operation was "very successful," noting that it resulted
in 147 convictions. He said it also turned up evidence that 35 of the men had
sexually abused children.

For some of the targets of the undercover operation, the shame proved
unbearable. Postal authorities say at least four men committed suicide after
being charged.

One of them, a 34-year-old farmer who lived about 50 miles from Mr. Jacobson,
was married and had two children. On the day before his arraignment, he drove a
pick-up truck along a country road, pointed a gun at his head and pulled the
trigger.

'Cursed' With a Preference

Tom Maul, a lawyer for the man, called the Government's conduct "absolutely
outrageous."

A Wisconsin lawyer who committed suicide after being charged left a note that he
had been "cursed with a sexual preference."

Mr. Mihalko said the investigators could hardly be blamed for the suicides. "It
is not unusual for people to commit suicide after some kind of arrest or
charge," he said.

Mr. Jacobson has been working at the farmer's co-op here, a farmer-owned fuel
and supply outlet, trying to put it all behind him. During the turmoil, the
manager of the co-op, Allen Schroeder, called Mr. Jacobson at home. "We need
some work done around here," he said. "And you need to get out more. Why don't
you come to work for us?"

But Mr. Jacobson knows that some residents still whisper about him. He had come
to terms with his sexuality about mid-life, he said, but he had chosen to remain
"in the closet." The Government has changed all that.

"Doesn't the Government realize," he asked, "that they can destroy a man's
life?"

LOAD-DATE: April 19, 1992

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo: Keith Jacobson, a farmer in Newman Grove, Neb., who won
vindication last week from the United States Supreme Court. The court ruled that
he had been entrapped by Federal postal inspectors five years ago when he was
charged with receiving child pornogrpahy. (Jeff Beiermann for The New York
Times)

Map of Nebraska, indicating Newman Grove

                   Copyright 1992 The New York Times Company


                              42 of 281 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                  April 19, 1992, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

THAIS ARE ANGERED BY GENERAL'S RISE

BYLINE: By PHILIP SHENON,  Special to The New York Times

SECTION: Section 1; Part 1; Page 6; Column 1; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 622 words

DATELINE: BANGKOK, Thailand, April 17


In an uncharacteristically blunt display of opposition to military rule, dozens
of Thai politicians say they will begin wearing black to sessions of Parliament
to make clear their anger over the appointment of the general who led a coup
last year as the new Prime Minister.

The politicians said on Wednesday that they would wear black T-shirts stenciled
with "Sacrifice your life, not your word," a reference to the broken promise by
the officer, Gen. Suchinda Kraprayoon, who had said earlier that he would refuse
the job of Prime Minister. This protest is part of a larger, fast-growing
crusade by pro-democracy forces in Thailand to end military rule and install
true democracy.

Since his appointment on April 7, General Suchinda has come under siege by
diverse opponents, including politicians, university students and Bangkok's
influential and freewheeling newspapers. (The television and radio stations are
under the Government's thumb and report almost nothing controversial.) A former
member of Parliament has gone on a hunger strike in front of Parliament House,
calling for General Suchinda to resign as Prime Minister and saying he is ready
to die for democracy.

Vietnamese Are Critical, Too

Criticism of the general's appointment has even come from neighboring Vietnam.
While the Vietnamese Prime Minister sent a letter of congratulations to General
Suchinda, a Hanoi-controlled newspaper described the appointment as "a second
coup d'etat."

"The trouble Suchinda is having is quite substantial," said Suchit Bunbongkarn,
dean of the political science faculty at Chulalongkorn University, the nation's
most prestigious university. "We don't know if this is an historic time, but I
don't think any Prime Minister in the past has faced this kind of resistance."

General Suchinda, who stepped down as Thailand's army chief after he was named
Prime Minister, was a main architect of the February 1991 coup, which the
military justified as necessary to end rampant corruption in the democratically
elected civilian Government. After the coup, General Suchinda, a 58-year-old
career officer, insisted publicly that he would reject any offer of the
premiership.

But after parliamentary elections March 22, the general changed his mind, saying
he would make a "sacrifice" and accept an offer to become Thailand's non-elected
Prime Minister. The offer was made by five pro-military political parties that
won a majority in Parliament's lower house.

To some critics, General Suchinda's broken promise is not as galling as his
seeming willingness to form a Cabinet that includes politicians who were found
guilty of being "unusually rich" -- a euphemism for corrupt or probably corrupt
-- by the junta's anticorruption investigators after the coup.

'We Have to Be Realistic'

In the English-language Bangkok Post on Wednesday, General Suchinda was quoted
as saying he might have to accept some "unusually rich" Cabinet members because
they were leaders of the five parties in his coalition. "We have to be
realistic," he said.

The Thai who has emerged as General Suchinda's chief nemesis is Bangkok's former
Governor, Chamlong Srimuang, a former army major general who leads the Palang
Dharma, or Power of Virtue, political party. Mr. Chamlong, "Mr. Clean" of
Thailand's otherwise corrupt political system, may well be the nation's most
popular political figure. In an open letter this week to General Suchinda, he
called on the Prime Minister to resign.

"The concept of having an outsider as Prime Minister is outdated," Mr. Chamlong
wrote. "A superpower of the Communist bloc like the Soviet Union could not
resist the democratic trend," he said. "How can a small country like Thailand
resist it?"

LOAD-DATE: April 19, 1992

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1992 The New York Times Company


                              43 of 281 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                  April 19, 1992, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

Military Language School Adjusts for a World Without a Cold War

BYLINE: By ERIC SCHMITT,  Special to The New York Times

SECTION: Section 1; Part 1; Page 14; Column 1; National Desk

LENGTH: 993 words

DATELINE: MONTEREY, Calif., April 13


With an ear to the future, the Pentagon is gearing up to teach military
linguists the languages of the post-cold war world, from Azeri to Ukrainian.

The collapse of the Soviet Union and simmering political tensions in the Middle
East are forcing the military to rethink its language needs. For example, when
Iraq invaded Kuwait in August 1990, the military could identify only 18 soldiers
among the three million active-duty and reserve troops who were fluent in the
Arabic dialect spoken in Iraq. Now, the number of Arabic speakers at the Defense
Department's huge language school here is expected to triple in the next few
years.

The school, the Defense Language Institute, teaches 3,000 students a year from
the four military services in 20 foreign languages. Nearly 1,000 students study
Russian, the most popular language. That number is expected to shrink, and the
instruction will become more specialized to teach the arcane terminology of
disarmament verification.

More Students of Spanish

Several languages spoken in the former Soviet republics will be offered
beginning next year. As the military steps up efforts to intercept drugs in
Latin America, the number of those studying Spanish is expected to rise to about
530 next year, a 25 percent increase from 1991.

"There will be a greater commitment on the part of the Defense Department to
keep working on requisite language skills," said the institute's commandant,
Col. Donald C. Fischer Jr. of the Army.

"We'll be developing capabilities in the Commonwealth of Independent States and
Baltic languages and taking a hard look at other areas of the world, like
Africa, and increasing the emphasis on the Middle East," said Colonel Fischer,
whose own second language is German.

Since founding its first language school 50 years ago to develop Japanese
speakers, the military has taught soldiers languages mainly to meet military
intelligence needs: intercepting radio messages, interrogating prisoners and
analyzing captured documents.

Emphasis on Speaking Ability

Listening and reading skills are still important for mastering translation and
eavesdropping, but the emphasis here is shifting to speaking ability. This is
important because the United States military is increasingly involved in
international relief operations, like those in the former Soviet Union and in
Kurdistan after the Persian Gulf war. A growing number of scientific and
military exchanges also demand linguists who can talk on a broad range of
topics.

The Pentagon's school here is a barometer of hot spots and American interests
around the world. Languages that were important during the cold war, like Czech
and Polish, will be taught to fewer students. The demand for Chinese is growing,
and as Washington's relations with Vietnam improve, so are the requirements for
Vietnamese.

Some students change their plans as the world changes. "With the breakup of the
Soviet Union and all the concern in the Middle East, I thought I'd have a better
future with Arabic than Russian," said Capt. James Johnson, a 30-year-old Army
captain who is training to be a military attache in an American embassy in the
Middle East.

Sudden Need for Dialect

The gulf war posed the toughest test for the institute. When Iraqi forces rolled
into Kuwait, the Pentagon had scores of linguists trained in the Arabic dialects
spoken in Egypt and Syria, but was woefully short on experts in the Iraqi
dialect.

Colonel Fischer said the institute drew up several refresher courses for Arabic
speakers, using cassettes and videotapes and new Iraqi dialect dictionaries, as
well as crash courses for thousands of troops in the field. The training was
especially handy when thousands of Iraqi prisoners surrendered to the first
American troops they met.

Life at language boot camp begins and ends on a foreign note. Students attend
classes from 8 A.M. to 4 P.M., take an hour break for physical-fitness training
and then log another two or three hours a night in homework. Classes usually
range from six to 10 students and are taught by two instructors, who rarely
speak English in class.

A vast majority of students here are newly enlisted soldiers who are immersed in
a basic course lasting 25 to 63 weeks, depending on the language, and sent on to
their military specialty.

What the Courses Cost

The military spends $9,045 for instruction alone on each graduate in the 25-week
French and Spanish courses, while the more difficult 63-week Arabic course costs
the Pentagon $21,105 per graduate.

The Pentagon's goal is for at least 80 percent of basic-course graduates to be
proficient enough to handle long descriptions and explanations in two of three
categories -- writing, listening and speaking. In recent years, since the
greater emphasis was placed on practical speaking knowledge, the percentage of
students attaining proficiency has increased markedly, from 29 percent in 1985
to about 67 percent last year.

Technology is playing a more important role, as new computers and
teleconferencing are bridging the language gap for non-specialists who need to
learn basic conversation skills. Special Forces troops in Fort Bragg, N.C., for
example, hooked up by teleconference today with a French instructor here.

Pentagon officials say that the language school's $50 million annual operating
budget is likely to be spared deep cuts, and many students see their second
language as an insurance policy.

In the same wooden barracks that housed soldiers just returned from quelling a
rebellion in the Philippines 90 years ago, Pvt. Donald Rice and a handful of
other young soldiers are immersed in the 47-week Russian course.

"I thought I'd have a better career with language training, especially if I had
to get out of the military someday," said Private Rice, 18, who switched from
artillery training to learn Russian. "Here, I'm learning a language and getting
paid for it."

LOAD-DATE: April 19, 1992

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo: Students at the Defense Language Institute in Monterey, Calif.,
where about 3,000 members of the armed forces a year learn any of 20 languages.
(Susan Spann for The New York Times)

                   Copyright 1992 The New York Times Company


                              44 of 281 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                  April 19, 1992, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

VETERANS TO HELP MINE-FIELD VICTIMS

BYLINE: By BARBARA CROSSETTE,  Special to The New York Times

SECTION: Section 1; Part 1; Page 22; Column 6; National Desk

LENGTH: 421 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON


While the United States Government considers how much it can afford to
contribute to the rebuilding of Cambodia, a Vietnam veterans' organization is
already moving into the devastated country with a people-to-people aid project
that is designed to restore mobility and productivity to some of the most tragic
victims of war, the amputees.

The organization, the Vietnam Veterans of America Foundation, hopes to raise the
money by selling T-shirts and greeting cards decorated with reproductions of
paintings and graphics by Indochinese artists whose work has not been seen in
the United States. The foundation calls the effort the Indochina Project.

In Cambodia, as many as 50,000 combatants, refugees and farmers lost limbs in
the last two decades as they crisscrossed dense mine fields. Millions of
unexploded mines and grenades still lurk below the ground, maiming Cambodians
returning to their fields in peace.

Disabled Helping Handicapped

"There just isn't a whole lot of concern for Indochina out there," said Robert
O. Muller, executive director of the Vietnam Veterans of America Foundation.
After several visits to the Cambodian capital, Mr. Muller decided that helping
people handicapped by war might be something disabled American veterans could do
best. He himself must use a wheelchair after being wounded in Vietnam in 1969.

Last year the foundation, created 12 years ago as a money-raising organization
for the Vietnam Veterans of America, took over a struggling Cambodian
rehabilitation clinic at Kien Khleang. Mr. Muller brought in three specialists
from India who could teach Cambodians to make an aluminum and rubber prosthesis
that costs only $35 to $50.

In Washington, the group brought in Dan Walsh, whose Liberation Graphics
company, based in Alexandria, Va., has generated United States markets for
Nicaraguan and Palestinian art and political posters from the former Soviet
Union.

In February, the veterans' group received a license from the Treasury Department
to import paintings and graphics from Vietnam although the United States
maintains a near-total embargo on Vietnamese products.

The first T-shirts and greeting cards, all made in the United States, will
feature reproductions of Vietnamese art, often impressionistic street scenes.

The veterans' foundation will sell the T-shirts for $16 and the cards for $12 a
dozen by mail order or through galleries. A brochure can be obtained from the
Indochina Project, 2001 S Street N.W., Suite 470, Washington D.C. 20009.

LOAD-DATE: April 19, 1992

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1992 The New York Times Company


                              45 of 281 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                  April 19, 1992, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

IN SHORT: NONFICTION

BYLINE: By David Murray

SECTION: Section 7; Page 12; Column 4; Book Review Desk

LENGTH: 263 words



ROGUE WARRIOR
By Richard Marcinko
with John Weisman.
Pocket Books, $22.

For 30 years, Richard Marcinko carried on a love-hate relationship with the
United States Navy. He loved it when his assignments let him do what he was good
at and liked best -- killing people. What he did not like was what he calls the
"small-minded naval officers" who exhibited a "high level of mismanagement and
addle-brained thinking" that frustrated his gung-ho group of Seals, the Navy's
special warfare units. Mr. Marcinko rose from high school dropout and enlisted
man to the rank of commander; he was a combat officer who led from the front,
not the rear, and took good care of his men. But ultimately, by his account, the
Navy "railroaded" him out of the service and into a Federal prison after he was
convicted of conspiracy. While his story is fascinating, the method of telling
it in "Rogue Warrior," written with John Weisman, a freelance writer who
specializes in espionage and military nonfiction, is not. Mr. Marcinko, 51 years
old, comes across as less the genuine warrior than a comic-book superhero who
makes Arnold Schwarzenegger look like Little Lord Fauntleroy. Deplaning for his
first combat assignment, he writes, he inhaled deeply and "knew instantly that I
was going to like Vietnam a whole lot." He revels in "the wonderful lethal odor
of cordite wafting over me" and tells us that after one particularly hairy
action, "I dreamt of warm women and cold beer." It's as if S. J. Perelman were
writing a profane parody of an article in Soldier of Fortune magazine.

LOAD-DATE: May 9, 1992

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Review

                   Copyright 1992 The New York Times Company


                              46 of 281 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                  April 20, 1992, Monday, Late Edition - Final

THE MEDIA BUSINESS;
Playboy's Philosophy Still Pays Off

BYLINE: By DEIRDRE CARMODY

SECTION: Section D; Page 11; Column 4; Financial Desk

LENGTH: 813 words


Poor old Post New Age Man.

Pity him as he sits pondering who he is. Where, oh, where are his Cosmo, his
Redbook, his Ms. magazine to help him through?

Editing a men's magazine these days -- to say nothing of starting one -- is like
shooting at a moving target, as men's roles continue to evolve.  Men's Life
struggled to life but expired after a single issue two years ago. Smart for Men
never made it to the starting gate. Jann Wenner has just brought out the
promising Men's Journal -- but it's about escaping life, not dealing with it. So
what magazine really talks to men?

Try Playboy, says its new executive editor, Kevin Buckley, whose job is to get
men to do just that.

A conversation with Mr. Buckley is somewhat of a surprise because it includes
none of the usual new-editorspeak. No, his mandate is not to redesign the
magazine nor to give it a different voice. "It's a magazine for men and it's
about issues," he said. "It began that way and still is that way. It says, 'Hey,
you, listen.' "

Ghosts of the Past

Mr. Buckley, a 51-year-old journalist, magazine editor and author, is somewhat
bemused to find himself editing a magazine with such a secure sense of itself.
The ghosts in his past include New Times, which closed in 1978, three months
after he arrived; the resurrected Look, which was undergoing a relentless
identity search in 1979 when he was there and closed later that year; Geo, which
tried to reposition itself in 1979 and closed in the process, and Lear's, which
he helped to start but left after disagreements with its owner, Frances Lear,
before the first issue appeared in 1988.

He is better known for his work as a correspondent for Newsweek from 1963 to
1972, much of it from Vietnam, and for his recent book, "Panama: The Whole
Story," which was published last year by Simon & Schuster.

In his new position, he succeeds Barry Golson, who left two years ago to start
Men's Life and is now executive editor of TV Guide.

"My slot in all of this is nonfiction," said Mr. Buckley, who will head
Playboy's New York bureau but will also spend time at the Chicago headquarters
of Playboy Enterprises Inc., where he reports to the editorial director, Arthur
Kretchmer. "I'm here to take advantage of my contacts and friendships with
writers in New York and bring them into the magazine."

Referring to his new magazine as a "regular guy's guide," he said he would
introduce in a "hey you, listen" tone of voice such vital but dense subjects as
national defense ("Here's why you pay so much money for it") and health care
("It's like algebra again to try and read most medical insurance stories").

The magazine will continue to include the lengthy Playboy interviews, which do
not fall under Mr. Buckley's purview, and a mix of consumer pieces, pop culture,
humor and, of course, unclad women -- for which Mr. Buckley makes no apologies.

"It's not pornography," he said. "Playboy is a general-interest magazine that is
often sexy, whereas the other magazines that run nude women are sex magazines
with no general interest."

May's Photo Spread

In its May issue, Playboy has a nude photo spread of Elizabeth Ward Gracen, Miss
American 1982, who received a lot of attention recently for suggesting but never
quite claiming that she had an affair with Gov. Bill Clinton of Arkansas. The
accompanying article is a tease that never answers the question. After the
article appeared, Ms. Gracen said the affair never took place.

Playboy's formula is evidently successful. In 1991, Playboy's overall
circulation of 3.5 million was up almost 2 percent from the previous year, with
a 4 percent increase in newsstand sales. The magazine posted a 4 percent
increase in advertising pages.

In comparison, Penthouse's pages increased almost 16 percent, while Esquire's
declined 23 percent and GQ's fell 20 percent, according to Publishers
Information Bureau.

"I suspect that Playboy's audience has changed less rapidly than the audience
who reads GQ and Esquire," said John Emmerling, president of the John Emmerling
Inc. advertising agency. "It's a very strong editorial package that reaches a
broad, younger, probably more blue-collar audience."

How Men Cope With Change

Although Playboy is contemplating no big changes, it nonetheless keeps its ear
to the ground through Mantrack, a polling project with the Roper Organization
that tracks how men are coping with change. The magazine will soon begin a
regular feature covering such topics as sexual harrassment, responsible sex and
how men want to spend their leisure time.

"Guys are not told anywhere else how to succeed -- what do I wear to my first
job, what do I do about buying wax to wax my car," said Steve Klein, media
director at the Kirshenbaum & Bond advertising agency. "Readers care about those
things. It's a lot of cool stuff about being a guy."

NAME: Kevin Buckley

LOAD-DATE: April 20, 1992

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo: Kevin Buckley, the new executive editor of Playboy, sees no need
for big changes. "It's a magazine for men and it's about issues," he said. (Fred
R. Conrad/The New York Times)

TYPE: Biography

                   Copyright 1992 The New York Times Company


                              47 of 281 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                  April 20, 1992, Monday, Late Edition - Final

Canada-Vietnam Gas Deal

BYLINE: Reuters

SECTION: Section D; Page 10; Column 2; Financial Desk

LENGTH: 224 words

DATELINE: HANOI, April 19


Petrovietnam, Vietnam's national oil company, signed an agreement with a
Canadian group on Saturday to set up a joint venture that will build a natural
gas pipeline and a gas plant for $300 million, officials said.

The agreement was signed in Hanoi with Liquigaz/SNC, which groups one of
Canada's biggest natural gas recovery companies, Liquigaz, with SNC, Canada's
biggest engineering and construction concern.

Vietnam produced 557,000 barrels of crude oil last year, but has no way to
capture the natural gas that is being flared off its South China Sea rigs.

"The idea is to recover that gas, to install compressors on the existing
platforms and to pump it onshore," said Denis Crevier, president of SNC
International Ltd., based in Montreal.

He said Petrovietnam and Liquigaz/SNC expected the project to take two years to
complete. Both sides hope to complete all the details around June.

Mr. Crevier said the liquefied petroleum gas plant to be built in southern
Vietnam would produce butane, propane, condensates and residual gas.

In the first eight years of the operation, 90 percent of the plant's production
will be exported, to pay off loans initially used to finance the project, he
said. The other 10 percent will go to domestic consumption.

Vietnam will eventually get to keep 100 percent of the production.

LOAD-DATE: April 20, 1992

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1992 The New York Times Company


                              48 of 281 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                  April 20, 1992, Monday, Late Edition - Final

Senator Links Reports Of M.I.A.'s to Deserters

BYLINE: AP

SECTION: Section A; Page 6; Column 4; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 236 words

DATELINE: BANGKOK, Thailand, April 19


Soldiers who deserted during the Vietnam War may account for a number of
reported sightings of Americans in Indochina after prisoners of war were
returned in 1973, a United States Senator said today.

Senator John Kerry, Democrat of Massachusetts, said at a news conference that
there was evidence of "a significant enough number" of deserters to take into
account when evaluating reports of sightings of American servicemen unaccounted
for after the Vietnam War.

All American prisoners of war were supposed to be returned in 1973 under terms
of the Paris peace accords, but some people believe that of the almost 2,300
Americans listed as missing some are still held captive.

Mr. Kerry, a decorated Vietnam veteran, and four other members of the Senate
Select Committee on P.O.W.-M.I.A. Affairs are to begin a visit Monday to
Cambodia, Vietnam and Laos.

Mr. Kerry, chairman of the committee, said the panel could identify no specific
cases of American deserters who might still be alive. But he said it did have
information about deserters and others who may have remained in Indochina after
the war.

"There is some evidence, still being measured, that some people were still alive
in Laos after the 1973 accords," Mr. Kerry said, though he would not provide any
details.

During their trip, the committee members plan to visit some caves in Laos where
American prisoners are known to have been held.

LOAD-DATE: April 20, 1992

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1992 The New York Times Company


                              49 of 281 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                  April 20, 1992, Monday, Late Edition - Final
                              Correction Appended

Stride Rite Chairman To Resign

BYLINE: By STEPHANIE STROM

SECTION: Section D; Page 1; Column 6; Financial Desk

LENGTH: 1010 words


Arnold Hiatt, the shoe salesman who pioneered no-smoking offices and child care
at the work place, is stepping down as chairman of the Stride Rite Corporation
to devote himself full time to the company's philanthropic foundation.

The Stride Rite board is expected to approve his resignation at a meeting this
morning. The directors are expected to pick Ervin Shanes, the chief executive
and president, as the new chairman.

Two years ago, Mr. Hiatt told the board that he intended to take over as
director of the Stride Rite Charitable Foundation this year, and that he hired
Mr. Shanes from General Foods to take his place.

Not a Retirement

"I hope it doesn't sound like I'm retiring," Mr. Hiatt, who is 64 years old,
said in a telephone interview. "I've been straddling the two jobs for a couple
of years now, and both are pretty big challenges."

Through its foundation, Stride Rite has served as a sort of guinea pig for
corporate America. In 1971, in a move that was then considered radically
countercultural for a titan of commerce, Mr. Hiatt opened a day-care center for
employees and community members at the company's manufacturing plant in the
blighted Roxbury section of Boston.

When the company moved its headquarters to Cambridge a few years later, it
continued to operate the Roxbury center, even though fewer of the participants
were related to company employees. It also opened a second day-care center at
the new headquarters site.

In 1986, smoking of cigarettes, cigars and pipes was banned from Stride Rite,
and two years ago the day-care centers became "intergenerational" centers
attended by both young and old.

At the same time, the company's return on investment has earned it a spot among
the top 1 percent of companies whose stock is traded on the New York Stock
Exchange. Earnings per share have had a compounded annual growth rate of 46
percent; revenues have increased every year since 1973, with one exception.

Undoubtedly, such a strong performance has allowed Mr. Hiatt to foster such
programs that do not have an easily discerned effect on the bottom line.

A 'Focused' Company

Mr. Hiatt joined Stride Rite in 1967 when it acquired Blue Star, a children's
shoe company he had bought 15 years earlier while it was operating under Federal
bankruptcy protection. Stride Rite was doing about $35 million a year in sales
when Mr. Hiatt became president in 1968; last year, shoppers spent $574 million
on the company's shoes, and Mr. Hiatt expects sales of more than $600 million
this year.

"Even while putting money into day-care and community service, they've never
taken their eye off the business," said Josie Esquivel, an analyst at Lehman
Brothers.

Mr. Hiatt said that dedication to social issues was not incidental. When he
asked the board to allocate money to start a day-care center in Roxbury, the
neighborhood was falling apart around Stride Rite's corporate offices. It was in
Stride Rite's business interests to give its employees good reasons to continue
to work there, he said, or they would leave for jobs in less threatening areas.

'It's Good for Business'

Similarly, Mr. Hiatt says, America's inner cities, home to 38 million people,
are becoming more and more like a third-world country.

"I think businesses now have to realize that unless they get involved in those
communities and reversing that growth, those are 38 million fewer consumers of
their products, 38 million people who consume corporate taxes and aren't paying
taxes themselves," he said. "That's why it's good for business to get involved."

The son of a Lithuanian immigrant who became a successful businessman in
Worcester, Mass., Mr. Hiatt grew up while Franklin D. Roosevelt and Harry S.
Truman were fostering social changes through government policy. And he was so
angered by the Vietnam War that he took a leave from Stride Rite to serve as
national treasurer for Senator Eugene McCarthy's Presidential campaign in 1968.

But there was no seminal event that transformed Mr. Hiatt into one of the
nation's best-known corporate do-gooders. "I'd like to tell you I had some sort
of epiphany, that I went to Lourdes and saw the face of Mary," Mr. Hiatt said.
"But, no, all I had and have is a sense of obligation."

In Step With Consumers

After the McCarthy campaign, Mr. Hiatt returned to Stride Rite and acquired the
Herman Shoe Company, a small manufacturer of work boots and outdoor shoes, just
as young adults were adopting heavy, utilitarian footwear as part of the
anti-Establishment uniform.

A few years later, Stride Rite bought Sperry Top-Sider, just in time to supply
the emergent generation of "preppies" with their leisure shoes of choice. The
company added Keds to its stable in 1982. And although it had a bit more
difficulty digesting Keds and restoring luster to that brand name, Stride Rite a
few years ago embarked on an aggressive marketing campaign to catch the "back to
basics" mania that has swept the country.

"Three times in a row in the last two decades there have been major changes in
the consumer taste in footwear, and he's been there every time with a new
acquisition," said Steven Nichols, chairman and president of K-Swiss Inc., an
athletic footwear company, and a Stride Rite alumnus.

The Stride Rite foundation receives 5 percent of the company's pretax earnings,
roughly $5 million last year, which goes into an endowment.

Each year, Stride Rite helps 40 students from inner-city neighborhoods attend
Harvard, Mr. Hiatt's alma mater. In exchange, they do social work with the
homeless, with abused children, with the elderly or whatever outcast community
they choose.

Many opt to continue their social service as a Stride Rite Fellow after they
graduate.

But after that year, in which they receive a stipend from the foundation, Mr.
Hiatt encourages them to go to business or law school, to pursue a profession.

"As much good as they're doing hands-on in the community," he said, "they can
make more of a difference by moving into positions of power."

NAME: Arnold Hiatt

LOAD-DATE: April 20, 1992

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

CORRECTION-DATE: April 21, 1992, Tuesday

CORRECTION:

An article in Business Day yesterday about the resignation of the chairman of
the Stride Rite Corporation identified the new chairman incorrectly. He is Ervin
Shames.


GRAPHIC: Photo: Arnold Hiatt is stepping down as chairman of the Stride Rite
Corporation to head the company's philanthropic foundation. (Stride Rite) (pg.
D10)

TYPE: Biography

                   Copyright 1992 The New York Times Company


                              50 of 281 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 April 21, 1992, Tuesday, Late Edition - Final

COMPANY NEWS;
Hongkong Bank

BYLINE: Reuters

SECTION: Section D; Page 5; Column 2; Financial Desk

LENGTH: 100 words

DATELINE: HANOI, Vietnam, April 20


The Hongkong and Shanghai Banking Corporation opened an office in Ho Chi Minh
City, the former Saigon, its first presence there since the Vietnam War ended in
1975, the bank's Vietnam representative, Bill Cameron, said. Mr. Cameron, who
said the bank wanted to play a part in Vietnam's economic growth, said the bank
had not yet asked the Vietnamese Government for permission to open a full
banking branch in Vietnam. Hongkong and Shanghai is the eighth foreign bank to
open a representative office in Vietnam, which is trying to attract overseas
investment and modernize its own banking system.

LOAD-DATE: April 21, 1992

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1992 The New York Times Company


                              51 of 281 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 April 21, 1992, Tuesday, Late Edition - Final

COMPANY BRIEFS

SECTION: Section D; Page 5; Column 5; Financial Desk

LENGTH: 303 words



* Advacare Inc., Horsham, Pa., expects to report revenue of about $18.2 million
and income before extraordinary write-offs of about $800,000 for the quarter
ended March 31.

* Ameritech Corp., Chicago, joined an international consortium that will bid for
the first cellular license in Sao Paulo, Brazil.


* Walt Disney Co., Burbank, Calif., said its shareholders had approved a 4-for-1
split of the company's common stock, effective yesterday.

* Dominion Bankshares Corp., Roanoke, Va., said its board had voted to suspend
payment of its dividend on common shares.

* Morrison Knudson Corp., Boise, Idaho, received a $21.8 million contract from
the California Department of Transportation to provide construction engineering
and inspection services during an extensive improvement project for the Harbor
Freeway in Los Angeles.

* Neutrogena Corp., Los Angeles, acquired a minority interest in Cellegy
Pharmaceuticals Inc., Napa, Calif., a research and development company for
dermatologic products. No terms were disclosed.

* Nova Pharmaceutical Corp., Baltimore, filed a new drug application seeking
marketing approval from the Food and Drug Administration for a treatment used in
conjunction with self-donated bone marrow transplants.

* Pan American World Airways' bankruptcy court proceedings were presented a $97
million demand by Guatemala for $22 million owed to 85 Guatemalan employees plus
$75 million in taxes.

* Pioneer Electronic Corp., Tokyo, and TDK Corp., also based in Tokyo,
established a music video channel with Tokyo Agency Inc.

* Showa Shell Sekiyu K.K., Tokyo, said its wholly owned unit had obtained
official authorization from the Vietnamese Government to become the first
Japanese company to gain entrance into Vietnam's oil development businesses.

LOAD-DATE: April 21, 1992

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1992 The New York Times Company


                              52 of 281 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 April 21, 1992, Tuesday, Late Edition - Final

As China Looks at World Order, It Detects New Struggles Emerging

BYLINE: By NICHOLAS D. KRISTOF,  Special to The New York Times

SECTION: Section A; Page 1; Column 3; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 2627 words

DATELINE: BEIJING, April 20


As the band strikes up for a new international order in the 1990's, one major
power broods on the side of the ballroom, equally alarmed at the Western tune
and at the prospect of being left out of the dance.

As China broods, it pumps more money into the military -- a 50 percent increase
since 1989 -- and sells what it describes as civilian nuclear technology to
Algeria and Iran. The message seems to be that while China has lost strategic
importance with the collapse of the Soviet Union, Beijing still has a dizzying
capacity to disrupt the post-cold-war party.

Much the same is true of the other remaining Communist country in northern Asia,
North Korea. Economically near collapse, its President 80 years old, North Korea
also has plenty of ways to disrupt the world, including what Western officials
call its emphasis on developing nuclear weapons.

Any Western-oriented plan for a new international order could face major
challenges from this Communist rear guard because China has nuclear warheads,
three million troops and significant territorial disputes with its neighbors and
because North Korea may be able to make nuclear arms in a few months or years.
Both countries may collide regularly with international efforts to promote human
rights, to curtail the spread of missiles and nuclear technology, and simply to
preserve the peace.

Fears About the West

"One cold war has ended -- two more cold wars have begun," warns a Chinese
central Government document whose nervous tone underscores Beijing's
insecurities in the post-cold-war era. The two new cold wars appear to be first,
the struggle between capitalism and the remaining Communist countries, and
second, growing frictions within the Western alliance.

The analysis was intended for internal use only, to guide the coverage of
foreign events in the Chinese press, and consequently it offers a window into
the leadership's private concerns about China's role in the new world order. The
document warns that Western forces are infiltrating neighboring Mongolia and
Indochina, that the United States is using human rights "as an excuse to
pressure our country," and that the collapse of Communism abroad has added to
China's burden.

"After the end of the cold war between the United States and the Soviet Union,
the confrontation and struggle between the two systems and two ideologies is
still fierce," the document adds. "The collapse of the Soviet Union is a severe
blow to international socialism, and it puts those countries that are sticking
with socialism and other third-world countries on the front line against the
threat of imperialism."

The Soviet Collapse
Possible Bellwether For the Chinese

The suicide of the Soviet Union (as officials here see it) has encouraged many
Chinese dissidents, who echo Mao's dictum in the 1950's that "the Soviet Union's
today is China's tomorrow." The Soviet disintegration has also cost China some
strategic leverage with both Washington and Moscow, for the China card was most
valuable in an era of superpower rivalry. Washington today seems to find little
use for the China card in a game of solitaire.

Yet, the end of Soviet might was in some ways also a relief for China, which had
experienced not only a cold war with Moscow but also a border battle in 1969.

"The recent events in Moscow can benefit us," insisted an elderly Chinese who
occupies a senior post in the foreign affairs hierarchy. "The Soviet Union was a
menace to us, a threat, and now it's gone."

Moreover, the economic troubles in the Soviet Union have had a cautionary effect
on many ordinary Chinese, reminding them that overthrowing the established order
may lead not to prosperity and efficiency but rather to shortages and upheavals.
And in a country that in the last 100 years has faced repeated convulsions, no
word provokes more shivers than luan -- chaos.

"What happens in the Soviet Union will be of crucial importance in China,"
another senior Government offical recently said. "If chaos continues and prices
rise, then that will help the Chinese Government because the last thing people
here want is chaos. But if there is a quick turnaround in Russia, and production
increases and living standards rise, then people here will say they want to make
the leap as well."

The Military
Spending Increases As Tensions Ease

One of the puzzles of China in the 1990's is why it is pouring money into the
military even though its most important military threat collapsed with the
Soviet Army. The risk of military conflict with other neighbors, particularly
India and Vietnam, has also diminished sharply in recent years as Beijing has
normalized diplomatic relations with those countries.

Yet China is not only increasing military spending generally, but in particular
it also is seeking to project power beyond its shores. It is trying to do this
by acquiring air-refueling capability for its fighter aircraft, by building up a
blue-water navy, and eventually by building an aircraft carrier.

All this is raising concerns in Taiwan about whether it is the target of the
rising military spending. China regards Taiwan as a renegade province and
reserves the right to use force to resolve what it considers to be its own
"internal affair." A confrontation in the Taiwan Strait could well happen if
Taiwan's opposition movement gets its way and declares independence from China.

"If Taiwan declares independence, we'll have to attack them," said a Chinese
official with ties to senior generals.

Taiwan Crisis Not Ruled Out

In part this may be bluff, and military experts say a conventional assault by
the People's Liberation Army on Taiwan would be difficult and not necessarily
successful. But while most scholars and diplomats seem to believe that a
military crisis in the Taiwan Strait is unlikely in the 1990's, few rule it out.

Huan Guocang, a scholar at Columbia University who grew up in China, cited two
additional security risks in the post-cold-war era.

The first is in Xinjiang, the semi-desert region of northwest China. Xinjiang is
inhabited by Muslims of Turkic origin who are ethnically related to the people
of Uzbekistan, Kyrgyzstan, Tajikistan and Kazakhstan across the old Soviet
border. Two years ago the Chinese authorities in Xinjiang confronted an armed
rebellion, and there are reports of continuing discontent in the bazaars.

"They're getting guns smuggled in over the mountains from Pakistan and
Afghanistan, and that's very worrying," said a Chinese official well informed on
security issues.

The South China Sea

The second security risk cited by Mr. Huan is the territorial dispute in the
South China Sea. China claims a huge region of islands and ocean, extending more
than 1,000 miles south of Hong Kong and embracing virtually everything between
Vietnam, Malaysia and the Philippines.

The zone includes the Spratly Islands, beautiful, palm-lined islets that are
essentially uninhabited, set in an area thought to contain oil, natural gas and
phosphorus deposits.

Some or all of the islands are claimed by nations in the region, and clashes
could quickly follow a major oil find. In 1988, China and Vietnam fought a minor
battle over the islands.

China alarmed Southeast Asia this year when it approved a new law asserting its
sovereignty over the South China Sea.

Strategy
Exploiting Discord And Gaining Power

The internal Government document supports the view that China is increasing its
readiness not because it wants to take on its neighbors, but because it feels
threatened itself.

"Facing this international turbulence, our policy is to coolly survey the
situation, bide our time, increase our guard, and absolutely not stick our head
up," the document declares. "We're going to exploit the divisions among Western
countries, strengthen ourselves, and focus our efforts on the Asia-Pacific
region and the nations along our border."

Chinese officials note that the military budget, while rising, is tiny by
international standards: just $6.8 billion this year. But true military spending
is far higher than that official figure, which does not include funds raised by
arms sales or the income from hundreds of army-owned factories.

With a bit of sleight of hand, the generals also exclude capital expenditures,
which fall under a separate budget category.

Perhaps the structural problem facing China today is that it was so weak
beginning in the early 1800's that it could not defend its interests, and as a
consequence it lost significant chunks of territory. Now for the first time, it
is gaining economic and military clout, largely because it enjoys one of the
most buoyant economies in the world. With that strength, it seems increasingly
interested in resolving long-time disputes in its own favor.

So while China has no interest in conquering India, for example, it might some
day feel that it needs to "retake" a large swath of Indian land in the Himalayas
that it says is historically China's. That was how the Chinese-Indian border war
of 1962 broke out.

While it is not Government policy, some Chinese would also like to recover the
independent country of Mongolia, which China was forced to give up earlier in
this century, as well as strips of territory taken by Russia in the last
century.

On Japan
Lingering Hatred Clouds Relations

The nationalist pressures are greatest in shaping policy toward Japan. Chinese
grow up hearing and reading about the brutal Japanese occupation of China
beginning in the 1930's. About 10 million Chinese may have died because of the
Japanese occupation, which lasted until the defeat of Japan by allied forces in
1945.

"There's considerable hatred for Japan, and we have to be careful not to inflame
it," the elderly senior official said.

Whenever the Chinese leaders improve relations with Tokyo, they risk being
criticized as unpatriotic by Chinese students. In 1985, thousands of Chinese
students demonstrated against the profusion of Japanese imports, and in 1990
there were calls for demonstrations against the Beijing leadership because it
was accused of failing to defend the Diaoyu Islands, also claimed by Japan,
which remain a potential flashpoint between the two countries.

Wartime Reparations

The clearest sign that the Chinese Government feels pressured to take a stronger
position against Japan came just in the last few months. A small group of
Chinese scholars and officials, acting without Government approval, began to
issue calls for Japan to pay China compensation for damage and injuries in the
1930's and 40's.

China's leaders and Japan's agreed in 1972 to resolve all claims, and Chinese
officals had previously acknowledged this. But now the leadership seems afraid
of squelching the reparations movement. When Jiang Zemin, the Communist Party
leader, was asked this month about reparations, he responded with virtually an
outstretched hand.

"As for the left-over issues concerning the war of aggression," he said, "we
have always maintained that all of the issues should be settled fairly and
reasonably through mutual consultations in the light of the principles of
seeking truth from facts and adopting a serious attitude."

Diplomacy
Shedding Status As Pariah in West

For all of China's diplomatic difficulties in the 1990's, most diplomats and
scholars say the Government has made great strides in improving its position
lately.

Just a couple of years ago, for example, China seemed to face an intractable
challenge in its handling of foreign relations: Li Peng's hands. No Western
leader wanted to shake them.

Prime Minister Li had been a central figure in the 1989 crackdown, in which the
army crushed the Tiananmen democracy movement and shot to death hundreds of
pro-democracy demonstrators. While the third world paid little attention, the
West was outraged and some diplomats suggested then that if China wanted to
resume high-level exchanges with the industrialized world, it would be obliged
to ease Mr. Li from power.

But the Government proved more patient than its critics, and these days Mr. Li
is no longer grounded.

His triumphal 11-day visit in January and February to Italy, Switzerland, Spain,
Portugal and the United Nations in New York, where he met with President Bush,
suggests that China has largely reintegrated itself into the international
community.

On the United States
Conflicting Views About Washington

The only major trading partner of China that is not improving relations
significantly with Beijing is the United States. Indeed, there could be a
significant further deterioration in ties with Beijing if a Democratic president
is elected this fall and refuses to extend China's access to low trade tariffs
known as most-favored-nation status.

China's leaders apparently are as vexed by the United States as the other way
around. Most Chinese express deep admiration for America, but the leadership
seems to feel that it has been betrayed by American support for anti-Communist
dissidents in China. The central document conveys that ambivalence about
America, as it passes on instructions on presenting news from America to Chinese
audiences.

"We want to ease tensions with the United States and break down the sentiment in
America for sanctions," the document states. "We should take prudent and active
measures, and properly report issues in Sino-American relations, so that
bilateral relations develop in a way that will help us. Propaganda news stories
must be careful and tactical, paying attention to results. As for American
interference in our internal affairs, violations of our sovereignty, and
slanderous rumor-mongering, we can reveal this in ways that accord with the
circumstances and with our diplomatic aims.

"We should study and write about the problems that the United States is having
now, since being victorious in Eastern Europe and the Soviet Union," the
document adds. "We should point out that since becoming the sole superpower, the
United States has been grasping wildly for new hegemonism and power politics,
and also that it's strength is in relative decline and that there are limits to
what it can do. The American domestic problems are severe, and can be the topic
of exposes, but we must be accurate."

Forgoing Ideology

Paradoxically, China now says it is abandoning ideology in foreign policy, just
as Americans are becoming more idealistic -- or, from Beijing's point of view,
ideological -- about relations with China, particularly in American criticism of
China on human rights.

"In your country, some people are very ideological, especially your
congressmen," a senior Foreign Ministry official said in an interview. "But what
determines relations between states is not ideology but common interests."

Reflecting that new position, China recognized Israel in January -- after
assuring the Palestine Liberation Organization representative in Beijing that
this would never happen. Beijing also seems to be moving toward recognizing
South Africa.

In an effort to appear accommodating and non-ideological, China says it is
willing to discuss human rights issues in general -- although not its own human
rights problems in particular. And last year, under pressure from the West,
China said it would abide by the Nuclear Non-Proliferation Treaty and, with
conditions, the Missile Technology Control Regime. Most diplomats do not
entirely trust China to curtail arms sales and nuclear proliferation, but they
believe the moves are still significant.

"You have to give it some credit," said a Western diplomat in Beijing. "On human
rights and arms control, it was backed into the corner and it finally acted
rationally. It seems to be coming slowly in our direction."

LOAD-DATE: April 21, 1992

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

SERIES: After the Cold War -- Third article of a series: Chinese Views

GRAPHIC: Photo: While Communist systems collapse all around it, China continues
to pump more money into its military. The ability of Beijing to disrupt any
Western plan for international order is still a part of the post-cold-war era.
Military units trained in the Gobi desert in Xinjiang Province. (Sipa Press)
(pg. A10)

TYPE: Series

                   Copyright 1992 The New York Times Company


                              53 of 281 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 April 21, 1992, Tuesday, Late Edition - Final

Bid to Save Rare Crane Advancing

SECTION: Section C; Page 4; Column 1; Science Desk; The Environment Page

LENGTH: 508 words


THEY are the tallest flying birds in the world, at five feet. Their bodies are
pale gray, their heads a flash of color: green beaks, orange-yellow eyes and
bright red necks. Their call, which they use to defend their territory, can be
heard for miles.

Now these birds, members of a subspecies called the Eastern sarus crane that is
found in Southeast Asia, are the object of intense preservation efforts.

They have been banished from southern China, Thailand and the Philippines by
war, hunting and development. But Cambodia, the last nation where the cranes are
believed to flock in large numbers, has joined an international effort to save
the birds, which have long been objects of adoration and mythology in Eastern
culture. Several hundred are left.

The Department of Forestry in Cambodia recently signed an agreement that may be
the first step toward preserving a large expanse of pristine wetlands where the
cranes breed during the rainy season.

Many naturalists are concerned that the wetlands may be in danger as Cambodia
modernizes. In early March, members of the International Crane Foundation, a
Wisconsin-based group involved in the conservation effort, and the Royal
Forestry Department of Thailand made an aerial survey of wetlands surrounding a
large Cambodian lake, Tonle Sap, and the Mekong River.

Vast Wetlands, Few People

The foundation and the Thai forestry agency then signed the agreement with the
Cambodian forestry agency, which will allow more detailed surveys and research
in the wetlands. The foundation hopes that will lead to intense preservation
efforts in the region.

"There is a vast expanse of shallow wetlands with scattered trees and very few
people," Dr. George Archibald, director of the International Crane Foundation,
said of the Cambodian area. "It was like seeing a Shangri-La, a great ocean of
tranquillity in the middle of a country torn apart by civil war."

This was the foundation's first look at the Cambodian lands, which had been
considered too dangerous for naturalists to study, Dr. Archibald said. The
foundation has been involved in conservation projects in Thailand and Vietnam
since the mid-1980's.

Researchers in Vietnam are trying to restore the dry-season habitat of the
cranes, which were driven from their wetland home, the Plain of Reeds on the
Mekong Delta, by the war there. In Thailand, researchers are breeding cranes in
captivity and hope to release them to the wild soon.

The wetland habitat in Cambodia will help both missions, Dr. Archibald said. It
will provide a model for restoring the wetlands environment in Vietnam. And it
will offer Thai naturalists a chance to see the birds on their natural breeding
grounds.

"These have been hostile neighbors for thousands of years," Dr. Archibald said.
"Now these three Indochinese countries have the chance to cooperate on wildlife
preservation."

Dr. Archibald hopes to take a group of researchers to Cambodia next winter to do
a thorough study of the region as a basis for further preservation efforts.

LOAD-DATE: April 21, 1992

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo: Eastern sarus crane. (George Archibald)

Map of Cambodia showing location of Plain of Reeds.

                   Copyright 1992 The New York Times Company


                              54 of 281 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                April 22, 1992, Wednesday, Late Edition - Final

THE 1992 CAMPAIGN: Media;
Clinton Moves to Retouch His Image

BYLINE: By ELIZABETH KOLBERT

SECTION: Section A; Page 20; Column 1; National Desk

LENGTH: 933 words


Hoping to deliver Bill Clinton to the Democratic National Convention with a
retouched public image, the Arkansas Governor's staff has devised a two-pronged
strategy to counteract the damaging information that has emerged about him so
far.

The first part of the strategy is to present the Governor's background in a more
flattering light. The second is to project Mr. Clinton as a potential President
with a series of high-profile policy speeches, including the economics message
he delivered last week in Philadelphia and an environmental address scheduled
for today.

The aim is to use the months before the general election campaign not just to
win primaries but also to bring down the negative ratings that Mr. Clinton
receives in public opinion polls. Although he is increasingly being viewed as
the presumptive Democratic nominee, his advisers say he cannot squander the
months before the national convention in July and thus head into the fall with
the same "character" issues still clouding his campaign.

"You have to start to address some of the high negatives between now and the
convention," said a Clinton adviser, who would discuss the strategy only on the
condition of anonymity.

Advice From Outside Experts

The plan emerged from a series of meetings at which Mr. Clinton's top aides have
sought advice from outside experts, including Al From, president of the
Democratic Leadership Council; Samuel Popkin, a professor at the University of
California at San Diego, and Carter Eskew, a consultant who is not affiliated
with the campaign.

One idea that was discussed and rejected was a suggestion that Mr. Clinton give
a reprise of the "Checkers" speech that Richard M. Nixon gave in 1952 in
response to charges of financial impropriety. Instead, the campaign has
apparently decided to counter the questions that have dogged Mr. Clinton's
campaign -- about his financial dealings, his draft status in the Vietnam War
and marital infidelity -- more obliquely.

Through media appearances, staged events and new advertising, the Clinton
campaign is hoping to redirect voters' attention away from issues that have
proved harmful to the Governor and toward issues that may prove more salubrious.

"There's more than one way to answer some things," said James Carville, a top
adviser to Mr. Clinton. "What kind of country you want tells people something
about who you are."

New television ads that were broadcast last night in Pennsylvania, which will
hold its primary on Tuesday, portray Mr. Clinton as a man who grew up under
tough circumstances but who has his priorities straight.

"His father died just before he was born," one advertisement says, while a black
and white picture of Mr. Clinton's mother, father and grandfather appears on the
screen. "And his mother and her family struggled to give him better
opportunities, to teach that with hard work, faith and a good education,
anything was possible."

In another ad Mr. Clinton faces the camera and says, "Some people say I've taken
some hits lately, but nothing like the hits the American people have taken."

"You deserve better," Mr. Clinton continues. "I want to create jobs, invest in
education and health care, make the rich pay their fair share, put our people
first. That's what really matters."

Mr. Carville said the advertising was an effort to "fill in some important
information," and added, "I don't think people have very much of a sense of
where he comes from, what kind of struggles he's had to overcome."

The effort to present more flattering details of Mr. Clinton's biography and the
attempt to speak in a Presidential pitch represent well-trodden political
territory; indeed, the Clinton campaign itself used similar tactics at the
outset of the primary season. But since then the campaign has spent most of its
time scrambling in reaction to events -- from losses in some primaries to the
fallout from Mr. Clinton's playing golf recently at an all-white country club.

Although campaign aides say they still worry about unexpected attacks from Mr.
Clinton's last significant Democratic rival, former Gov. Edmund G. Brown Jr. of
California, they no longer seem to regard Mr. Brown as a serious threat.
Already, Mr. Clinton's media consultant, Frank Greer, is starting to assemble a
media team, including some commercial advertising executives, to prepare for the
general election campaign.

Aides to Mr. Brown said yesterday that they had no plans to broadcast new attack
advertisements in Pennsylvania, or any new ads for that matter. Joe Trippi, Mr.
Brown's media adviser, said the campaign planned to broadcast an old
advertisement featuring Mother Teresa that was used in the New York campaign.

Facing aA Timing Problem

In its effort to retool Mr. Clinton for the general election, the Governor's
staff faces an obvious timing problem: the campaign is trying to shift attention
just at the point when many Americans have stopped paying attention to the
campaign altogether. Even in those states that have yet to hold their primaries,
excitement over the increasingly uncompetitive race is expected to be minimal.

Nevertheless, Clinton advisers note, voters in several large and populous
states, including Pennsylvania, Ohio, New Jersey and California, have yet to go
to the polls, and if these voters can be persuaded to take another look at Mr.
Clinton, they say they will have accomplished something significant.

"Between now and the last primary, we will be reaching 30 percent of the people
who will vote in November," Mr. Greer said. "It's a wonderful opportunity."

LOAD-DATE: April 22, 1992

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1992 The New York Times Company


                              55 of 281 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                April 22, 1992, Wednesday, Late Edition - Final

U.S. and Vietnamese Launch Big Search For War Missing

BYLINE: AP

SECTION: Section A; Page 9; Column 1; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 86 words

DATELINE: BANGKOK, Thailand, April 21


Joint teams headed into the Vietnamese countryside today to begin the biggest
effort so far to account for 2,266 American servicemen missing from the Vietnam
War, a United States military spokesman said.

The teams left from Hanoi, the Vietnamese capital, Maj. Gary Patton, a spokesman
for the task force, said by telephone from Hanoi.

The 58 American specialists are being organized into two excavation teams and
three investigation teams and will work in seven provinces in northern and
central Vietnam.

LOAD-DATE: April 22, 1992

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1992 The New York Times Company


                              56 of 281 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 April 23, 1992, Thursday, Late Edition - Final

Yale Names Baptist Pastor As Chaplain

BYLINE: Special to The New York Times

SECTION: Section B; Page 6; Column 1; Metropolitan Desk

LENGTH: 535 words

DATELINE: NEW HAVEN, April 22


Yale University today named the Rev. Frederick J. Streets, the pastor of a
Baptist church in Bridgeport, as its new chaplain.

Mr. Streets will be the first black and the first Baptist to hold the post,
which was filled by the Rev. William Sloane Coffin, the outspoken Vietnam War
critic, in the 1970's and by Timothy Dwight, the Yale president and patriarch,
in the 1790's.

"It is just a really important opportunity to recognize we are not an island in
this community," Yale's president, Benno C. Schmidt Jr., said of the
appointment.

"In this day, religion is one of the most important ties between the university
community and the larger community, and the chaplain's relationship between the
two is pivotal," Mr. Schmidt said.

Going Beyond Tradition

Mr. Streets, 42 years old, is the pastor of the Mount Aery Baptist Church in
Bridgeport and an adjunct professor of pastoral theology at the Yale Divinity
School. He will succeed the Rev. Harry Baker Adams, 67, this summer. Mr. Adams
will remain a professor in the divinity school and master of one of Yale's 12
residential colleges, Trumbull.

Mr. Streets said that beyond performing the traditional duties of the chaplain,
he hoped to "consistently bring to bear on public issues a moral and spiritual
voice," create "a true fellowship" among New Haven communities divided along
racial and class lines, and "develop a model for urban ministry."

He said he hoped to emulate Mr. Coffin by extending his ministry into the public
realm without losing sight of his less visible duties as a pastor. "There are
all kinds of ways of being a prophetic voice," he said, whether "in front of a
line of demonstrators" or "behind the pulpit."

Mr. Streets has been breaking ground in urban ministry since he graduated from
Yale Divinity School in 1975, said Mr. Schmidt, who called Mount Aery "one of
the most vital urban congregations in the Northeast."

Through his ministry there, Mr. Streets has created after-school programs for
children whose parents work, an AIDS ministry, and programs providing health,
education and job referral, scholarships, assistance to the elderly and
affordable housing. Mr. Streets, who has a master's degree in social work, has
also counseled psychiatric patients at a local mental health center.

Mary Willis, a third-year divinity student from Nashville who takes a class on
social ministry from Mr. Streets, said he teaches "the responsibilities of
Christian leaders in terms of living out the model that Jesus exhibited, which
is basically to take on the very hard issues, with love."

Michael Morand, a third-year divinity student and a New Haven alderman, praised
Mr. Streets for building a coalition among Latinos, blacks and whites in
Bridgeport, and said he expected similar success in New Haven. Mr. Streets was
also a New Haven alderman when he was a divinity student.

Mr. Streets said he based his philosophy of pastoral care on the work of the
Rev. Dr. Martin Luther King Jr. and the Rev. Howard Thurman, a former dean of
the chapel at Boston University who founded the Church of All People in San
Francisco, which Mr. Streets called "one of the first integrated, multicultural
churches."

NAME: Frederick J. Streets

LOAD-DATE: April 23, 1992

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Biography

                   Copyright 1992 The New York Times Company


                              57 of 281 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 April 23, 1992, Thursday, Late Edition - Final

COMPANY BRIEFS

SECTION: Section D; Page 4; Column 5; Financial Desk

LENGTH: 261 words



* Allied-Signal Inc., Morristown, N.J., received a five-year contract from
Grumman Corp., Bethpage, L.I., to develop engine components for the U.S. space
propram. The contract is valued at $43 million.

* British Aerospace Inc., Herndon, Va., a unit of British Aerospace Holdings
Inc., said AMR Eagle Inc., a commuter airline unit of AMR Corp., would buy 15
more Jetstream Super 31 planes.



* Ecogen Inc., Langhorne, Pa., a maker of biological pesticides, signed an
agreement to acquire Scentry Inc. from Conagra Inc. The price is $2 million in
cash and $3.5 million in Ecogen common stock.

* Enron Power Services Inc., Houston, a unit of Enron Corp., signed a 16-year
contract with an affiliate of Energy Initiatives Inc. to supply the natural gas
requirements of a cogeneration plant Energy Initiatives is developing in Geddes,
N.Y.

* GE Capital Fleet Services, a unit of General Electric Co., said its McCullagh
unit had completed the acquisition of the leasing portfolio of Mossy Vehicle
Leasing, San Diego. The price was $6.5 million.

* Information Resources Inc., Chicago, a computerized data-base company, has
agreed to acquire the outstanding capital stock of Towne-Oller & Associates Inc.
in return for approximately 650,000 common shares of Information Resources.

* Sprint, Kansas City, Mo., the telecommunications company, plans to offer
direct-dial service to Vietnam.

* Zenith Laboratories Inc., Northvale, N.J., a maker of generic drugs, received
F.D.A. approval for its generic version of Duricef, an antibiotic.

LOAD-DATE: April 23, 1992

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1992 The New York Times Company


                              58 of 281 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 April 23, 1992, Thursday, Late Edition - Final

Abortion and the Law;
Sketches of 3 Lawyers In Abortion Argument

SECTION: Section B; Page 10; Column 2; National Desk

LENGTH: 369 words



Kathryn Kolbert
American Civil Liberties Union lawyer

One of three senior lawyers for the A.C.L.U. Reproductive Freedom Project. . . .
Successfully argued the case of Thornburgh v. American College of Obstetricians
and Gynecologists before the Supreme Court in 1985. . . . As state coordinating
counsel for the Reproductive Freedom Project since 1989, the 40-year-old
Philadelphian assists the A.C.L.U.'s state offices and other local groups in
lobbying for abortion rights. . . . Litigated challenges to Pennsylvania
abortion laws for the Philadelphia-based Women's Law Project from 1979 to 1988.
. . . Graduated from Cornell University School of Arts and Sciences and Temple
University School of Law. . . . Two children.

Ernest D. Preate Jr.
Pennsylvania Attorney General

Elected Attorney General in 1989. . . . The 51-year-old Republican served three
consecutive terms as Lackawanna County District Attorney, winning five death
sentences against convicted murderers, a record for the state. . . . Has
concentrated on drug crimes. . . . In his only other argument before the Supreme
Court, Mr. Preate successfully defeated a challenge to Pennsylvania's death
penalty and how juries are instructed in weighing mitigating circumstances. . .
. Served as a Marine infantry officer in Vietnam in 1967 and 1968. . . . Earned
a degree in economics from the Wharton School of Finance and a law degree from
the University of Pennsylvania. . . . Divorced. . . . Two children.

Kenneth W. Starr
U.S. Solicitor General

The Administration's chief litigator before the Supreme Court. . . . Appointed
by President Bush, has served as Solicitor General since May 1989. . . . Raised
in San Antonio, Mr. Starr, 45, received his law degree from Duke University
School of Law in 1973. . . . Clerked for retired Chief Justice Warren E. Burger
from 1975 to 1977. . . . As partner with Gibson, Dunn & Crutcher in Los Angeles
and Washington, litigated Federal civil cases. . . . Served as chief of staff to
Attorney General William French Smith. . . . Appointed to the U.S. Court of
Appeals for the District of Columbia Circuit in 1983. . . . Lives in McLean, Va.
with his wife and three children.


NAME: Kathryn Kolbert; Ernest D. Preate Jr.; Kenneth W. Starr

LOAD-DATE: April 29, 1992

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photos: Kathryn Kolbert (Reuters); Ernest D. Preate Jr. (Associated
Press); Kenneth W. Starr (The New York Times)

TYPE: Biography

                   Copyright 1992 The New York Times Company


                              59 of 281 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 April 23, 1992, Thursday, Late Edition - Final

Abortion and the Law;
Sketches of 3 Lawyers In Abortion Argument

SECTION: Section B; Page 10; Column 2; National Desk

LENGTH: 369 words



Kathryn Kolbert
American Civil Liberties Union lawyer

One of three senior lawyers for the A.C.L.U. Reproductive Freedom Project. . . .
Successfully argued the case of Thornburgh v. American College of Obstetricians
and Gynecologists before the Supreme Court in 1985. . . . As state coordinating
counsel for the Reproductive Freedom Project since 1989, the 40-year-old
Philadelphian assists the A.C.L.U.'s state offices and other local groups in
lobbying for abortion rights. . . . Litigated challenges to Pennsylvania
abortion laws for the Philadelphia-based Women's Law Project from 1979 to 1988.
. . . Graduated from Cornell University School of Arts and Sciences and Temple
University School of Law. . . . Two children.

Ernest D. Preate Jr.
Pennsylvania Attorney General

Elected Attorney General in 1989. . . . The 51-year-old Republican served three
consecutive terms as Lackawanna County District Attorney, winning five death
sentences against convicted murderers, a record for the state. . . . Has
concentrated on drug crimes. . . . In his only other argument before the Supreme
Court, Mr. Preate successfully defeated a challenge to Pennsylvania's death
penalty and how juries are instructed in weighing mitigating circumstances. . .
. Served as a Marine infantry officer in Vietnam in 1967 and 1968. . . . Earned
a degree in economics from the Wharton School of Finance and a law degree from
the University of Pennsylvania. . . . Divorced. . . . Two children.

Kenneth W. Starr
U.S. Solicitor General

The Administration's chief litigator before the Supreme Court. . . . Appointed
by President Bush, has served as Solicitor General since May 1989. . . . Raised
in San Antonio, Mr. Starr, 45, received his law degree from Duke University
School of Law in 1973. . . . Clerked for retired Chief Justice Warren E. Burger
from 1975 to 1977. . . . As partner with Gibson, Dunn & Crutcher in Los Angeles
and Washington, litigated Federal civil cases. . . . Served as chief of staff to
Attorney General William French Smith. . . . Appointed to the U.S. Court of
Appeals for the District of Columbia Circuit in 1983. . . . Lives in McLean, Va.
with his wife and three children.


NAME: Kathryn Kolbert; Ernest D. Preate Jr.; Kenneth W. Starr

LOAD-DATE: April 29, 1992

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photos: Kathryn Kolbert (Reuters); Ernest D. Preate Jr. (Associated
Press); Kenneth W. Starr (The New York Times)

TYPE: Biography

                   Copyright 1992 The New York Times Company


                              60 of 281 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 April 25, 1992, Saturday, Late Edition - Final

The Tides of Crime

SECTION: Section 1; Page 22; Column 1; Editorial Desk

LENGTH: 597 words


Crime is going down, the New York City police report. Can it be true, after all
these years of pain, cost and fear? The police and criminal justice experts
respond with proper caution. History teaches that crime waves arise from
profound forces not easily subject to Government control. Officials can't
honestly do more than try to contain crime and minimize its damage.

But to the extent they exceed the trends elsewhere, the New York figures also
suggest that government can achieve such containment, to visible and reassuring
effect. There's good reason, in short, to persevere in efforts like the current
expansion and redeployment of police in New York.

Scholars trace three crime waves in American history. The first began sometime
in the 1840's and lasted until the Civil War. Homicide figures document a second
surge in the early 1900's. The third wave has been going on since the
mid-1960's. One reason is the baby boom, which increased the proportion of
crime-prone young men.

Other reasons include immigration, domestic population transfers and economic
changes that produce structural unemployment. Wars also disrupt labor markets
and legitimize violence. The Vietnam War did both.

But those factors faded out in the 1980's, while crime leveled off at an
elevated rate and then began a decline, so slight that it offers little
reassurance. Some analysts attribute this decline mostly to "target hardening"
-- more locks and alarms -- and the fear that keeps people home at night.

Why hasn't crime declined more? In part, surely because of ongoing structural
unemployment and social alienation as more of the middle class abandons cities,
leaving behind ever-harsher concentrations of poverty. But there is also a much
more dramatic explanation: the crack epidemic.

Crack began to spread widely in the mid-80's and soon introduced millions to
lives of drug abuse and crime. It produced a new generation of dealers, and a
new profusion of firearms. They escalated street violence to appalling levels,
much as Prohibition generated the violent gang mayhem of the 1920's and Samuel
Colt's new handguns increased bloodshed in the 1840's and 50's.

The brutal surge in drug weaponry fed on itself as more youngsters felt the need
to arm for self-defense. Manufacturers tooled up to supply the expanding new
market, while smugglers reaped enormous profits running guns from states with
lax gun laws to cities with strict ones.

In short, crime hasn't fallen back with changes in the population because of
crack and guns. And while Government can't do much about the big historic tides
of crime, it can do a great deal about these two specific scourges.

The Federal Government could, for example, pay for a big expansion of drug
treatment, authorizing it as the first sanction for criminals found to be
drug-involved. Public and private funds now support about 600,000 drug treatment
slots nationwide; at least 300,000 more are needed.

There's even more the Bush Administration could do by way of urban arms control.
It could restrict access to guns with uniform national purchase waiting periods.
It could insist on licensing, training and other measures now blocked by
Congressional capitulation to the gun lobby. And it could help localities expand
and better deploy police against drugs and guns.

Americans have become resigned to crime as part of their daily routine. A
serious Federal commitment to drug treatment, gun control and help for local
police would not necessarily turn the tide. But it certainly could reduce crime,
bloodshed and fear.

LOAD-DATE: April 25, 1992

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Editorial

                   Copyright 1992 The New York Times Company


                              61 of 281 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                  April 26, 1992, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

The Island That Fell From Grace

BYLINE: By Barbara Crossette;  Barbara Crossette, who has been bureau chief for
The New York Times in New Delhi and Bangkok, Thailand, reported from Sri Lanka
regularly between 1985 to 1991.

SECTION: Section 7; Page 14; Column 1; Book Review Desk

LENGTH: 1164 words



ONLY MAN IS VILE
The Tragedy of Sri Lanka.
By William McGowan.
397 pp. New York:
Farrar, Straus & Giroux. $25.


 TO encounter Sri Lanka, the island nation off the coast of India, is to become
obsessed with it, and to search ever after for an explanation of how this
arrestingly beautiful place plunged into hell on earth in barely a decade. What
happened to Sri Lanka -- where Buddhists, Hindus, Muslims and Christians lived
together in relative harmony for centuries before the ethno-religious weave
ruptured, and tens of thousands of people were massacred in the most gruesome
ways -- is not only a mystery story of sorts but also a cautionary tale for
other nations still grappling for their own identity a generation or two after
independence. William McGowan's "Only Man Is Vile: The Tragedy of Sri Lanka" is
a story not only about Sri Lanka but also about the unfinished business of the
imperial age, and not just in Asia.

The contrast between the landscape of Sri Lanka and its people is not a new one.
It was nearly two centuries ago that an Anglican clergyman, Reginald Heber,
wrote the lines that became the missionary hymn that gives this book its title:

 What though the spicy breezes
 Blow soft o'er Ceylon's isle
 Where every prospect pleases
 And only man is vile.

But what Sri Lanka, the former Ceylon and also the Serendip of ancient Arab
traders, has done to itself is extraordinary. Beginning in the 1950's,
governments led by the island's majority Sinhalese, most of whom are Buddhists,
began to legislate against the Tamils and the Tamil language; militant Sinhalese
believed that under British colonialism the urbanized Tamil minority, many of
whom are Hindus, had cornered too large a percentage of jobs in government and
the professions. In 1983, this 30-year campaign degenerated into an anti-Tamil
pogrom. The Tamils retaliated, arming themselves and starting a reign of terror
that brought bombs to the national capital, Colombo, and horrific massacres to
towns and cities across the north and east, the traditional Tamil homelands.
Soon there was civil war.

Less than five years later, the Sinhalese south witnessed a different kind of
eruption. A radical People's Liberation Army -- Sri Lankan Communists branded
them Pol Potists because they resembled the Khmer Rouge in their fierce
commitment to remaking society -- brought terror to the lush hills and shores of
the southwest. Those whose behavior was judged incorrect by the Liberation
Army's standards were slaughtered, and families were forbidden to dig graves for
them; the life and economy of Colombo were paralyzed by anonymously announced
"people's curfews," self-enforced by a population quaking with an almost
palpable, near-hysterical fear.

To counter this rebellion while fighting a war against Tamil guerrillas in the
arid north and east, the Sri Lankan authorities (and a lot of unofficial
score-settlers) fought back against the People's Liberation Army with death
squads. Soon bodies were floating down gentle, palm-shaded rivers and washing up
on some of the most beautiful tropical beaches on earth.

In 1986, amid this violence, William McGowan first came to Sri Lanka, leading a
group of students from the United States on a semester abroad. He returned to
Sri Lanka the next year as a freelance journalist. A keen observer, he was soon
looking for coherent meaning in what he saw. After returning to the United
States in mid-1988, he wrote this book.

IN an era when many outsiders, including some human rights monitors who should
have dug deeper, have been taken in by simplistic explanations of right and
wrong, Mr. McGowan is anything but naive. With a shrewd eye for details and a
quick understanding of complexities, he saw the ruthlessness of the leading
Tamil guerrilla army, the Liberation Tigers of Tamil Eelam, when some other
observers were making victims or heroes of them and their wily leader,
Vellupillai Prabakaran.

Mr. McGowan has also grasped the colossal cynicism of India, which armed and
trained the Tigers and gave their leaders sanctuary in the 1980's, more to
destabilize Sri Lanka's pro-Western President, Junius R. Jayewardene, and to
appease India's nearly 50 million Tamils, than to foster the idea of a Tamil
homeland in Sri Lanka. Then, in July 1987, India under the late Prime Minister
Rajiv Gandhi suddenly turned peacemaker, sending troops to Sri Lanka ostensibly
to disarm the Tigers and others it had previously armed.

In short order, the Jaffna Peninsula in the north, the heart of Sri Lankan Tamil
culture, became New Delhi's Vietnam, and Indians, even more than the Sinhalese,
became the Tamils' sworn enemies. India, which withdrew the last of its forces
in early 1990 without defeating the Tigers, now charges Mr. Prabakaran, still in
hiding in a Sri Lankan jungle, with the assassination of Mr. Gandhi in May 1991.

Some of the finest writing in this book is about the conflict in Jaffna,
including a classic portrait of two Indian Army brigadiers waxing loose-tongued
over a bottle of Scotch. Mr. McGowan also paints vivid verbal landscapes of the
tormented eastern coast, where Indian troops waded into an already tense ethnic
mix.

However, "Only Man Is Vile" has a central weakness. It never does more that
skirt the peripheries of Sri Lanka, avoiding the tough job of coming to grips
with the heart of the nation, the Sinhalese establishment. Mr. McGowan bases a
good deal of his assessment of Sinhalese culture on the opinions of foreigners,
on the behavior of militant Sinhalese Buddhist monks, and on his own neophyte
observations of traditional religious rituals whose alien character seems to
repel him.

The author hangs out at a sleazy beach bar where he temporarily befriends a
crippled youth nicknamed the Crab, a cruel if accurate description of how the
young man moves along the ground because of his deformities. Unfortunately, the
author somehow tries to turn the boy into a touchstone for analyzing Sinhalese
Buddhism.

Mr. McGowan says it is hard to find Sri Lankans willing to look at the big
picture, or Sri Lankans who will open up to an outsider. This is not so. In the
Tamil, Sinhalese and Burgher communities -- the last a Eurasian group with
Portuguese, Dutch and British strains -- there are many thoughtful, remorseful,
deeply pained people who not only talk about what has happened to their society
but also try to mitigate the disaster that has befallen the island's people.

Indeed, the Sri Lankan tragedy may not have all that much to do with such themes
of Mr. McGowan's book as the mysteries of the Sinhalese Buddhist soul or an
Asian indifference to Western concepts of truth, punctuality and personal
responsibility. The most obvious suspects are internationally common failures
like weak political parties and inadequate leadership. If Mr. McGowan had made a
greater effort to penetrate, tap and understand Sri Lankan society, his would
have been a stronger book.

LOAD-DATE: April 26, 1992

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo: Police and medical workers identifying bodies of Sinhalese
massacred in northeastern Sri Lanka in 1987. (Associated Press)

TYPE: Review

                   Copyright 1992 The New York Times Company


                              62 of 281 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                  April 26, 1992, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

By Spies & Thrillers

BYLINE: By Newgate Callendar

SECTION: Section 7; Page 21; Column 1; Book Review Desk

LENGTH: 809 words


Communism, Chinese style, and Communism, Russian style, are examined in two
recent thrillers. THE YEAR OF THE FIRE MONKEY, by Chris Mullin (Chatto &
Windus/Trafalgar Square, $23.95), is set in the period between 1949, when Mao
Zedong took control of China, and 1971, when President Richard Nixon restored
relations with the country. MOSCOW MAGICIAN, by John Moody (Thomas Dunne/ St.
Martin's, $17.95), takes place during the early days of Mikhail S. Gorbachev's
ascendancy.

Mr. Mullin is a Labor Member of Parliament who appears to know a great deal
about the Far East (one of his previous novels had to do with Saigon). He is
also a skillful writer who has done his research. In "The Year of the Fire
Monkey," he looks at the cult of personality that pervaded Maoist China, as
experienced by a Tibetan boy who has never seen a car, a train, a toilet.
Through a weird set of circumstances, the boy gets involved with the Central
Intelligence Agency and one of its insane schemes. There is a down-to-the-wire
sequence in which an assassin has to be stopped.

The book is very well written. We live with the boy, see the world through his
innocent eyes, sympathize with him through the horrors of the Cultural
Revolution, suffer with him when he has an agonizing decision to make. Without
becoming preachy or heavy-handed, Mr. Mullin exposes a horrible period in
history. At the end, he has the reader on edge trying to figure out how he is
going to get the hero out of his predicament. The finale is a bit of a cop-out,
but no matter; there is enough interesting material -- and action -- to hold any
reader's attention.

"Moscow Magician" is equally absorbing. Mikhail Gorbachev may have brought
glasnost and perestroika to the Soviet Union, but the venomous K.G.B. still
slithers around. The people of Moscow are always on guard. One careless word,
and it's Dzerzhinsky Square and interrogation in a torture chamber.

The man called "the Magician" is Viktor Nikolaich Melanov, a fixer. He seems to
know everything and everybody, and he does things for people. Not in a big way;
he's small-time, interested only in legally beating the system and getting
along.

Through no fault of his own he finds himself on the K.G.B. blacklist. A friend
of his -- a Jew -- tells him to hide before he is sent to a gulag. Before long,
both he and the friend are on the run, first to Poland, then to Czechoslovakia,
before attempting a flight to the West. Close on their heels is a K.G.B.
colonel, determined to get his hands on them.

Mr. Moody, a correspondent for Time magazine, examines many aspects of the
Soviet empire. The pervasive anti-Semitism; the despair of the proletariat,
disgusted with the rotten system they face; the defiant Poles who work against
the Kremlin -- all come in for a searching look. And we even have a prostitute
with a heart of gold. "Moscow Magician" is never dull.

Quiller, the indestructible British agent, is in peak form in Adam Hall's
QUILLER SOLITAIRE (Morrow, $20). This time he has to infiltrate a new Red Army
Faction in Germany. It seems that something unthinkable is being planned, and
Quiller has to stop it.

Mr. Hall's prose is of the rat-a-tat variety, spraying words in short bursts
like an Uzi: "He was a Sicilian, Giovanni Scalfaro, spoke some kind of French,
some kind of English, no German, sucked on some kind of chewing gum which I
suspected was laced, he flew dope, it was his living."

And if it's action you want, well: "Something moved in from the left side and
the Saab rocked and I dragged it straight and saw another gap and took it and
hit a pillar and broke free but the Mercedes was close and we rocked again and
righted and then rolled over with the roof metal screaming on the concrete and I
hit the belt buckle and got the door open and found the Mercedes alongside with
the driver slumped at the wheel with blood on his face so I smashed the window
and found his gun and saw the BMW moving in and fired twice and. . . ."

Whew.

Naturally, any writer of British sea stories set 200 years ago is going to have
Horatio Horn blower thrown at him. The famous C. S. Forester series set an
all-time standard. But Dewey Lambdin (an American, no less) has started a series
that can stand up very well against the stories of the master. Mr. Lambdin's
latest Alan Lewrie adventure is THE KING'S PRIVATEER (Donald I. Fine, $21.95).

Lieutenant Lewrie is quite different from the introspective, self-doubting
Hornblower. He is brash, a womanizer and strictly out for himself. The reason he
goes to sea this time is to escape a jealous husband. Otherwise, the plotting
follows the Horn blower format. There are trips to exotic countries (the Far
East here), naval and land engagements, intriguing characters and all the
seagoing expertise one would want. You could get addicted to this series.
Easily.

LOAD-DATE: April 26, 1992

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Review

                   Copyright 1992 The New York Times Company


                              63 of 281 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                  April 26, 1992, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

THEATER;
An Updated 'Lyndon' Is Coming to the Emelin

BYLINE: By ALVIN KLEIN;  Laurence Luckinbill as "Lyndon" at the Emelin Theater,
Library Lane, Mamaroneck, performances on May 7 and 8 at 8 P.M. and May 9 at 3
and 8 P.M. Box office: 698-0098.

SECTION: Section 12WC; Page 18; Column 5; Westchester Weekly Desk

LENGTH: 962 words


IN his newly augmented performance, Laurence Luckinbill makes his L.B.J. a
response, in part, to Oliver Stone's "J.F.K."

While "Lyndon," the one-man show that Mr. Luckinbill has been playing on tour
nationwide for more than a year, remains an homage to a misunderstood President
Lyndon B. Johnson, it has become, as well, a refutation of a film that
implicates President Johnson in a conspiracy to assassinate President Kennedy.
The actor's next stop for his portrayal is the Emelin Theater in Mamaroneck on
May 7, 8 and 9.

Mr. Luckinbill, who lives in northern Westchester with his wife, Lucie Arnaz,
the actress, and their three children, Simon, 11, Joseph, 9, and Kate, 7, took
on the role for a 90-minute television show, "Lyndon Johnson," for the Public
Broadcasting Service in 1987, under the provocation of David Susskind, the late
producer.

"He threw the script at me and I said, 'I can't,' " Mr. Luckinbill recalled. "
'Then you're no actor,' he answered."

So Mr. Luckinbill rose to the producer's challenge. His transition to the stage
in "Lyndon" followed in 1991, when the play, which was written by James Prideaux
and had previously been acted on stage by Jack Klugman, was produced at the John
Houseman Theater Off Broadway.

The actor, who started out as a freelance writer for newspapers and magazines,
had his breakthrough theater role in "Boys in the Band" in 1968 and has since
been a visible presence on stage, screen and television. He has been married to
Ms. Arnaz for 12 years and has two sons, 22 and 16, from a previous marriage.

It wasn't until January of this year that Mr. Luckinbill incorporated new
material into two scenes in the play. It is drawn from the National Security
Action Memorandums No. 263, approved by President Kennedy in October 1963, and
No. 273, approved by President Johnson on Nov. 26, 1963. Both are now
declassified.

"I took great umbrage at the complicity stated in the movie -- that L.B.J.
conspired in Kennedy's murder because Kennedy was attempting to get us out of
Vietnam," Mr. Luckinbill said. "I've been researching this since 1986, and we
pulled the documents from the Kennedy Library in Boston and the Johnson Library
in Austin, Tex.

"The thrust of both memorandums was the same. Kennedy was not going to back away
from a Communist threat; and after his assassination on Nov. 22, No. 273 was
hammered out, calling for a recommitment and widening of the war."

He went on: "Kennedy was on the plane to Dallas to make a speech about how we
will fight the Communists to a standstill to make it clear that we are not
backing off. Stone referred to the same memoranda -- but not by number -- and
said that Kennedy was planning to pull everybody out of Vietnam, which obscures
the facts."

In a letter published in Variety, the show business newspaper, on March 16, Mr.
Luckinbill wrote that Mr. Stone's film was "a stupifyingly banal, manipulative
product, destined to stun by distorting."

"Johnson, too, thought the Warren Report was incomplete and the assassination
was a conspiracy," Mr. Luckinbill continued. "But it was a Cuban one, and he
asked for special protection for his family against the Cubans."

The play takes place in the Oval Office in 1968 right after President Johnson
has announced that he will not seek re-election. "He pours whiskey, lights a
cigarette, takes off his jacket, rolls up his sleeves and lets us -- his
friends, associates and friendly reporters -- in on an intimate afternoon with
L.B.J.," said Don Buford, who was the assistant presenter of the play in New
York and is producing the tour.

Of the L.B.J. persona, Mr. Luckinbill said: "He was painfully self-aware and
self-conscious that he would never rise to the Kennedy glamour. But he was the
greatest legislator in our history. 'Let's reason' was his credo. He was handed
one hornet's nest after another, and he rose to the occasion of the Presidency
in a magnificent manner."

Mr. Luckinbill went on: "He was accused of racism, of warmongering, of using
political machinery for venal ends, but his list of legislation says that is not
the case. He would be attacking the problems of cities with a vengeance -- from
Head Start on up. His Great Society speech is one of our last great attempts to
address our problems. I'm not protecting him. He gerrymandered, and he took big
gifts, but put that in perspective. He gave us a better system than we have
now."

Mr. Luckinbill's characterization has been widely praised -- for its physical
likeness, a cosmetic triumph "from the jug ears to the jowls," as Mel Gussow put
it in his New York Times review of the play, and its communication of a man's
larger-than-life essence, in contrast to a more familiar dulled media
personality.

Even with his depiction of a brash L.B.J., Mr. Luckinbill said that in Texas,
Johnson's home state, an inevitable comment about his performance is "One thing
is wrong, the language is too clean."

Having added Clarence Darrow -- in David W. Rintels's one-man play that starred
Henry Fonda on Broadway in 1974 -- to his monodramatic repertory, Mr. Luckinbill
plans to play Johnson and Darrow for six shows in three days back to back in
August in Madison, Ga. "That will be an antebellum treasure trove," the actor
said.

And next Feb. 22 at the United States Military Academy at West Point, Mr.
Luckinbill expects to do "George Washington: An Unfinished Portrait," a one-man
play he is co-writing with Mr. Buford.

"All three were instrumental in holding up the light of change," Mr. Luckinbill
said. "And L.B.J. believed the key to that change was education. If he believed
in God, it was the god of education. To some, he was mean -- and then he turned
around and was generous, loving, apologetic. He was a great actor."

LOAD-DATE: April 26, 1992

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Review

                   Copyright 1992 The New York Times Company


                              64 of 281 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                  April 26, 1992, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

Mutual Funds;
It's Earth Day. Where's Your Money?

BYLINE: By Carole Gould

SECTION: Section 3; Page 16; Column 1; Financial Desk

LENGTH: 866 words


During last week's Earth Day celebration, mutual fund owners might have wondered
if their investments are helping to protect the planet. More and more believe
the answer is yes.

There are now more than a dozen "social conscience" funds, which pick securities
according to a company's record in protecting the environment or other ethical
or social criteria. In the last decade, assets managed by these funds rose more
than tenfold, to $1.5 billion from $125 million.

The granddaddies of do-good funds are Dreyfus Third Century in Manhattan and Pax
World in Portsmouth, N.H. The Calvert group in Bethesda, Md., has a family of
social-conscious funds. New Alternatives in Great Neck, L.I., invests at least
25 percent of its portfolio in companies with an interest in solar or
alternative energy.

Then there are two newcomers, started last year: the Muir California Tax-Free
Bond Fund in San Francisco and the Domini Social Index Trust in Boston. The
Green Century Funds, a no-load group, opened in mid-March with a twist --
besides investing in companies with environmentally sound businesses, the fund
sponsor promises to donate its profits to nonprofit environmental groups.

With all these choices, what should investors look for? Two things, says Don
Phillips, vice president of Morningstar Inc.: ethical criteria and investment
results.

One problem is that people can have different ideas about what is good for the
world. Most funds will not invest in companies involved with military-related
business, nuclear power, gambling, alcohol or tobacco.

But there are no universal standards for socially responsible investing. For
example, Dreyfus Third Century has owned two companies that other funds might
not: Dow Chemical, maker of Agent Orange, the defoliate used in the Vietnam War,
and Lockheed, a military contractor. Those companies were selected as the best
in their industries, a criterion that the fund no longer uses.

As a rule, descriptions of a fund's investment guidelines can be found in its
prospectus. A fund's actual holdings are listed in its semiannual or annual
report.

Investments made by social-conscience funds vary. Pax World and Calvert Social
Investment Managed Growth are balanced funds, combining stocks and bonds. Other
Calvert stock funds, Dreyfus Third Century and Parnassus Fund are growth funds.

As for performance, it is a mixed bag. Pax World had a 10.5 percent return in
1990, a year in which most stock funds lost money. But Parnassus lost 21.2
percent, placing in the bottom 1 percent of all funds, according to Morningstar.
A particularly volatile fund, Parnassus shot up in the year that ended on March
31, returning 29.2 percent, more than double the average stock fund.

As a group, the funds' performance was mediocre in the three years that ended on
March 31. Only two of the seven stock funds existing that long beat the stock
fund average. In the last decade, those two, the two oldest funds, made money
every year. Pax World returned an annual average of 15.6 percent, the same as
the average stock fund, and Dreyfus Third Century returned 14.6 percent.

A more recent entrant, the Rightime Social Awareness Fund in Wyncote, Pa., which
uses market timing, has a dismal track record. In the year ended March 31, the
fund gained only 4.5 percent, eight full percentage points less than stock funds
on average.

Then there is the Domini Social Index Trust. The fund replicates an index of 400
companies with an average market value of more than $10 billion. Among other
criteria, the companies must have good employee relations, strong commitments to
their communities and environmentally sound products. The fund has no upfront
load, but its operating expenses -- 75-hundredths of 1 percent of average net
assets -- are high for an index fund. That may partly explain its poor
performance so far. In the first quarter of 1992, the fund lost 2.4 percent,
compared with a 0.8 percent dip for all stock funds.

For socially conscious investors who need income, the Calvert Social Investment
Bond Fund returned 11 percent a year for the three years ended March 31,
compared with 10.4 percent for all fixed-income funds, Morningstar said. In
March, the fund was yielding 6.48 percent.

California residents who want income free of Federal and state taxes can use the
Muir California Tax Free Bond Fund, which purports to invest only in "the
highest-priority public needs of California." The fund yields roughly 9.5 to
9.75 percent after taxes, depending on the investor's state tax bracket.

As for sales charges, the Domini Trust, Dreyfus Third Century and Pax World are
no-loads. The rest of the funds carry upfront sales charges. The five Calvert
funds charge 4.75 percent. Parnassus has a 3.5 percent load; New Alternatives,
5.66 percent; Rightime, 4.75 percent, and Muir, 4.5 percent.

Despite their good intentions, social conscience funds have detractors. As
Sheldon Jacobs, publisher of the No-Load Fund Investor, put it, "Investors
having trouble finding an attractive social conscience fund might consider
putting their money into a better-performing fund and giving the excess profit
to their favorite charities."

LOAD-DATE: April 26, 1992

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Chart: "Ethical Investing," lists total returns from funds that invest
in socially responsible companies, annualized for the periods ended March 31,
1992 (Source: Morningstar)

                   Copyright 1992 The New York Times Company


                              65 of 281 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                  April 26, 1992, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

The Only Winner in Peruvian President's Coup Is the Military

SECTION: Section 4; Page 18; Column 4; Editorial Desk

LENGTH: 437 words


To the Editor:

The greatest mistake is to think that Peru's choices are between President
Alberto K. Fujimori and the previous constitutional order. "Peru and U.S.: What
Course to Take?" (news analysis, April 15) is right to state that a return to
the constitutional order is necessary but not sufficient for the preservation of
the democracy.

But throughout the analysis runs the common assumption that President Fujimori's
intentions are relevant. It will not be long before Mr. Fujimori realizes that
he is little more than a figurehead for a military regime. The true choice in
Peru is between democratic rule and military rule.

Mr. Fujimori, by his auto-coup of April 5, has made himself expend
The Times welcomes letters from readers. Letters must include the writer's name,
address and telephone number. We regret that we cannot acknowledge or return
unpublished letters. Those selected for publication may be shortened for space
reasonsable. By attacking the Constitution, the judiciary and the Congress, he
has destroyed vital checks and balances, leaving himself dependent on the
Peruvian military. If he can provide a veneer of legitimacy to avert
international sanction, the military will continue to use him as "President." If
he cannot, he will be unceremoniously dumped.

In short, any reality-based approach to the crisis in Peru must proceed on the
understanding that the military is already in charge.

Vietnam taught us -- I would hope -- that military governments cannot command
the popular allegiance needed to defeat a peasant-based revolution. The Peruvian
military must be told point-blank that it is on its own if it opposes
restoration of constitutional government. Without international support it knows
it cannot defeat the Shining Path rebels. At best the military will survive from
year to year with contraband weapons purchased with drug money -- making it
virtually indistinguishable from its adversaries. Peru will become the festering
sore of South America.

Or the military can escort Mr. Fujimori to the border (since his credentials as
a democrat are now worthless) and begin negotiations with the Peruvian Congress
and the acting president with whom the lawmakers have constitutionally replaced
him. The Congress and new president need the military to defend constitutional
order; the military needs constitutional order to secure international
assistance to defeat the Shining Path.

If the military is not able to make this basic choice, Peru is doomed. If it can
do the right thing, there is hope. Peru needs hope.

AARON TOVISH
New York, April 16, 1992

LOAD-DATE: April 26, 1992

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Letter

                   Copyright 1992 The New York Times Company


                              66 of 281 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                  April 26, 1992, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

THE WORLD;
Fujimori Talks Tough But the Coca Thrives

BYLINE: By NATHANIEL C. NASH

SECTION: Section 4; Page 2; Column 4; Week in Review Desk

LENGTH: 934 words

DATELINE: LIMA, Peru


THREE days after President Alberto K. Fujimori seized almost dictatorial power
on April 5, the newspapers here announced a bold move. The Air Force was being
sent into Peru's Upper Huallaga Valley, where the raw material for 60 percent of
the world's cocaine is produced. The mission: control the municipal and
clandestine airports used by Colombian traffickers and shoot down any
unauthorized air traffic. A week later, Peruvian policemen stormed the city of
Uchiza, the valley's Wild West boom town of drug trafficking and violence.

The two moves, the Government said, showed that Mr. Fujimori was tough on drug
trafficking, a prime reason he gave for his so-called "self-coup," in which he
dissolved what he called an obstructionist Congress and corrupt judiciary.

But for narcotics experts here, the strikes were at best too little too late, or
simply good theater. "Gringo baiting," one Peruvian expert called them -- moves
intended to pump up support for Mr. Fujimori's faltering international image.

"If you examine what he has done, there have been no coherent actions in the two
years that express a political will by the Fujimori Government to seriously
fight narcotics trafficking," said Diego Garcia-Sayan, executive director of the
Andean Commission of Jurists, a human rights organization.

And United Statesdrug officials are taking a dim view of the future. More and
more, they see little reason for the United States to maintain some of the drug
programs it conducts in Peru. Many are recommending a significant pullback.
"Everything we're doing is under close review," said an American official from
Washington. "We're not really getting a lot of results from the programs we
have."

Discouragement with the drug fight is certain to get worse in the wake of the
shooting on Friday by Peruvian fighter jets of a United States C-130 transport
plane that officials said was on a routine anti-drug mission off the Peruvian
coast. One crew member died and two were wounded; President Fujimori apologized
for the incident.

Indeed, a look at results shows not only little progress, but a clear indication
that drug production is growing unhindered in Peru. The amount of production
capacity in Peru has jumped 21 percent in two years. And eradication of coca
leaf seedlings, the future production capacity, fell 13 percent from 1990 to
1991. Seizures of drugs have also dropped. In 1988, drug police seized about six
tons of cocaine base. Last year that had fallen to about four tons.  Seizures of
cocaine paste fell from a 1988 high of about three tons to perhaps one ton in
1991.

Indeed, the only real sign of progress during Mr. Fujimori's two years in office
has been that the number of cocaine laboratories raided has grown from 39 in
1989 to 90 last year. And while the amount of coca under cultivation has
stabilized in the last three years, some Peruvian experts say it is the result
of a fungus, not police interdiction.

Meanwhile, the cost to the United States of supplying and maintaining the Santa
Lucia base that it built three years ago in the Upper Huallaga Valley is high.
Some 30 Drug Enforcement Administration agents and 260 Peruvian policemen
conduct raids and eradication programs from the base in what is known as
Operation Snow Cap; building the base cost almost $20 million, and it costs $25
million a year to run. Two D.E.A. helicopters have crashed this year, killing
three Americans and a Peruvian.

Words vs. Deeds

Moreover, Mr. Fujimori's commitments to the drug fight seem to reflect more
verbiage than policy. After getting large numbers of coca farmers to agree to
crop substitution last year, Mr. Fujimori pushed out his drug czar, Hernando de
Soto, and the program languished. An office to help farmers substitute other
crops for coca has yet to open.

Every day, Peru's Government looks the other way as the Central Bank sends out
couriers to buy up between $5 million and $6 million in American currency from
money changers who get their dollars from drug traffickers. Corruption among
police and army officials in the Upper Huallaga Valley is widely believed to
remain rampant.

In February, at the San Antonio drug summit, Mr. Fujimori accused the D.E.A. of
being corrupt and abusing human rights and said that the United States, by
militarizing the drug war, was risking another Vietnam. American officials were
stung by Mr. Fujimori's strident language, but they are also concerned that one
of his closest advisers, Vladimiro Montesinos, a former army captain and lawyer
considered to be in control of the Peruvian intelligence agency, has in the past
been tied to drug cartels. In the early 1980's, he signed legal documents on
behalf of a Colombian client for the purchase of two buildings in Lima that were
later raided and found to house cocaine processing. Mr. Montesinos has never
been convicted of a crime.

Now, in the wake of Mr. Fujimori's coup, the pressures within the Bush
Administration and in Congress are mounting to scale back the American presence,
because of both disappointment with Peru's commitment to the drug fight and a
desire not to prop up what is seen as a dictatorship.

Already, the United States has pulled out a group of Green Berets who were
training the Peruvian Army to fight drug traffickers. And the operation of two
large radar installations in the Upper Huallaga Valley is being halted.

There is also serious talk about ending Operation Snow Cap. "In the end we might
just end up with D.E.A. working in Lima and leaving the highlands to the
Peruvians," said one United States official.

LOAD-DATE: April 26, 1992

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo: Harvesting coca leaves in Peru. (Gustavo Gilabert/JB Pictures)

                   Copyright 1992 The New York Times Company


                              67 of 281 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                  April 26, 1992, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

Specter of Khmer Rouge

BYLINE: By HENRY KAMM,  Special to The New York Times

SECTION: Section 1; Part 1; Page 10; Column 1; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 1176 words

DATELINE: PHNOM PENH, Cambodia, April 22


Cambodia today is as peaceful as it has been in many a year. The rapidly
expanding United Nations presence, which is to guide the nation through free
elections by next May, appears to be succeeding in keeping the most combative of
the four contending factions, the Khmer Rouge and the Phnom Penh regime, from
gnawing at the edges of the zones the other occupies.

Although far from resting on their laurels, the top international officials,
bolstered by a visit last weekend by Secretary General Boutros Boutros-Ghali,
are gaining confidence that the largest and costliest of United Nations
peacekeeping operations might realize its mandate. That is to steer Cambodia
peacefully through elections and turn the country over to a government chosen by
its people by mid-1993.

Many Cambodians, from government ministers to peasant farmers, welcome that
measure of relief from the anxiety that has marked their lives almost without
interruption since war engulfed the country 22 years ago. Yet unlike the men and
women of many nations who have arrived here -- perhaps a quarter of the total of
22,000 who are eventually to take part in the international operations --
Cambodians hold no great hopes in the elections.

The most experienced diplomats here, as well as senior United Nations officials
when they speak privately, share the Cambodians' preoccupation: Can peace last
beyond the elections and the departure of the peacekeepers?

Khmer 'the Big Problem'

Over three weeks of interviews and casual conversations, no Cambodian expressed
the belief that the Khmer Rougewould live up in more than token fashion to its
obligation under the Paris peace agreement of last year to surrender its arms
and demobilize 70 percent of its troops.

"The Khmers Rouges have not changed," a senior minister of the Government of
Prime Minister Hun Sen said. "Their return is the big problem."

The Khmer Rouge, which is still commanded from redoubts on the Thai border by
Pol Pot, is represented here by two senior leaders, Gen. Son Sen, the military
chief, and Khieu Samphan, once the organization's nominal president. They live
in the capital and take part in official life as members of the 12-member
Supreme National Council led by Prince Norodom Sihanouk.

But wherever they appear -- at council meetings, official receptions or airport
ceremonies -- the gulf that separates them from the three other political
factions, or from ordinary Cambodians, is grimly evident.

Thai Logging Interests

They stand together in every crowd, glaring. Other Cambodians glare at them from
a distance. The United Nations officials who have business with them talk with
them at such occasions, with painfully forced smiles that do nothing to convey
amiability from either side. The Khmer Rouge distaste for the foreign presence
is as palpable as the support for it from Prince Sihanouk and other Cambodians.

Reluctantly, the Khmer Rouge guerrillas are beginning to comply to an extent
with demands for access to their zones and transparency in their activities,
United Nations officials say. But they show no disposition for the national
reconciliation that the Paris agreement calls for.

Their thinly disguised hostility, and reports from United Nations officers who
have seen Khmer Rouge troops on the ground and consider them by far the most
disciplined, well-armed and combat-ready force, give substance to the widespread
fear that they provoke. Cambodians and diplomats hold that Pol Pot and his
associates are profiting from the international legitimacy that China gained for
them by obtaining their participation in the Paris agreement but remain
determined to restore their rule over Cambodia, from which Vietnam dislodged
them in 1979.

Although China is believed to be living up to its commitment to halt material
support, the Khmer Rouge organization has developed its own sources of revenue
in trade with Thailand. The guerrillas sell rubies and other precious stones
from the Pailin area under their control and allow Thai logging interests to
operate extensively in the hardwood forest in their border zone.

Opening to the West

The Pol Pot faction is given slight chance of winning more than a feeble
percentage of vote. Because of a pronounced tendency of Cambodians to express
support for those who govern them, the governing party, which like the Khmer
Rouge has publicly abandoned communism, is thought likely to obtain a result
approximating the 80 percent of the territory that it controls, thanks to the
Vietnamese invasion.

No one here believes it likely that the Khmer Rouge would then become peaceful
members of a loyal opposition. Even leading members of the governing party
expect an unrelenting struggle in which Pol Pot will not hesitate to employ
military force after the United Nations troops have gone.

In contrast with the evident solidity of the Khmer Rouge movement, Prime
Minister Hun Sen's governing party is split into many factions. Diplomats from
the formerly Communist countries, who have the closest ties to the leaders of
what was once also a Communist Party, identify two main, openly hostile wings.

One is led by Mr. Hun Sen, who with great pragmatism has gone the furthest in
throwing the former ideology overboard and has committed himself to opening
Cambodia to the West. The other is led by the party chief, Chea Sim, who shuns
Westerners and is reputed to be a traditionalist and nationalist.

"There's only one ideology today -- survival in the power struggle," a central
European ambassador said. "They never were Marxists. They came out of the forest
in 1979 with no education or experience. Most are still the same today."

"Socialism is finished here," said the ambassador of an allied country. A senior
government minister said, "Communism simply does not go with the Cambodian
character."

Gone also, according to high officials and knowledgeable diplomats, is heavy
domination by Vietnam, which created the Hun Sen regime. Vietnam is believed to
still maintain ties with the military and a well-developed intelligence network.
But its own weakness and need for Western links to make up for the loss of
Soviet assistance have caused Hanoi to scale down its involvement here and in
Laos.

The demise of socialism has opened the door to what an ambassador with close
Government ties called "unbelievable corruption." Some Government ministers,
knowledgeable diplomats and much of the public fear that the openness of
official dishonesty, shown in luxurious villas rented to foreigners, many
expensive cars and a startling rise in the living standards of large extended
families, is playing into the hands of the Khmer Rouge, whose members continue
to enjoy a reputation for austerity.

"They are selling the country," the ambassador close to the regime said. "Their
wives, brothers and cousins are all in business."

The ambassador of an allied country said: "There are no rules, no laws, no
sanctions. It is very open and very extensive and reaches from the bottom to a
very high level.'

LOAD-DATE: April 26, 1992

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: News Analysis

                   Copyright 1992 The New York Times Company


                              68 of 281 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                  April 26, 1992, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

Bland Style That Made Desegregation Palatable

BYLINE: By LYNDA RICHARDSON,  Special to The New York Times

SECTION: Section 1; Part 1; Page 36; Column 1; Metropolitan Desk

LENGTH: 1093 words

DATELINE: YONKERS, April 24


No one will ever accuse this city's newly elected Mayor of being a flamboyant
politician.

But in a city that has been roiled for a dozen years by tumult over a Federal
court order to desegregate housing, many now say that Yonkers could do with less
flashy leaders. In Terence M. Zaleski, a former chemistry teacher and a lifelong
Boy Scout who still wears his uniform proudly, they believe Yonkers may have
found the bland style it needs.

"He's the kind of person who can possibly make resolving this thing palatable,"
said Andrew Beverage, a Westchester County Democratic Party official and a
sociology professor at Queens College. "So he's a little nerdy and he's the guy
who won all the scout awards. There are people like that in every community and
they often come back and end up running the town."

Searching for the Cure

In the tense days before agreement was reached on April 14 in the housing case,
Mr. Zaleski approached the negotiations dispassionately, analyzing the details
like a scientist in search of a cure.

"I saw this as the city's best and last chance to gain control of its destiny,"
said the 39-year-old Mayor, who was sworn into office in January. "This was a
chance for me to take the skills and approach I bring to problems to bear."

On the Sunday evening before the City Council vote on the compromise, a time of
flaring tempers and last-minute pacts, Mr. Zaleski kept his cool as a lawyer for
the N.A.A.C.P. lit into him at a meeting with black clergy and community
leaders.

"I was basically laying it on him," the lawyer, Michael Sussman, said with some
wonderment. "He seemed to be able to do what had to be done in a mature way."

The Mayor's calm approach was a striking contrast to that of the city's previous
Mayor, Henry J. Spallone, whose defiant discussion of the housing issue often
involved incendiary language equating Yonkers and Vietnam.

After campaigning last year on a platform that highlighted openness and
professionalism in city government, Mr. Zaleski, a Democrat, won the three-way
contest with 36 percent of the vote. He was viewed as a moderate who supported
compliance with a Federal judge's order to desegregate.

New Powers Were Put to Use

Mr. Zaleski, who took office under a new strong-mayor form of government, was
able to marshal support for the housing compromise using broad executive powers
and working with an idea that had been tossed about for years by civic leaders
and government officials. The Mayor worked from a proposal to desegregate
housing that relied primarily on existing housing rather than new construction,
as intended in the original plan.

The arrangement between the city and the plaintiffs -- the Justice Department
and the N.A.A.C.P. -- now awaits the approval of Judge Leonard B. Sand of the
Federal District Court in Manhattan.

"He was more practical," said City Councilman Nicholas C. Wasicsko, who was
denied re-election as mayor in 1989 because he supported compliance with the
court order. "Anyone who was seen as identifying too much with either side would
have had difficulty reaching an agreement. Maybe that's the type of person
needed to ultimately resolve this."

The Word Is Practical

Practical is a word that many people use to describe Mr. Zaleski.

The life of Mr. Zaleski, the Yonkers-born son of a sugar refinery worker,
reflects the history of many residents here. He grew up working class in this
city of 188,000, where the Saw Mill River Parkway has long separated whites on
the east side from blacks on the west side. His family lived for a time in a
cold-water flat and later settled in southwest Yonkers, where Judge Sand ruled
in 1985 that the city had deliberately segregated blacks for four decades in
grim housing projects.

"My roots are and always have been in southwest Yonkers," the Mayor said at City
Hall the other day. His office window overlooks the elegant spires of St. Mary's
Roman Catholic Church, where he attended the parish school and won many forensic
league trophies for his gift for public speaking.

But others say the Mayor is a son of Yonkers in more complicated ways -- keeping
too low a profile when the city could have used his leadership skills,
particularly in 1988 when he was a State Assemblyman and Yonkers was drawing
national attention as its Council members defied the order to desegregate.

Jack O'Toole, who heads a group of white homeowners who oppose the desegegration
order, said the Mayor ducked the issue because it was politically volatile. Even
now, Mr. O'Toole said, the Mayor speaks out of both sides of his mouth on the
housing issue.

"He never did anything prior to this to force integration," Mr. O'Toole said.
"I wouldn't trust the Mayor again. I'll tell everyone in the city not to trust
him."

Past Reticence

Today the Mayor seems to have trouble explaining his reticence back then.

"Quite frankly, nobody had asked and I was grappling with 'What was the
appropriate solution?' " Mr. Zaleski said. "The city was really on fire. At that
point, it seemed as though no one was willing to listen. It seemed like everyone
was caught up in a frenzy."

Critics and supporters alike agree that Mr. Zaleski's persistence helps him get
his way.

Charles Reiner, commissioner for the Westchester-Putnam Council of the Boy
Scouts of America, recalled how the Mayor refused to go home after he broke a
leg at a staff session at the Boy Scouts' national training headquarters in the
early 1970's. He went on to another Boy Scout camp, where he finished a 10-day
training session.

"That's Terry, on crutches, dancing around in the woods," Mr. Reiner said. "He
lives the principle of scouting in his whole life."

Now Mr. Zaleski says that his goal is to put the divisive housing issue behind
Yonkers and move on to the pressing issues of running the state's fourth largest
city.

"I've always had a desire to see this community work," he said.

He has his work cut out for him. The Mayor returned last Thursday from a
vacation in the Berkshires to find a minor move afoot to overthrow his
government.

While he was away, some City Council members introduced legislation that would
sharply curtail his executive powers by giving Council members their own
legislative department and the power to reject consultant contracts over $5,000.
There too, after meeting with Council members, the Mayor is working toward a
compromise.

"One day there is peace in the valley and the next there is full-out war," said
the Mayor's exasperated press aide, Robert Weber.

NAME: Terence M. Zaleski

LOAD-DATE: April 26, 1992

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo: "I saw this as the city's best and last chance to gain control
of its destiny," said Mayor Terence M. Zaleski of Yonkers. (Suzanne DeChillo for
The New York Times)

Chart: "Terence Mark Zaleski"

Born: Jan. 15,1953.

Hometown: Yonkers.

Family: Married to Lynn, Mastandrea. They have two children, Terence 2d and
Kimberly.

Education: Manhattan Preparatory High School, 1970; bachelor's degree in
chemistry, Columbia College, 1974; Masters degree in science eductation,
Columbia's Teachers College, 1975; Law degree, Columbia University Law School,
1984.

Career: Mayor of Yonkers since January. Democratic State Assemblyman from the
83rd District, 1987-1991; lawyer at the New York firm of Breed, Abbott & Morgan,
1984-1987; chemistry teacher at Tuckahoe High School in Eastchester, 1975-1981.

Salary: $102,000.

TYPE: Biography

                   Copyright 1992 The New York Times Company


                              69 of 281 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                  April 26, 1992, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

BACKTALK;
The Trick to Understanding Ali

BYLINE: By ROBERT LIPSYTE

SECTION: Section 8; Page 9; Column 3; Sports Desk

LENGTH: 844 words


TWENTY-FIVE years ago, when Muhammad Ali was saying "I was the onliest boxer in
history people asked questions like a senator," the Government considered him a
dangerous role model for young black men who would follow the champion's example
and reject the draft, or desert. That seems so absurd now as Ali, smiley and
hushed, comes to town to be patted and patronized, and to perform little hand
tricks that demystify magic.

But on April 28, 1967, chill and drizzly in Houston, when Ali refused to step
forward and be inducted into the United States Army, the world indeed watched.
Except for a brief demonstration staged by television news producers who needled
some black students and secretaries into performing for their cameras, there was
little immediate reaction outside the Custom House.

But throughout America, particularly on campuses and in locker rooms, it was
quite clear that something extraordinary had happened. A man was willing to give
up the heavyweight championship, the richest prize in all of SportsWorld, for
something as abstract as religious principle. Here was an athlete who stood for
something besides winning and money.

His principles were narrow. Ali never became seriously involved in the growing
antiwar, anti-administration, civil rights movements of the time because that
would conflict with the Nation of Islam's divorcement from white politics. At
least in the beginning, his objection to the Vietnam War was not an informed
political opinion, nor was it an expression of international solidarity with
other people of color. It was simple. Muslims did not serve. The leader, Elijah
Muhammad, had been jailed during World War II for refusing induction.

A year before his noninduction, when Ali said, "I ain't got nothing against them
Vietcong," state governments and boxing commissions and veterans' groups and
editorial writers waved the quote like a bloody flag and used it to drive him
out of the country to fight. But he meant precisely what he said. He did not
know where Vietnam was. He could not understand why he had just been
reclassified 1A without a new test. He whined, "Why me?" As the champion, he
pointed out, his taxes would "buy a lot of bullets, at least three jet bombers a
year."

By the time his number actually came up, Ali had received so much encouragement
from the kind of left-leaning, integrationist, dope-smoking, Christian and
atheistic groups he privately derided, here and abroad, he began to compare
himself to such other great men of history as Jesus, Moses and Wyatt Earp.

But it was clear to men and women coming of social and political age in the 60's
that Ali actually believed in something, and that the system was crushing an
individual's right to dissent. No matter how absurd his religion may have seemed
to many of them at the time, they understood that Ali was prepared to sacrifice.
By the time the case was finally adjudicated -- the Supreme Court reversed his
conviction in a decision that seemed to indicate that the climate of the 70's
did not require Ali in jail -- he had lost more than three years of athletic
prime time.

And as we know, Ali went on, for money and fame, to fight too long and too hard.

There are older people who believe that Joe Louis was a better fighter, a better
person and a more important racial symbol than Ali. There are younger people who
see Ali as the shambling wreck, a celebrity shell who patiently signs
autographs, gratefully poses for pictures, hands out religious tracts and does
those magic tricks. That may be the metaphor. He doesn't want to mislead the
audience. He wants to be understood.

Two weeks ago, at a symposium at Miami (Ohio) University convened by Elliott
Gorn, a history professor, Ali performed before one of his most educated groups.

Eight scholars -- Michael Eric Dyson of the University of Chicago; Gerald Early
of Washington University, St. Louis; Othello Harris of Miami; Thomas Hietala of
Grinnell College; Michael Oriard of Oregon State; Randy Roberts of Purdue;
Jeffrey Sammons of New York University and David Wiggins of George Mason
University -- read papers about Ali's historical, religious, linguistic and
political impact while the former champion himself smiled and nodded, and
sometimes nodded off. Gorn had invited him almost casually, as a courtesy. He
showed up, for expenses only.

Some of the papers added new insights, some rehashed old myths, but all treated
him with a respect for his importance to his time that many of the
undergraduates in the audience could not fully understand. They see Ali the
international guest, the pet, who will help publicize a second-rate fight in New
Jersey with the same good nature he brings to Mideast hostage negotiations or a
Midwest academic conference. He is sharper than one thinks, but far more
diminished than when he was "asked questions like a senator." But the will that
scared a government and energized a generation seems still to throb inside that
stiff body. How else could he still push himself out into the world to make
tricks?

LOAD-DATE: April 26, 1992

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo: Muhammad Ali talking with servicemen before entering the Armed
Forces Examining and Entrance Station in Houston on April 28, 1967. (Associated
Press)

                   Copyright 1992 The New York Times Company


                              70 of 281 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                  April 26, 1992, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

THE 1992 CAMPAIGN: President's Family;
One of Bush's Campaign Advisers Is Also His Son

BYLINE: By ROBERTO SURO,  Special to The New York Times

SECTION: Section 1; Part 1; Page 26; Column 3; National Desk

LENGTH: 1348 words

DATELINE: ATHENS, Tex.


The crowd at the Rotary Club's weekly luncheon in this small East Texas county
seat was up and applauding before the guest speaker had a chance to say a word.

With an aw-shucks toss of his head, the man at the podium said, "When you are
Nolan Ryan's boss and Barbara Bush's son, people treat you the nicest ways."

George W. Bush seems to be a very happy man this spring because his life is a
blend of baseball and politics with enough time left over for some serious bass
fishing.

Confidant and Adviser

As managing general partner of the Texas Rangers baseball franchise, he
cheerfully predicts his team will be a pennant contender, but beyond that, he
has an important and singular role in the affairs of American government and the
Presidential campaign. As the eldest son of George H. W. Bush, he is a confidant
of the President, an adviser who can be counted on to provide the unvarnished
truth, and one who can be a fiercely loyal advocate.

He has already left his mark by helping push John H. Sununu, the former chief of
staff, out of the White House last December and by warning his father's campaign
team two weeks ago that Ross Perot should be taken seriously as a possible
Presidential candidate.

"I'm not a thousand-pound gorilla," he said of his role in the campaign, "but do
I talk to my dad? You bet. Do I bring a different perspective than what he
usually hears? You bet. Does he do everything I suggest? No way. But he can
always be totally sure that my agenda is his agenda."

And the President can be sure that his son will react quickly to a perceived
slight or personal attack on any member of his family.

'Very Protective'

"Anything that is said in or out of context against his father, well, he almost
takes it personally," said Dr. Charles Younger, an orthopedist in Midland, Tex.,
who has been a friend of Mr. Bush for many years. "It comes to such a degree, I
guess that paranoid is not the right word, but he is very protective."

He is equally sensitive about himself, expressing deep resentment over
suggestions that as a director of the Harken Energy Corporation he sold $848,000
worth of the oil company's stock in 1990 on the basis of inside information, two
months before its price dropped sharply. He dismisses such accusations, saying,
"You question a man's integrity, you better believe he'll get angry."

In Texas, Mr. Bush, 45 years old, has become such a highly visible public figure
that he has moved out of his father's shadow, although he still benefits from
being the other George Bush.

He cheers at almost every Rangers' home game from a front-row seat on the
first-base line, and every time the veteran Nolan Ryan sets a pitching record
Mr. Bush is there to share the limelight. Recently, he has been promoting a plan
to build a new stadium by 1994 for the team that his partnership bought in 1989.

Mr. Bush lives in an upper-middle-class neighborhood in Dallas with his wife,
Laura, and their twin 10-year-old daughters, who go to a public school.

Among business leaders Mr. Bush is known for his connections rather than his
wealth.

"He gets called about business opportunities because he knows a lot of people
with money and he knows how to get them together around an idea," said Clay
Johnson, an investor and a friend of Mr. Bush since high school.

Mr. Bush is equally well connected in the world of Republican politics, popping
up frequently in different parts of the state to campaign for candidates. "He's
one of the people you want to see if you're going to make a run at the
Legislature or something because his backing counts and because he gives good
advice," said Rick Perry, who was elected Texas Agriculture Commissioner in 1990
with Mr. Bush's help.

At least twice a week, by his own reckoning, he is campaigning somewhere,
offering the message he gave the Rotarians here: Rangers baseball is the best
entertainment value in Texas and George Bush is the best President in the world.


Run for Governor?

Having considered a run for governor in 1990 before deciding he was not ready,
Mr. Bush now looks very much as if he is preparing for a campaign of his own. In
1978 he ran for Congress in West Texas. He won the Republican nomination but
lost in the general election.

While Texans speculate that he will challenge Gov. Ann W. Richards in 1994, he
will say only: "I've got a lot of neat things to do right now. If politics comes
along and there's an opening, that'd be great, but I don't have a game plan."

Mr. Bush exudes an almost boyish zeal for competition whether it is baseball, an
election or fishing. But people who have campaigned with him insist that his
enthusiasms are tempered by canny political instincts. A man who much prefers
wearing jeans to business suits, Mr. Bush says his greatest asset may be his
ability to get along with and understand ordinary people, those who fill ball
parks and decide elections.

Like his father, Mr. Bush is a product of the Ivy League, having graduated from
Andover, Yale and the Harvard Graduate School of Business Administration. Yet
he, too, sees fundamental differences between himself and the President.

"I am a Texan in mind and spirit, and this is where I belong," he said on a
recent fishing trip as he cast a lure into the reedy shallows of a lake teeming
with bass. "One big difference between me and my dad is that I did go to San
Jacinto Junior High School in Midland, Tex., and he went to Greenwich Country
Day. You are what you come from."

Washington is a place he dismisses as "the epicenter of gossip and self-
promotion." Washington is also about the only place people call him "junior," a
misnomer he dislikes.

He spent 20 months in Washington working on his father's 1988 campaign and then
on the transition team. That experience changed his relationship with his
father.

"We had done a lot of stuff together, but we had never worked together," he
said. "We had never shared anything like a campaign. It's one thing to know a
guy as your dad and another to know him as a warrior, to be in the trenches with
him during a tough political fight."

Older Than the Vice President

More than any of his siblings, more than any other Presidential offspring in the
postwar era, Mr. Bush has become a trusted adviser in the Oval Office. It helps
that the age difference between father and son is only 22 years.

"I'm his kid, but I'm also older than his vice president," Mr. Bush said.

This year he plans to visit Washington regularly but not become a fixture in the
campaign headquarters. "I think I can bring an added dimension by staying out
here and staying in touch with folks like the Athens, Tex., Rotary Club."

When he talks about politics, Mr. Bush does not focus much on ideology, issues,
poll numbers or television advertising strategies. "I don't think campaigns are
terribly profound," he said. "The issues are profound. The debate should be
profound. But campaigning is really just a matter of getting the message out to
the voters and getting the voters to the polls."

Karl Rove, a Republican campaign consultant in Austin, said: "His strengths are
his ability to read the political environment and sense the best way to
articulate a vision so that it comes across. He is definitely a big- picture
kind of guy, not someone fascinated with the day-to-day minutiae of a campaign."

Within party circles, Mr. Rove said, Mr. Bush was known as "a reform Republican
who believes the party must acknowledge generational change and go beyond the
agenda of the past 20 years."

But, for someone who graduated from college in 1968, he seems to have avoided
the political turmoil that once gripped many in his generation.

Mr. Bush says he has trouble recalling his own position on the Vietnam War,
except that he was prepared to serve. He joined the Texas Air National Guard and
became a fighter pilot based in Houston.

As his father struggles to focus his message in a tumultuous election year, Mr.
Bush says his own task is simple: "It's pretty easy to talk about how great your
dad is when you love him."

NAME: George W. Bush

LOAD-DATE: May 9, 1992

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo: George W. Bush, the son of President Bush, fishing recently in
Athens, Tex. He warned his father's campaign team two weeks ago that Ross Perot
should be taken seriously as a possible Presidential candidate. (Mark Perlstein
for The New York Times)

TYPE: Biography

                   Copyright 1992 The New York Times Company


                              71 of 281 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                  April 26, 1992, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

After AIDS, Gay Art Aims for a New Reality

BYLINE: By MICHAEL CUNNINGHAM;  Michael Cunningham is author of the novel "A
Home at the End of the World."

SECTION: Section 2; Page 1; Column 1; Arts & Leisure Desk

LENGTH: 2641 words


I was 17 when i saw "The Boys in The Band," and it just about scared me
straight. This was Pasadena, 1970. The new future wasn't happening there.
Pasadena was still Buicks and tartan plaid. Most boys my age were stolid and
cheerful as Rotarians, and wore the same shoes. I was dating girls but I had
some questions I hoped the movie might answer.

If you're straight, you may not fully appreciate how terrifying "The Boys in the
Band" could be to a guilt-haunted 17-year-old unsure of his sexuality. In the
movie, as in the play, a gaggle of gay men hold a birthday party and take turns
demonstrating their crisp, clever self-hatred. Everyone is witty and empty and
howlingly sad.

Sitting alone in the theater in 1970, I said to myself, "I'll do anything to
escape this. I'll learn to think different thoughts." I went to a lot of trouble
trying to rewire myself, to invent a revised self with a more conventional
future. I was lucky enough to fail.

Now, more than 20 years later, we have William Finn's "Falsettos," opening
Wednesday at the Golden Theater, the first big-deal Broadway musical in which
two men with ordinary lives sing an old-fashioned love duet to each other. In
"Falsettos," the gay lovers share a tormented mix of devotion and misgivings,
like any lovers do. No one is revealed to be shallow or sadistic or emotionally
barren. "Falsettos" is about two men who manage to hold onto each other as one
of them is blown away, piece by piece, by AIDS.

AIDS has slammed in a new perspective. These days, most theater by or about gay
people is fueled by a sorrow so intricately threaded with rage that the two
emotions have started to feel like the same thing. Mourning and fury run through
work as various as the piercing tragicomic sketches about black gay life by the
San Francisco group PoMo Afro Homos (Post-Modern African-American Homosexuals);
the fiercely political plays of the Cuban Ana Maria Simo sometimes performed in
Manhattan, and the Wooster Group actor Ron Vawter's impersonations of Roy Cohn,
the world's most infamous closet case, and of Jack Smith, the flamingly gay
performance artist who inspired Susan Sontag's seminal essay "Notes on Camp."
Both Cohn and Smith died of AIDS.

In "The Destiny of Me," a recently completed play by Larry Kramer, a livid
middle-aged man with AIDS joins his defiant, tormented adolescent self to sing
an old song of love and optimism from "South Pacific." In his dance piece
"Translucent Illustrations of Idiot People," the dancer-choreographer Doug
Elkins has same-sex and opposite-sex couples in T-shirts that say "Fag," "Dyke"
and "Queer" dancing defiantly to the voices of skinheads screaming their hatred
of homosexuals and George Bush extolling his thousand points of light.

Gay anger isn't new. Gay sorrow isn't either. Both were burgeoning well before
AIDS announced itself. But if gay emotions feel especially sharp these days, it
may be because, until relatively recently, many of us tended to tell ourselves
we were provisional members of the status quo. Unlike most other groups that
live on the margins, white gay men can pass. Taxi drivers don't ignore us. We
get good tables in restaurants. It was easy to imagine we belonged to the club,
and that may help account for an old tendency to apologize for whatever set us
apart.

A play like "The Boys in the Band" cooperated with the stereotypes, even if gay
men knew better. Right, we're hollow and full of self-disdain and we don't know
love from a 2 by 4. Right. If you tell the lie about yourself first, you get the
jump on everybody else.

AIDS has changed everything, and not only because it's invading our bodies. AIDS
has also torn the wrapper off this country's hatred of homosexuals. During the
plague's 11 years, two Presidents have pointedly reserved their sympathies for
the so-called innocent victims of AIDS -- babies and hemophiliacs. Gay-bashing
has become so popular that in Houston, the first American city to send
undercover police officers into gay neighborhoods, two agents were attacked
their first night on the job. Gov. Pete Wilson of California vetoed a basic
anti-discrimination bill, and Magic Johnson recently inspired cheers and
applause with his announcement to the talk-show host Arsenio Hall that while
he's H.I.V.-positive he's not in any way homosexual.

Some of us had let ourselves believe we were forgiven, even embraced. We had
thought we were on the bus.

The sea change in gay male sensibility is apparent in "Falsettos," in the gulf
that stretches between Act I and Act II. What's now being performed as
"Falsettos" is really a combination of the last two parts of a trilogy of
one-act musicals by Mr. Finn, each staged independently over the last 13 years.
(The first part, "In Trousers," doesn't figure in the current production.) Act I
of "Falsettos" originally appeared Off Broadway in 1981 as "March of the
Falsettos." It's a domestic comedy that centers on Marvin, who's married but
gay, his wife, his male lover and his 12-year-old son, who worries that he has
gay genes. The second act was first performed as "Falsettoland" in 1990. The
mood is blacker, more charged with fury. Now a ragged family composed of Marvin,
his boyfriend and two new characters, lesbian lovers, look to the now
13-year-old to hold them together as death starts scraping against the glass.

It's good to have a show like "Falsettos" on Broadway. We need to remember,
though, that AIDS in the United States is spreading not only among gay people
but among women, intravenous drug users and other groups. But if you judge by
what has been shown on and Off Broadway, you could easily imagine that gay white
men are the only ones contracting AIDS, and the only ones writing plays about
it. That's beginning to change. "Before It Hits Home," a new play by Cheryl West
that appeared last winter at the Public Theater, maps the emotional geography of
a black family whose eldest son, a bisexual musician, gets the disease. Paula
Vogel's "Baltimore Waltz," at the Circle Rep earlier this season, doles out an
AIDS-like disease to a straight female protagonist who is comforted by her
healthy gay brother.

Still, if you go to a show that touches on AIDS, the odds are good you're going
to be seeing a lot of gay white men.

Would all this interest in the lives of gay men exist without AIDS? Probably,
but in a different form. Throughout the 1970's and early 80's changes were
subtle and nonconfrontational; they had about as much to do with profits as with
human rights. I remember noticing the inroads. Men started turning up as sex
objects in advertisements. Most of the hottest clubs were essentially gay
parties to which straight people were invited, as long as they behaved. Shows
like "Torch Song Trilogy" and "La Cage aux Folles" packed houses, in part by
telling audiences that their gay sons wanted exactly the same things straight
people were expected to want: reliable love, children, somewhere safe to put a
few potted plants.

It was all, at heart, about the kindness and harmlessness of gay people. In
1982, 20th Century Fox released "Making Love," the first sympathetic Hollywood
movie about gay lovers. Instead of preening queens, the protagonists were spruce
and foursquare as two senior class presidents. They were like the guys I grew up
with in Pasadena.

I saw "Making Love" and hated it. Afterward I wondered if maybe I was refusing
to be satisfied out of plain peevishness. I kept asking myself, what exactly do
I want?

AIDS, and all the slumbering homophobia it has stirred up, seems to be answering
the question. I want to see gay characters portrayed as fully, elaborately
human. We've come a long dark way since the Stonewall riots in 1969, when a
police raid on a gay bar in Manhattan sparked gay activism. A whole generation
of gay people has come of age since then. While we have nothing to apologize
for, it's clear that we're more than just straight people with this one little
variation. We may or may not be biologically different, but our experience of
otherness absolutely helps shape who we become. In the last few years most gay
artists have joined gay activists in insisting not only on our similarities but
on our disparities as well.

In drama, it's goodbye to well-groomed, well-behaved characters like the big
yawns in "Making Love" and hello to characters like Whizzer, the young lover in
"Falsettos." Whizzer is as jockish and competitive as Jimmy Connors. At the same
time he harbors an interest in style that makes Paloma Picasso look like an
amateur.

In a certain way we've negotiated a 20-year circle. "The Boys in the Band" was
about our differences, too. But today no one worth mentioning is trying to turn
a few bucks by pandering to audiences' disdain for gay people. The message is
relatively simple: we have every right to our particularities.

Now the performance artist Holly Hughes complains to audiences about all the
flack her lover takes on the street because she looks more butch than James
Dean. The Manhattan-based Five Lesbian Brothers perform a burlesque of lesbian
stereotypes in which one character is impaled by a javelin at the Olympics and
another plans to build an orphanage out of toast. The performance artist Tim
Miller tells obsessive stories about growing up gay in the suburbs, and the
comedian Frank Maya reminisces about a childhood in which he wore Speedos and
sunglasses and walked his poodle to the score from "Gypsy," which blasted
through speakers he had set up in the windows of his parents' house.

I'd like to think all this exposure is making things a little easier for
whoever's growing up gay in Pasadena right now, but I'm not so sure. Most of the
gay stuff is still rarefied. A small avalanche of gay movies is now playing or
will soon arrive in Manhattan, including Derek Jarman's "Edward II," Tom Kalin's
"Swoon" and Gregg Araki's "Living End."

None is likely to turn up at theaters in shopping malls. What's playing in the
malls is "The Prince of Tides," featuring George Carlin as a swishy old queen
who's every bit as wise, good-hearted and ultimately extraneous as Mammy in
"Gone With the Wind."

In the Pat Conroy novel on which "The Prince of Tides" is based, the brilliant
and suicidal sister of the character played by Nick Nolte is a lesbian. That
fact didn't make it into the movie. The most prominent gay and bisexual female
characters currently appearing on screens nationwide are the ones in "Basic
Instinct," all of whom are psychotics.

If white boys who suspect they are gay don't get many chances to see themselves
portrayed as complex characters, young lesbians and ethnic gay young people
rarely see themselves portrayed at all. Adrienne Rich is probably the most
famous living lesbian who writes about lesbians, but she's a poet, working in
the least visible field of human artistic endeavor. Jenny Livingston's
documentary "Paris Is Burning," about black and Hispanic cross-dressers, got
ecstatic reviews but wasn't even nominated for an Oscar in the documentary
category.

The television industry is doing slightly better. In addition to sympathetic gay
male characters on series like "Roseanne" and "Beverly Hills 90210," "L.A. Law"
features C. J., a cheerfully bisexual woman, and ended its last Christmas show
with a shot of her happily reunited with her female lover.

In the visual arts the most widely seen, overtly gay images are the work of Gran
Fury, an AIDS activist artists' collective responsible for the now-famous
photographs of women kissing women and men kissing men over the phrase "Read My
Lips." Real attention has also been paid to artists like David Wojnarowicz,
Donald Moffett, Robert Gober and others. But if you ask dealers and curators to
name some interesting gay women artists, you'll probably get an embarrassed
silence. The most prominent artist whose work directly reflects her lesbianism
is the Los Angeles-based Millie Wilson. Other lesbian artists are more
circumspect. As the painter Deborah Kass says, "Women are so stigmatized as
women, queer politics are almost a luxury for us."

We need more gay voices, a wider range, because a deep melancholy -- a numbness
-- is beginning to crowd out the rage and whatever was left of the optimism gay
people once felt. Sometimes it seems important that gay artists are dying faster
than new ones are arriving.

"Everyone I know is discouraged," the playwright Larry Kramer says. "We thought
we were going to change the world."

Still, some gay people have survived their childhoods, and some -- a smaller
number -- are surviving the plague. Now we hope to survive the mounting
discouragement of a generation that can't help but wonder what good art of any
kind is accomplishing as we walk from hospital room to hospital room and as we
keep hearing, over and over, that a largely unconcerned government is doing
everything it can.

But even in the plague years, male and female artists are turning out passionate
new work about gay lives. Maybe the most hopeful news these days is the growing
evidence that the black sheep -- all who have been scorned or shunted aside --
are beginning to band together. We're starting to see that we're all subject to
the same hostile indifference, whether we're gay or female or ethnic or some
combination of the three.

There's a terrible love going around, and it's surviving all this death. There
is a scattering of small miracles to look forward to. Tony Kushner's "Angels in
America," now showing at the National Theater in London and due in New York next
March, compassionately explores the lives of a drag queen, a straight woman and
a host of gay men who range from campy to closeted. Alternate Visions, a
racially mixed battalion of adolescent writers and performers, is playing La
Mama and other places with a series of sketches about life among the young and
gay. Jacqueline Woodson, who has written six young-adult books, is at work on an
adult novel that brings a black lesbian character into explosive contact with
racism and the war in Vietnam.

A bigger, broader, more complicated gay experience is being depicted these days.
It's apparent in Act II of "Falsettos," as the two men bicker and complain and
then, when one of them is dying, sing a love song that could scratch a diamond.
A wider emotional range is beginning to show up not only among gay artists but
among straight artists, too, as we see more and more clearly how homophobia, as
well as racism and sexism, diminish all of us, whatever our race, gender or
sexual bent.

This is "The Promise," a new poem by Marie Howe, who's working on a collection
of verse about her brother, a gay man who died of AIDS:

 In the dream I had when he came back, not sick
 but whole, and wearing his winter coat,
 he looked at me as though he couldn't speak, as if
 there were a law against it, a membrane he couldn't break,
 his silence was the thing he could not
 not do, like our breathing in this world, like our living,
 as we do, in time.
 And I told him: I'm reading all this Buddhist stuff
 and listen, we don't die when we die. Death is an event,
 a threshold we pass through. We go on and on
 and into light forever.
 And he looked down and back at me. It was the look we'd pass
 across the kitchen table when Dad was drunk again and dangerous
 the level look that wants to tell you something
 in a crowded room, something important, and can't.

That's what we do these days. We pass level looks across the table, as things
keep getting more and more dangerous. We strenuously reject not only the old
stereotypes but the newer, well-intended oversimplifications. We try to tell
ourselves and other people what we're learning from our anger and our loss and
the upper reaches of our fear. We try to comfort one another. We shine a
ferocious light.

LOAD-DATE: April 26, 1992

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photos: The 1982 film "Making Love" with Harry Hamlin, left, and
Michael Ontkean -- Foursquare lovers. (Wynn Hammer/20th Century Fox); Brian
Freeman, left, Bernard Djola Branner and Eric Gupton of PoMo Afro Homos, which
performs sketches about black gay life. (Tom Brazil)(pg. 16)

Drawing: The musical "Falsettos" opens on Wednesday with, from left, Michael
Rupert, Heather Mac Rae, Chip Zien, Carolee Carmello, Barbara Walsh, Stephen
Bogardus and Jonathan Kaplan -- A prime example of the sea change in gay male
sensibility. (pg. 1)(Al Hirschfeld)

                   Copyright 1992 The New York Times Company


                              72 of 281 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                  April 27, 1992, Monday, Late Edition - Final

THE 1992 CAMPAIGN: Candidate's Record;
Perot Goes Heavy on Drama, and Light on Details

BYLINE: By STEVEN A. HOLMES,  Special to The New York Times

SECTION: Section A; Page 1; Column 3; National Desk

LENGTH: 2294 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, April 26


Leon Sullivan, a Philadelphia minister who in the past two decades has been one
of America's leading advocates for change in South Africa, recalls a
conversation he had in the mid-1980's with Ross Perot, the Dallas billionaire
who is considering a candidacy for President.

In their discussion Mr. Sullivan remarked that he doubted any significant
improvement would occur in South Africa until Nelson Mandela, leader of the
African National Congress, got out of prison. "If Mandela being in jail is the
problem, let's find a way to get him out," Mr. Sullivan remembers Mr. Perot
saying.

"It was vintage Perot," Mr. Sullivan said last week in a telephone interview
from Philadelphia. "If there's a problem, find a way to solve it. You don't need
committees and commissions."

To some who have been drawn into Mr. Perot's orbit and emerged as either backers
or bashers, the incident is illustrative of another aspect of his approach to
problems: his suggestion was devoid of details on how to achieve the end, and
there appeared to be little follow through. When Mr. Mandela's release came --
in 1989 -- it had nothing to do Mr. Perot.

John Cole, president of the Texas Federation of Teachers, who worked with Mr.
Perot on overhauling the state's school system, said, "My perception is that his
style is to move into something like a whirlwind, to do something that's high
profile, and then, bang, dust his hands and on to the next subject."

As a highly successful businessman who periodically injects himself into the
public policy arena, Mr. Perot has earned a reputation as a no-nonsense problem
solver. It is an image that Mr. Perot projects as he ponders whether to enter
the Presidential race.

Clues From the Past

"If the people don't want action, if they don't want these problems solved, if
they don't want aggressive programs to get rid of the violence in the
communities, to rebuild the cities, to get this country back on track, to stop
the deterioration of the job base and the tax base, they don't want me," Mr.
Perot said recently in a televised interview with David Frost. "This will take
action, action, action."

So far, Mr. Perot, who built his fortune in the computer industry, has been
reticent about spelling out how he would tackle problems like crime, drug use,
poor performance of students or the Federal budget deficit.

But hints of how Mr. Perot would approach complex issues do emerge from an
examination of the times when he has left the business world and moved like a
Texas twister into the public policy arena. Whether it is revamping the Texas
schools, fighting drug abuse or aiding American prisoners of war held in North
Vietnam, Mr. Perot has displayed a penchant for direct action and for working
outside conventional rules, as well as a flair for the dramatic that guarantees
publicity.

He has also shown strong evidence of bipartisanship. In 1979 William P. Clements
Jr., the Republican Governor of Texas, appointed him to head a study group on
drug abuse. Five years later he was chosen by Gov. Mark White, a Democrat, to
head a panel to study the state's educational system.

In 1985 when officials from the Reagan Administration asked him to try to secure
the release of of William Buckley, the Beirut station chief for the Central
Intelligence Agency who had been kidnapped, Mr. Perot turned to the Rev. Jesse
Jackson, who the year before had run for the Democratic Presidential nomination.

"Somebody asked, 'Who had a track record of getting somebody out of Beirut?' and
Jackson was the only one who had," Mr. Perot said.

Opening Checkbook

Mr. Perot paid for a trip to Beirut by Mr. Jackson, who in 1984 had gained the
release from Syria of Robert Goodman, a Navy pilot shot down over Lebanon. But
the civil rights leader was unable to gain Mr. Buckley's freedom.  But in a
recent interview, Mr. Perot said Mr. Jackson was the one to learn that Mr.
Buckley had died while in captivity.

As one of the country's richest men, worth between $2.5 billion and $3.5
billion, Mr. Perot has also not been shy about opening his checkbook to deal
with problems. In 1970, he offered to buy the release of American captives from
the North Vietnamese, saying he could raise $100 million. In 1986 he agreed to a
request from Lieut. Col. Oliver L. North, the former National Security Council
aide, to pay a $1 million ransom for American hostages held in Lebanon.

In both cases, no ransom is known to have been paid and none of the captives
were released.

Over the years Mr. Perot has also attracted people who share his leanings
towards swashbuckling action.  But at times this attraction has led him into
embarrassing situations.

In 1979, he provided security guards to protect Creig Matthews and his wife, Kim
Wozencraft, two undercover narcotics officers from Tyler, Tex. The two had
convinced Mr. Perot and law enforcement authorities that their lives were in
danger for having arrested 121 drug figures in East Texas.

It later turned out the Ms. Wozencraft and Mr. Matthews had themselves become
users of some of the drugs they had bought as undercover agents. They had also
faked evidence and committed perjury. Their exploits were later turned into a
novel, "Rush" (Random House, 1990), written by Ms. Wozencraft, and a movie.

Bored With Conventions

Some people who have worked with Mr. Perot on government panels say he is one
who quickly gets bored with the conventions and compromises that characterize
most government work, a trait that could be attractive to an electorate grown
sour on Washington.

"One of the unique attributes of the man is that he has a very clear idea of
what he wishes to do and how he wishes to do it," said Leo Cherne, the former
vice chairman of the Foreign Intelligence Advisory Board, a private body that
advises the Federal Government on intelligence matters. Mr. Perot quit the board
in frustration in 1985. "He is not necessarily easily accommodating of the views
of others," Mr. Cherne said.

Unlike his achievement in building Electronic Data Systems into the most
successful computer services company in the world, it is unclear whether Mr.
Perot's sorties into government policy have had lasting effect.

For example, in 1984, as the head of a special state body appointed by the
governor, he pushed through the Texas Legislature a package of changes for the
state's schools that included a tax increase, higher pay and a competency test
for teachers, a limit on class sizes and a prohibition on students'
participating in extracurricular activities if they fail subjects.

While the changes were praised at the time, Mr. Perot acknowledges that they
have since been watered down. The teacher competency examination only tested
whether teachers could achieve the literacy level of an 11th grader. Tough
economic times forced the state to cut the level of financing that the changes
had promised. Three years after the package passed, its major component -- the
change of the state board of education from an elected to an appointed body --
was reversed by voters.

Officials at the Educational Testing Service, which administers a standardized
math exam, said they lacked the data to determine whether Texas pupils had
improved as a result of Mr. Perot's efforts.

Similarly, in 1979 when Mr. Perot was named chairman of the Texas Special Task
Force on Drug Abuse, he developed laws, enacted by the Legislature, that
stiffened penalties to those convicted of selling drugs to minors, made it
easier for the police to seize the property of those accused of trafficking in
narcotics, and prohibited the sale and possession of drug paraphernalia.

Program Is Assailed

Drug arrests in the state totaled 61,742 last year, as against 47,879 in 1979.
And critics say the crackdown has not worked. "It certainly was not a successful
program," said Ted Lyon, A Democratic State Senator representing Dallas and
parts of East Texas. "That's not to blame Ross Perot. The focus was on passing
tougher laws, and not on building more prisons. It was a short-sighted way of
dealing with the problem."

Mr. Perot burst onto the national scene in 1969 when he paid to send 150
relatives of American prisoners to Paris, where they protested Hanoi's failure
to adhere to the Geneva Convention on the treatment of prisoners of war. At the
same time, Mr. Perot chartered two Boeing 707's, filled them with food, mail
from loved ones, medicine and clothing and tried to deliver the packages to
prisoners in North Vietnam.

Mr. Perot's efforts on behalf of the prisoners, and later for servicemen missing
in action, helped feed a movement that was encouraged by President Richard M.
Nixon as a political counterweight to anti-war sentiments. The M.I.A. effort
developed into a major cause, whose advocates saw the Government as at least
unresponsive, or at worst part of a conspiracy to hide the truth about missing
servicemen.

Mr. Perot says he undertook his mission at the behest of President Nixon and
Henry Kissinger, who at the time was national security adviser. Through a
spokesman Mr. Nixon said last week, however, that he has "no recollection" of
asking Mr. Perot to take on this task.  Mr. Kissinger declined to comment.

"I would not say we formally asked him to do it as such," said Alexander M.
Haig, who was Mr. Kissinger's deputy at the time, and served as the liaison
between the White House and Mr. Perot. "But we endorsed the concept."

Mr. Haig added: "There were a number of things that Ross conceived of, including
ransoming the prisoners with his own capital. I think the fellow put his money
where his mouth was and I have nothing but the highest admiration for him."

U.S. Award for His Work

Mr. Perot insists his efforts resulted in improved treatment for American
prisoners of war, and to bolster his point he provided a copy of a 1974
proclamation, signed by Defense Secretary James R. Schlesinger, awarding him the
Defense Department's Medal for Distinguished Public Service for his work on
behalf of prisoners of war.

Still, apparent contradictions have swirled around Mr. Perot's efforts. In 1981,
when it was disclosed that Mr. Perot declined two years earlier to finance a
private commando mission to Southeast Asia to search for missing Americans, a
spokesman for the Texas businessman said Mr. Perot did not believe there were
any Americans being held in Indochina. "We went through this issue in the 1970's
and were satisfied in our minds that there were no more Americans over there,"
William E. Wright 3d, a spokesman for Electronic Data Systems, said at the time.

Yet, in 1987 after President Ronald Reagan appointed a special envoy to
negotiate with the Vietnamese for information on missing Americans, Mr. Perot
undertook what he termed a "private" mission to Hanoi to talk about missing
Americans. "I still believe we left men behind," Mr. Perot said then, adding
that his trip had the "tacit approval" of the White House.

Asked about the apparent about-face, Mr. Perot said he was unaware of his
spokesman's comments in 1981. "I have never, ever taken the position that we
didn't leave anybody in Laos," Mr. Perot said.

In 1988, Mr. Perot once again inserted himself into a bitter debate, one
involving blacks in Dallas and the city's police officers.

Early that year, three Dallas officers were killed while on duty. Many officers
attributed the shootings to an environment that engendered a lack of respect for
the police. Included in that environment, some officers said, were efforts by
some black officials to strengthen the powers of a civilian review board, which
would investigate accusations of police misconduct.

With police morale plummeting, his aides said, Mr. Perot met with hundreds of
police officers. Monica Smith, the president of the Dallas Police Association,
said the officers voiced complaints over departmental procedures, as well as the
review board proposal. She said most officers expressed a desire for a
collective bargaining agreement with the city.

Ms. Smith said Mr. Perot said he did not believe the police association had
generated sufficient public support for such an agreement. He suggested the
association instead concentrate on increasing the number of police officers and
fighting the proposal for a more powerful civilian review board.

The police association responded with a petition drive that would have forced a
referendum on the review board. Fearful that the drive would succeed, and that
elimination of the review board would heighten racial tensions, the City Council
approved a plan, drafted by Mr. Perot's lawyer, for a review panel with limited
powers.

Criticism on Remarks

But Mr. Perot was criticized when news reports attributed remarks to him at the
meetings with police officers. Laura Miller, at the time a columnist with The
Dallas Times Herald, said Mr. Perot suggested one way to deal with the drug
problem in South Dallas, a predominantly black section of town, was to cordon
off neighborhoods and conduct house-to-house searches for drugs and weapons.

In a speech this month, Mr. Perot denied making that comment and attacked Ms.
Miller's credibility.

But Peter Elkind, who, like Ms. Miller, now works for The Dallas Observer, said
that in 1988 he asked Mr. Perot about the statement. Mr. Elkind said Mr. Perot
did not deny making the comment and defended house searches.

For his part, Mr. Perot said he did not recall Mr. Elkind's asking him about
searches.

"He explicitly defended the need for radical action," Mr. Elkind said. "He
didn't say, 'I didn't say that.' This guy believes in the straight-line solution
to problems. Niceties like civil liberties and international law shouldn't get
in the way."

NAME: Ross Perot

LOAD-DATE: April 27, 1992

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo: Ross Perot's efforts on behalf of war prisoners, and later for
servicemen missing in action in North Vietnam, helped feed a movement that was
encouraged by President Richard M. Nixon as a political counterweight to
anti-war sentiments. Mr. Perot, left, spoke through an interpreter with North
Vietnamese prisoners of war held at a South Vietnamese P.O.W. camp in April
1970. (United Press International)

TYPE: Biography

                   Copyright 1992 The New York Times Company


                              73 of 281 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                  April 27, 1992, Monday, Late Edition - Final

THE 1992 CAMPAIGN: Assessment;
For Pennsylvania Voters, Abortion May Not Be a Decisive Issue

BYLINE: By R. W. APPLE Jr.,  Special to The New York Times

SECTION: Section A; Page 14; Column 1; National Desk

LENGTH: 1000 words

DATELINE: PHILADELPHIA, April 26


In Washington last week, supporters and foes of abortion rights did battle in
the Supreme Court. In a case based on Pennsylvania's restrictive new abortion
law, lawyers debated whether the basic Court doctrine establishing abortion as a
fundamental right, enunciated in Roe v. Wade, should be affirmed, modified or
thrown out.

In Harrisburg, Gov. Robert P. Casey, a conservative Democrat who backed the
Pennsylvania law, to the ill-concealed discomfiture of most of his party's
national leaders, launched a diatribe against them. By advocating "abortion on
demand," he said, they had put the party on the wrong side of what he termed
"the issue that will decide whether or not we can get the Reagan Democrats, who
have so much trouble with our social values, to vote for a Democrat for
President."

In the Pennsylvania Democratic senatorial primary, a long-shot candidate, Lynn
H. Yeakel, has pulled even with her much-better-known opponent, Lieut. Gov. Mark
S. Singel, in the latest statewide polls. Politicians here say she may well win
the nomination to run against Senator Arlen Specter in the fall because Mr.
Singel, formerly a foe of abortion, has moved to the center on the issue,
backing abortion rights but supporting the restrictions in the Pennsylvania law,
thereby alienating voters on both sides.

How Crucial an Issue?

Pennsylvania, then, has become the crucible of abortion politics, right? Wrong,
if you look at it from the viewpoint of the average voter.

G. Terry Madonna, director of the Center for Politics and Public Affairs at
Millersville University in Lancaster, says that in his polls "abortion is not
and has never been a salient issue in this state," despite all the hullabaloo in
recent months on the subject.

"If Roe v. Wade is overturned completely, that would be a different story, here
and nationwide," he said. "But in two straight polls, the last one this week,
abortion makes hardly a blip when you ask open-ended questions about what
matters most. Pennsylvanians put jobs first. The economy in general comes after
that, then health care, then education."

It does not necessarily follow that people in this state think abortion is less
important than those elsewhere do. A fair inference, many political analysts
here think, is that the relatively conservative people of this state are
relatively satisfied by the legal-but-restricted formula.

Leaving the merits of the case to one side, which is something that few people
find easy to do, many professional politicians on the national level think the
center of political gravity in the United States as a whole, if there is one,
lies somewhere between unrestricted abortion and an outright prohibition of
abortion or something very close to it.

Although his party and most of its candidates are strongly committed to abortion
rights, Ronald H. Brown, the Democratic Party chairman, is one such; another is
Robert M. Teeter, President Bush's campaign chairman, despite the President's
own hard-line anti-abortion approach, which he has shown no sign of willingness
to soften.

In questions to the lawyers last week, Justices Sandra Day O'Connor and Anthony
M. Kennedy appeared to be searching for some middle ground.

The late Lee Atwater, the strategist who guided Mr. Bush to victory four years
ago, tried in vain to persuade his boss that the Republican Party must not
exclude voters who backed abortion rights. He had no more success than Mr.
Casey, who argued in an interview last week that the Democrats were making the
same mistake as the Republicans, in mirror image.

'Beltway Bunch'

"Democrats in Washington thought it was a joke when Bush visited that flag
factory in 1988," Mr. Casey said. "Blue-collar workers here -- and a lot of them
are Vietnam vets -- didn't think it was funny at all. They and their families,
most of them Democrats at heart, voted for Bush.

"Now they tell us in Washington that we've got to be pro-choice to win. Wrong
again. A lot of our voters, and a lot like them in other states, will go for
Bush again. The Beltway bunch has taken us off the cliff in four out of the last
five Presidential elections, and they're doing it again."

Mr. Casey argues vigorously that opponents of broad abortion rights can win,
here and elsewhere. He notes that he was re-elected in 1990 with the largest
majority in a race for governor in the state's history. Mr. Singel argues the
opposite. The record suggests that abortion has not been a decisive issue the
way gun control, for example, has proved to be in Western states.

In recent years, the state has elected Republicans who backed abortion rights,
such as Senator Spector, and Republicans on the other side, such as Ernest D.
Preate Jr., the State Attorney General, who is expected to run for Governor in
1994. It has also elected Democrats with disparate views, like Mr. Casey and
Senator Harris Wofford, an upset victor last year and a self-described moderate
on the issue.

Politicians seek to build majorities. They dislike polarizing issues, especially
those on which popular opinion seems fairly equally divided, because that
creates electoral instability, to say nothing of endless court cases and
ceaseless street demonstrations.

The problem for those who seek a third approach to abortion, hoping to find a
position behind which most of the country could rally, is the one that
confronted compromise-seekers on Vietnam in the late 1960's. The debate is
driven by the absolutists on both sides, many of whom see the issues in terms of
moral imperatives.

For that reason, it seems highly likely that the Republican platform this year
will oppose abortion in almost all cases and the Democratic platform will
advocate unfettered abortion rights. Whatever the mass of voters may think, the
moment for pragmatism does not seem to be at hand -- unless of course, Ross
Perot should decide to hitch his wagon to that star and invite the obloquy of
those on both sides who disdain the middle ground.

LOAD-DATE: April 27, 1992

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: News Analysis

                   Copyright 1992 The New York Times Company


                              74 of 281 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                  April 27, 1992, Monday, Late Edition - Final

Foreign Affairs;
Three Asia Hands

BYLINE: By LESLIE H. GELB

SECTION: Section A; Page 17; Column 1; Editorial Desk

LENGTH: 708 words


This column was supposed to be about China. It was going to key off Nicholas
Kristof's terrific and alarming articles in The Times recently about China's 50
percent increase in military spending over the last three years and the ardently
anti-American tone of its internal debates.

But in calling around to Asia hands, I ran into a still livelier, larger and
more worrisome debate. The experts see Asia bubbling with the kind of strategic
turmoil and uncertainty that could inspire high orders of diplomatic tangling
and danger.

States are disintegrating and rising up in Europe, all much in Western
limelight. Yet the same forces at play in Asia remain somewhat out of Western
focus. To America's Asia hands, the Oriental upheavals loom more ominously than
the European. For history -- Japan in World War II, Korea and Vietnam -- is
never out of their thoughts.

They do not predict new wars. But they are worried, and they are searching for a
way to understand their dynamic and volatile region, for some
strategic/intellectual net.

In my meanderings I found three approaches: the Holbrookian School of New
Triangular Diplomacy, the Abramowitzian Academy of Internal Preoccupations and a
Mystery Man's Theory of a Chinese-Iranian Connection.

All three of these Asia hands are old and close friends of mine and of each
other. And they are threatening me with legal action and letters to the editor
for presumptive misrepresentation of their views. But to know them is to forgive
me for honest license in summarizing their sometimes sparsely developed views.

Richard Holbrooke, the architect of the Carter Administration's successful Asia
policy and now a mildly overweight investment banker, sees a new kind of
triangular diplomacy dominating the region. He argues that the old
Washington-Beijing-Moscow tussle has been superseded by a
Washington-Beijing-Tokyo struggle.

The key questions, he says, are who will fill the vacuums being left by the
disappearance of the Soviet Union and the perceived retreat of U.S. power, and
how. He especially sees China maneuvering to slow down the spread of Japanese
power, but unwilling to use a "hostile" Washington as the counterpoise. Such
gyrations will be further complicated, he believes, by the fact that everybody
invests in and trades with everybody else.

Morton Abramowitz, formerly a premier U.S. career diplomat noted for his can-do
pessimism and now a foundation president, thinks this is old think. He does not
envision a return to classical balancing acts. And he notes that the Washington
and Tokyo points of the triangle are far stronger than Beijing's. In any event,
he feels that Asian nations are mostly preoccupied with making money and
internal affairs.

To him, there are two potentially transforming events in the region: the
unification of Korea, which could become a minor dynamo threatening its
neighbors; and the possible breakdown of China, which would generate enormous
political uncertainties. The biggest issue, he maintains, is whether China will
stay together or "regionalize" after its present leaders depart.

Mystery Man, mildly terrified at being identified, also frets most about China
and Chinese absorption with internal political control and national
disintegration. He sees China blaming Washington for making matters worse with
human rights and trade pressures, and seeking to blunt these pressures.

But China cannot seem to buy off Washington by cooperating with U.S. diplomacy
in places like Cambodia. And Beijing feels unable to play off Tokyo against
Washington. So, Mystery Man sees China forging a desperate and dangerous
extra-regional alliance -- by means of missile and nuclear sales -- with Iran.

Though the three Asia hands offer different strategic slants, they appear to
agree on a critical and surprising point: Tokyo and Washington, despite
substantial money conflicts, have powerful common interests and can work things
out. By contrast, tensions between Washington and Beijing over arms, trade and
human rights could get out of hand, leaving Japan and everyone else at loose and
perilous ends.

Remembering history, the three agree on something else: The U.S. had better
maintain a sizable, active and smart presence in Asia.

LOAD-DATE: April 27, 1992

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Op-Ed

                   Copyright 1992 The New York Times Company


                              75 of 281 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 April 28, 1992, Tuesday, Late Edition - Final

Chhong Khenis Journal;
On Cambodia's Great Lake, the New Tide of Fear

BYLINE: By HENRY KAMM,  Special to The New York Times

SECTION: Section A; Page 4; Column 3; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 879 words

DATELINE: CHHONG KHENIS, Cambodia


This is the most movable of towns. Now, at the height of the dry season, part of
it is on land, on the edge of the Tonle Sap, the Great Lake of Cambodia. But
most of it, even now, is on the lake.

Houseboats are moored to tall stakes. Other families have built
bamboo-and-thatch houses and moor them on poles.

But in June the rainy season will start. The settlement on land will give way to
the rising level of the lake. Some residents will take to boats; others will
move their houses further inland. At the height of the monsoon, in September,
the annual miracle of the Tonle Sap will occur.

The river that flows out of the lake to join the Mekong in Phnom Penh will
reverse its course, filling the lake to overflowing and inundating the land all
around. Then, in November or December, the river -- it, too, bears the name
Tonle Sap -- will once more change its direction and drain off, leaving the most
fertile soil in Cambodia around the lake.

"When the rains come, we will live far from here," said a fisherman who received
a visitor on his boat. He pointed landward, where rice fields alternate with
lotus swamps. At the height of the rains, he explained, the thousands of
fishermen and their families who live offshore literally pull up stakes. They
let their houses drift until the flood has crested. Then they moor themselves
once more until the waters recede.

An Unchanging Distinction

The people of Chhong Khenis build large bamboo cages in which they trap young
fish, feed them to market size and net them.

One thing doesn't change in this town of several thousand men and women, with an
abundance of children. The Cambodian fishermen form their own quarters, and the
Vietnamese theirs. Chhong Khenis currently consists of five Cambodian "villages"
and two Vietnamese.

Five Vietnamese who gathered around a visitor on one of their boats said the
usually tense relations between the Cambodian majority and the Vietnamese who
have lived among them for centuries are friendlier on the lake, because all
share an unusual way of life. But they said most things usually reflected the
fluctuations that stem from the common Cambodian view of Vietnam as an almost
hereditary enemy.

The Vietnamese minority is now once more afraid of its neighbors, and the four
men and one woman said their people were again subjected to pressure. "Our
neighbors are all right," a man said, "except for those who wear uniforms and
carry guns, the army and the police."

The fishermen said the police and military exacted from each Vietnamese family a
monthly tribute of 1,000 riels for "protection." This amounts to only $1.33 but
represents about one-tenth of the monthly salary of an ordinary Cambodian. The
Vietnamese added that the police routinely stopped their boats for a "toll" as
the fishermen were on their way to shore to sell their catch. Other policemen or
soldiers did so again as the men carried their fish to market.

"Life is so hard here now because there are to be elections in 1993," said one
man, a Hanoi-trained paramedic. "We don't know who will still have a job after
that. So they are all making a maximum of money now."

Under the Paris agreement of last year, the four contending political groups and
armies agreed to United Nations-arranged free elections by May 1993.

The Vietnamese who were born on Tonle Sap said their lives took a sharp turn for
the worse when the Vietnamese Army, which invaded Cambodia in 1979 and toppled
the Pol Pot Government, withdrew two years ago.

The men said the Vietnamese on the lake who remained lived in fear.  They are
afraid above all of the Khmer Rouge guerrillas of Pol Pot, who operate not far
north of here. The Khmer Rouge are particularly vengeful toward all Vietnamese.
But Vietnamese fear of Cambodians has deeper roots.

In 1970 the American-backed Government of Prime Minister Lon Nol mounted a
pogrom against all Vietnamese in this country. They were estimated to number
500,000 and were suspected of supporting the Vietnamese Communist forces who
invaded Cambodia in March 1970.

After mass killings and looting, the Vietnamese were interned in primitive camps
until the South Vietnamese Government conducted a large repatriation operation.

Most of the Vietnamese on the lake fled to South Vietnam. Those who survived
here until 1975 were freed by Vietnamese Communist forces, a fisherman said, but
turned over to the Pol Pot army, then nominally an ally of Communist Vietnam.

"We didn't know the Khmer Rouge would betray us," the man said. He said whole
families were massacred simply for being Vietnamese.

In 1976, before the Vietnamese and Cambodian Communist Governments went to war,
the surviving Vietnamese were allowed to leave for Vietnam. They started to
drift back here in 1980, after the invasion, until the latest exodus started
with the withdrawal of the Vietnamese Army in 1990.

There are no more ardent supporters of the United Nations military and police
presence than the Vietnamese minority.

"The United Nations troops are here not only to protect Cambodians but us, too,"
a Vietnamese fisherman said. "Nobody else protects us."

"We live from day to day," another said. "If something happens to us, we will
just not exist anymore, that's all."

LOAD-DATE: April 28, 1992

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo: Although relations between Cambodians and Vietnamese in a
fishing village on the Tonle Sap are traditionally friendlier than elsewhere,
tensions have begun to rise between the two groups. Residents live on houseboats
or in houses moored on poles so their dwellings can float and move with changing
tides. (Henry Kamm/The New York Times)

Map of Cambodia showing location of Tonle Sap.

                   Copyright 1992 The New York Times Company


                              76 of 281 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 April 28, 1992, Tuesday, Late Edition - Final
                              Correction Appended

THE 1992 CAMPAIGN: Political Week;
Lack of Party Discipline Makes Contest Untidy

BYLINE: By R. W. APPLE Jr.,  Special to The New York Times

SECTION: Section A; Page 19; Column 5; National Desk

LENGTH: 856 words

DATELINE: PHILADELPHIA, April 27


Back in the Pleistocene era of American politics, which ended about the same
time the Vietnam War heated up, there was something called party discipline. It
gave a phrase to the language: either "toe the party line," they said, or get in
trouble with its elders.

With the popular rebellion against the fighting in Vietnam and the attendant
changes in social values, insurgency became a more or less permanent political
condition, especially in the Democratic Party. Big-city bosses and ward heelers
passed from the scene. Congressional and legislative leaders lost their clout.
Smoke-filled rooms were replaced by primary elections.

Now there is no party line, no party discipline and no party elders (or, to be
more accurate, none that anyone pays much attention to).

Which is one reason why the contest for the 1992 Democratic Presidential
nomination is so untidy, and one reason it is likely to remain so after
Tuesday's Pennsylvania primary.

Gov. Bill Clinton of Arkansas seems sure to win here, and to keep winning,
except perhaps in California. His lone active rival, former Gov. Edmund G. Brown
Jr. of California, sounded today as if even he knew the game was up. After the
Pennsylvania votes have been counted, 7 of the 10 biggest delegations to the
Democratic convention will have been chosen, with the other three -- from
California, Ohio and New Jersey -- to be picked on or before June 2.

It is becoming almost impossible to find knowledgeable politicians who doubt
that Mr. Clinton will be nominated. Yet there are plenty who talk wistfully
about an open convention, who savage Mr. Clinton's record or his character and
question his electability, who fantasize about what might have been -- all of
which contributes to the impression of party disarray.

Gov. Robert P. Casey of Pennsylvania is not alone in hesitating to endorse Mr.
Clinton and to urge party unity against the Republicans, although he has been
much more explicit and outspoken than most in his criticism. The Democratic
governors of three other big states already won by Mr. Clinton have also held
back: Mario M. Cuomo of New York, Ann W. Richards of Texas and Lawton Chiles of
Florida. So have dozens of prominent Congressional Democrats. And so have
Senator Bob Kerrey of Nebraska and former Senator Paul E. Tsongas of
Massachusetts, two of Mr. Clinton's vanquished rivals.

Only Senator Tom Harkin of Iowa, a man from an older tradition, swallowed his
pride after his early withdrawal from the race, endorsed Mr. Clinton and took to
the road to solicit votes for his erstwhile adversary. For his pains, he has
been denounced as a hypocrite by Mr. Brown.

One major reason for the party's tardiness in rallying around its presumptive
standard-bearer, obviously, are the questions raised about Mr. Clinton's private
life, his financial dealings and his draft status during the Vietnam War, and
what those questions have done to his chances of defeating President Bush in
November. As one Senator put it, "This is more than we're usually asked to
swallow in the name of party unity, so it takes awhile."

But a larger reason, perhaps, is the lack of party discipline. It is every man
or woman for himself or herself in American politics these days, and there are
no real sanctions anyone can take against the naysayers.

Of course, those who hope for preferment in a Clinton Administration, through a
judicial nomination or a Cabinet or sub-Cabinet position or an ambassadorship,
will not be likely to hesitate. But since relatively few Democratic politicians
seem to believe at the moment that Mr. Clinton can win, the loss of a potential
political plum is not that much of a deterrent.

Once upon a time, a Jim Farley or a John M. Bailey would have come down hard on
those who refused to play ball. But Democratic national chairmen no longer have
that kind of power; Ronald M. Brown, the current one, feels he has to be
extremely careful even in suggesting that the time may be at hand for the party
to turn its attention to combating Mr. Bush in the fall.

What he says in his private phone calls may be another matter, but in public Mr.
Brown is not willing to go much beyond the comment that an open convention
"means a death-knell fight at the convention with a lot of Democratic blood on
the floor, which I don't think is going to help us."

On the NBC News program "Meet the Press" on Sunday, Ronald Brown complained
about "this search for a knight in shining armor," insisting that "there is
none." But when he was asked directly whether Jerry Brown should fold his tent
if he loses in Pennsylvania, the chairman begged off with the comment, "That's a
question for him to answer, not for me to answer."

There is no cost to the individual politicians who continue to resist the all
but inevitable. But there is clearly a cost to the party as a whole and its
fragile hopes of winning the White House for only the second time since 1964.
With a wounded incumbent and an economy still struggling toward recovery, the
Democrats describe themselves as hell-bent on victory.

Their behavior so far suggests they don't really mean it.

LOAD-DATE: April 28, 1992

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

CORRECTION-DATE: April 29, 1992, Wednesday

CORRECTION:

Because of an editing error, the Political Week column yesterday, about disarray
in the Democratic Party, misstated the date for choosing delegates to the
Democratic National Convention from California, Ohio and New Jersey. Primary
elections in those states will be held on June 2.


                   Copyright 1992 The New York Times Company


                              77 of 281 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                April 29, 1992, Wednesday, Late Edition - Final

Books of The Times;
America's Red Diaper Baby: The Left

BYLINE: By HERBERT MITGANG

SECTION: Section C; Page 19; Column 1; Cultural Desk; Word and Image Page

LENGTH: 1079 words



The Rise and Fall of the American Left
By John Patrick Diggins
Illustrated. 432 pages. W. W. Norton. $22.95.

As a political idea and force in the United States, what's left of the left? Of
the old reformist-minded left, the Marxist-oriented left, the more moderate
democratic left?

After the downfall of the dictatorial Soviet and Soviet-dominated states,
nationalism, ethnicism and tribalism have reappeared in several corners of the
world. Political parties once considered on the left are in disarray in western
Europe. What do these revolutionary changes and elections like the Labor Party's
recent loss in Britain signify for the American left, if there still is one?

To help clarify what's happening requires a historian's long view. The necessary
enlightenment appears in "The Rise and Fall of the American Left," by John
Patrick Diggins, distinguished professor of history at the Graduate Center of
the City University of New York. It updates the facts he presented in his 1973
work, "The American Left in the 20th Century."

His new book is a highly readable account of American radicalism and the liberal
impulse that resulted in major reforms in this century. Professor Diggins says
we live in a curious time in the United States; the class war has been lost in
the factories and fields. He maintains that the left no longer has political
significance but still has educational influence in the battle for "cultural
hegemony" on college campuses.

The most important point the author makes -- and it's one that the old
Congressional un-American activities committees, the latent McCarthyites, the
radical right and its neo-conservative cousins never acknowledged -- is this:
"The American left was born in the United States."

"Contrary to popular belief, it was not the product of foreign powers and alien
ideologies," he writes. "Although each left generation would have its rendezvous
with European Marxism, Marxist ideas were usually embraced to support a radical
movement that had already come into being. Most left intellectuals and activists
in America read Thomas Jefferson and Walt Whitman before they read Karl Marx or,
later, Mao Zedong, and many caught the flame of William Jennings Bryan or John
Fitzgerald Kennedy before they felt the fascination of V. I. Lenin or Fidel
Castro."

"The Rise and Fall of the American Left" is especially informative about the
differences between leaders of the left and their aims in the 20th century.
Professor Higgins divides the left's history into four groups: the Lyrical Left,
the Old Left, the New Left and the Academic Left.  Although these labels are
arbitrary and they overlap, they do serve as useful signposts.

The Lyrical Left is placed before and after World War I, when Greenwich Village
and environs was home to Socialists, anarchists, single taxers, suffragists,
birth-control advocates and politicized poets. On the front lines of social and
personal revolt were such legendary figures as John Reed, Max Eastman, Morris
Hillquit, Emma Goldman, Mabel Dodge, Edna St. Vincent Millay and Margaret
Sanger.

Their radical influence extended far beyond New York; writing about them in
1912, the artist John Butler Yeats said, "The fiddles are tuning as it were all
over America."

Professor Diggins says the Massachusetts trial and execution of Nicola Sacco and
Bartolomeo Vanzetti, the Italian anarchists, was the rallying cry in 1927 for
the Lyrical Left. John Dos Passos captured the shock of the execution in his
1936 novel, "The Big Money."

The Old Left is linked to the Depression. Its high points were the Spanish Civil
War (Americans who served in the Abraham Lincoln Brigade against Generalissimo
Franco's Fascists were listed in Federal Bureau of Investigation files) and
Stalin's Moscow trials. The Old Left was convulsed by the purge of former
Bolshevik leaders; the phony trials aggravated the split between the Trotskyites
and those who continued to look to Moscow for guidance.

After World War II, the cold war discredited the Old Left in the eyes of the
younger generation. The Soviet occupation of Eastern Europe caused many Old
Leftists to realize that democratic freedom and one-party rule were
incompatible. In this country, the assault against individual liberties by
home-grown McCarthyites briefly gave the Old Left scattered sympathy but not
political influence.  After the failure of the revolution abroad, few veteran
leftists were able to sustain their vital spirit.

To define the New Left's posture in the 1960's, the author quotes Jerry Rubin,
one of its standard-bearers: "Communism? Who the hell knows from Communism? We
never lived through Stalin. We read about it, but it doesn't affect us
emotionally. Our emotional reaction to communism is Fidel marching into Havana
in 1959."

The growth of American militarism and the Vietnam war, Professor Diggins says,
"dramatized to young antiwar dissenters the powerlessness of idealism." But
unlike Big Bill Haywood, the Wobblies and early radicals who had come out of the
labor movement, the New Leftists had come out of the colleges. The New Left
emerged in Madison, Wis., Ann Arbor, Mich., and Berkeley, Calif.; the author
writes respectfully of such ideological groups as Students for a Democratic
Society, founded at the University of Michigan in 1961.

Today's controversies over higher education find a home in Professor Diggins's
Academic Left. At its center is the dispute over multi-culturalism and political
correctness on campus.

If there is a shortcoming in Professor Diggins's book, it is that he doesn't
reach back far enough into American reformist history. Nor does he place enough
emphasis on the truly radical reforms achieved during the Administrations of the
two Roosevelts, Theodore and Franklin, the first by regulatory agencies and
trustbusting during the muckraking era, the second by New Deal legislation that
remains so deeply ingrained in American lives that only one President since the
1930's, Ronald Reagan, tried to weaken the social gains in the name of
privatization.

Child-labor laws, safety in the workplace, minimum wages, unemployment
insurance, Social Security, environmental concerns: all were once denounced as
Socialistic and un-American. Particularly in a Presidential election year,
Professor Diggins's "Rise and Fall of the American Left" deserves to be read and
pondered to understand the evolution of once radical ideas into accepted
reforms.

LOAD-DATE: April 29, 1992

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo: John Patrick Diggins

TYPE: Review

                   Copyright 1992 The New York Times Company


                              78 of 281 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                April 29, 1992, Wednesday, Late Edition - Final

When the Irish Came Into the American Club

SECTION: Section A; Page 24; Column 4; Editorial Desk

LENGTH: 572 words


To the Editor:

As an opponent of Patrick J. Buchanan's racist American nationalism, I enjoyed
Prof. Fred Somkin's knock at President Bush's challenger from the right in
"Buchanan's Club" (letter, April 6). But I am disappointed that, as a teacher of
American history, he shows limited knowledge of American assimilation and
nativist history.

Irish and German Roman Catholics were admitted to American club privileges the
moment they got off the boat, as against African-American Protestants. By about
1900, they were members of the club itself -- not without recurring discomfort
about Irish superpapal Catholicism. The rules had to change in the face of
massive immigration from Southern and Eastern Europe.

United States immigration quotas of the 1920's were silent on religion, but
implicitly defined Northwest Europeans as the core of the American nation whose
proportion should be sustained under future immigration. This was abandoned in
the 1960's, but two immigration acts last decade specifically allowed quotas for
the Irish. I am not aware of any other group given such undisguised privilege.
Indochinese refugees got special treatment because of the Vietnam War. With
Poles and Soviet Jews, it was done largley for domestic political
considerations, plus some genuine philo-Semitism, mixed with guilt for
ungenerous behavior 50 years ago. But they still had to pass a test as refugees
from likely persecution.

Irish-American politicians were the central patrons of the Irish immigration
privilege, but many in Congress accepted that the Irish make quintessential
American recruits. Hispanic and Asian groups complained about these Irish quota
acts.

Mr. Buchanan, in his television interview with David Frost, said he was
"multicultural," being the descendant of Scotch-Irish, Irish and Germans. When
campaigning in the South, he drew attention to his "old stock" Protestant
ancestors who had fought for the Confederacy.

A look at the history of the Christian Front in New York City around 1940 is
interesting. It was a fascist-model, openly anti-Semitic group. Like the America
First movement, it opposed United States involvement in World War II (calling it
"Jews' war"). The group took its ideas from the Rev. Charles Coughlin, the
Canadian-Irish radio priest. The membership was disproportionately
Irish-American, but it was American nationalist, not old-country linked, and not
at all explicitly Roman Catholic, but rather devoted to the "white, Christian
American race."

After Pearl Harbor, the Federal Government suppressed the Italian Fascist and
Nazi organizations in this country. The Christian Front presented a continuing
difficulty because it was not foreign linked.

My mother used to point out to me the arrogance of her fellow Irish immigrants
when they referred to native-born Americans of non-English-speaking stock as
"foreigners." It seems that her fellows understood something that the
Congressional majority also intuitively accepts. The Irish Immigration Reform
Movement campaigned in the 1980's with placards reading "Legalize the Irish."
Advocates of special treatment for Salvadorans or Haitians feel it is necessary
to come up with some extraordinary reason, for example, "Don't Send Them Back to
the Death Squads."

ROBERT ST-CYR
Greenlawn, L.I., April 13, 1992

The writer is co-author of "Mick: A Documentary History of Anti-Irish
Discrimination in America."

LOAD-DATE: April 29, 1992

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Drawing

TYPE: Letter

                   Copyright 1992 The New York Times Company


                              79 of 281 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 April 30, 1992, Thursday, Late Edition - Final

U.S. Further Eases Its Restrictions on Trade With Vietnam

BYLINE: Reuters

SECTION: Section A; Page 11; Column 1; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 383 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, April 29


The United States further relaxed its 28-year-old economic embargo against
Vietnam today, saying it would allow commercial sales of items like food,
medicine and farm machinery that meet basic human needs.

The State Department said that Washington would also lift restrictions on
projects sponsored by American non-governmental and nonprofit groups.

The spokeswoman for the department, Margaret D. Tutwiler, said the Bush
Administration decided to ease the embargo "in response to Vietnam's
strengthened commitments to take positive actions on P.O.W.-M.I.A. issues and
its support of the United Nations political settlement process in Cambodia."

"It is in keeping with the established U.S. policy of a step-by-step process for
normalizing relations with Vietnam," she said in a statement.

The Bush Administration began improving ties with Hanoi last October after
approving a peace settlement for Cambodia, which was invaded by Vietnamese
troops in late 1978.

The economic embargo was imposed on North Vietnam in 1964 and was extended to
the south in 1975 when the American-backed government there fell to the
Communist north.

Last week a delegation of United States senators visited Vietnam to inspect a
prison camp and several military bases where they believed American servicemen
might be held. The Vietnam War ended in 1975 and the United States says 2,266
servicemen are still unaccounted for.

Most of those servicemen are believed to be dead, but there have been
unconfirmed reports that Americans were seen alive after the war.

The senators said they found no evidence during their trip that any missing
American servicemen were still alive. They praised Hanoi's cooperation and said
they were were hopeful that the issue could be resolved soon.

For many Americans, this issue remains a highly emotional barrier to improved
relations with Vietnam.

Over the last year, scores of United States experts, working with Vietnamese
officials, have dug up graves and interviewed villagers about servicemen missing
from the war.

Economic competition is also a factor in the improvement of relations. Many
businessmen from Japan and other nations have been moving eagerly into Vietnam,
and American businesses fear they will be at a disadvantage in a fertile new
market.

LOAD-DATE: April 30, 1992

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1992 The New York Times Company


                              80 of 281 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                   May 1, 1992, Friday, Late Edition - Final

THE 1992 CAMPAIGN: Media;
As Political Campaigns Turn Negative, the Press Is Given a Negative Rating

BYLINE: By ELIZABETH KOLBERT

SECTION: Section A; Page 18; Column 1; National Desk

LENGTH: 1898 words


The bitter Presidential race pictured this year on television has been blamed
for ills ranging from Gov. Bill Clinton's negative polls to the scant primary
turnout in most states. But it could be the news media that sustain the most
damage if the campaign turns out to be another overwhelmingly negative race.

Social scientists studying the election say that voters are increasingly blaming
the news media -- newspapers, magazines and, most powerfully, television -- for
what they see as the degeneration of Presidential politics. In a burst of
apparent self-loathing, even the press seems to have been swept up in this wave
of anti-press sentiment.

Four years ago, 60 percent of the commentators assessing campaign coverage on
the network news gave the press a negative rating, according to a study by the
Center for Media and Public Affairs in Washington. This year, the proportion of
negative assessments jumped to 90 percent.

"In American politics, there's a tendency to be suspicious of power brokers no
matter who they are," said Darrell West, a professor of political science at
Brown University in Providence, R.I. "It used to be this was the back-room
politicians, and people were very upset with them. Now people are becoming more
suspicious of the media. They see the media as part of the establishment, and
that's not a great position to be in."

Attack Ads (Against the Press)

Professor West noted that a few candidates, including Governor Clinton of
Arkansas, had used television commercials this year explicitly attacking the
news media, breaking a longstanding taboo.

"Even the media haters like Richard Nixon never dared run an ad against the
press," he said.

Voters increasingly seem to view the campaign as a function of what news
organizations choose to report rather than the other way around. In a January
poll by the Times Mirror Center for the People and the Press in Washington, 58
percent of the respondents said news organizations had "too much" influence on
who became President, as against 51 percent who said that at the start of 1988.

"Press-bashing used to be ideological," said Todd Gitlin, a professor of
sociology at the University of California at Berkeley. "It was from the right,
like from Goldwater and Nixon, or from the left over the Vietnam War. But this
is different. I think people are tired of knowing more about Gennifer Flowers
than about the defense budget the Senate passed that day."

How News Reporting Rates

In a recent survey of Boston-area residents, Mr. West found that roughly half
the respondents rated the reporting on this year's campaign as "poor" or "fair."
A recent nationwide poll by the Center for the People and the Press showed
Americans to have a more benevolent view of the news media but one that is
nevertheless souring.

In the center's poll, 65 percent of the respondents rated the reporting on the
campaign as "excellent" or "good," down from 71 percent in 1988. The proportion
of respondents who rated the coverage "fair" or "poor" was 33 percent, up from
22 percent four years ago.

Just as politicians tend to fare badly in hard times, journalists, too, may be
suffering from side effects of the recession. Many news executives say that if
the public blames the news media for its disappointment with the race so far, it
is blaming the wrong party.

"I'm continually impressed with how little we can do about the tone of a
campaign," said Tom Hannon, political director for the Cable News Network. "The
tenor seems beyond the control of any news organization. The process moves
along; the media are essentially passive, despite appearances to the contrary."

Social scientists agree that much of the criticism of news organizations is
probably a result of general disgruntlement with the economy and the political
process. But they say, and some journalists concur, that long-term trends are at
work that may also be undermining Americans' faith in the news media.

Standards of Privacy

As in the last campaign, when Gary Hart's love life became a national news
event, news organizations this year are once again struggling with a changing
standard of privacy for public officials.  To many reporters, Governor Clinton
often seemed to be inviting scrutiny of his private life by equivocating when
questioned by journalists. But this struggle between public and private makes
many Americans uncomfortable -- they are at once curious and disgusted,
researchers say -- and has probably contributed to the growing complaints about
the coverage.

At the same time, the structure of the news reporting itself is changing.

While once the major newspapers and the network television news programs set the
agenda for the campaign coverage, this year the newspapers and the networks
often seemed to be responding to supermarket tabloids and television talk shows.
Governor Clinton and former Gov. Edmund G. Brown Jr. of California put in
appearances in New York not only with the standard newscasters and editorial
boards, but also with Don Imus, the radio personality, and with Phil Donahue.
Ross Perot, the Texas billionaire, has conducted virtually most of his campaign
on "Larry King Live."

Local newscasts have also assumed greater influence in recent years, and this,
too, has changed the nature of campaign coverage. "The day of the network news
being the horse that pulls the cart is over," said Lane Venardos, executive
producer of special events for CBS. "We're either being pulled, or at best we're
running alongside."

When voters criticize the news media, they tend to lump together the most sedate
and the most sensational outlets, from newspapers to the local news to "tabloid"
television programs like "A Current Affair," social scientists say. "People get
their news in a remarkably haphazard way," said Tim Cook, a professor of
political science at Williams College in Williamstown, Mass., who is studying
local news coverage of the election.

Focus on the Networks

When professional critics talk about the role of news organizations in the
campaign, however, they tend to focus on the network news.

The networks' initial commitment to reporting on the campaign in a substantive
way can be seen in the early emphasis of their broadcasts. Reports about policy
made up 45 percent of the coverage in the weeks leading up to the New Hampshire
primary on Feb. 18, according to the Center for Media and Public Affairs in
Washington.

But in the weeks after New Hampshire, when voters in dozens of other states
began to attend to their own primary contests, the focus of the reporting
shifted to the daily back and forth among the candidates. The proportion of
policy reports dropped to 19 percent.

"The evidence is clear that the networks tried to do the right thing," said
Marvin Kalb, director of the Shorenstein Barone Center on Press, Politics and
Public Policy at Harvard University. Early in the campaign, he noted, the
networks agreed to provide prime time slots for debates and to broadcast
in-depth features on the candidates.

But after the New Hampshire primary, he said, "You could see the descent on a
day-to-day basis. The sound bites decreased. Substance became character. They
allowed themselves to be seduced by the obvious: sex, sleaze, draft."

'Taken Aback' by 'Donahue'

Network news executives call such criticism a clear case of blaming the
messenger for an unwelcome message. It was not the networks' fault that
name-calling became the principal campaign theme, they say; it was the
candidates'.

"I think it's much improved over '88," Tim Russert, senior vice president of NBC
News, said of the reporting this year. "But the tone of the campaign forced us
to cover the shooting back and forth. We started out very much on the issues,
but when the candidates got off the issues and got into the attacks and
counterattacks, we had to go with them."

But even network executives confessed that they were "taken aback" by the debate
on the "Donahue" show April 6, the day before the New York primary, when
Governor Clinton and Mr. Brown questioned each other without a moderator.

"It was so interesting that on 'Donahue,' with no interlocutor, all the talk was
about issues, as opposed to when somebody else was asking the questions, and
then there were absolutely no issues involved," Mr. Venardos of CBS said.

To be sure, even the most vehement critics of the campaign reporting this year
give the networks credit for some gains over 1988. For example, there has been
little reporting of the kind of photogenic events, like flag factory visits,
that were so popular with the Bush campaign four years ago.

But the soul searching that followed the 1988 campaign, and the efforts this
year to elevate the public debate, make this year's lapses all the more
significant in the eyes of critics. They question whether the unwritten rules of
journalism in general, and television journalism in particular, allow for the
kind of consistently substantive reporting that news executives insisted they
wanted to provide.

Since issues like the economy and health care remain constant, these critics
argue, they will inevitably be sacrificed to the latest scandal by an industry
that values newness and drama above public policy.

"The classic pattern we always see is before the public begins to focus, the
media provides substance," said Thomas E. Mann, director of governmental studies
at the Brookings Institution. "As soon as the race gears up, the focus shifts to
the horse race and the scandals. Once voters finally begin paying attention,
they see the slash and burn and nothing else. So basically what we get is a
vicious cycle."

Stressing Early Reporting

Mr. Mann and other critics have also expressed growing concern about the
disproportionate influence of early reporting. Candidates, they argue, once
categorized by the news media, tend to receive only reporting that will
reinforce that initial representation.

"You can empirically demonstrate that each candidate carves out a sort of
niche," said S. Robert Lichter, co-director of the Center for Media and Public
Affairs in Washington. "Each candidate gets defined in certain terms, and then
everything is built around that initial definition. Once reporters decided that
the character issue was most important for Bill Clinton, that's what was
newsworthy. In theory, in a different world, Clinton could have been defined as
a very issue-oriented candidate."

Out of the 189 reports on Mr. Clinton that were broadcast on network news
leading up to the New York primary, more than half involved a discussion of
"character," according to Mr. Lichter's organization. In contrast, out of the 85
reports featuring Mr. Brown, only 6 percent discussed "character."

If news organizations were to change their habits, of course, there is no
guarantee that the public or even news media experts would respond
enthusiastically. News executives argue, and some social scientists agree, that
reporting of the campaign reflects the public's real tastes, rather than the
idealized preferences they profess in public opinion surveys.

"People are both turned off by the media and attracted to it at the same time,"
Mr. West of Brown University said. If campaign reporting remained fixed on the
weighty issues and ignored the scandals, he said, "it would probably be pretty
boring."

LOAD-DATE: May 1, 1992

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Graph: "Focus of the Coverage" shows the percentage of network news
shows that dealt policy issues, candidate controversies, horse race and strategy
and tactics. (Source: Center for Media and Public Affaris)

                   Copyright 1992 The New York Times Company


                              81 of 281 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                  May 2, 1992, Saturday, Late Edition - Final

RIOTS IN LOS ANGELES: The President;
Bush Says Verdict 'Stunned' Him; He Vows to Put an End to Rioting

BYLINE: By ANDREW ROSENTHAL,  Special to The New York Times

SECTION: Section 1; Page 1; Column 4; National Desk

LENGTH: 1304 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, May 1


President Bush said tonight that he had been "stunned" by the verdict in the Los
Angeles police beating case, promised that the state court trial that touched
off rioting and looting "was not the end of the process" and sent Federal troops
into the ravaged city to restore order.

Seeking to diminish tensions and demonstrate that Mr. Bush is taking action, the
Justice Department disclosed that a grand jury in Los Angeles has been reviewing
evidence and issuing subpoenas to determine whether the four police officers
acquitted of beating a black motorist should now be charged under Federal civil
rights laws.

Mr. Bush, while expressing sympathy for the outrage of civil rights leaders over
the acquittal, said he would use "whatever force is necessary" to stop the
violence in Los Angeles. The President sent 1,000 marines and between 2,500 and
3,000 soldiers into the streets. They werearmed with light weapons and ordered
to return fire if fired upon. Mr. Bush also put the California National Guard
under Pentagon command and dispatched 1,000 riot-trained Federal law officers to
reinforce the local police.

Troops on City Streets

His orders, issued at 9:20 P.M., put a total of between 6,500 and 7,000
soldiers, marines and National Guard troops into the streets of Los Angeles
during the night.

Mr. Bush addressed an anguished nation from the Oval Office, surrounded by the
symbols of the Presidential power that he has brought to bear in war and
diplomacy and is now being forced to turn to in the biggest domestic crisis of
his political career. [Excerpts, page 8.]

By mixing forceful calls for order with expressions of sympathy, he seemed to be
moving to stabilize the situation before the violence that has touched Los
Angeles and a number of other cities developed into a national pattern of civil
unrest.

He condemned the riot in Los Angeles as producing television pictures that were
"horrifying almost beyond belief."

"What we saw last night and the night before in Los Angeles is not about civil
rights," Mr. Bush said, his expression grim and determined. "It's not about the
great cause of equality that all Americans must uphold. It's not a message of
protest. It's been the brutality of the mob, pure and simple. And let me assure
you I will use whatever force is ncessary to restore order."

Under pressure from civil rights leaders who met with Mr. Bush today in the
White House and from some of his own advisers, the President broke with his
refusal to comment on the verdict in the police officers' trial.

'Hard to Understand'

"Viewed from outside the trial," the President said, "it was hard to understand
how the verdict could possibly square with the video" of the beating of Rodney
G. King. "Those civil rights leaders with whom I met were stunned, and so was I,
and so was Barbara and so were my kids," he said. "But the verdict Wednesday was
not the end of the process."

Mr. Bush said he had immediately ordered Federal authorities to pursue the
possibility of filing criminal charges against the four acquitted men and other
police officers under Federal civil rights laws, an investigation being
conducted in a political climate that seems to demand an indictment. Today's
announcement that a grand jury is reviewing the case seemed likely to increase
the pressure to bring charges against the officers.

During a day of urgent meetings and rapid decisions that threw the White House
into a state of emergency of a kind not seen since the war in the Persian Gulf,
Mr. Bush sent 1,500 marines from the First Marine Expeditonary Force and 3,000
members of the Army's Seventh Infantry to Los Angeles to help keep order.

Mr. Bush signed the deployment order after speaking to Gov. Pete Wilson of
California and Mayor Tom Bradley of Los Angeles. Though they told him that the
situation was improving, Mr. Bush wanted a strong show of force on the streets
through the night, a senior Administration official said.

Mr. Bush's orders were to equip the troops with loaded handguns and M-16 rifles
and to have them shoot back if fired upon, the official said.

New Test for Bush

Although Federal troops were used to prevent rioting in the Virgin Islands after
Hurricane Hugo in 1989, today's action was more in keeping with the deployment
of soldiers in the 1960's and 1970's to control race riots and disturbances
during the Vietnam War. The decision, reached early at the White House meeting
by Mr. Bush and his top military and legal advisers, was a major escalation in
Mr. Bush's response to the rioting.

The violence thrust a dizzying new test on Mr. Bush in already stormy political
days, and the President sought to reassure outraged minorities by meeting with
civil rights leaders in the White House. The guest list was drawn from the old
guard of the 1960's with whom he is more comfortable rather than from prominent
young politicians, intellectuals or artists.

The session forced him to confront questions about what had become of the more
tolerant America he promised at his inauguration more than three years ago, just
as his public stance immediately after the verdicts aroused criticism that he is
not sensitive to racial issues.

Before tonight's televised address, Mr. Bush had been walking a fine political
line: While he focused on issues of law and order in public, his aides behind
the scenes sought to convey the impression that he was as upset and confused as
anyone else.

Administration officials said Mr. Bush had felt constrained in his public
statements out of concern that he not prejudge any new Federal proceeding or
appear to undercut his own arguments in favor of law and order by denouncing the
original jury verdict.

There is precedent on both sides of the question. Lyndon B. Johnson used the
arrest of four Ku Klux Klansmen on charges of murdering a civil rights worker in
March 1965 to declare war on the racist organization, which he said was
responsible for the slaying. But Richard M. Nixon was embarrassed into making a
public retraction of his pronouncement that Charles Manson was "guilty, directly
or indirectly, of eight murders" before the Sharon Tate murder case went to
trial in 1970.

After the White House meeting, the civil rights leaders continued to assail the
President's policies and demanded that he exert "moral leadership." In doing so,
they openly confronted Mr. Bush with an accusation that had simmered unspoken
since Wednesday's acquittal of the four police officers: that 12 years of
Republican leadership had created a climate of economic inequity and racial
injustice.

"He's been very vociferous about violence in the streets, but very silent about
violence in the economic and in the criminal justice suites, which are the
breeding grounds for violence in the streets," said the Rev. Joseph E. Lowery,
head of the Southern Christian Leadership Conference.

Mr. Lowery and the others applauded Mr. Bush's decision to send Federal
reinforcements to Los Angeles and his announcement that the Justice Department
had revived its inquiry into whether the police officers should be charged under
Federal civil rights statutes.

But they demanded that Mr. Bush address the broad range of economic, social and
racial issues that they said were behind the violence in Los Angeles and have
gone unattended during the Bush Administration.

System 'Failed Us'

"We reminded the President that for 14 months the black community has been very
patient, waiting on the American justice system to act, and it failed us
miserably," said Benjamin L. Hooks Jr., executive director of the National
Association for the Advancement of Colored People.

Mr. Bush echoed those words tonight in his speech and said, "We owe it to all
Americans who put their faith in the law to see that justice is served."

LOAD-DATE: May 2, 1992

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photos: Benjamin L. Hooks Jr. , at left, the executive director of the
National Association for the Advancement of Colored People, leaving the White
House yesterday after civil rights leaders met with President Bush. With him
were the Rev. Joseph E. Lowery, head of the Southern Christian Leadership
Conference, at center, and John E. Jacob, head of the Urban League, right. (Jose
R. Lopez/The New York Times); President Bush addressing the nation on the
situation in Los Angeles. (CNN)(pg. 8)

                   Copyright 1992 The New York Times Company


                              82 of 281 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                  May 2, 1992, Saturday, Late Edition - Final

RIOTS IN LOS ANGELES: The Troops;
Elite U.S. Forces Sent In To Perform a Rare Role

BYLINE: By ERIC SCHMITT,  Special to The New York Times

SECTION: Section 1; Page 8; Column 1; National Desk

LENGTH: 489 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, May 1


The 1,000 Federal law-enforcement officers and 4,000 Army and Marine troops
President Bush ordered to Los Angeles today are elite mobile forces trained for
civil disturbances, but they rarely perform that role.

Some officers and troops began arriving in Los Angeles today.  The
law-enforcement officers were sent into the city immediately, while the military
set up outside Los Angeles, ready to move in only on orders from Mr. Bush.

Federal troops were last sent to assist in civil disturbances in 1989, when Mr.
Bush ordered troops to the Virgin Islands to prevent looting after Hurricane
Hugo. Before that, Federal troops were sent to Washington in 1972 to help
control riots protesting the Vietnam War.

Law-enforcement officers sent to Los Angeles include officers from the Federal
Bureau of Investigation, United States Border Patrol, Bureau of Prisons, Federal
Marshals office and the Bureau of Alcohol, Tobacco and Firearms.

Varied Training

They are part of specialized squads in their agencies, trained for riot and
crowd control, securing buildings or specific geographic areas and transporting
arrested people under secure conditions.

Among the units, the 200-member F.B.I. S.W.A.T. team is trained in crowd
control, but is better known for offensive operations like freeing hostages. The
150 Alcohol, Tobacco and Firearms Bureau agents investigate bombings and arsons,
but also have training in security.

Law-enforcement officials said in interviews today that they intend to operate
under a separate command that will support Los Angeles authorities. Attorney
General William P. Barr sent Robert S. Muller 3d, the head of the department's
criminal division, to Los Angeles today to coordinate the Federal
law-enforcement response.

About 2,500 Army troops from Fort Ord, Calif., and some 1,500 marines from Camp
Pendleton, Calif., were ordered to areas south of Los Angeles, where they can be
sent into the streets quickly.

The Army troops include units that participated in the United States invasion of
Panama in 1989. Many of the marines are veterans of the Persian Gulf war.

The infantry forces are fast, mobile troops designed to respond quickly to third
world hot spots. They are equipped with M-16 rifles, bayonets and bullet-proof
vests and helmets.

About 1,400 California National Guard members are now on duty in Los Angeles
with another 1,200 ready to assist local authorities. An additional 4,000 Guard
members are standing by in California to assist, said Marlin Fitzwater, the
White House spokesman.

If Mr. Bush deploys the active-duty troops, Mr. Fitzwater said National Guard
forces, now under state control, would report to regular Army commanders.

California National Guard forces receive 16 hours of riot-control training and
military police units, which compose a significant portion of those units
activated, received additional training, military officials said.

LOAD-DATE: May 2, 1992

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1992 The New York Times Company


                              83 of 281 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                  May 2, 1992, Saturday, Late Edition - Final

Trained to Do Our Dirty Work for Us

BYLINE: By Ira Socol;  Ira Socol, a writer, is a former New York City police
officer.

SECTION: Section 1; Page 23; Column 2; Editorial Desk

LENGTH: 640 words

DATELINE: MUSKEGON, Mich.


To be surprised by the verdict in Los Angeles, one has to be completely ignorant
of the American public's relationship with its urban police forces. After Rodney
King was beaten last spring, there were urgent calls for an overhaul of police
training and widespread denunciation of the city's "occupying army." But this
was a response to symptoms, not causes.

Though many police departments across the country have learned to respect and
understand citizens and communities, the force run by Chief Daryl Gates more
truly mirrors what Americans expect of big-city cops. Angelenos have known for
30 years what kind of department Mr. Gates has been running.

Some forces, including New York's, have training programs that try to battle the
Hollywood image of the cop-assassin -- the principal role model for many young
officers.

But in Los Angeles and other places, most citizens have been happy in the
knowledge that the urban enemy is afraid of the warriors in blue. Americans
insist on "control" of street crime. Politicians at every level echo that call,
and no one really protests. Not the media, not civic leaders, not even the
American Civil Liberties Union.

We send our police out to fight a war on drugs and a war on crime. We send them
far away from our comfortable neighborhoods, to places we don't understand, to
preserve our lives and life style. We send them out poorly equipped and trained
for "combat," and with no political support for efforts to win the hearts and
minds of the inner-city population. We send out these cops without caring at all
about the people of the areas we send them to. We want the threat to disappear,
and we expect victory, no matter what.

In New York and other cities, cops are trained to pull their partners away from
situations where tempers have flared. The cops who beat Rodney King just watched
one another. Unlike many urban police departments where supervisors are trained
to enforce what is called community service policing, the L.A. bosses compare
their city to Vietnam. Unlike Philadelphia or Chicago, where an out-of-control
incident would be a huge embarrassment, the four L.A. cops were so confident of
official approval that they joked about it on the radio.

Only when the collateral damage ends up on TV do we worry. Then our conscience
takes over, and we are stunned and shocked. Like Vietnam, we have sent people to
do our dirty work, but, please, don't let any of the blood splatter on us.

While America watches TV cops blow criminals away, big city cops spend their
time with victims. The enemy strikes and disappears, and cops clean up the
aftermath.

Do the police become racist? Certainly. Do they become violent? It happens. It
is far too easy to get pushed over the edge.

But cops may be among the few Americans who really know whose war this is and
what Americans want them to do. They understand the desperate struggle between
the vast majority of law-abiding minority residents and the growing angry
underclass. They know that at times like this society will see every urban cop
as a violent racist, just as American soldiers in Vietnam were portrayed as baby
killers.

The acquittal in the Rodney King case was assured when the trial was moved to
the exurbs, where the residents are most frightened of the "urban beast." The
verdict is an honest appraisal of how Americans feel about the role of cops and
about our inner cities.

Can the L.A.P.D.'s attitude be improved? No doubt. Could different training
counter the TV image of police behavior? Many departments have done it.

Can the acceptance of violence and racism be eliminated? In time. But until
Americans stop declaring "wars" on their neighbors and commit themselves to
providing our cities with something more than "police protection," all this will
only make an incremental difference.

LOAD-DATE: May 2, 1992

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Op-Ed

                   Copyright 1992 The New York Times Company


                              84 of 281 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                  May 2, 1992, Saturday, Late Edition - Final

They've Been Macedonians for 1,400 Years;
Uncopyrighted Names

SECTION: Section 1; Page 22; Column 6; Editorial Desk

LENGTH: 199 words


To the Editor:

The Greeks claim that the Yugoslav republic of Macedonia has no right to use its
own name when it becomes independent because Greece already has a political
subdivision known as Macedonia.

International boundaries often slice through historical regions. Our own state
of New Mexico sits on the Mexican border, and California has not one, but two
counterparts in Mexico: Baja California and Baja California del Sur. Mongolia
borders a region of China known as Inner Mongolia. When South-West Africa became
independent, it took the name Namibia, which was the name of a neighboring
province in Angola.

The world has coped with two Koreas, two Vietnams, two Germanys, two Chinas, two
Congos and two Yemens, and can surely handle a Greek Macedonia and an
independent Slav Macedonia. After all, the Georgians of the Caucasus didn't
complain when we named a state Georgia, and the islanders of Rhodes were not
upset when the British named an African colony Rhodesia. Besides, the United
States counts no fewer than 16 cities named in honor of Athens.

Until Greece finds a way to copyright Macedonia, it should cease and desist.

MICHAEL STACY
Dallas, April 15, 1992

LOAD-DATE: May 2, 1992

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Letter

                   Copyright 1992 The New York Times Company


                              85 of 281 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                   May 3, 1992, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

TRAVEL ADVISORY;
Hawaii Cemetery To Ban Buses From Unloading

SECTION: Section 5; Page 3; Column 3; Travel Desk

LENGTH: 261 words


Hawaii's most visited tourist site, the National Memorial Cemetery of the
Pacific, at Punchbowl Crater on Oahu, will prohibit tour buses, vans and other
commercial vehicles from dropping off passengers there, for six months beginning
June 1. The vehicles will be allowed to drive through the cemetery in what G. E.
Castagnetti, the cemetery director, calls a "windshield tour," but they will not
be permitted to stop. People in private or rental cars will still be allowed to
park, however.

The ban is designed to reduce congestion and noise at the cemetery, where about
36,000 veterans from World War I to the Vietnam War are buried. The sweeping
view of Honolulu and the coast draws about 130 buses and 700 other vehicles
daily to the 112-acre cemetery. About six million people visited in 1991.

Referring to the congestion, Mr. Castagnetti said: "I think we do an injustice
to the veterans and the next of kin here. That tranquillity is disrupted if you
have all those tourists in here."

After six months, a decision on whether to extend the ban will be made by Allen
Clark, director of the national cemetery system of the United States Department
of Veterans Affairs in Washington.

Mr. Castagnetti said he would like to see the travel industry stop marketing the
cemetery as a tourist attraction.

The ban follows other efforts to change tourists' behavior in the cemetery since
last year, including the implementation of a no-smoking policy, new sidewalks to
keep visitors off the grass, and signs that offer guidelines for respectful
behavior.

LOAD-DATE: May 3, 1992

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1992 The New York Times Company


                              86 of 281 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                   May 3, 1992, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

Pornography and the New Puritans: Letters From Andrea Dworkin and Others

SECTION: Section 7; Page 15; Column 1; Book Review Desk

LENGTH: 1694 words


To the Editor:

As a woman determined to destroy the pornography industry, a writer of 10
published books and someone who reads, perhaps I should be the one to tell John
Irving ("Pornography and the New Puritans," March 29) who the new Puritan is.
The old Puritans wouldn't like her very much; but then, neither does Mr. Irving.

I am 45 years old now. When I was a teen-ager, I baby-sat. In any middle-class
home one could always find the dirty books -- on the highest shelf, climbing
toward God, usually behind a parched potted plant. The books themselves were
usually "Ulysses," "Tropic of Cancer" or "Lady Chatterley's Lover." They always
had as a preface or afterword the text of an obscenity decision in which the
book was exonerated and art extolled. Or a lawyer would stand in for the court
to tell us that through his mighty efforts law had finally vindicated a
persecuted genius.

Even at 15 and 16, I noticed something strange about the special intersection of
art, law and sex under the obscenity rubric: some men punished other men for
producing or publishing writing that caused arousal in (presumably) still other
men. Although Mrs. Grundy got the blame, women didn't make these laws or enforce
them or sit on juries to deliberate guilt or innocence. This was a fight among
men -- but about what?

Meanwhile, my life as a woman in prefeminist times went on. This means that I
thought I was a human being with rights. But before I was much over 18, I had
been sexually assaulted three times. Did I report these assaults (patriarchy's
first question, because surely the girl must be lying)?

When I was 9, I told my parents. To protect me, for better or worse, they did
not call the police.

The second time, beaten as well as raped, I told no one. I was working for a
peace group, and I heard jokes about rape day in and day out. What do you tell
the draft board when they ask you if you would kill a Nazi who was going to rape
your sister? "I'd tell my sister to have a good time" was the answer of choice.

The third time, I was 18, a freshman in college, and I had been arrested for
taking part in a sit-in outside the United Nations to protest the Vietnam War.
It was February of 1965. This time, my experience was reported in The New York
Times, newspapers all around the world and on television: girl in prison -- New
York's notorious Women's House of Detention -- says she was brutalized by two
prison doctors. Forced entry with a speculum -- for 15 days I had vaginal
bleeding, a vagina so bruised and ripped that my stone-cold family doctor burst
into tears when he examined me.

I came out of the Women's House of Detention mute. Speech depends on believing
you can make yourself understood: a community of people will recognize the
experience in the words you use and they will care. You also have to be able to
understand what happened to you enough to convey it to others. I lost speech. I
was hurt past what I had words for. I lived out on the streets for several days,
not having a bed of my own, still bleeding; and finally spoke because Grace
Paley convinced me that she would understand and care. Then I spoke a lot. A
grand jury investigated. Columnists indicted the prison. But neither of the
prison doctors was charged with sexual assault or sexual battery. In fact, no
one ever mentioned sexual assault. The grand jury concluded that the prison was
fine. In despair, I left the country -- to be a writer, my human dream.

A year later I came back. I have since discovered that what happened to me is
common: homeless, poor, still sexually traumatized, I learned to trade sex for
money. I spent a lot of years out on the street, living hand to mouth, these New
York streets and other streets in other hard cities. I thought I was a real
tough woman, and I was: tough-calloused; tough-numb; tough-desperate;
tough-scared; tough-hungry; tough-beaten by men often; tough-done it every which
way including up. All of my colleagues who fight pornography with me know about
this. I know about the lives of women in pornography because I lived the life.
So have many feminists who fight pornography. Freedom looks different when you
are the one it is being practiced on. It's his, not yours. Speech is different,
too. Those sexy expletives are the hate words he uses on you while he is using
you. Your speech is an inchoate protest never voiced.

In my work, fiction and nonfiction, I've tried to voice the protest against a
power that is dead weight on you, fist and penis organized to keep you quiet. I
would do virtually anything to get women out of prostitution and pornography,
which is mass-produced, technologized prostitution. With pornography, a woman
can still be sold after the beatings, the rapes, the pain, the humiliation have
killed her. I write for her, on behalf of her. I know her. I have come close to
being her.

I read a lot of books. None of them ever told me the truth about what happens to
women until feminists started writing and publishing in this wave, over these
last 22 years. Over and over, male writers consider prostituted women "speech"
-- their speech, their right. Without this exploitation, published for profit,
the male writer feels censored. The woman lynched naked on a tree, or restrained
with ropes and a ball gag in her mouth, has what? Freedom of what?

I lost my ability to speak -- became mute -- a second time in my life. I've
written about being a battered wife: I was beaten and tortured over a period of
a few years. Amnesty International never showed up. Toward the end, I lost all
speech. Words were useless to the likes of me. I had run away and asked for help
-- from friends, neighbors, the police -- and had been turned away many times.
My words didn't seem to mean anything, or it was O.K. to torture me.

Taken once by my husband to a doctor when hurt, I risked asking for help. The
doctor said he could write me a prescription for Valium or have me committed.
The neighbors heard the screaming, but no one did anything. So what are words? I
have always been good with them, but never good enough to be believed or helped.
No, there were no shelters then.

But I am talking about speech: it isn't easy for me. I come to speech from under
a man, tortured and tormented. What he did to me took away everything; he was
the owner of everything. He hurt all the words out of me, and no one would
listen anyway. I come to speech from under the brutalities of thousands of men.
For me, the violence of marriage was worse than the violence of prostitution;
but this is no choice. Men act out pornography. They have acted it out on me.
Women's lives become pornography. Mine did. And so for 20 years now I have been
looking for the words to say what I know.

But maybe liberal men -- so open-minded and intellectually curious -- can't find
the books that would teach them about women's real lives. Maybe, while John
Irving and PEN are defending Hustler, snuff films and "Deep Throat," the direct
product of the coercion of Linda Marchiano, political dissidents like myself are
anathema -- especially to the free-speech fetishists -- not because the
publishing industry punishes prudes but because dissenters who mean it, who
stand against male power over women, are pariahs.

Maybe Mr. Irving and others do not know that in the world of women, pornography
is the real geography of how men use us and torment us and hate us.

With Catharine A. MacKinnon, I drafted the first civil law against pornography.
It held pornographers accountable for what they do: they traffic in women
(contravening the United Nations Universal Declaration of Human Rights and the
Convention on the Elimination of All Forms of Discrimination Against Women);
they eroticize inequality in a way that materially promotes rape, battery,
maiming and bondage; they make a product that they know dehumanizes, degrades
and exploits women; they hurt women to make the pornography, and then consumers
use the pornography in assaults both verbal and physical.

Mr. Irving refers to a scene in "The World According to Garp" in which a woman
bites off a man's penis in a car when the car is accidentally rammed from
behind. This, he says, did not cause women to bite off men's penises in cars. I
have written (in my novels, "Ice and Fire" and "Mercy," and in the story "The
New Womans Broken Heart") about a woman raped by two men sequentially, the first
aggressor routed by the second one, to whom the woman, near dead, submits; he
bites viciously and repeatedly into her genitals. When I wrote it, someone had
already done it -- to me. Mr. Irving uses his imagination for violent farce. My
imagination can barely grasp my real life. The violence, as Mr. Irving must
know, goes from men to women.

Women write to me because of our shared experiences. In my books they find their
lives -- until now beyond the reach of language. A letter to me dated March 11
says in part: "The abuse was quite sadistic -- it involved bestiality, torture,
the making of pornography. Sometimes, when I think about my life, I'm not sure
why I'm alive, but I'm always sure about why I do what I do, the feminist theory
and the antipornography activism." Another letter, dated March 13, says: "It was
only when I was almost [raped] to pieces that I broke down and learned to hate.
. . . I have never stopped resenting the loss of innocence that occurred the day
I learned to hate."

Male liberals seem to think we fight pornography to protect a sexual innocence,
but we have none to protect. The innocence we want is the innocence that lets us
love. People need dignity to love.

Mr. Irving quoted Hawthorne's condemnation of Puritan orthodoxy in the short
story "Endicott and the Red Cross" -- a graphic description of public
punishments of women: bondage, branding, maiming, lynching. Today pornographers
do these things to women, and the public square is a big place -- every
newsstand and video store. A photograph shields rape and torture for profit. In
defending pornography as if it were speech, liberals defend the new slavers. The
only fiction in pornography is the smile on the woman's face.

ANDREA DWORKIN
Brooklyn

NAME: Andrea Dworkin

LOAD-DATE: May 3, 1992

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Drawing

TYPE: Biography; Letter

                   Copyright 1992 The New York Times Company


                              87 of 281 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                   May 3, 1992, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

RIOTS IN LOS ANGELES;
General and Troops Have Domestic Mission

BYLINE: By JASON DePARLE,  Special to The New York Times

SECTION: Section 1; Page 23; Column 1; National Desk

LENGTH: 486 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, May 2


The general in command of the military forces sent to quell the Los Angeles
riots, Maj. Gen. Marvin L. Covault, helped develop the Army's use of light
infantry, units extablished to react quickly to emergencies around the world.

Reached by telephone today, he said the Los Angeles riot presented classic
conditions for the use of such a force. As of late this afternoon, the troops
had not been deployed.

"It's the kind of mission when you need rapid deployment forces, lots of soldier
power and the ability to execute in a decentralized mode," he said. "In
constrained and urban terrain, and in situations where you need lots of soldier
power deployed very rapidly to deal with a crisis situation, the light forces
have great utility."

The White House said Friday night that the Los Angeles military force would
report to the Justice Department. But General Covault said today that though he
is consulting with Justice Department officials, his line of command is a
military one. He reports to Gen. Edward Burba, the commander of the Army Forces
Command in Fort McPherson, Ga., and General Covault said that General Burba in
turn reports to Dick Cheney, the Secretary of Defense.

In Los Angeles, General Covault is overseeing a force of 2,500 soldiers from
Fort Ord and 1,500 marines from Camp Pendleton, Calif. He also has about 8,000
Federalized soldiers from the National Guard under his command. General Covault
said he was selected to head the operation not only because of his infantry
expertise, but also because he was based nearby and has experience in leading
joint operations of different military branches.

Since September, he has commanded the Army's first large light infantry unit,
the Seventh Infantry Division, which is based at Ford Ord.

Military Strategist

General Covault, 51 years old, joined the Army in 1963 after studying marketing
as an undergraduate at the University of Iowa. He served as an artillery and
intellgence officer in Vietnam.

From 1984 to 1986, he was the director of force design at the Army staff school
in Fort Leavenworth, Kan., where he helped develop the light infantry concept.
"I helped design it, helped field it," he said.

General Covault said his previous experience with commanding a joint operation
included last year's relief mission to the Philippines after the eruption of
Mount Pinatubo. He served as the deputy commander of the American military force
sent there.

General Covault did not participate in the recent deployments to Panama or Saudi
Arabia.

While designing the use of quick, light infantry, General Covault said, he never
imagined he would command its use on American soil.

"It's depressing that we have a situation in America that's brought us here," he
said. "But we know that we have trained, ready, compassionate, and very
sensitive soldiers, and we are going to regain the safe environment that our
civilians want."

NAME: Marvin L. Covault

LOAD-DATE: May 3, 1992

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Biography

                   Copyright 1992 The New York Times Company


                              88 of 281 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                   May 3, 1992, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

Vietnam Malaria Kills 4,500

BYLINE: AP

SECTION: Section 1; Page 10; Column 3; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 64 words

DATELINE: BANGKOK, Thailand, May 2


A malaria epidemic attributed in part to the loss of Soviet aid swept through
Vietnam last year, afflicting more than 1.1 million people and killing 4,500,
the official Vietnam News Agency reported this week. The agency said Vietnam
used to receive up to $5 million worth of mosquito-killing solutions and malaria
drugs annually from the former Soviet Union and the Netherlands.

LOAD-DATE: May 3, 1992

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1992 The New York Times Company


                              89 of 281 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                   May 3, 1992, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

SPORTS OF THE TIMES;
Joe Namath Receives a Brand-New Pair of Knees

BYLINE: By Dave Anderson

SECTION: Section 8; Page 3; Column 1; Sports Desk

LENGTH: 884 words


IN a corner room overlooking the East River that he crossed so often going to
Shea Stadium as the Jets quarterback, Joe Namath eased himself off his bed at
the Hospital for Special Surgery and clutched a metal walker. Time for therapy.
Time to rehab each leg that received a metal-and-plastic knee replacement in
four hours of surgery on Wednesday.

"All right now," a therapist, Dan Donato, said softly. "Move the walker first.
Then the right foot. Then the left."

Slowly, painfully, one small sliding step at a time, with Donato and another
therapist, Eustace Worrell, holding him, Namath moved around the foot of the
bed.

"The last time time I did this, I almost passed out," he said as he shuffled
along. "It's not as bad now."

On the other side, he took a deep breath, exhaled, sat back on the bed and slid
himself into it. Looking up, he glanced at his wife, Deborah, and smiled.

"Nice going," Donato said.

"Thank you," Namath said.

"We'll start the bending exercises Monday," Donato said. "Keep working on that
extension. Don't let those knees bend too much."

Those new knees.

For nearly 20 years, Joe Namath's life revolved around his old knees. His
football knees. He needed four operations, two on each knee, for various
ligament, cartilage and tendon damage. In recent years he didn't walk so much as
he hobbled. But now, approaching his 49th birthday, he has new knees, one of
130,000 Americans who will undergo such surgery this year.

"The doctor told me I can't play golf for four to six months, but it'll be much
sooner than that," he was saying now. "He also told me I'll be half an inch
taller."

He took medication for the arthritic pain in his knees, medication that
contributed to his decision to stop drinking five years ago. But what prompted
him to let Dr. Chitranjan Ranawat, an internationally recognized surgeon in
joint replacements, insert the artificial knees was a sudden lack of stability,
not the pain.

"The left knee was buckling," he said. "I found myself favoring the right knee,
which has always given me more trouble."

At Christmas, he was assembling a swing set for his two daughters, 6-year-old
Jessica and 16-month-old Olivia, in the backyard of their Tequesta, Fla., home.

"That's the day you fell," Deborah recalled. "You'd never fallen before."

"As an athlete, I'd always been able to adjust, instinctively," he said. "But
when the left knee went, I didn't want to take any chances falling when I was
carrying Olivia. I had to have this done."

Now that it's done, was his Hall of Fame football career worth the incisions
above each knee?

"I've asked myself that," he said. "I think if I had it all to do over, I
would've played baseball. I wanted to play baseball. The Cardinals, the Cubs and
the Orioles wanted to sign me out of high school as an outfielder. One team was
offering a $50,000 bonus. I had a new car all picked out, a powder-blue
Oldsmobile Starfire convertible. I was ready to go."

But the Beaver Falls (Pa.) High School quarterback also had dozens of college
football offers, notably the University of Alabama.

"My mother was still working then," he recalled. "One night my brothers Bob and
Frank and my sister Rita sat around the table with my mother and Bob asked her,
'What do you want Joe to do?' My mother said, 'Go to college,' and Bob said,
'That's it.' Broke my heart. But if I'd played baseball and been healthy, I
probably would have gone to Vietnam."

In 1965, his rookie year with the Jets, his football knee problems classified
him 4-F in the military draft.

"My senior year at Alabama, I was on a run-pass option when I hurt my right
knee. Nobody laid a hand on me. I must've stepped in a hole. My cleats were bent
outward. Then at the Orange Bowl that year I was unloading the trunk of my car
when it gave way again."

Shortly after Namath signed his original $427,000 Jets contract, he had his
first knee operation.

"Jim Nicholas," he said of the Jets orthopedist, "gave me no more than four
years of football."

In a 1971 exhibition with the Detroit Lions, Namath fell while trying to make a
tackle after a Jets fumble. Linebacker Paul Naumoff landed on the quarterback's
left knee. Told that surgery was needed, he smiled at Frank Ramos, the Jets'
public-relations director.

"I guess my career as a safety is over," Namath joked, meaning the position he
had sometimes played at Alabama.

Throughout his 12 seasons with the Jets and one with the Los Angeles Rams, he
was nowhere near as agile as the quarterback that the late Paul (Bear) Bryant
once called the best athlete he had ever coached.

"I never played a down of pro football healthy," Namath was saying now in his
hospital room. "Not one down."

Year by year, those old knees had an identity all their own, as if they were
separate members of his family.

"I'd talk to 'em," Joe Namath said, smiling. "I'd tell 'em what a good a job
they were doing. I'd tell the left one to look after the right one. The left one
took the burden on after the original operation."

"I'd pat his knees and ask 'em, 'How you doing?' " Deborah Namath said, smiling
at her husband. "Especially the right knee that was so deformed. But with his
new knees, his legs now are prettier than mine."

LOAD-DATE: June 10, 1992

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo: Joe Namath, who had knee replacement surgery Wednesday: "I think
if I had it all to do over, I would've played baseball." (United Press
International, 1976)

TYPE: Biography

                   Copyright 1992 The New York Times Company


                              90 of 281 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                   May 5, 1992, Tuesday, Late Edition - Final

Humanity Confronts Its Handiwork: An Altered Planet

BYLINE: By WILLIAM K. STEVENS

SECTION: Section C; Page 1; Column 1; Science Desk; The Environment Page

LENGTH: 5689 words


HUMANS have always exploited nature in the belief that the all-encompassing
biosphere -- the seamless, wondrously resilient fabric of life, land, water and
air -- was so vast and enduring that people could never do it basic harm.

Events of the last decade have shattered that comforting perception. The moment
of awakening may have come in the mid-1980's when governments finally accepted
and acted on the evidence that waste industrial chemicals were weakening the
stratospheric ozone shield that protects living things from biologically harmful
ultraviolet rays.

But that is almost the least of it. People have now transformed the biosphere on
so many fronts, scientists say, that Homo sapiens rivals grand forces like the
movement of continents, volcanic eruptions, asteroid impacts and ice ages as an
agent of global change.

The transformation has sharply escalated in both scale and pace since World War
II. And it is raising serious questions not only about the ability of nature to
sustain the global economy, but also about the health and future of the
biosphere itself. That is why delegates from around the world are preparing to
gather at an "Earth Summit" early next month in Rio de Janeiro.

There are many reasons for concern:

*People have transformed or manipulated ecosystems constituting about half the
planet's ice-free land surface and have made a significant impact on most of the
rest.

*They have appropriated to their own use about 40 percent of the photosynthetic
energy produced by plants.

*They have steadily reduced the number of other species in the world through
pollution, hunting and destruction of natural habitat. Now, as the inroads
become deeper and more widespread, many biologists fear that human activity
could bring about a mass extinction of epic scale, wiping out 25 percent of the
world's remaining species in the next 50 years.

*By burning coal, oil, natural gas and trees they cut down, humans have altered
the global flow of energy within the biosphere. Atmospheric concentrations of
heat-trapping carbon dioxide have increased by 25 percent since pre-industrial
times. That is well above levels recorded at any other time in the last 160,000
years, which is as far back as scientists have been able to track the trend. No
end to the buildup is in sight. If it remains uncontrolled, scientists warn, a
disruptive and possibly catastrophic warming of the earth could take place.

*Global population, which stood at 2.5 billion only 40 years ago, is expected to
reach 6 billion by the year 2000 and swell to perhaps 10 billion 60 years from
now.

Delegates to Rio hope to sign legally binding treaties to cope with the threats
of climate change and species extinction. The final round of talks on climate is
to conclude at the United Nations in New York this week. The last round of
biodiversity talks starts next week in Nairobi, Kenya.

The Rio delegates also hope to adopt a statement of principles and an agenda for
action to prevent broad damage to the biosphere while accommodating the economic
needs of the surging population.

The question of limits to economic and population growth has come to the fore
once again in connection with the summit. But this time it has been joined by
the newer and more pressing question of the degree to which the biosphere is in
jeopardy. Scientists are still struggling toward an answer in each case.

Until now, humans have always been able to push back the physical limits imposed
on their expansion by the rest of the biosphere. When limited food supplies have
threatened to check the proliferation of people, for instance, people have
employed technology and social organization to grow crops and then clear
forests, plow grasslands and, finally, harness science to agriculture. Humanity
has not repealed the laws of ecology, but it has bent them; it continually
expands to fill its ecological niche, then stretches the niche -- at some cost
to other elements of the biosphere.

Capacity for Growth

Is the capacity of the earth to accommodate human growth infinite?

No, argue Donella H. Meadows, Dennis L. Meadows and Jorgen Randers, three
authors of the "limits to growth" thesis propounded 20 years ago under the
sponsorship of the Club of Rome, an informal group of academics, civil servants
and business leaders. The thesis, based on computerized simulations of the
workings of the global ecosystem, held that limits to growth on the planet would
be breached within a century and that a sudden and uncontrollable decline of
population and industrial capacity would ensue. Damage to the biosphere's
natural resources were one element in the predicted collapse.

In a new book called "Beyond the Limits" (Chelsea Green Publishing Co.), based
partly on updated computer simulations, the three authors argue that if human
activity continues as at present, it will "overshoot" the carrying capacity of
the biosphere and precipitate a collapse within the next few decades.

The result, they write, would be "a permanently impoverished environment and a
material standard of living much lower than could have been possible had the
environment never been overstressed."

The new analysis puts more emphasis on deterioration of the biosphere, and
Dennis Meadows said that it convinced him that less time is available to halt
the expected collapse than had earlier been thought. Twenty years ago, he said,
"it seemed to us there was a period out to 2030 or 2040 in which to fashion a
sustainable society." Now, he said, it looks as if a new set of attitudes and
policies are not in place in the next 20 years, it will be too late to avoid an
eventual collapse.

Are Limits Real?

The original limits-to-growth thesis drew sharp criticism and dissent, and the
updated one is likely to provoke argument as well. Indeed, Allen Sinai, chief
executive officer of the Boston Company Economic Advisors, an economic analysis
group, took issue with its forecast of overshoot-and-collapse in a debate on the
subject a few weeks ago in Cambridge, Mass. The debate was organized by
Earthwatch, a Boston-based scientific research and education organization. The
earth's carrying capacity is "roughly infinite over the time span of relevance
to most of us, which would be 50 to a hundred to 150 years," Dr. Sinai said.

He did not discount "the very real effects" of population and economic growth on
the physical world in the short term. But "again and again," he said, the market
system has "stretched limits which appear finite to roughly infinite,"
frustrating Malthusian predictions of disaster.

But no one knows the capacity of the biosphere to sustain humanity's expansion.
"We have yet to see a cogent analysis of what the real, sustainable carrying
capacity of the earth is for people," said Dr. Daniel Botkin, an ecologist at
the University of California at Santa Barbara.

Scholars have a better fix on the ways in which human activity is transforming
the biosphere, even though they have only recently begun looking at the question
systematically.

No Immediate Danger

Contrary to widespread popular perception, they say, the earth itself is in no
danger at the hands of humanity, and life itself is not about to be wiped out.
Grand movements of the continents, shifts in the earth's position relative to
the sun that bring on ice ages, global temperatures higher than any contemplated
in the foreseeable future, bombardment of the planet by debris from space -- all
have transformed the earth in the past without destroying the planet or
extinguishing all life.

Nor are humans the only species that has altered the biosphere. The earth's
original atmosphere, for instance, was far different from today's. But about 2
billion years ago, photosynthesizing microbes that lived on hydrogen began to
break down water and expel oxygen as a byproduct. Oxygen was toxic to most other
organisms then alive, and they perished as atmospheric oxygen built up. The
ultimate result was the creation of a new, oxygen-rich atmosphere that supports
today's animal kingdom.

Nevertheless, the extent of change wrought by humans "is enormous; you can't get
away from it," said Dr. B. L. Turner 2d, a geographer at Clark University in
Worcester, Mass., who directs a new program based at Clark on human
transformation of the earth. The most recent and comprehensive inventory of
biospheric changes caused by humans was published in 1990 under the auspices of
Clark. In it, a wide range of experts in the physical and social sciences from
around the world described the last 300 years of change.

"Humankind has altered or transformed virtually every element of the biosphere,"
Dr. Turner, Dr. Robert W. Kates of Brown University and Dr. William C. Clark of
Harvard University wrote in the first chapter of the voluminous report, "The
Earth as Transformed by Human Action" (Cambridge University Press, 1990).

The face of the earth, the 1990 report said, bears the most visible and oldest
marks of change, although the more recent and more subtle changes in the flows
of the biosphere's energy and chemicals may be more profound.

Alterations to the face of the earth have been going on "a bit longer than most
people realize," Dr. Turner said. For instance, one quarter of the deforestation
that has now taken place in the world had taken place by 1700, and 75 percent by
1915.

But in most cases, at least half the biospheric change caused by humans has
taken place since World War II. This is especially true of the byproducts of the
consumption-oriented industrial societies: emissions of carbon dioxide and other
gases that trap heat in the atmosphere, chlorofluorocarbons that weaken the
protective ozone layer, nitrates that alter patterns of plant growth and
sulfates that cause heat-reflecting clouds to form and acid to pollute water and
soil.

Some changes analyzed in the study are decelerating even while others speed up.
Humans increasingly alter the distribution of water in the biosphere by
withdrawing more and more of it for their own use, for instance, and carbon
dioxide continues to build up in the air. But some changes are decelerating
because awareness of harmful impacts has led to regulation. One example is the
successful effort to reduce emissions of lead, sulfur and carbon tetrachloride.
Now that the world has formally agreed to phase out the manufacture of
ozone-destroying chlorofluorocarbons, they are expected in time to diminish as a
problem.

Moreover, the global pattern of biospheric transformation is uneven. Much land
in the industrialized countries has reverted to forest, for example, as those
countries have moved toward zero population growth and the area devoted to
farming has declined. But in the developing countries, where population is
surging and industrialization is only now taking hold, forests are being cleared
at an increasingly rapid rate to provide both farmland and lumber.

The effects of the changes are also expected to vary regionally, with winners
and losers emerging. If the human population were ever to plunge sharply because
there were no longer enough resources to sustain it, "you wouldn't see a global
crash," Dr. Botkin said. "You'd see it in one region or another." The Clark
study warns that "regional population declines are possible, potentially brutal
and even likely accompaniments" to the achievement of zero population growth
globally.

Similarly, some cold regions might benefit, or suffer less, from global warming
while others would suffer catastrophic drought or flooding from rising sea
levels. Developing countries would be hardest hit in both instances, experts
believe.

What of the future?

Demographers do not expect the global population to stabilize until it reaches
11 billion to 12 billion more than a century from now, and even this projection
assumes that fertility rates eventually stabilize at replacement level -- an
insecure assumption. Some analysts say the increase would be accompanied by a
tripling or quadrupling of agricultural production and a sixfold to eightfold
increase in energy use. Dr. Turner and his colleagues say that this analysis
suggests that "the enormous transformations of the last three centuries will be
doubled, trebled or more in the centuries to come."

But surprises are virtually assured.

"The very best scientists of any time," they wrote, "may only poorly understand
the fundamental processes governing nature, society and the relationships
between them."

And even if fears about the biosphere's health are genuine, they said, "the
gloomiest of forecasts may not be realized because society takes them seriously
and acts upon them."

POPULATION
Pressure Is Building

THROUGHOUT most of history, humans have been a quite minor presence on the
planet. Only 200 million people were alive at the time of the birth of Christ.
By the time Europeans first settled in America 1,600 years later, the world
population had grown to 500 million. But the human population spurted to 1
billion in 1850, more than doubled by 1950 and then more than doubled again, to
5.3 billion, in just the next 40 years. This post-Industrial Revolution
expansion -- and especially the last 50 years -- is generally held responsible
for most of the stress humans have put on the biosphere.

Demographers say that though women have been having fewer children since 1950,
improved health and control of disease have caused death rates to plummet, so
that global population increased. At the same time, population growth feeds on
itself: more people means more women of childbearing age.

The United Nations now projects that if fertility ultimately stabilizes at a
replacement rate of about 2.06 births per woman, the global population will
reach 10 billion in the year 2050 before leveling off and stabilizing at around
11.5 billion soon after 2200. But those numbers could vary greatly if fertility
rates turn out to be higher or lower. At a rate of 2.5 births per woman, the
U.N. calculates, world population would reach 28 billion in 2150. At a rate of
1.7, which a few industrialized countries have achieved, it would reach 7.8
billion in 2050 but then fall to 4.3 billion a century later.

Economics and Population

According to conventional wisdom, a country's population will stabilize as its
economy develops and living standards rise. This "demographic shift," as it is
called, has already taken place in industrialized countries, where the fertility
rate is generally at or below replacement level.

But the shift is only starting in developing countries of the Southern
Hemisphere, where fertility rates, while dropping in many instances, are still
double and even triple those in the affluent countries of the North. As a
result, the developing countries in 1990 accounted for 77 percent of the global
population; by 2025, they are expected to account for about 85 percent. The U.N.
projects that more than 60 percent of these will be urban dwellers, as compared
with 37 percent in 1990.

Because the rural dwellers of developing countries rely for their direct
sustenance largely on ready-at-hand renewable resources like trees, soil and
water, growing population puts increasing pressure on the local biosphere.
Forests are cut for wood, soil is depleted, water is withdrawn at ever-rising
rates. In an anxious quest for income, many of these countries are also cutting
some of their forests for commercial sale.

Perhaps a billion people remain desperately poor in these circumstances of
mismatched resources and population, slowing the onset of the demographic shift.
Many of these are moving to increasingly overcrowded and misery-racked cities in
their search for sustenance.

AGRICULTURE
Revolution Has Slowed

TEN thousand years ago in the Middle East, humans first freed themselves from
dependence on what they could glean from the wild. By cultivating grains for the
first time, they were able to expand food supplies so that an unprecedented
growth in population was made possible.

For millennia, farmers sustained population growth mainly by clearing and
cultivating new lands. The clearing escalated about three centuries ago, and
since then there has been a 450 percent increase in the world's cultivated
acreage, from a total area equivalent to Argentina to an expanse as large as
South America.

Almost all prime agricultural land is now under cultivation. And although
forests are being cleared at a rapid rate, scientists say, the land now being
freed for farming is of marginal productivity and will have relatively little
impact on future food production.

Moreover, since World War II, agriculture, deforestation and overgrazing have
left an area about the size of China and India combined with moderately to
severely diminished soil quality, reducing overall productivity.

The Green Revolution, based on higher-yield seeds and fertilizer, largely
overcame these limitations starting in the 1960's and 1970's, enabling the
world's farmers to sustain the doubling of the global population that began
after World War II.

High-yield strains of wheat and rice bred in the world's agricultural
laboratories doubled and tripled harvests in much of the developing world. So
abundant did the harvests become that world food prices declined by more than 20
percent in the 1980's.

Sub-Saharan Africa is the main exception to the rule. It is the only region in
the world with declining food production. It relies most heavily on imported
food and a higher proportion of its people are malnourished than for any other
region.

But out-and-out famine as a result of underproduction has largely disappeared.
World hunger today is caused mostly by political upheaval, ineffective
distribution of food and inability of the poor to buy it.

Yet the demand for basic food grains could double by 2020, and the ability of
agriculture to keep pace with the demand is being called into question. Some
neo-Malthusians insist that mass starvation is on the horizon, while some
economists counter that human ingenuity will come through as it always has.

Even some who have brought the Green Revolution about, however, acknowledge that
it has made its biggest and easiest gains, and that the challenge ahead appears
formidable.

Side Effects of Production

"The task will not be an easy one," said Dr. Donald L. Winkelmann, the
director-general of the International Maize and Wheat Improvement Center in
Mexico, where the Green Revolution's "miracle wheat" was developed. The Green
Revolution has entered a new and slower phase, he said, one in which increased
production will depend on relatively simple measures like more intensive use of
fertilizers, more efficient water use and fast-maturing varieties of plants that
allow multiple crops.

Intensive use of synthetic chemicals runs the risk of further polluting water
supplies through runoff, and a number of advocates urge the adoption of
alternative methods of cultivation that rely on organic fertilizers and natural
pest controls. But alternative agriculture is making inroads slowly.

Many scientists say that a variety of highly productive new strains of crops
might be developed, but there are widespread fears that the natural genetic
material from which they might be created is rapidly disappearing.

Farmers, as they embrace the Green Revolution, are abandoning traditional crop
strains that constitute part of this genetic capital. And the United Nations
Food and Agriculture Organization warned recently that global agriculture could
be threatened by the extinction of 40,000 important plant species in the next 60
years unless conservation measures are immediately stepped up.

SPECIES
The Signs Of Danger

IN THE last 600 million years, the earth has experienced five big extinctions of
life, usually linked to climatic change, in which 35 percent to 95 percent of
all species then on the planet disappeared. Scientists know from fossil records
that in each case it took 10 million years or more for the earth to regain its
biological diversity.

Humans may now be precipitating an extinction of comparable scale, many
biologists fear. Some economists argue that the fears are based on insubstantial
evidence, and a few biologists say they may be exaggerated. But most biologists
who have studied the situation believe the threat to species diversity is a
clear and present danger.

As people alter or obliterate natural ecosystems to plant crops, harvest trees
and build cities and towns, they destroy species habitat. Eventually a species
that lives in a given kind of habitat will be doomed to extinction if enough
patches of habitat disappear.

Globe-traveling humans have also introduced countless species into new habitats
around the world, where they tend to choke out native species. Few areas on
earth have been unaffected by this redistribution of plants and animals. Many
animals have already been hunted to extinction. Others, like the rhinoceros and
the African elephant, are threatened by hunting today. The Mediterranean Sea and
parts of the Pacific and Indian Oceans are so heavily fished that fish
populations can no longer withstand the pressure, the United Nations Food and
Agriculture Organization says, and pressure is nearly as heavy in some other
oceanic areas.

Diversity of Life

No one can say for sure how many species are being doomed. But Dr. E. O. Wilson,
a Harvard University biologist, has determined on the basis of field
observations that when a patch of habitat is reduced by 90 percent, the number
of species living in it eventually declines by about half. Using this formula,
Dr. Wilson has calculated that at the rate at which tropical rain forests are
being destroyed, 10 percent to 22 percent of rain forest species will be lost in
the next 30 years because of habitat destruction alone.

The rain forests contain about half the plants, animals and microbes on earth. A
quarter or more of the planet's species could be eliminated in 50 years, Dr.
Wilson said.

How many species this amounts to is unknown, for the simple reason that the vast
majority of all living species have yet to be discovered. About 1.4 million have
been named, but biologists say there may be as many as 10 million, or even 100
million undiscovered species. The overwhelming majority are not charismatic
species like elephants and whales but obscure but essential invertebrates and
microbes that undergird the web of life. "The life of this planet," Dr. Wilson
said, "is largely unexplored." If he and others are right, much of life could
vanish before scientists can even name it.

What does it matter?

Apart from the value attached to life in general, natural ecosystems provide the
materials of human sustenance That is where crops originally came from. Forests
contain untapped riches in the form of medicines. But more than that, scientists
say, natural ecosystems are such an essential part of the biosphere that mass
extinctions could undermine its functioning. It is now widely recognized, for
instance, that the diversity of life interacts with the oceans and the
atmosphere in regulating climate, that it is essential in creating soils and
holding them in place, that it cleanses waters of pollution and maintains a
microbial standoff that keeps harmful pathogens under control.

Scientists do not know at what point a gradual loss of species results in the
disintegration of ecosystems, or at what point the loss of ecosystems begins to
affect the overall health of the biosphere. But many argue that it is dangerous
to take chances.

FOREST
Chain-Saw Progress

OF ALL the differences humans have made in the face of the Earth, perhaps none
is so striking as the disappearance of forests. People have long been cutting
down trees, but only in recent decades have they become alarmed at the scope and
rate of deforestation.

Trees play a vital role in the maintenance of the biosphere. They hold soil in
place, preventing erosion and the silting of rivers. They absorb water and give
off moisture, helping to recycle water. They absorb vast amounts of
heat-trapping carbon dioxide and lock it up in their cells. And they contain a
disproportionate share of the world's living species.

Estimating the extent of forest cover and of deforestation is chancy, since many
forests regenerate and are in constant flux.

In fact, deforestation of temperate-zone forests in the industrialized countries
has reversed in this century as marginal farm land is taken out of production
and trees reclaim it. There were an estimated 7.7 million square miles of forest
in the developed nations in 1900, and about 8 million in 1985.

Pressure on Forests

But the population explosion in the developing countries has intensified the
pressure on forests there, which are one of the last sources of fuel and of new
pasture and arable land, however marginal. The advent of the chain saw, truck
and tractor have made it immeasurably easier to clear trees. As a result,
according to United Nations estimates, an area of tropical forest larger than
the state of Florida is disappearing each year.

Scientists estimate that about half the forest cover of the developing world has
vanished in this century, and the rate of tropical deforestation is believed to
have increased by 50 percent in the 1980's.

Worldwide, scientists say, there has been a net loss of more than 3 million
square miles of forest, an area roughly equal to the 48 contiguous states of the
United States. About half the loss has come since 1850. Figures on deforestation
vary somewhat, but experts agree that trees are being destroyed on a large
scale, and many believe the rate in the tropics is accelerating.

Assuming that about 3 million square miles of forest have been lost, that would
be 12 to 13 percent of the pre-agricultural worldwide total. Forests may
therefore cover an area 85 to 90 percent as large as they did 10,000 years ago.
Scientists nevertheless raise two main alarms.

First, some 25 percent of the heat-trapping carbon dioxide released into the
atmosphere as a result of human activity has come from deforestation. While the
burning of fossil fuels will continue to be the main source of carbon dioxide
buildup, accelerating deforestation adds substantially to the atmospheric total.

Second, the tropical forests -- which happen to be in the very developing
countries where population pressures are greatest -- harbor far more living
species per acre than forests elsewhere. Their density, complexity and fertility
allow many habitats to coexist in a small area, and the loss of even a tiny
patch can doom numerous species.

WATER
Few Drops To Spare

AS POPULATION expands and economies develop, humans are pressing the world's
freshwater resources hard, and some regions are starting to bump up against
limits imposed by water supplies.

Only 3 percent of the water on earth is fresh. Most of that is locked up in ice
caps and glaciers. If all the water in the world amounted to 25 gallons, about
half a teaspoon would be available for human use.

Against this background of limitations, human use is 35 times what it was three
centuries ago. People withdraw the equivalent of Lake Huron from the world's
rivers, streams, lakes and aquifers each year, and withdrawals have been
increasing by about 4 to 8 percent a year in recent decades. About 40 percent of
the water withdrawn is returned quickly to the water cycle as waste water. The
rest is consumed.

About two-thirds of the withdrawals are used for agriculture, about 25 percent
for industrial use and the rest for domestic purposes. Experts expect
withdrawals for farming to increase slightly by the end of this century and
withdrawals for industrial use to double. Most of the increase will be in the
developing countries. Water use is stabilizing in the industrialized countries
and is actually expected to decline slightly in the 1990's.

Water Supply Problems

The vagaries of rainfall make the distribution of water uneven related to human
need. Water is chronically short in many areas of sub-Saharan Africa,
threatening the ability of agriculture to keep up with population. Supplies of
water are beginning to fall behind demand in northern China, and the World
Resources Institute says shortages could reach crisis proportions in the Middle
East before this decade is out. Shortages have become a familiar and serious
problem in the southwestern United States, particularly in California.

In their thirst, humans have greatly altered the distribution and quality of
fresh water on the planet, most of which is found in river basins. They have
submerged an area the size of France in reservoirs, disrupting the flow of
rivers and transforming their ecosystems. They have polluted more than enough
river water to fill Lake Superior. And typically, they have caused the amount of
choking sediments to triple in large rivers and to increase eightfold in smaller
ones in crowded regions.

The World Resources Institute says that in general, river water quality as
measured by the biological demand for oxygen has improved in industrialized
countries over the last 20 years because of better sewage treatment.

In the developing world, water quality is difficult to determine with precision
because of a lack of information. But there appears little doubt that it is
deteriorating there, especially around urban areas. Industrial discharges are
usually poorly controlled, according to the World Resources Institute, and few
cities in the developing countries treat their sewage.

Both pollution and development have had a heavy impact on many river ecosystems,
and the rivers also carry pollution to coastal areas, where they affect coral
reefs and the breeding grounds of marine life.

ATMOSPHERE
Potential Disaster

GLOBAL warming is the most far-reaching transformation wrought by humans because
it could catastrophically magnify other changes as well -- if it develops as
many scientists fear.

Atmospheric levels of some gases that trap heat in the atmosphere, mainly carbon
dioxide and methane, are rising steadily as a result of human activity like the
burning of fossil fuels. But scientists agree on little else beyond that.

They have not yet fully understood the myriad atmospheric interactions that are
touched off when these "greenhouse" gases trap heat. The ultimate heating
depends on the degree to which these interactions cancel each other out. But
with that caveat, an international group of scientists convened by the United
Nations predicts that if humans continue to pour greenhouse gases into the air
at the present rate, the average surface temperature of the globe will rise by 3
to 8 degrees Fahrenheit some time in the next century. In comparison, the
average temperature of the earth has risen by 9 degrees since the depths of the
last ice age.

Whether a human-induced warming has already begun is unclear. The 1980's were an
unusually warm decade, and 1990 and 1991 were the warmest years recorded,
globally, since surface-temperature records have been kept. As provocative as
this change is, it falls well within the natural swings of climate variability.

Warming, at least in the lower range of the prediction, could well benefit some
people, scientists say. Higher concentrations of carbon dioxide, for example,
stimulate crop growth. Some areas of the world would probably receive increased
rainfall, making them more fertile. Some would enjoy longer growing seasons in
regions where it is now too cold for maximum farm production. The cities of the
industrialized North would experience a more salubrious winter climate, while
still able to insulate themselves from summer's heat.

But there is also a long list of possible catastrophes, especially if warming
develops in the high end of the predicted range. As glaciers and ice caps
partially melt, according to the United Nations forecast, the level of the
oceans would rise by about two feet by the end of the next century. This would
place many coastal cities in jeopardy, inundate many low-lying, populous areas
in countries like Egypt and Bangladesh and devastate coastal wetlands.

Redistribution of Water

Warming would pour more energy into the climate system, and some studies show
that the result would be more frequent and more disastrous storms.

While some areas would receive increased rainfall, others, particularly in the
interior of continents, would probably get less. This global redistribution of
water would subject some areas to disastrous flooding. In others, drought would
devastate agriculture, and some studies show that drought generally would become
more frequent.

One recent study suggests that agricultural yields would increase in the lower
ranges of the predicted warming but decline in the higher ranges, and that
farming in industrialized countries would fare better than in the developing
world.

Developing countries, according to a U.N. study, would generally be the most
vulnerable to climate change because they depend more on agriculture, forests
and other natural resources. People in many developing countries already live on
the margins of existence, and their plight would be intensified.

Even if humans were able to adapt, many scientists say, natural ecosystems would
not easily be able to do so. While nature has adapted to climate change many
times in the past, the rate of change was much slower then, taking place over
hundreds or thousands of years. Global warming would take place over mere
decades, and ecologists say that many ecosystems would be torn asunder as
temperate-zone trees, for example, would be unable to migrate to friendly climes
fast enough. Many climate-sensitive habitats could be destroyed, hastening the
extinction of species. One study suggests that as much as 40 to 60 percent of
the planet's vegetation could be disrupted, and the web of life with it.

How all of this might actually play out remains to be seen. But one conclusion
seems inescapable:

By altering the chemistry of the atmosphere, humans have launched out into
unexplored territory.


LOAD-DATE: May 7, 1992

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH



GRAPHIC: The human species, from a small population 2,000 years ago, has now
grown to rank with grand natural forces like volcanoes and continental drift as
a transformer of the earth's life-support system. Through technology and social
organization, people have continually pushed back the natural limits on their
population, allowing their numbers to increase exponentially over the last two
centuries. The human impact on the globe has grown in proportion, and scientists
now question how long the biosphere can continue to sustain growth without
suffering severely damaging disruptions.

Irrigation
Diagram/Graph: "Demands of People: The Widening Impact"

As early as 4100 B.C., humans had laid the foundation for one of the world's
earliest civilizations by irrigating the Euphrates River plain. But the
inhabitants had abandoned these lands by 1700 B.C. because their farming methods
caused the soil to become laden with salt.

Farming transforms the land

Early agrarian societies changed the landscape on a major but local scale,
clearing and draining land for agriculture. Almost all the world's arable land
was under cultivation by the early 20th century.

The growth of cities

In 1900, 16 cities had one million or more inhabitants. By 1990, 276 cities have
reached that population.

Emissions

With the Industrial Revolution, human influence became truly global as emissions
of substances like carbon dioxide and sulfur changed the chemistry of the
atmosphere and introduced the possibility of climate change.

Autos and trucks

Contemporary transportation systems in some countries rival agriculture as a
consumer of land.

Population explosion

Rapid population increases drive the search for more productivity, more land for
crops, more wood for houses and fuel.

Water pollution

So fetid had the River Thames become from sewage that by 1850 all the fish had
died and cholera plagued London. Since World War II, however, the river has been
restored to health.

Graph shows increase in population from 200 million in A.D. 1 to projected 11.6
billion in the year 2150. (Sources: "The Earth as Transformed by Human Action,"
(Cambridge); National Geographic; United Nations Population Fund) (pg. C1)

Graphs: "Can Resources Support Developing Populations?"

World Population

The U.N. Population Division projects that the developing countries will have an
even greater share of the world's total population in the next century.

1990 Population Figures

   Developing countries: 4,036 million (77.2%)
   Industrialized countries: 1,207 million (22.8%)

Projected 2025 Population Figures

   Developing countries: 7,150 million (84.1%)
   Industrialized countries: 1,354 million (15.7%)

(Source: United Nations Population Division) (pg. C6)

Water, Clean and Otherwise

There has been a geometric rise in water demand for industrial, agricultural and
municipal uses. In many regions, a small fraction of raw sewage is treated
before it is discharged.

Graph tracks and compares total amount of water used with consumptive water use,
not returned to source, from 1700 to 1980. (Source: William Meyer, Clark
University) (pg. C6)

Graph: "Sewage Treatment" shows percent of sewage treated in the following
locations:

   Europe: 72%
   Mediterranean countries: 30%
   Caribbean Basis: Less than 10%
   Southern Pacific: Almost zero percent
   South Asia: Almost zero percent
   South Pacific: Almost zero percent
   West and Central Africa: Almost zero percent
(Source: World Resources Institute) (pg. C6)

Graph/Map: "Food Gains and Soil Losses"

Total food production has generally increased in developing regions, although
many experts think the promised gains of the Green Revolution, the surge of
production made possible by high-yield strains of grain and fertilizers, have
largely been achieved. And the gains have enabled the food supply to keep pace
with population increases. But per capita cropland has declined in all regions,
and per capita food availability fluctuates dramatically. Soil degradation by
agriculture, deforestation and grazing is increasing. Farming contributes to
soil erosion, salinization and loss of soil nutrients. Soil restoration is
sometimes possible, but expensive and difficult.

Graph tracks food production in the Far East, Asia (centrally planned economies
-- Cambodia, China, North Korea, Mongolia, Vietnam), Latin America, the Near
East (excluding Israel), and Africa from 1970 through 1990 (Source: U.N. Food
and Agriculture Organization) (pg. C6)

Map of world shows areas with acute scarcity or deficit of fuelwood, areas under
stress from acidification, areas with very high or high risk of desertification,
and areas where population may exceed carrying capacity of local agriculture.
(Source: Scientific American) (pg. C6)

Table: "Tropical Deforestation"

Deforestation has greatly increased in the tropics. Trees are key in recycling
water, removing heat-trapping carbon dioxide from the atmosphere and preventing
soil erosion.

Loss in thousands of hectares (1,000 hectares = about 2,500 acres)

                                 Forest     Forest
Region                        Area 1980  Area 1990
Central America & Mexico         77,000     63,500
Caribbean Subregion              48,800     47,100
Tropical South America          797,100    729,300
South Asia                       70,600     66,200
Continental Southeast Asia       83,200     69,700
Insular Southeast Asia          157,000    138,900
West Sahelian Africa             41,900     38,000
East Sahelian Africa             92,300     85,300
West Africa                      55,200     43,400
Central Africa                  230,100    215,400
Tropical Southern Africa        217,700    206,300
Madagascar                       13,200     11,700


(Sources: U.N. Food and Agriculture Organization, "Biodiversity," National
Academy Press) (pg. C6)

Chart: "Fading Biodiversity"

Tropical deforestation is a threat to a disproportionately large share of the
world's plant and animal species. Although tropical forests cover only about 7
percent of the globe, they are thought to contain more than half the world's
species.

The Utility of Biodiversity

On the most profound level, the benefit biodiversity confers is a healthy
biosphere, for species are the agents of essential biological processes. Varied
species help scientists answer evolutionary questions. They also provide
valuable products. New medicines are constantly being sought, as well as fibers,
spices, oils and lumber. Perhaps most immediately important to people, varied
species insure vigorous crops and the resources for crop improvement. The strain
of rice grown in Asia has been made immune to some diseases with genes from a
single wild Indian species.

Approaching Extinction?

Populations of some animals have dwindled so rapidly that extinction within our
lifetime seems inevitable. One in every three species of primate is in some
danger, some conservationists believe, and one in every seven is highly
endangered. The major cause is destruction of their habitats in tropical
forests. They are also being hunted as a source of food or fur and to eliminate
them from agricultural areas where they have become crop raiders. (Source:
"Biodiversity," National Academy Press) (pg. C6)

Diagrams: "Flows of Carbon: A Global View"

Carbon circulates among four reservoirs: terrestrial plants, plants and soils,
the ocean, the atmosphere and fossil fuels buried in the earth. Because the
other reservoirs are so large, only a small amount is contained in the
atmosphere.

The Land Reservoir -- Respiration

Plants withdraw and store carbon from the atmosphere through photosynthesis.
About half of all carbon storage in plants takes place in the tropics.

Carbon is transferred to soil through decomposition.

The Ocean Reservoir -- Evaporation

Atmospheric carbon dioxide dissolves into surface ocean waters through the
action of the wind. Some is taken up by plankton and incorporated into their
shells and organic matter.

Some carbon is transferred to other organisms through the food chain, and some
remains dissolved in water.

Some carbon is transferred to sediments.

How human activities affect the balance

The burning of fossil fuels and forests is releasing heat-trapping carbon
dioxide into the biosphere faster than the oceans and plants can absorb it. As a
result, atmospheric concentrations are at higher levels than any seen in at
least 160,000 years. (Sources: "The Earth as Transformed by Human Action"
(Cambridge); Scientific American) (pg. C7)

                   Copyright 1992 The New York Times Company


                              91 of 281 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                  May 7, 1992, Thursday, Late Edition - Final

AT HOME WITH: Jon Robin Baitz;
The Playwright As Modern-Day Moralist

BYLINE: By WILLIAM GRIMES

SECTION: Section C; Page 1; Column 3; Home Desk

LENGTH: 1519 words


GRAYDON MASSEY, the antihero of Jon Robin Baitz's play "The End of the Day,"
makes a strong first impression.

It's not a good one.

As the play opens, he gazes admiringly into a three-paneled dressing mirror. A
cad, an opportunist and a coward look back.

In a maliciously witty monologue, Massey, played by Roger Rees, reveals that he
has come to Los Angeles from his native England ready to load up his tray in the
land of second helpings. He sings a twisted hymn of praise to America, which he
regards with the sharp-eyed affection of the confidence man for an easy mark.

Massey, a psychiatrist who turns do-good doctor, is a character that audiences
love to hate. And that perplexes his creator.

"I'm surprised, frankly -- surprised and occasionally bemused -- at how much
people loathe Massey," Mr. Baitz said. "I identify with him."

Mr. Baitz, who is known as Robbie, was dead earnest about this. Sitting on a
tiny, fragile chair in his apartment on West 22d Street in Manhattan, he twisted
and turned, groping for the right answer, determined to do right by Massey,
right by himself. Two minutes into the interview, and already he was into the
deep end of the pool.

"I feel I'm always struggling to behave decently," he said. "Sometimes when I
do, I wonder why I do. I wonder what impels decency, in the sense of being
connected to others."

Mr. Baitz, at the age of 30, has come very far very fast with a handful of plays
that explore the moral problems of what he calls "a benumbed, brutalizing little
society." He has two plays running in New York -- "The Substance of Fire" at the
Mitzi E. Newhouse Theater and "The End of the Day" at Playwrights Horizons --
and a slew of film and stage projects in the works.

The Baitz express is gathering full steam, an odd development for a playwright
who speaks of "embracing failure in all its aspects."

In one sense, though, he has done nothing else. His plays have offered up one
memorable, deeply flawed protagonist after another. Mr. Baitz claims kinship
with all of them. He does so with the disarming frankness of someone who says he
treats newspaper interviews as he would a therapy session, "since that seems to
be the closest equivalent."

Mr. Baitz responds to questions as though he were paying for the time. If he
finds himself giving a canned response, he stops in midsentence, begins to
squirm a bit, and works the answer a little harder. Nothing can be too personal.
It's a challenge to get a question in about Mr. Baitz's innermost thoughts
before he serves them up unbidden.

Nobody does sincere quite like Mr. Baitz.

He does so with enormous fluency, and it's hard not to think that whatever comes
out of his mouth finds a receptive ear. Lean, with thick black hair, Mr. Baitz
is strikingly handsome, just on the other side of that critical line that
divides the merely attractive from the head-turners. He has energy, charm and a
prep-school confidence. If he confessed to a string of murders, the judge would
be thinking, "A misguided youth, let's try community service."

His surroundings are soothing, surprisingly muted for a playwright who springs a
clever furniture joke in "The End of the Day." As the curtain rises on Act II,
the audience sees a Belgrave Square apartment that has suffered a invasion of
Memphis furniture.

The dowager who rules the apartment, one of the hard-drinking, tough-talking
female characters Mr. Baitz calls "Auntie Mame types with a thyroid problem,"
announces that she got rid of her Chippendales "to fight the blahs."

Chez Baitz there are no blahs in sight, even if the style of the place is
tastefully antistyle. In the living room, there's an unvarnished rusticated
armoire; a couple of old-fashioned squashed-looking chairs; a Navajo rug; a
stark, graphic painting of a black house on a red ground; a few Day of the Dead
souvenirs from Mexico; a bushy-tailed cat named Hudson. Mr. Baitz skillfully
manages to keep the cat out of the act while serving up the contents of his
soul.

"I think there are many shallow people, and I'm probably one of them, who can
look at themselves and find themselves wanting," he said. "In Graydon's case,
he's trying to take action and is simply unable to."

Isaac Geldhart, the fiercely moralistic book publisher in "The Substance of
Fire," would rather destroy his family and himself than bend a principle. Mr.
Baitz likes him. "He's appealing to me because I believe that I am him in some
ways," he said.

And there's a large slice of Mr. Baitz in Jonathon Balton, the weak-willed
teacher of "The Film Society," who tries to cushion himself from the brutal
realities of South Africa in 1970 by escaping into art but ends up as a smoothly
functioning cog in the machinery of repression.

It is South Africa that made Mr. Baitz. The son of a Carnation executive, he was
born in Los Angeles, grew up in Brazil and, from the ages of 10 to 16, lived in
Durban, where he attended the kind of English-model school that provides the
setting for "The Film Society."

Mr. Baitz described his response to apartheid as a crushing moral failure. "When
one is confronted with such day-to-day evil, it should be very clear how to
respond," he said. "And yet I found myself lacking -- found myself, my peers, my
parents, my parents' friends, the world lacking."

Most people would be prepared to let a schoolboy off the hook, but Mr. Baitz,
who as a boy looked to novelists like Dickens and Conrad as "a moral compass,"
is quite firm on where his duty lay. "I would have preferred to be less
acquiescent, less compromised," he said, "less silent, less of a schoolboy."

The best he could manage, he said, was a kind of wisecrack on his first day a
school. Throughout the day, he watched in annoyance as his classmates stood up
whenever an adult entered the room. At the end of the last class, a black
janitor arrived to do some cleaning.

"So I stood up," Mr. Baitz said. "They looked at me like, 'We know what that's
about, the American Jew kid.' And it was downhill from there."

With time, that initial act of defiance gave way to what Mr. Baitz sees as a
squishy accommodation: "In my six years in South Africa, I got increasingly
comfortable, increasingly integrated, increasingly anguished, because as a
teen-ager you get anguished. So the more comfortable I became, the less
comfortable I was."

As though in compensation, Mr. Baitz created a mythic America in which a
generation of committed young people had taken on their Government and brought
the Vietnam War to a halt. It was this America he thought he would find in 1978,
when his family returned to Los Angeles.

"What I came back to was Beverly Hills High," he said, a look of wonder on his
face. "I think I'm probably still staggered at how absolutely disengaged and
completely benumbed, except on the issues of AIDS and the ecology, my generation
seems to be."

By way of the Los Angeles fringe theater scene, and the Padua Hills Playwrights
Festival and Workshop in Claremont, Calif., Mr. Baitz discovered the stage as "a
forum to jump-start something," to battle the "ever-present impulse to
disengage."

Mr. Baitz writes funnier than he talks. There is real comic bite to "The
Substance of Fire" and "The End of the Day," which Mr. Baitz likes to think of
as "a comic sleigh ride to hell, laughing all the way." Take away the
earnestness and the complexity, and an outstanding writer for "Cheers" might
emerge.

"I think it's very difficult to know exactly what you're fueled by," he said.
"We're turned off by things we can't face, we're hysterical in the face of those
things, and we're turned on by things we don't know, we don't see, we yearn for.
I've always thought people's politics in some ways come out of their sexual
feelings, their desire to be embraced by a father, a mother, and integrated."

Mr. Baitz is gay, but he has not yet tackled the subject, or the AIDS crisis, in
his work. Although "The End of the Day" includes a plot thread involving a gay
patient, Mr. Baitz called that "the least satisfactory part of the play."

There's no question that the gay political vanguard expects more from him.
"Larry Kramer once asked me, 'When are you going to write your gay play?' " Mr.
Baitz said. "And I snapped back, 'When it comes out.' "

"You don't want it to be banal," he continued. "You want to rise up to it. So I
repeat, 'When it comes out.' "

On paper, Mr. Baitz looks like a man in a terrific hurry. He is about halfway
into a projected trilogy of "vaguely, vaguely related" plays and has just
finished an adaptation of the Sinclair Lewis novel "Dodsworth." Other projects
include an adaptation of the Somerset Maugham novel "Up at the Villa" for Sydney
Pollack and the film version of "The Substance of Fire" for Agnieszka Holland,
the director of "Europa, Europa." It's a bit startling to hear Mr. Baitz call
himself, rather disingenuously, "a journeyman with a lot to learn."

"I'll keep writing about the decreasing power of the individual and the
increasing responsibility of the individual," he said. "I'm in pursuit of
something, and it's a long-term notion."


NAME: Jon Robin Baitz

LOAD-DATE: May 7, 1992

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photos: Jon Robin Baitz: the importance of being earnest. (Andrea
Mohin/The New York Times) (pg. C1); From left, Nancy Marchand, Roger Rees and
Paul Sparer in "The End of the Day." (T. Charles Erickson/"The End of the Day")
(pg. C6)

TYPE: Biography

                   Copyright 1992 The New York Times Company


                              92 of 281 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                  May 7, 1992, Thursday, Late Edition - Final

Essay;
Old Pro Perot

BYLINE: By WILLIAM SAFIRE

SECTION: Section A; Page 27; Column 5; Editorial Desk

LENGTH: 707 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON


H. Ross Perot used to make himself useful around the Nixon White House, in hopes
of settling disputes his company was having with the Social Security
Administration.

When we were battling the sinister forces of Vietnam protest in 1970, the short
Texan with the Haldeman crewcut came up with an idea to dramatize the vastness
of our support.

He ran pro-Nixon, anti-protester ads in various cities, each containing a coupon
to get a mail pull and build a mailing list. The Perot plan: to fill trucks with
the returned-coupon mail and dump out the contents in front of cameras at the
White House, proving that the people were spontaneously identifying with our
Silent Majority.

As a certified mind-twister, I attended a meeting with chief of staff H. R.
Haldeman, his aide Alex Butterfield and press secretary Ron Ziegler. My
contemporaneous notes show Haldeman asking for a report on the Silent Majority
reaction to a Nixon speech: Where were the Perot letters?

Butterfield said that Perot had reported he was carefully holding onto all the
letters in each of the cities where ads had been run.

"Where exactly are the letters?" asked Haldeman, who liked specifics.

"In banks," replied Butterfield.

"You mean," said Ziegler, smacking his forehead, "when reporters ask me, 'Where
is the Silent Majority?', I can say we have them locked up in bank vaults all
over the country?"

"Yes," deadpanned Butterfield. "It's all part of 'One Nation Under God' Month."

Now, after all these years, I see the purpose of those letters: They were the
seeds at the core of the up-from-the-people, Perot-for-President campaign.

Look, I have nothing personal against the barefoot boy from Easy Street. Anybody
who kicked in a reported $200,000 to Nixon's '72 campaign -- out of conviction
about the war, or gratitude for favors, or the chance to show political
insiderhood in board rooms -- can't be all bad.

But it's troubling to see good people, tired of watching politicians trying
clumsily to manipulate their emotions, throwing themselves into the arms of a
master manipulator.

He strikes the pose of an amateur in politics, a surprised object of a
grass-roots draft movement; in fact, Ross Perot is an old pro of 30 years'
standing in the business-politics complex, and the financier of a candidacy that
waters and cultivates its own long-green grass roots.

He sells the notion of being on the side of the "little guy." Yet when he went
up against the entrenched and hidebound management of General Motors as a member
of its board, instead of battling for the interests of stockholders he took a
huge bundle of their money from the board in return for shutting up and
tiptoeing away.

He pretends to be ready to balance our budget while solving our social ills --
"no sweat" -- but the Perot solution to urban violence is to allow a handgun in
every pocket, opposing even a waiting period to see if the purchaser is a felon.

P.R. experts have to admire his little touches. The billionaire derides
lobbyists "in their alligator shoes," dissociating himself ostentatiously from
the trappings of wealth. The candidate with no idea of what to do longer than a
soundbite snaps at questioners for dealing in soundbites.

The big touches are skilled, too: Having established himself in the polls by
being all things to all men -- the rallier of the general outrage -- the
putative savior of the Republic now deflects inquiry by withdrawing into the
silences for 60 days to work out what he stands for.

Such an autocratic moratorium should give even believers in the Tooth Fairy
pause. What kind of leader needs 60-day wonderment to decide his basic approach
to complex issues? Can a two-month cram course in popular positioning prepare
anyone for the Presidency?

His first evasion has been to offer to bring "the leading authorities together"
on the great battles. But authorities disagree; this is not a country that can
be run by knocking heads together. Nor can we replace representative government
with his "electronic town meetings" -- mobocracy by instant referendum.

The Perot candidacy is an amusing diversion for outrage groupies, their coupons
destined for bank vaults. The rest of the electorate has a serious choice to
make.

LOAD-DATE: May 7, 1992

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Op-Ed

                   Copyright 1992 The New York Times Company


                              93 of 281 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                   May 8, 1992, Friday, Late Edition - Final

Corporations Ask Bush to Lift Vietnam Ban

BYLINE: Special to The New York Times

SECTION: Section D; Page 18; Column 4; Financial Desk

LENGTH: 239 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, May 7


Eight large United States corporations, among them four oil companies, asked
President Bush today to lift restrictions on business with Vietnam and allow
Americans to compete in its growing market.

"The United States economic sanctions with respect to Vietnam have become
unilateral, with our allies and trade partners investing heavily and trading
vigorously," said the letter from executives of Caterpillar, Boeing, Hunt Oil,
Chevron, Amoco, Phillips Petroleum, Windmere, American International Group and
the Coudert Brothers law firm.

"Accordingly," the letter continued, "the effect of the American embargo is not
to deny Vietnam access to Western technology and financing, but rather to
penalize U.S. companies to the benefit of foreign competitors. The United States
is rapidly losing ground and is forfeiting to foreign competition a market where
we could have a competitive edge."

The executives requested a White House meeting to press their case.

In April, after a trip to Vietnam by an Assistant Secretary of State, Richard
Solomon, the Administration concluded that Hanoi was making greater efforts to
solve the cases of Americans missing or unaccounted for since the Vietnam War,
and permitted telephone service to resume.

At the same time it also allowed American businesses to sell goods of a
humanitarian nature -- medicines, food and clothing -- to the Vietnamese. But
all other trade is prohibited.

LOAD-DATE: May 8, 1992

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1992 The New York Times Company


                              94 of 281 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                   May 8, 1992, Friday, Late Edition - Final
                              Correction Appended

THE 1992 CAMPAIGN: Candidate's Record;
White House Aides' Memos Paint Perot as Nixon Insider

BYLINE: By STEVEN A. HOLMES,  Special to The New York Times

SECTION: Section A; Page 1; Column 1; National Desk

LENGTH: 1490 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, May 7


Ross Perot, whose incipient Presidential campaign is based largely on his image
as an outsider, was closely allied with the Nixon White House, often asked for
special favors and promised contributions to Nixon public-relations efforts,
according to documents in the National Archives.

The documents, mainly notes from White House aides in the Nixon Administration,
suggest that Mr. Perot told Nixon aides that he would give up to $50 million to
a public relations campaign to burnish Mr. Nixon's image. Nixon aides say the
money was never delivered.

Aides' View of Perot

Mr. Perot declined to be interviewed directly about the Nixon papers. Instead
his campaign released a six-page statement generally denying any impropriety.
The statement acknowledged that Mr. Perot discussed starting an "electronic town
hall" with Mr. Nixon, but added: "At no time did Mr. Perot indicate any interest
at all in spending $50 million on a special project for the President."

The papers' existence was first reported today by The Associated Press. The
memoranda and notes from President Richard M. Nixon's aides describe a
relationship that was at times cozy and at times strained. It was a symbiotic
relationship that benefited both parties. Mr. Perot held out the prospect of
spending large amounts of money in public-relations campaigns to enhance Mr.
Nixon's popularity and to bolster support for his policy on the Vietnam War.

Nixon aides indicated in the notes and in follow-up interviews today that for
his part Mr. Perot got help in his problems with the Internal Revenue Service
and with government agencies that were awarding contracts to his computer
company and monitoring its performance.

Mr. Perot said that the implications of a money-for-influence deal existed in
the minds of the Nixon aides. The A.P. quoted Mr. Perot as saying that Nixon
aides would sometimes solicit him with "fantasyland numbers" and "beautiful and
strange ideas," and adding, "I always made it very clear to them I wasn't
interested."

In response to questions about the amounts of money referred to in the notes,
Mr. Perot was quoted as saying, "I can't control what people scribble on pads."

On their face, the papers paint a portrait of Mr. Perot that runs counter to his
image as a private entrepreneur disdainful of the inner workings of Washington.

The documents indicate that Mr. Perot sought and received White House
intervention in disputes he was having with the Social Security Administration
over subcontracts his company, Electronic Data Systems, had won to process
Medicare claims. A January 1972 memorandum from Gordon Strachan, a White House
aide to H. R. Haldeman, the chief of staff, indicated that Nixon aides tried to
have a lucrative contract to process Medicare claims in California returned to
E.D.S. The memorandum said that the White House "became involved too late to
turn it around without an inordinate amount of flak."

Robert H. Finch, the former Secretary of Health Education and Welfare, said in
an interview today that the contract had been awarded to another company because
Mr. Perot's charges to process the claims were too high.

Milledge A. Hart 3rd, the former president of E.D.S., told the Associated Press
that Mr. Perot's ties to the White House allowed the company to use it as a
"court of last resort" in disputes with agencies. But, Mr. Hart said, even when
the company voiced its complaints, "damn little happened."

Documents from the National Archives indicate that Mr. Perot's campaign in
support of American prisoners of war was part of an orchestrated effort by the
Nixon White House to build support for the President's Vietnam policies at a
time of mounting opposition to the war.

"I think that Ross Perot might be the kind of hard-hitting, young individual who
could set up a pro-Vietnam Committee," Peter Flanigan, a White House aide wrote
in June 1969, almost six months before the businessman was to begin his effort
to help war prisoners.

William Safire, a former Nixon aide and now a columnist for The New York Times,
recalled Mr. Perot's effort in a column today on the Op-Ed page of The Times.

At the time of Mr. Perot's activities, the White House, apparently in an effort
to insure Mr. Perot's efforts were perceived as a grass-roots operation not
connected to the Administration, sought to maintain an arms-length relationship
with Mr. Perot.

Indeed, in January 1970, after Mr. Perot made a highly publicized trip to
Southeast Asia to try to deliver food, medicine and mail to American prisoners
of war, a memorandum to Mr. Nixon from Alexander P. Butterfield, a White House
aide said, "As you know, we have purposefully stayed one step removed from his
P.O.W. activities."

"This business about him being an outsider is nonsense," Mr. Flanigan, a former
Nixon aide who met with Mr. Perot more than 40 times, told the Associated Press.
"He knows how to play every instrument in that band. He was the ultimate
insider."

The papers also portray Mr. Perot as a prickly individual, often seeking special
treatment from the White House, and prone to complain to everyone, including
George Bush, then the Ambassador to the United Nations, that his work was not
being appreciated.

"Ambassador Bush has asked me to pass along some information which he picked up
at the Waldorf in New York when he bumped into Ross Perot," said a April 1971
memorandum from Thomas Lias, an aide. "Perot seems to think that he hasn't been
getting very much White House attention of late and mentioned this to Bush."

According to the memo, Mr. Perot was apparently upset because an article in Life
magazine about people that Mr. Nixon talked to failed to mention him.

On a number of occasions, Nixon aides questioned Mr. Perot's ability to make
good on promises he made.

For example, in October 1969, Mr. Perot promised a far-reaching campaign to
pressure Hanoi to release American prisoners. The campaign would establish
national organization, place advertisements in 100 of the country's largest
newspapers and in magazines, arrange with oil companies to have petitions handed
out at service stations and arrange for the Boy Scouts to deliver handouts door
to door.

The aim of the campaign was to generate a barrage of letters that would be
delivered to the North Vietnamese officials in Paris urging that the prisoners
be released.

Meeting With President

But in a 1971 memo Mr. Strachen said: "Perot delivered on part of his promise.
He set up an organization and ran one ad that we approved." But the memo
concluded that he did not produce the promised flood of letters.

In addition, in the spring of 1970, Mr. Perot "met personally" with Mr. Nixon
and promised to contribute $10 million to set up a "Pro-Nixon" public policy
research institute. He never produced any money, the records say, and today he
denied offering to establish such an organization.

On another occasion, Mr. Perot met with Mr. Nixon and asked him, "how could I
spend $50 million for you?" according to an aide's hand-written notes of the
meeting. The 1971 memo said Mr. Nixon suggested the "purchase of media" by Mr.
Perot who then considered tying to buy The Evening Star, a Washington newspaper,
or the ABC network. "Perot did not deliver," the memo said.

"This guy was in there all the time," a former White House aide, Charles W.
Colson, said today.

At the time, Mr. Perot seemed to be held in high regard by the White House. An
August 1969 memo described him as one who made "substantial contributions to the
campaign by giving their airplane or a couple of members of the staff."

No Campaign Contribution

In fact, Mr. Perot did not make any direct cash contributions to either Mr.
Nixon's 1968 or his 1972 campaign, though top E.D.S. officials did, however,
contribute more than $200,000 to Mr. Nixon's re-election drive.

Mr. Perot did dispatch seven of his company's employees -- "five of whom were
useful" -- to Mr. Nixon's 1968 campaign. "Perot tried to deduct their salary on
his corporate tax return," according to a January 1972 memo. When a an Internal
Revenue Commissioner rejected this claim, Mr. Perot became upset and asked the
Administration to intercede.

In 1971, the documents say, Mr. Nixon encouraged the businessman to invest in a
failing Wall Street stock brokerage, duPont Glore Forgan, saying that if the
borkerage collapsed it would destroy investor confidence in Wall Street. Mr.
Perot invested $55 million in the venture, and lost millions in the company
before it filed for bankruptcy.

Mr. Peot tried to enlist White House help in getting a tax break to compensate
him for some of his losses in the failed Wall Street enterprise. The documents
do not indicate what kind of aid, if any, the White House provided. But in the
mid 1970's. Mr. Perot sought to have a $15 million tax break passed by Congress
to make good some of his losses. That effort failed.

NAME: Ross Perot

LOAD-DATE: May 8, 1992

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

CORRECTION-DATE: May 9, 1992, Saturday

CORRECTION:

An article yesterday about ties between the Nixon White House and Ross Perot,
the undeclared Presidential candidate, referred erroneously to his dissolution
of duPont Glore Forgan, a Wall Street brokerage house he controlled. Mr. Perot
liquidated it; he did not declare it bankrupt.


TYPE: Biography

                   Copyright 1992 The New York Times Company


                              95 of 281 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                  May 9, 1992, Saturday, Late Edition - Final

Review/Film;
Coming of Age at 12 With a Stripper as Mom

BYLINE: By CARYN JAMES

SECTION: Section 1; Page 17; Column 1; Cultural Desk

LENGTH: 652 words


Goldie Hawn does not giggle or act bubble-headed once in "Crisscross." She is
thoroughly restrained and convincing as Tracy Cross, a divorced mother raising
her 12-year-old son, Chris, in a seedy Florida hotel in 1969. That is just the
first of many surprises in a film that offers a deeply touching and tough-minded
treatment of motherhood and adolescence.

Seen largely from Chris's point of view, the story is as understated as his
admission that he has "a screwed-up life." Things are so messed up in this
hard-scrabble family that Chris has two jobs in addition to his paper route. And
while Tracy keeps her day job as the Eden Hotel's waitress, at her night job she
has moved on from bartending to stripping in a local dive. She'll make five
times as much money, but doesn't want her son to find out.

The story is an open invitation to the kind of upbeat inspirational sentiments
that hackneyed movies are made of. But Scott Sommer's script and Chris Menges's
direction avoid every pitfall. Like Mr. Menges's last film, "A World Apart,"
this is the story of parents who make desperately wrong choices with all the
best intentions. The film doesn't flinch from the pain and anger those decisions
inflict on the family.

Chris, baffled when he overhears a reference to "Tracy's new act," sneaks into
the club one night. As the camera cuts back and forth between the determined
mother and her confused son, it is impossible to guess who is in more pain. The
scene is never lurid, but is profoundly troubling.

The actors evoke enormous sympathy for people who are trying hard to survive and
make sense out of the emotional conflicts of their lives. Chris's father is so
traumatized by his service in Vietnam that he has abandoned his family and
retreated to the shelter of a monastery where he works as a gardener. In that
brief and implausible role, Keith Carradine creates the compelling image of a
gaunt, haunted man barely able to help himself, much less the son who needs him
so much.

As Tracy's love interest, Arliss Howard is just as mysterious and effective as
he needs to be. But it is David Arnott, as Chris, who carries this film. With a
voice that seems just about to crack into adolescence, Chris is intelligent and
poignant, but still a quickly maturing kid.

The film's flaws are minor. It relies so heavily on Chris's voice-overs that it
becomes a touch too literary. And Mr. Menges has a mercifully short attention
span for the 1960's atmosphere, which includes watching the moon landing on
black-and-white television. Those scenes don't need to be here at all.

But when it counts, "Crisscross" makes all the right moves, including an ending
that is both optimistic and realistic. And Goldie Hawn, whose company produced
this film, shows that she can stop being a bubblehead any time she wants.

"Crisscross" is rated R. (Under 17 requires accompanying parent or adult
guardian.) It includes scenes of drug use and some brief flashes of nudity.



CRISSCROSS

Directed by Chris Menges; screenplay by Scott Sommer, based on his novella;
director of photography, Ivan Strasburg; edited by Tony Lawson; music by Trevor
Jones; production designer, Crispian Sallis; produced by Anthea Sylbert and
Robin Forman; released by Metro-Goldwyn-Mayer. Running time: 100 minutes. This
film is rated R.

Tracy Cross . . . Goldie Hawn
Joe . . . Arliss Howard
Emmett . . . James Gammon
Chris Cross . . . David Arnott
John Cross . . . Keith Carradine
Jetty . . . J. C. Quinn
Louis . . . Steve Buscemi
Blacky . . . Paul Calderon
Oakley . . . Cathryn dePrume
Kelly . . . Nada Despotovich
Blondie . . . David Anthony Marshall
Shelly . . . Deirdre O'Connell
Monica . . . Anna Levine Thomson
Snyder . . . Neil Giuntoli
Termina . . . Christy Martin
Buggs . . . Damian Vantriglia
Cruz . . . Derrick Velez
Harvey . . . Frank Military
Connie . . . John Nesci

LOAD-DATE: May 9, 1992

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo: Goldie Hawn, the producer and star of "Crisscross." (Deana
Newcomb/Metro-Goldwyn-Mayer Pictures)

TYPE: Review

                   Copyright 1992 The New York Times Company


                              96 of 281 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                   May 10, 1992, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

Our Bad Guys

BYLINE: By Stephen Kinzer;  Stephen Kinzer reported from Latin America for more
than a decade, and is now chief of the Bonn bureau of The New York Times. He is
the author of "Blood of Brothers: Life and War in Nicaragua."

SECTION: Section 7; Page 22; Column 3; Book Review Desk

LENGTH: 707 words



INSTRUMENTS OF STATECRAFT
U.S. Guerrilla Warfare, Counterinsurgency, and Counterterrorism,
1940-1990.
By Michael McClintock.
604 pp. New York:
Pantheon Books.
$30.

FROM the moment John Winthrop declared that he and his brethren in Boston would
build "a city on a hill," Americans have nurtured the belief that their country
is a beacon for the world, guided by higher ethical principles than most other
nations and peoples.

Yes, the United States has been involved in nasty little interventions in the
Pacific and the Caribbean, but in the two world conflicts of this century it
provided the decisive blows against tyranny. As the cold war began, the United
States seemed a wise and benevolent superpower.

Yet for many Americans like Michael McClintock, that is no longer so. A series
of foreign adventures, he argues, has shown the United States willing to support
governments whose principles and practices are fundamentally opposed to American
ideals. So long as these governments sided with the United States in its
confrontation with the Soviet Union, their domestic policies were considered
their own business.

The Soviet threat may now be vanquished, but, Mr. McClintock suggests in
"Instruments of Statecraft," the American victory -- if such it was -- came at a
terrible price. During the decades when American Presidents faced down threats
they perceived everywhere, from Iran and Guatemala to Vietnam and Chile, they
accepted the premise that leftist movements could not be fought with "normal
methods." United States forces, and the foreign forces with whom they worked,
Mr. McClintock writes, often adopted and sometimes even improved upon the
tactics of their most savage adversaries.

This book describes the process by which the United States became a promoter of
counterinsurgency warfare. Mr. McClintock, whose previous book, "The American
Connection," was about United States covert activities in Latin America, begins
by recounting American efforts to learn the tactics of Nazi occupiers in Europe.
Next he provides a detailed examination of the American role in suppressing the
Huk uprising in the Philippines during the late 1940's, and from there he goes
on to describe the emergence of what he calls "counterinsurgency states" --
governments that existed to put down revolutions -- in Africa, Asia and Latin
America.

Much of "Instruments of Statecraft" is a densely written review of American
military manuals, Presidential directives, policy memorandums and articles from
magazines like Military Review. Taken together, they show a clear trend toward
accepting terror tactics as a necessity of guerrilla war. By accepting such
tactics, Mr. McClintock asserts, the United States Government became
responsibile for "distant holocausts" from Central America to East Timor.

Mr. McClintock gives credit to President Jimmy Carter for trying to introduce
human rights considerations into American policy making, but portrays Mr.
Carter's efforts as ultimately unsuccessful. "Bringing human rights into the
foreign policy equation bruised the interests of too many more powerful
departments and challenged the viability of larger lines of policy," he
concludes.

HAS it not been necessary for many American-backed governments to use torture,
murder, mass relocation or other common antiguerrilla tactics to defend
themselves against subversion? Might not some of these governments have fallen
to Communism if their armies had observed the rules of war?

Mr. McClintock argues that many third world insurgencies of the postwar era,
particularly those in El Salvador and other Latin American countries, have been
aimed at distributing land and breaking the hold of feudal elites. But their
reformist and sometimes radical rhetoric sounded threatening to the cold-war
United States. Rather than try to deal with political and social problems, the
United States felt it was safer to try to destroy the rebellions that the
problems sparked.

By supporting corrupt governments and by looking the other way, or worse, when
those governments used torture and murder, the United States lost much moral
credibility. It was and is, Mr. McClintock convincingly concludes, "an
un-American way of war."

LOAD-DATE: May 10, 1992

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Review

                   Copyright 1992 The New York Times Company


                              97 of 281 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                   May 10, 1992, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

Freedom Fighter

BYLINE: By Trip Gabriel;  Trip Gabriel is a frequent contributor to this
magazine.

SECTION: Section 6; Page 24; Column 1; Magazine Desk

LENGTH: 4186 words


Early this April, six weeks before its most notorious citizen was scheduled to
die by electrocution, the Appalachian coal-mining town of Grundy, Va., was raw
with conflicting emotions. An ad in The Virginia Mountaineer urged residents to
plead with the Governor not to intervene. At the same time, the rugged hillsides
and deep hollows were full of rumors questioning the official version of the
1981 crime, the rape and murder of a 19-year-old housewife. Jim McCloskey had
come to Grundy to chase down the rumors, because he believed that 286 miles
away, in the state penitentiary at Boydton, the wrong man was ticking down the
days on death row.

McCloskey is the Presbyterian lay minister and self-taught private eye who heads
Centurion Ministries, a kind of charity-supported detective agency and advocacy
group whose only clients are prisoners claiming they were wrongfully convicted.
In the past 12 years, he and a handful of colleagues have conducted tenacious,
shoestring investigations that have freed 12 men and women awaiting execution or
serving life terms. The group had just scored its most recent victory -- a
double play -- in March, with the much publicized release of two men falsely
imprisoned for 17 years for killing an off-duty deputy sheriff in Los Angeles.

Two weeks later, on April 6, McCloskey was in Virginia, pursuing the case of
Roger Keith Coleman, who had seemingly exhausted all his appeals and had an
execution date of May 20.

The crime Coleman was convicted of scarred the soul of Grundy. The murdered
woman, Wanda Fay McCoy, was a victim out of American folklore: a member of the
hillbilly clan that had battled the Hatfields in the 19th century. When she was
gruesomely stabbed in her home on a hillside above Slate Creek, the entire
community felt violated.

Police hastily concluded she had let her attacker into her house. Her husband
named the only three men for whom Wanda would have opened the door. One was her
brother-in-law, Roger Coleman, a miner from across the valley, who became a
prime suspect because he had once served time for attempted rape.

At the trial a year later, in 1982, the town was in a state of high agitation.
After Coleman's arrest, someone had posted a sign near the courthouse that read:
"Time for another hanging in Grundy." One juror supposedly had told a friend
that he wanted to "help burn the S.O.B." Coleman was convicted on circumstantial
evidence and sentenced to death.

But two years ago, in the 11th hour of his appeals fight, there was a startling
development: a Grundy resident, Teresa Horn, said that another man had admitted
to the murder. In a 1990 affidavit accusing a man named Donald Ramey of
attempted rape, Horn said that Ramey had ordered her to shut up or "he was going
to do me like he did that girl on Slate Creek."

Donald Ramey, it turned out, had lived in the house directly behind Wanda
McCoy's. Two other Grundy women also gave sworn statements to Coleman's
investigators that Ramey had sexually attacked them. None of the incidents were
reported to police, and through an attorney Ramey has denied involvement in them
or the McCoy murder.

McCloskey first took the Coleman case in March 1988, and over the years he and
Coleman's lawyers had developed other tantalizing bits of evidence that
undermined the state's version of the crime. In 1988, he uncovered a police
report that stated the victim's husband, Brad McCoy, had said his wife might
have taken the trash out that night, raising the possibility she was first
attacked outdoors. The report also said a "pry mark" and a latent fingerprint
were found on the front door. And last year, a genetic trait test, more
sophisticated than tests run in 1981, showed the presence of semen from two men
in the victim's body. Prosecutors have attacked the interpretation and
significance of all these findings, and a succession of state courts has agreed
with them, refusing to allow Coleman even a hearing on the new evidence. The
sole promising lead seemed to be the reports connecting Donald Ramey to the
crime.

In his role as gumshoe, McCloskey never telephones. He presents himself face to
face at people's doors or at their jobs -- in convenience stores, lumberyards
and auto-body shops. He usually wears a clerical collar, for the sense of
authority and trust it can impart. But beyond that, there is little calculation
in his approach. He stands before potential informants, a balding 49-year-old
with a double chin and a bluff manner, and allows people to take the measure of
him.

This afternoon, he dropped in on an unemployed maintenance man, an acquaintance
of Donald Ramey's. When the man appeared at the door of his mobile home,
McCloskey came bluntly to the point, saying he suspected that Ramey, whose
nickname is Trouble, was involved in the McCoy murder.

Sometimes it takes repeated visits to a source, over months and years, before
McCloskey ferrets out any information. But this time the maintenance man simply
blurted it out: "I know that at a party one night four or five years ago when he
was drunk Trouble said he had a hand in it."

McCloskey betrayed no emotion. "Did he give any details?" he asked the man, who
didn't want his name to appear in print.

"I remember another boy said, 'Are you blowin' again, or are you telling the
truth?' He never answered."

McCloskey, who was raised on the Philadelphia Main Line, normally speaks in a
smooth and oratorical voice. But now, perhaps unwittingly, he slipped into a
slight good-ol'-boy drawl. "Think back," he prodded, "and to the best you can
come, tell us the exact words he used."

"He said, 'I helped them.' That's the only thing," the man said. "Someone said,
'What you talking about?' He said, 'You remember that incident that happened up
on Slate Creek?' That's all he said, and walked away."

For McCloskey, it was pay dirt, an overheard admission that would probably be
admissible evidence in court. It pointed toward the possible involvement of
another man, even if it did not exonerate Coleman. He asked the maintenance man
if he'd sign a statement summarizing what he'd said, and when the man seemed
willing, McCloskey promised to type one up and bring it the next day.

By itself, the new evidence would not sow enough doubts to pull Coleman from the
fire. The odds were still very long. "I know it's an extremely difficult
mission, that we have an excellent chance of failing," McCloskey said later.
"But I don't believe Roger Coleman is going to be executed. I think something's
going to happen, some miracle."

MIRACLES HAVE A WAY OF HAPPENING for James McCloskey. The way this minister
measures them, every one of his successful cases is a miracle because of the
excruciatingly difficult task of convincing the criminal-justice system that
mistakes are made.

McCloskey is a former management consultant who entered the seminary during a
midlife crisis, and later -- motivated by a combination of compassion for those
unjustly imprisoned and outrage at the system that put them there -- became a
crusader. "All the sad stories overwhelm him and hurt his heart," says Kate
Germond, a colleague whose job includes researching the hundreds of requests for
help Centurion Ministries receives in its basement office in Princeton, N.J. The
group can pursue only a handful of cases at a time, and takes only clients on
death row or serving life terms.

A lifelong bachelor, McCloskey has time for almost no outside interests. When
lawyers he works with fall into animated discussions of civil liberties,
McCloskey's attention drifts. "The only thing I care about are the facts," he
says. "Did this person have anything whatsoever to do with the crime he was
sentenced for? Once we come to believe -- after a studied review of the record
and long interviews with the convict -- that he's innocent, we re-investigate
the case as if it happened yesterday. If we're wrong, we go away. That's
happened one and a half times."

The "half" was a case in Louisiana in which a prisoner's alibi didn't check out.
In the other instance, a convicted murderer, under sharp questioning by
McCloskey, gave a near confession.

Many of the group's cases feature witnesses who are friends of the accused,
usually in trouble with the law themselves, who years later admit they lied
under police pressure to save their own skins. In the case of Damaso Vega,
convicted in 1982 for strangling a teen-age girl in Monmouth County, N.J., the
state's two star witnesses were Vega's friends. One was the best man at his
wedding. Sentenced to life, Vega pleaded with the judge: "I will eat a stone. I
will eat dust. I will eat anything worse in the world for me to prove my
innocence. I am not the man."

In 1989, both the key witnesses admitted, shamefully and reluctantly, that they
had lied under pressure from a detective. The detective denied it. But New
Jersey Superior Court Judge Robert Figarotta found the recanting witnesses were
telling the truth. Vega was freed.

In Dallas the same year, Centurion Ministries demonstrated that Joyce Ann Brown,
a prostitute serving life for murder, was a victim of mistaken identity, and
that a jailhouse informant lied to convict her. "She told the whole world she
was innocent -- no one believed her," McCloskey says. "The prosecutors and the
cops were lying! Cops lie all the time. The system is upside down!"

After a decade of probing the excesses of the criminal-justice system, McCloskey
has a dark opinion of justice in America. He has learned that the police can and
do coerce witnesses to commit perjury. That prosecutors can and do suborn the
self-serving lies of jailhouse informants. And that defendants on the margins of
society may receive sloppy and uncaring defense lawyering. McCloskey estimates
that 10 percent of all defendents brought to trial for violent crimes -- rape,
murder, assault -- are wrongfully convicted.

"People think we must have some special gift for weeding out all the fakers who
petition us and picking the innocent ones," he says. "But it's like shooting
ducks in a barrel. Wrongful convictions happen all the time."

Most of McCloskey's fellow citizens don't accept that. Faith in the jury system
is close to a secular religion.

"Don't you think I know that?" McCloskey responds. "I run into that wall all the
time. I see things upside down and in reverse from the conventional. I was them
12 years ago. Twelve years ago, if I'd met me, I would think: That man is
crazy."

THE MAN MCCLOSKEY WOULD HAVE met 12 years ago was a law-and-order Republican who
gave no thought to convicted prisoners. He was conservative, not to say
reactionary. When Martin Luther King Jr. was shot, he recalls, he thought: Good,
they got the troublemaker.

The son of a prominent builder, he graduated from Bucknell University and served
with the Navy in Vietnam. Back home on the Main Line, McCloskey commuted to an
office on Rittenhouse Square and drove a Lincoln Continental.

So far, so predictable. But by his mid-30's McCloskey had come to feel an
emptiness. "My life was like a rainbow," he says. "It might have looked nice
from the outside, but it was all vapor." A self-described "closet Christian," he
returned to the Presbyterian church after abandoning his faith in late
adolescence. At the age of 37, after a year of inner spiritual turmoil, he
elected to enter the ministry.

He drove the Lincoln to Princeton Theological Seminary. In his second year, he
became a student chaplain at maximum-security Trenton State Prison. There he met
George (Chiefie) De Los Santos, the man who would change his life. De Los
Santos, a drug addict convicted of murdering a Newark used-car salesman,
insisted he was innocent. McCloskey agreed to look at the trial transcript. What
he read convinced him to take a year off to re-investigate the case.

In July 1983, after two and a half years of McCloskey's legwork, Chiefie De Los
Santos was freed. A Federal judge ruled that testimony by a jailhouse witness
"reeked of perjury," and that a prosecutor had known it and permitted it.
McCloskey's education in real-life law and order had begun.

McCloskey was convinced that his unlikely progress from corporate cog to
crusader for the innocent was no accident, that God must be showing him his
calling. On graduation from the seminary, he skipped ordainment and founded
Centurion Ministries, named after the Roman soldier who looked upon Christ on
the cross and said, "Surely, this one was innocent."

Says McCloskey of De Los Santos: "The facts freed an innocent man and gave him
new life. My life was turned around by a flat-out, heroin-addicted junkie."

McCloskey went on to conduct other stunning investigations. In the case of
Nathaniel Walker, convicted of raping a New Jersey woman, McCloskey discovered a
12-year-old semen sample from the victim that, inexplicably, had never been
tested and was still gathering dust in a police property room. A blood test
showed with scientific certainty that Walker was not the rapist, and he was
freed in 1986.

The following year, McCloskey was in Conroe, Tex., where a black janitor named
Clarence Brandley had been sentenced to death for the 1980 rape-murder of a girl
at the school where he worked. Police had arrested Brandley, then assembled the
other janitors he supervised, all of whom were white, and had them give
statements in each other's presence. By the time McCloskey dropped in years
later on one of these men, John Henry Sessum, Brandley was scheduled to die in
two weeks. With tears in his eyes, Sessum confessed that two of the other white
janitors had dragged the victim off, while he had ignored her pleas for help. A
stay of execution was granted, and Brandley -- whose story was told in Nick
Davies's book "White Lies" -- was eventually freed.

The publicity generated by the Walker and Brandley cases brought Centurion
Ministries a modest stream of income, averaging about $140,000 a year. The
full-time staff includes McCloskey and two assistants. Two other licensed
investigators are retained on a case-by-case basis: Richard Reyna of Texas and
Paul Henderson, a former journalist who won a 1982 Pulitzer Prize for articles
in The Seattle Times that exonerated a falsely convicted rapist.

McCloskey, who pays himself a salary of $22,000, encamps in shabby hotels and
dines on fast food on the road. He does not practice self-denial out of
principle, but by necessity. He looks forward to the boost his income will enjoy
from a movie about his career that Warner Brothers is developing. He dreams of
moving into a "modest little ranch-style house" and being reunited with the
furniture from his Philadelphia home, which he put into storage 12 years ago.

IN TERMS OF ATTENTION, CENTURION Ministries' earlier cases were small-time
compared with the burst of celebrity that followed the recent release of Benny
Powell and Clarence Chance for the 1973 killing of a Los Angeles County deputy
sheriff, David Andrews. Beginning in 1988, McCloskey and Paul Henderson had
pounded the pavement of L.A.'s downtown skid row and other high-crime
neighborhoods in search of the original witnesses in the case, many of them
down-and-outers.

They eventually found three women who'd testified for the state that they had
overheard the defendants boast of the killing. In sworn statements given to
McCloskey, all three recanted. They described how two police investigators,
William Hall and Richard Knott, used threats and promises until the women made
up stories they thought the cops wanted to hear. Hall, now a lieutenant, denies
he or his partner, who has since left the force, coerced any witnesses. "Isn't
McCloskey doing the same thing he's criticizing us for doing?" Hall says. "In a
different way, he's putting on his collar, going down into the quote-unquote
ghetto, and he's giving people an opportunity to get even with society, the
criminal-justice system, the police."

Prodded by McCloskey, the District Attorney's office reopened the investigation
and found that one of the central nails in the case -- the testimony of a
notorious jailhouse informant, Larry Wilson -- was corroded to the core. On
March 25, Powell and Chance, brought down from Folsom Prison, were together
again in a courtroom for the first time since 1975. Powell, who had not seen any
members of his Phoenix-based family in 17 years, searched the room for
recognizable faces. Chance looked uncomprehendingly sad, his thin frame
swallowed up by a baggy sport coat provided by his lawyers.

His attorney held up a photograph of a young and robust Chance before his arrest
and told the judge: "This is a picture of what he looked like a couple of years
before he went to prison, when he was released from the Army. The theft of his
youth in this case is something that there are no words to describe."

Judge Florence-Marie Cooper of Los Angeles County Superior Court ruled that had
the facts about Larry Wilson been known, the murder charges probably would have
been thrown out. "The conduct of the officers in this case is reprehensible,"
she said.

Addressing Chance and Powell, she offered an official mea culpa: "On behalf of
the people of the state of California and the criminal-justice system in
particular, I offer to each of you gentlemen sincere apologies for the gross
injustices perpetrated in these cases."

McCloskey and Paul Henderson were seated directly behind the defendents.
Overwhelmed by the judge's on-the-record vindication of their years of legwork,
both men daubed tears from their eyes.

"Mr. Powell and Mr. Chance," the judge pronounced, "you are free men."

Later that evening, McCloskey drove to a celebration for Clarence Chance, at his
parents' home in the community of Cerritos. "Let me hug this guy!" Chance
shouted as McCloskey entered.

"You're home!" McCloskey boomed back as they embraced in the kitchen beside a
cake decorated with the words "Free at Last, Free at Last."

"It's exhilarating," Chance told McCloskey. "You can't describe it. You're free
but you don't really know freedom."

TWELVE DAYS LATER IN GRUNDY, McCloskey was working the opposite end of a case --
searching for new evidence to save Roger Coleman. He was also at the opposite
end of his emotional spectrum: "I'm totally depressed by the situation. All the
new evidence we're developing isn't having much impact on the judicial system."

McCloskey says he is "totally, completely convinced" of Coleman's innocence,
despite forensic evidence that pointed to him as the rapist and killer of Wanda
Faye McCoy. A dime-size drop of blood on Coleman's jeans was type O, the same as
the victim's. Two pubic hairs found on her were "consistent" with Coleman's,
according to the state, and a semen sample in her vagina showed the assailant
was blood type B, the same as Coleman's.

What drew McCloskey to the case was what he considers the sheer implausibility
of the state's theory of what happened the night of March 10, 1981. Shortly
after 10 P.M., after leaving the TJM Mines, where he worked, Coleman stopped his
pickup truck to chat casually with a friend, Philip Vandyke. At the trial,
Vandyke testified that Coleman seemed in no hurry to go anywhere, and they
parted around 10:25 or 10:30. The state claimed he left earlier.

Coleman then drove to a trailer park, where he retrieved a music tape he'd lent
a friend. Coleman testified that he then drove into Grundy, showered at a public
bathhouse and returned home at 11:05.

According to the state, however, before he took his shower, Coleman made a
spur-of-the-moment fatal detour. Prosecutors claim he parked his pickup at a
turnout, waded across Slate Creek and walked uphill 350 yards past several homes
to Wanda McCoy's. It was about 10:50. Knowing her husband got off work at 11 and
would be home by 11:15, he would have had to work fast. As soon as McCoy opened
the door, police say, Coleman used a pocketknife with a three-inch blade to
nearly sever her head. He raped her and stabbed her twice in the chest. No one
in the neighborhood saw him coming or going. No one heard anything.

"The case was built on innuendos and lies and ludicrous, insane theory that
falls flat in the face of common sense," McCloskey said as he drove along Slate
Creek last month. In 1988, he had retraced the route the prosecution said
Coleman took -- the drive from the mine, the visit to the trailer park, the wade
across the swift-running creek -- and concluded there hadn't been time for
Coleman to rape and murder.

And now there was evidence that seemed to point to one or more other attackers:
the sworn statement by Teresa Horn that Donald Ramey admitted the crime to her
and the 1991 genetic trait test that showed the presence of semen from at least
two men in the victim's body.

In March, there was a Gothic turn in the case: Teresa Horn was found dead, just
one day after telling her story on a Roanoke television station. State police
don't have final toxicology results, but believe her death resulted from an
accidental drug overdose. Horn's family, noting that parts of her body were
covered with bruises (which police say were caused by medical personnel trying
to resuscitate her), suspect she was beaten and forced to take the drugs.

Many other Grundy residents seem to believe Horn did not die as authorities say.
"There's a real palpable fear," McCloskey said. "It's really inhibiting us.
They're all afraid they're going to end up as another Teresa Horn."

The fear was vividly on display when he dropped in on a woman who knew Ramey and
said she'd recently bought a gun for protection against him. She described a
visit she'd made last fall to Ramey's trailer, when the subject of Wanda McCoy's
murder arose. Ramey made a comment, she said, that revealed he knew the layout
of the McCoy living room the night of the murder. The admission had chilled her
to the quick.

Seated on the edge of his chair in her living room, McCloskey asked if she'd
sign a statement summarizing what she'd said. The woman recoiled visibly. She
didn't want her name used.

"I respect that and understand that," McCloskey said. "You don't want Donnie to
ever know you gave us a statement because you're afraid of what he might do to
you or your loved ones." Gently but firmly, he bid her to weigh what was at
stake for Roger Coleman. "On the other hand, we have an innocent man who's going
to be executed."

His voice was softer than usual. "What's going through your mind and heart?" he
asked.

"Fear," the woman replied. "The way Teresa got killed, I believe, was over
that."

"Let's take it one slow step at a time," McCloskey said. "First, we've talked to
you. Let us go away, type up a statement and see where you are at that point."

AS MCCLOSKEY traveled through Grundy, the image of another convict often pressed
upon his thoughts. Jimmy Wingo was the one client of McCloskey's for whom time
finally ran out. Wingo was convicted of murder in Louisiana in a one-day trial
and in 1982 was sentenced to death. McCloskey had videotaped a recantation by a
key witness against him, a woman who said she'd lied because a deputy sheriff
threatened to have her children removed. She'd been so terrified of the deputy
she even agreed to have sex with him.

On the day of the execution, in 1987, McCloskey gave the videotape to a top
gubernatorial aide, who promised to review it and discuss it with the Governor.
But the aide never called McCloskey back, and finally he drove to the state
penitentiary at Angola to be with Wingo on his last evening. "I'm sitting with a
man, so calm and full of grace," McCloskey recalls, "I'm thinking, This is
unreal -- this man is going to be electrocuted."

For McCloskey, it may have been the darkest night of his life. "One of the last
things he said was to encourage me, very gently, to continue working on behalf
of other Jimmy Wingos."

The day after talking to the woman who said Donald Ramey revealed knowledge of
the murder scene, McCloskey returned with a typed statement, but she declined to
sign it. The maintenance man also decided he didn't want to sign. It was "too
dangerous" to get involved, he said.

McCloskey had hoped to incorporate these and other statements into a last plea
on Coleman's behalf. He had exhausted his appeals in the Virginia state courts.
And in a controversial 1991 decision, the United States Supreme Court, as part
of its campaign to end delays in carrying out the death penalty, froze him out
of the Federal courts because his lawyers missed a filing deadline by one day.
His last chance was a defiant Federal judge or Gov. L. Douglas Wilder of
Virginia.

McCloskey has vowed that his investigation will go on until Coleman is executed
or his case is resolved. "I'm giving all I have to give," he said over a dinner
at Wendy's. "I honestly believe we're going to save Roger. I also know the Wingo
experience. It can go the other way." But he pushed the unwelcome memory aside
and forced a bit of optimism. "I'm not thinking about that now. I'm thinking
about just finding people and convincing them to muster up courage to come
forward."

NAME: Jim McCloskey

LOAD-DATE: May 10, 1992

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photos; McCloskey in Grundy, Va., outside the house on Slate Creek
where Wanda McCoy was murdered. Higher up on the hill is the one-time residence
of the man McCloskey thinks may be the actual killer. (Photograph by Keith
Carter for The New York Times)(pg. 24); Roger Coleman has been sentenced to
death for murdering Wanda McCoy. (Keith Carter for The New York Times); Jimmy
Wingo, shown with his mother, was executed despite McCloskey's help. (Stephan
Savoia/Morning Advocate)(Pg. 26)

TYPE: Biography

                   Copyright 1992 The New York Times Company


                              98 of 281 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                   May 10, 1992, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

A New Face for American Labor

BYLINE: By Sam Roberts;  Sam Roberts is the urban affairs columnist for The New
York Times.

SECTION: Section 6; Page 14; Column 1; Magazine Desk

LENGTH: 3679 words


Dennis Rivera is in a hurry. sporting his distinctive Indiana Jones-style fedora
with a tiny hole in the crease and lugging a bulging, battered leather satchel,
he charges into a Capitol Hill hotel late for the first formal session of a
national Hispanic political fund-raising committee. He pauses briefly in the
hotel lobby to greet friends from New York, then tries to slip unnoticed into
the basement ballroom where the meeting of nearly three dozen political figures
has already begun.

Instead, to a rousing ovation, he is ushered to the only vacant seat at the head
of a U-shaped table, next to Gloria Molina, the newly elected Los Angeles County
supervisor. Later that day, his attempt to duck out of a Georgetown cocktail
party is thwarted by another ovation. In between, in a series of meetings and
meals, a self-conscious Rivera is lionized by speaker after speaker. At lunch,
Bill Richardson, the Democratic Representative from New Mexico, who heads
Hispanic PAC U.S.A., limits his introductions to elected officials, with one
exception. "Dennis may not be an elected official," Richardson says, "but he
controls about nine million votes."

That's about nine million more than Rivera controlled just seven years ago, when
he was left broke and in tears after being dismissed from his $270-a-month job
wheeling patients through the halls of Beth Israel Medical Center in Manhattan.
Today, the slight, mustachioed 41-year-old college dropout, already a potent
force in New York politics, is rapidly becoming a muscular national presence.
His emergence is all the more remarkable because it is built on two shaky
foundations -- organized labor and the fractured Hispanic community.

As head of the nation's largest union local for health-care workers, Rivera has
vigorously injected his voice into partisan politics. "Our ability to win good
contracts is directly dependent on the politics of health care in our country,"
he says, speaking with a pronounced Spanish accent.

But Rivera aspires to be something more than an effective advocate of better
salaries, benefits and working conditions for his members, most of whom are poor
black and Hispanic women. If his demands are met -- as now seems likely --
before the year is out, his Local 1199 of the Drug, Hospital and Health Care
Employees Union, with its 100,000 members, will rejoin the A.F.L.-C.I.O. and
forge a formidable coalition with 600,000 other health-care employees in 39
states. The proposed American Conference of Health Care Workers would comprise
Rivera's union and the health-care units of the American Federation of State,
County and Municipal Employees, representing government workers, and the Service
Employees International Union, most of whose members are in the private sector.
As executive vice-president, Rivera would be in day-to-day charge of the
conference, which he expects to give him a national platform, especially in
health-care policy.

"He's maybe the best piece of talent around in the labor movement," says Victor
Gotbaum, the former municipal union leader in Chicago and New York. Rivera is
also a vice chairman of the Democratic State Committee in New York, where he
helped fashion the diverse coalition that elected David N. Dinkins as New York
City's first black Mayor in 1989.

Rivera is also the brightest new star in Hispanic politics, although his
ambition to speak for the nation's exploding Hispanic population may be harder
to realize. Few Hispanic leaders have even tried to develop a national
following, and fewer yet have succeeded. The reasons are plain.

While Hispanic Americans will account for about one-tenth of the nation's
population by the decade's end, almost one in three Hispanic adults are not yet
citizens. Many others are too young to vote. And many are dispersed not just
geographically but culturally -- by country of origin -- so their influence has
been confined to discrete areas. As a result, Hispanic political representation
is paltry, with less than 1 percent of the nation's 500,000 elected officials of
Hispanic origin.

In the labor movement, few Hispanic leaders stand out beyond Cesar Chavez, the
65-year-old head of the farmworkers whose membership -- like that of Jack
Otero's Transportation Communications International Union -- is much narrower
than Rivera's. Local 1199 represents 40,000 service and maintenance workers,
33,000 professional, technical and clerical employees, 18,500 home care workers,
4,500 registered nurses, 4,000 pharmacists and 15 doctors -- a pyramidal slice
of the nation's fastest-growing industry.

Back at the Hispanic Political Action Committee meeting in Washington, Rivera
and Andy Hernandez of the Southwest Voter Registration Education Project are
lamenting the decision of New York's Governor, Mario M. Cuomo, to skip the
Presidential race because of budget problems in Albany. The Governor is among
the few people in public life who approach the moral threshold that defines
Rivera's heroes.

"Will he get a budget?" Hernandez asks hopefully.

"Well, it's a contradiction," Rivera replies. "Some of us are fighting like hell
against the budget he wants." Nudged by the Rev. Jesse Jackson, Rivera
eventually endorsed Edmund G. Brown Jr.

Rivera's election to the presidency of Local 1199 in 1989 marked the culmination
of a 12-year association with the union, during which he went from hotshot
organizer to hated, "disloyal" rival of Doris Turner, a former president of the
union who had Rivera fired several times in an effort to silence him. He has
evolved into a canny crusader, who plunges headfirst into every fight that he
believes needs to be fought. "I have tried to be a little more patient," he
says. "On the other hand, my contempt for some of the political process has
increased."

The transition from struggling, downtrodden outsider to inside political
operator promises to be difficult for Rivera, who is a curious mix of
idealistic, 60's-style liberal and tough, blunt-speaking realist who doesn't
hesitate to take on liberalism's sacred cows. In fact, he is unsparing in his
criticism of organized labor, and particularly of its leadership.

But his character -- authentic, and certainly in tune with the populist 90's --
is also his greatest strength. As Basil Paterson, a former New York City deputy
mayor who is Local 1199's lawyer and a key adviser, says of Rivera: "He views
things as an outsider even when he's an insider."

LEAVING A UNION rally at Columbia-Presbyterian Medical Center in Washington
Heights, Rivera muses about how far he has come in the 15 years since he
emigrated from his native Puerto Rico. "More people work at this hospital," he
says, "than live in my hometown."

He was raised in the small, rural town of Aibonito, where his parents met while
his Irish-American father was scouting for nonunion sites for a women's
underwear factory. (The factory was built, and his father stayed on as the
manager.) Throughout his youth, Rivera showed little interest in politics,
preferring baseball and basketball. That phase ended abruptly when he was
drafted during the Vietnam War. "When I said I wasn't going, it wasn't for
political reasons," he recalls with his usual candor. "I didn't want to die."

While he regained his student deferment, the process changed his outlook. He
embraced the socialist agenda of his draft-resistance counselors and joined the
Puerto Rican Independence Party (he now generally favors continued commonwealth
status). Fired by his discovery of social injustice, he eventually quit college
several credits short of graduation and devoted himself full time to labor
organizing.

In those early days, Rivera was long on enthusiasm but short on experience and
street smarts. At a rally of psychiatric workers in San Juan, he was jailed for
spitting at the hospital's boss. Soon after, he organized a walkout of San Juan
garbage men -- without bothering to tell the garbage men. "We had already
mobilized the media and we got to the garage at 4 A.M," he recalls. "We said we
needed to strike. There was silence. So we called it off.

"Small detail," he says wryly. "You cannot do a strike without the workers."
That lesson learned, he helped build unions of health-care workers and municipal
employees that still endure in Puerto Rico.

Rivera came to New York in 1977, primarily to accompany his girlfriend, a
medical intern who had applied for residency in a Brooklyn hospital. They
married, had a son, Jaime, now 11 years old, and were divorced in 1982, partly,
he says, because of the pressures of his union activities.

Rivera's career with the hospital workers union, although beginning on shakier
ground, has endured longer. His early introduction to Leon J. Davis, who was a
pro-Communist drugstore clerk when he founded Local 1199 in the Depression, was
not promising: Davis was dismissive, suggesting that Rivera might find it
difficult to organize workers because he barely spoke English. "He threw us out
of his office," Rivera says. "The office I now occupy."

When Davis retired in 1982, he was succeeded by Doris Turner, who quickly
plunged the union into a ruinous strike. Turner won re-election in 1984 in a
ballot that the Labor Department subsequently voided, after Turner loyalists
admitted to irregularities.

These were lean years for Rivera, especially after 1982, when he joined with
Davis loyalists in supporting a national merger with the Service Employees union
-- a merger Turner opposed. Enraged, she made sure he was assigned to a series
of dead-end jobs and, ultimately, fired him, even though he was an elected
organizer.

Things only got worse in the next two years, particularly after Rivera joined a
slate to challenge Turner in the 1984 elections. In early 1985, one day shy of
the two-month probationary period, he was dismissed from his job of transporting
X-ray patients at Beth Israel. A janitor's job in a unionized Long Island
nursing home nearly ended the same way.

Fortunately for Rivera, the Labor Department had by then extracted an agreement
for a Federally supervised rerun of the 1984 election, making him eligible to
campaign full time as a $200-a-week organizer for the insurgent Save Our Union
coalition.

Finally, in April 1986, Rivera was elected executive vice-president of Local
1199 on a slate headed by Georgianna Johnson, who proved less destructive than
Turner but equally ineffective. In 1989 -- with the help of Bill Lynch, who
would direct the Dinkins campaign, and Moe Foner, a savvy Davis-era veteran who
now heads the union's cultural program -- Rivera ousted Johnson and emerged as
the newest star in labor circles.

THREE DAYS AFTER HIS election, Rivera was pitched into negotiations on a new
contract. It rapidly became plain that, under Rivera, face-to-face bargaining
was only a part of the process. His counterpart in the negotiations, William J.
Abelow, who headed New York's League of Voluntary Hospitals, recalls that
Rivera's performance at the bargaining table seemed merely a sideshow to his
lobbying and public relations efforts, which "had all the trappings of a
political campaign."

Norman Metzger, an author and Abelow's predecessor, praises Rivera's
effectiveness. "Rivera, with far less support than Davis among the rank and
file, is far more successful," Metzger says. "Traditional across-the-table
negotiations are not his metier. He goes to the top. He calls in chits from
politicians. He uses government officials as allies. And he brings the civil
rights issue back into labor relations.

"You might bite your lower lip and be angry at the effects, given the fact that
hospitals are faced with enormous financial difficulties," Metzger concludes.
"But Rivera has changed collective bargaining in this industry."

A prime Rivera tactic, one used to great effect by the hospitals in the past, is
to divide and conquer. So it was that, one week after the contract expired, the
Roman Catholic Archdiocese defected from the hospitals coalition. Rivera then
orchestrated a series of brief walkouts that demonstrated the union's muscle
without overtiring its members. And he delayed a strike deadline until after the
mayoral primary, to free workers for the campaign and to avoid embarrassing
Dinkins. One month later, the other hospitals capitulated.

The key alliance for Rivera, one that continues to this day, was struck with
John Cardinal O'Connor, the Roman Catholic Archbishop of New York, who had been
something of a mentor to the young labor leader since 1987, when Rivera enlisted
him and the Rev. Jesse Jackson to rally support for home health-care workers.

If the Cardinal, the son of a union man, was predisposed toward Rivera, their
relationship -- and a new contract -- was cemented when Rivera passionately
pleaded his case in a meeting after 10:15 Mass at St. Patrick's Cathedral. "I
told him he had impressed me very much as a man of integrity," the Cardinal
recalls. "The union movement so desperately needs people with real leadership
ability who are incorruptible.

"I would love to see him grow and mature and achieve a national leadership
position," Cardinal O'Connor continues. "But only if he keeps his integrity and
doesn't just end up with happiness and high pay." To date, Rivera's integrity is
unchallenged. Happiness -- contentment, anyway -- has been more elusive. And
high pay? He still makes under $50,000 and -- following a policy set by Davis --
links his own raises to whatever percentage he negotiates for the rank and file.

Rivera's character was shaped two decades ago in the slums of San Juan, where
labor organizing was so highly charged that he carried a revolver in his belt.
Today, he is armed with a flip-top cellular telephone, which he wields, with his
Casio calculator watch, just as casually as he wears the blazers he buys
secondhand in thrift shops and the khaki pants he purchases at army-navy stores.

RIVERA'S AGENDA FOR change doesn't stop with labor. "I've heard him for two
years delivering a message that many of the Democratic candidates and some
Republicans are delivering -- about reinvesting in America and about health
care," says Gerald McEntee, president of Afscme. "I hate to put Dennis in this
category, but Newt Gingrich is saying some of the same things."

Publicly, Rivera usually speaks in absolutes, sometimes in slogans like "Tax the
Rich." He likes to quote the recent health-care essay by Cardinal O'Connor, a
social conservative. "Politics may well be the art of compromise, but not every
compromise is morally right and good," the Cardinal wrote. "Compromise can save
a lot of lives. Compromise can send a lot of people to their deaths."

But for all his bumper-sticker oratory, Rivera's thinking is nuanced and
surprisingly undogmatic. He disputes the labor canon that a union member is
necessarily a better human being, an unusual public admission for an organizer.
He maintains that more money itself is no antidote to poor health care -- "in
this country we spend 12 percent of G.N.P. on health care, while Canada spends
only 9 percent, and polls show they're more satisfied," he says.

And he admits to profound troubles about abortion. "I have tremendously mixed
feelings," Rivera says. "I don't think I'm definitely out of the pro-choice
corner, but I have taken a position that the union should not have a position.
Many women activist friends react in horror when they talk to me, but we've
become so jaded, so uncivilized. It's like euthanasia. Where do we stop?"

He reads voraciously and rattles off figures and quotations from books and from
think tanks that provide statistical backbone for his metaphorical references to
class warfare -- even if middle-class concerns are sometimes overlooked in his
obsession with the disparities between rich and poor.

While disenchanted with many public officials, Rivera is not eager to run for
public office. He lost his only attempt, for town council in Puerto Rico. Since
then, he has concentrated on pushing the candidacies of favored politicians like
David Dinkins, who has been a mild disappointment to Rivera. "He is a gentleman
and a conciliator," Rivera says. "Is that what New York needs right now? I don't
know."

Rivera is openly critical of Governor Cuomo. "The Governor is cutting Medicaid
by 20 percent," Rivera says in only a slight overstatement.  "He's cutting
schools by 2.5 percent, not that I'm advocating cutting schools. The richest
among us are paying the lowest taxes. We need a progressive tax system."

To Cuomo's warnings that Rivera's tax-the-rich nostrum would drive taxpayers
from New York, Rivera replies: "If the quality of life deteriorates any further,
they will leave anyway. Do you think we're going to have a mass exodus because
these people oppose paying $350 more? They spend more than that on a meal. I
don't know a single person who is leaving New York because of taxes. They're
leaving because they can't ride the trains, because they can't hire kids who can
read or write, because they don't feel secure."

"I'm not a radical," Rivera says. Rather, he defines his ideology as humanist,
populist and, without apologies, liberal. In organizing opposition to health
cuts, he admits to a convenient melding of the unions' and the public interest.
"The need for our services hasn't decreased," Rivera says. "What has decreased
is the commitment of politicians to fund our health-care system."

Nevertheless, Rivera the realist concedes that "it's highly unlikely we'll
succeed completely. But we establish a line. The strategy of government is,
'Let's slash where we get the least resistance.' What I'm trying to do is put up
some resistance."

His immediate goal this year was to fend off the state's proposed Medicaid cuts.
He generated resistance by rallying 20,000 shivering marchers in February and
threatening black and Hispanic legislators with political reprisals (this
spring, the union registered 40,000 new voters from its own ranks, and 102,000
New Yorkers overall). But his success was modest at best.

His larger agenda is a system of government-paid national health care patterned
on the Canadian model. But he warns that this goal may be doomed by a conspiracy
of "1,500 insurance companies, the American Medical Association and the concept,
scary to some, that this is a socialistic measure."

OF CURRENT projections prove accurate, perhaps only 10 percent of American
workers will be union members by the year 2000 -- down from about 35 percent in
the 1950's and about 16 percent today.

Rivera is candid about assessing blame for this decline, and he doesn't train
all his fire on the Republicans. Yes, he would like laws to simplify the union
certification process, to repeal right-to-work measures and to prohibit
employers from hiring permanent replacements for striking workers. Right now, he
says, "the rules of the game are stacked against labor."

But Rivera is highly critical of organized labor itself. "Dennis," complains
Barry Feinstein, president of Local 237 of the International Brotherhood of
Teamsters in New York, "has been more articulate in the negative about labor
leaders than is appropriate."

Says Rivera: "The labor movement right now is part of the problem. It's fat. It
has more in common with the employers than with the rank and file. That makes
you less daring, less hungry, less desirous of fighting the good fight. They
start seeing this as a business, not a mission or a cause.

"The fundamental problem is how untruthful we are to our mission. That's when I
get into trouble. Is it our job to change things or to get re-elected? That's a
common thread I see in labor and in elected officials. If you don't involve too
many people, you will stay in power. But where does that get you?"

Rivera's differences with his labor colleagues flared during the Daily News
strike in 1990 and 1991, when he pleaded with the city's moribund Central Labor
Council (in a meeting, he recalls slyly, in the Waldorf-Astoria's Herbert Hoover
room) to provide volunteers and financial aid. When the council declined, Rivera
jumped into the vacuum, even pumping $55,000 -- more than half of Local 1199's
bank balance at the time -- into a strike fund. His critics called it
grandstanding.

"The labor movement mentality is, we have a crisis, you're not supposed to talk
about it," Rivera responds. "If I do they say, 'Who is this showboat, Dennis
Rivera?' They didn't understand the catastrophic symbolism of the unions being
destroyed at the labor paper read by the working class in a union town."

DENNIS RIVERA, Cardinal O'Connor says, "is a man who tries to do what is the
right thing whether it is the popular thing or not. He's a man who trusts and
who looks to political leaders as people of honesty and integrity. He looks at
the system and he's getting maybe a bit mildly disappointed, and I think he's
coming to feel a little bit overwhelmed, wondering if it can change and
wondering if he can change it.

"His greatest danger is in getting not cynical but heartbroken, in seeing others
fail to live up to their promise and fail to have the same ideals he has."

For now, Rivera is occupied with the more mundane aspects of his job. Last
month, he was re-elected president of Local 1199, without opposition.
Negotiations continue with his prospective merger partners, and bargaining on a
new hospital contract is to begin this week.

In the longer future, though, he will be pushing a broader theme. "The objective
reading at this moment is that this society ain't functioning," Rivera says.
"What we are articulating, to quote Jose Marti, the Cuban patriot, is 'sailing
against the wind.' That's the kind of leadership we need."

He acknowledges that labor is a part of the problem, but for a reason management
might dispute. "Its fault is being ineffective. If it doesn't change the rules
under which it operates, it will cease to be an institution in American life.

"If 84 percent of all American workers do not belong to a labor union, labor is
not the problem," Rivera concludes. "Labor is irrelevant."

NAME: Dennis Rivera

LOAD-DATE: May 10, 1992

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photos: Dennis Rivera. (Fred R. Conrad/The New York Times); Dennis
Rivera, left, at Columbia-Presbyterian Medical Center with members of his union
local, the nation's largest for health-care workers. (Geoffrey Biddle/Dot for
The New York Times); John Cardinal O'Connor, below, has been something of a
mentor for Rivera. (Jim Tynan/Impact Visuals)

TYPE: Biography

                   Copyright 1992 The New York Times Company


                              99 of 281 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                   May 10, 1992, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

PHOTOGRAPHY VIEW;
The Power of a Video Image Depends on the Caption

BYLINE: By Chuck Hagen;  Chuck Hagen writes frequently about art and
photography.

SECTION: Section 2; Page 32; Column 1; Arts & Leisure Desk

LENGTH: 912 words


In the wake of the Los Angeles riots, the videotape of Rodney King being beaten
and kicked by a group of police officers will undoubtedly go down in history as
defining evidence of the state of American society today. This is a role usually
reserved for photographs, whether Dorothea Lange's pictures of migrant workers
in the Depression or Eddie Adams's 1968 photograph of the chief of the South
Vietnamese national police summarily executing a Vietcong suspect. As a number
of critics have observed, television today tends to provide the first visual
reports of a given situation, while still photographs define the event in the
public mind thereafter. In other words, television offers news, while
photographs make history.

In this case, though, it's hard to imagine a still photograph that would have
the excruciating impact of the videotape of the beating of Mr. King. Shot at
night from a distance, the blurry, shaky tape reduces the event to a primal
scene with the terrible power of nightmare, as the shadowy figures of the police
lash out at the prone figure of Mr. King, caught in the white glare of
headlights. The tape has a directness and gut-wrenching horror that is seldom
found in the routine and closely formatted stories of television news. Moreover,
much of the power of the tape comes from its sheer duration -- the fact that the
assault goes on and on, blow after blow. A single photograph, no matter how
powerfully composed, would show only one blow, one kick, and could never
adequately convey the shock of the event.

But as the verdict in the case demonstrates, the videotape remains open to
interpretation. While most Americans still regard the tape as irrefutable
evidence of police brutality, the jury that acquitted the indicted officers
obviously saw it differently. This puzzling fact goes to the heart of the
matter: that photographic images of all sorts remain essentially ambiguous, and
must be anchored in a convincing narrative before they take on a specific
meaning. And most images can be made to fit into a number of widely disparate
narratives.

Videotapes, no less than photographs or films, appear to offer up reality in all
its raw, sprawling unpredictability. The sheer density of detail in a videotape
seems to insure its authenticity, its integrity. But as critics of photography
have long recognized, photographic images are strikingly dependent on
interpretation for their meaning. In news photography, captions play a crucial
role in defining not only what a photograph means, but even what it depicts.
Photojournalists are fond of recounting incidents in which the same picture,
with different captions, has been used by different publications to illustrate
exactly opposite points of view.

In television news, the raw information provided by the videotape of an event is
heavily processed and filtered by a variety of mechanisms before it gets on the
air. The introduction provided by the anchor, the reporter's commentary, the
editing of the images and the addition of graphics -- station logos and the like
-- all serve as an elaborate frame of interpretation and analysis. This
framework also tames the images and provides a context in which a meaning is
specified and summarized.

In the California case, the defense was able in a sense to shift captions on the
videotape, to provide a different framework for the seemingly damning images.
Defense attorneys not only undercut the stark emotional power of the videotape
in question but also suggested a reading of it that shifted the jury's
understanding of the scene from one of police brutality to one of self-defense
and prudent procedures.

The jury was shown the tape more than 30 times in the course of the trial,
projected at various speeds. The tape was even broken down into a series of
still frames, each of which was then subjected to lengthy analysis by defense
witnesses and attorneys. As a result the defense was apparently able to deaden
the impact of the tape, separate it from its reference to reality. The effect of
all this was probably like that of saying your own name over and over until it
begins to sound strange, and loses any link to meaning.

The incident as a whole demonstrates once again the immense emotional power that
photographic images can have. During the riots that followed the verdict,
another bit of videotape, also widely broadcast, showed a group of blacks
pulling a white man from his truck and kicking and beating him as he lay in the
street. The scene served as a horrible counterpoint to the original videotape,
and for some viewers offered an almost biblical form of justice: an eye for an
eye, a televised beating for a televised beating. This was symbolic justice --
in an age of images, every bit as important as the real thing.

By the end of the week this second beating had become so important a symbol that
President Bush referred to it in his address to the nation. Noting that the
truck driver had been rescued by four blacks, Mr. Bush tried to give the
encounter yet another interpretation -- this time as an expression of hope and
compassion that transcended racial boundaries.

But symbols, whether of justice or of hope, can go only so far. For all the
emotional immediacy with which photographic images can depict social problems,
the meanings of those images depend ultimately on the narratives we fit them
into -- the stories we tell ourselves about who we are and who we want to be.

LOAD-DATE: May 10, 1992

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photos: Video snapshots of the Rodney King beating -- A single
photograph could never adequately convey the shock. (Photographs by George
Holliday/NBC)

                   Copyright 1992 The New York Times Company


                              100 of 281 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                   May 10, 1992, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

TELEVISION;
So Long To Johnny, America's Sandman

BYLINE: By FRANK RICH

SECTION: Section 2; Page 1; Column 1; Arts & Leisure Desk

LENGTH: 3198 words


Like nearly everyone else in America, I have tuned in Johnny Carson after the
following events:

A phone does not ring. The person you were hoping to hear from doesn't call, so
you turn to the reliable voice in Burbank instead.

A door is slammed. Someone in your house is angry, maybe you, and you need a
parental stand-in to calm you down.

A party is over. But the buzz lingers, and you need another party, someone
else's party, to help you wind down.

A child cries inconsolably. Until the unexpected sound of late-night laughter
chases the demons away.

On these nights, and on so many others for almost three decades, Johnny Carson
has been the last man America sees before it goes to sleep. So why is he never
in our dreams?

One other question, now that the end is near.

Is the "Tonight" show the last thing Johnny Carson sees before he goes to sleep?

I ask as, I think, a somewhat representative member of the Johnny Carson
generation. You know you are a member of the Johnny Carson generation if you are
a) young enough to remember having to beg your parents to stay up to watch
Johnny Carson in the days after he first took over from Jack Paar and b) old
enough to find yourself nodding off right after the monologue while watching the
"Tonight" show now.

Along with much of this audience, I'm going to miss Johnny Carson after he
leaves on May 22. But why, exactly? Though Mr. Carson entered office shortly
after John F. Kennedy did, ascending from the daytime game show "Who Do You
Trust?" to his late-night throne in 1962, he remains, like the President he
outlasted, something of a mystery, a distant icon.

Even so he arouses strong feelings. People go through periods of being delighted
by him, of finding him passe and boring, of being irritated by him, of
rediscovering him and declaring him chic (during the "he's so out he's in"
period of the 1970's, and again now), of willfully ignoring him, of jilting him
(for Dick Cavett, Martin Mull, Ted Koppel, Arsenio Hall but never Merv Griffin,
Joan Rivers, Joey Bishop or Ron Reagan).

But if our feelings about Mr. Carson change, he never seems to change at all.
Surely his most surrealistic period was the late 1960's -- at least from my
vantage point at the time, as a college student -- when he must have been the
only Hollywood star remotely considered cool who never pandered to The Young by
affecting long hair, bell bottoms, an open shirt or tinted granny glasses. Yet
never, even in that polarized time, did Johnny Carson arouse hatred, in part
because, unlike most fixtures in the show-business firmament, he has never
patronized the audience or sold out.

While the "Tonight" show is often an orgy of self-promotion, its host, the cool
eye in the hurricane of hype, is not himself a self-promoter. Mr. Carson has
never shilled for the political and corporate establishment like Bob Hope, and
he has never done commercials away from his own show, whether for a product or
for himself, like that practiced pitchman Bill Cosby. Except for the odd cameo,
Mr. Carson has never lent his talents to a bad movie or trashy sitcom or his
name to a best-selling ghost-written book. Immensely wealthy as he is, he has
never seemed greedy -- a rare feat for American tycoons.

And Mr. Carson still can be funny. A "Tonight" show delinquent can dip back into
the monologue after a month of crisis-spawned "Nightlines" or a summer of
late-night baseball games and find at least one joke, probably topical, to laugh
at. (Why were people like John Sununu, Gennifer Flowers and Geraldo Rivera born,
if not to be nightly Carson butts?)

At all times, Johnny Carson has remained a permanent, reassuring point on the
cultural compass, ready to pop up again at the turn of a dial or the click of a
remote control. You have a relationship with this man, even at those times when
the relationship takes the form of denial.

But then it's time to sleep, and Johnny evaporates, just as he always has, to
let our subconscious play without him. He has disappeared without a trace long
before the "Today" show dawns, and while his better jokes sometimes linger over
morning coffee, the man never does.

Drum Roll, Please: The Long Goodbye

Though Johnny Carson's departure is still almost two weeks away, his long
goodbye has been going on since he announced his retirement nearly a year ago.
For months the press has been waxing nostalgic about long-lived Carson
characters like Carnac the Magnificent, the psychic question man, and has been
canonizing long-lived, not to mention well-preserved, Carson regulars like Don
Rickles and Buddy Hackett. Handicapping the ratings prowess of his successors
has become a national pastime, as show-biz pundits and ordinary folk alike
wonder whether the designated "Tonight" show heir, Jay Leno, or Arsenio Hall or
some neo-Johnny-come-lately like Dennis Miller will inherit Johnny's whole
Nielsen ball of wax. (The answer may be none of the above, as I will explain.)

Aside from the nightly, prepackaged monologue wisecracks on the subject of
retirement, don't expect Johnny Carson to express much deep feeling about the
transition.  He is sure to be as elusive to the media posse when departing
"Tonight" as he was when he was building the franchise. Though the legend is
voluminous, his persona often seems only an inch deep. For all the tabloid and,
for that matter, serious journalism that Mr. Carson has inspired over the years,
no one seems to have any sense of who he is away from the television camera, the
desk, the couch. The interviewer Mr. Carson came closest to letting into his
life, Kenneth Tynan, who wrote a profile of him for The New Yorker in 1978, came
away with thousands of words of copy, gushing admiration for his subject's
telegenic talents and no knowledge of him as a person. The writer's conclusion
that talking with Mr. Carson offstage was like "addressing an elaborately wired
security system" has been the most frequently repeated characterization of the
man ever since.

A Soothing Video Lullaby

The official line is that we will miss Johnny Carson because he was a superb
comedian whose timing, bemused takes and ad libs could rescue even the bummest
jokes supplied by his writers (who could also supply the best), because he gave
young talents (including Mr. Leno) their breaks on network television, because
his nightly rituals were reassuring in times of private and public stress.

In truth, the actual content of a Carson show did not matter. At a time of
anxiety, who cares about the color and material of a security blanket? Alone and
exhausted in an antiseptic hotel room in a strange city, you could turn off the
volume of the "Tonight" show and still be tranquilized by a succession of images
as formulaic and reassuring as Kabuki: by the unchanging reaction shots of Ed
McMahon and Doc Severinsen during the monologue, by Mr. Carson's strange
backward tilt on his heels while setting up a joke, by the mimed golf swing
leading into the first commercial, by the way he fiddles with whatever phallic
prop comes to hand at his desk (for years a cigarette, but in these
health-conscious times a pencil), by his raised eyebrows in response to a
starlet's inevitable and inane breech of taste. Or you could bury your head in a
pillow, ignore the imagery and be lulled by the sounds: the bouncy theme music
(a classic composition credited to Paul Anka and Mr. Carson himself), Ed's
obsequious "Yessirs," the boyish Midwestern tenor of Johnny's questions, his
hearty laugh of appreciation when an interviewee scores with a joke of his own.
It's the lack of surprises that makes Johnny Carson endure.  As Tynan wrote, he
practices "the art of the expected."

There are some unofficial reasons to miss Mr. Carson, too. Even when he seemed
not quite human, he was always humane. By his choices of guests, and his
treatment of them on the air, he helped establish a kindly hierarchy of stardom
that spread to other media and set a show-business pecking order. He not only
promoted significant and offbeat new talent, whether a Barbra Streisand in the
early 1960's or an Eddie Murphy in the early 1980's, but also kept the spotlight
on retired talent. Mr. Carson has made a point of keeping a William Demarest or
James Stewart in view after their performing days were over, even as he
instinctively knew when the moment came to give up on passing sideshows, like
Tiny Tim, the troubadour who in 1969 married Miss Vicki on the highest-rated
"Tonight" show ever.

For Politicians, Nightmares

In a more modest way, Mr. Carson also played a role in determining the country's
political priorities. He has credibility, which is why it was commonly (and
correctly) believed that when his jokes turned on Richard Nixon during the
Watergate scandal, the country would follow suit. Perhaps Lyndon B. Johnson's
departure from office was assured as well once Mr. Carson declared the Vietnam
War "stupid and pointless" in a widely publicized interview conducted by Alex
Haley for Playboy magazine in 1967; certainly George Bush should be grateful
that the steady barrage of ridicule directed his way from Mr. Carson's corner
will end five months before Election Day.

Mr. Carson's durable clout with the public as a political prognosticator may be
a product of his remoteness: since he does not have an intimate relationship
with his viewers, the viewers can speculate that he keeps his distance from the
powers that be as well. And perhaps he does. Unlike nearly every other
contemporaneous show-biz titan of his stature, from Sinatra to Schwarzenegger,
Mr. Carson has never conspicuously been a crony or sycophant of the Kennedys or
the Reagans or any royalty in between. A secure power in his own right, he never
had to curry favor with others, his sponsors and his network included. Since
announcing his retirement, he has not only stepped up the anti-Bush jokes but he
has been merciless in ridiculing both NBC and its parent company, General
Electric, for corporate ineptitude.

When he so chose, Mr. Carson also exercised his power in more subtle ways that,
arguably, realigned American pop culture. When "Tonight" moved, at his
insistence, from NBC's studios at Rockefeller Center to those in Burbank in
1972, it was a migration that, along with the demise of "The Ed Sullivan Show"
on CBS the year before, essentially marked the end of Manhattan's parity with
Hollywood as a glitz capital for a national audience. Originally known as
"Broadway Open House" during television's infancy, the "Tonight" show had for 20
years been a platform for Broadway in the broadest sense -- whether for actors
dropping by after a show, cabaret entertainers, rising rock and jazz acts,
novelists or indigenous folk heroes. That ended in 1972. As someone who arrived
in New York in 1973, I felt cheated: it was in part the fantastical "Tonight"
show idea of Manhattan, as romantic to me in childhood as the Times Square of
Woody Allen's "Radio Days" was to a pre-television generation, that had lured me
to the city in the first place. And I just missed it! New York night life, from
its theaters to clubs, has eroded in size, substance and national importance
ever since Mr. Carson went west.

The other pop-culture sea change affected by Mr. Carson's reign was a
redefinition of what constitutes "live" television. Once the "Tonight" show
ceased to be broadcast live from 11:30 P.M. to 1 A.M. and instead was taped in
the early evening, West Coast time, it inevitably lost some of its spontaneity
(and eventually a half-hour of its nightly running time). Naughty words could be
bleeped out before air time -- in a day when the networks bleeped out far more
words than they do now -- and hadn't half the fun of watching the "Tonight" show
come from the hope that someone might sneak a no-no past the censors? (Jack Paar
had set the precedent, in more innocent times, with his notorious "w.c." joke.)
Worse, if Mr. Carson ceased to maintain the illusion of staying up late with the
rest of us insomniacs, could we still take solace in his companionship?

Once Mr. Carson could get away with taping his "live" program, everyone could,
with the result that live entertainment programming on national television is
largely extinct at night -- even though programs like "Tonight" are still
considered "live" by the television industry and much of an audience that
increasingly accepts virtual reality as a substitute for the real thing. Mr.
Carson, an opaque personality to begin with, became even more remote once
airbrushed by video.  All of network television seems more canned in the wake of
his relinquishment of the live standard.

One exception is "Saturday Night Live," itself a Carson progeny of sorts, since
the show got its big break 17 years ago when NBC decided to try it in a time
slot that had previously been occupied by little-watched "Tonight" show reruns.
As it happens, "Saturday Night Live," with its incomparable Carson and McMahon
impersonators, Dana Carvey and Phil Hartman, has been offering its own
continuous and hilarious commentary on the "Tonight" show transition. Last May,
just before Mr. Carson announced his retirement, "Saturday Night Live" featured
an eerie sketch in which Mr. Carvey's Carson, sporting a modest white Afro,
homeboy jargon and appropriate arm gestures, was reborn as "Carsenio" in an
effort to update his show with "a few adjustments for the young people." In a
subsequent sketch, Johnny and Ed dismissed a fawning Jay Leno as "king of the
brown-nosers," a "lantern-jaw freak" and a "one-trick pony." Thrilled to be
telling his successor what he really thinks of him, Johnny decided to rescind
his retirement.

The Right Man At the Right Time

That fantasy will not become reality, of course, though NBC may soon wish that
it had. It is hard to believe that Jay Leno will maintain Johnny Carson's
ratings for long, especially as the competition, which will expand to include
Chevy Chase by 1993, goes after him in earnest. The problem is not really Mr.
Leno, a skillful, smart comedian whose only serious flaw is a tendency to
softness (both in his treatment of guests and in his generic, nonpartisan
political one-liners). Nor will the Carson mandate disintegrate simply because
Arsenio Hall is seen by younger audiences as hipper than Mr. Leno or because
David Letterman, sure to end up a direct competitor to "Tonight" on one network
or another sometime soon, is much, much funnier than any of the contenders. The
real problem is that the national consensus represented by the old "Tonight"
show cannot exist anymore, on late-night television any more than anywhere else
in American life.

Johnny Carson -- born in Iowa, raised in Nebraska -- was the perfect jester for
a nation that still believed in the old American majority and could still be
unified by it, at least at bedtime. He was white, male, Protestant and moneyed
in a country that looked for those characteristics in politicians and movie
stars. When that establishment fell into disrepute in the late 1960's, shattered
by the conflicts of race and the Vietnam War, Mr. Carson proved better at
building a new consensus than most politicians of his day. Without trying to
remake his own reassuring establishment personality -- without trying to become
a "Carsenio" -- he routinely welcomed performers slightly outside the mainstream
to his show, not just blacks, but also female comedians in the days before they
were widely accepted and even the occasional recognizable homosexual, like
Truman Capote.

That balancing act is no longer necessary. The viewing audience, like the
country it represents, is permanently fragmented, and television, with its
dozens of choices at every hour, reflects that demographic splintering. Just as
the Democratic and Republican labels have become meaningless to most voters, so
network affiliation means nothing for a late-night talk-show star at a time when
there is a cable channel for every taste. All things considered, it is a miracle
that Mr. Carson upheld NBC's late-night majority as long as he did. With the
impeccable timing that has marked his entire career, he is abdicating his throne
at the exact moment when the revolutionary forces poised to topple the monarchy
are just breaking through the front gates. Jay Leno must get his version of the
"Tonight" show together at a time when networks are on the run and NBC is
constantly rumored to be up for sale. No longer bolstered by his predecessor's
reassuring theme music, set, props and supporting cast, Mr. Leno will be one of
many usurpers scrambling to compete for smaller slices of the late-night video
pie.

One Glimpse, And He's Gone

As May 22 approaches, I've come to believe that it is not a bad thing that
Johnny Carson stays out of our dreams.

Shortly after Mr. Carson announced his retirement last year, a pair of personal
tragedies prompted him to take an extended leave of absence from the "Tonight"
show: the death of his friend, the actor Michael Landon, by cancer, and the
death of his son Rick, a photographer, in a car crash. On the night he returned
to the show, July 17, I tuned in to watch, wondering if he might break precedent
and acknowledge his personal sorrows. I was hoping at last to find some personal
connection with him, not in the least because I was engaged in my own hospital
vigil, for my mother, who had been fighting a losing battle for her life
following a car crash two weeks earlier.

To my amazement, however, Mr. Carson came out and did his usual, upbeat
monologue and then went on to entertain some typical guests. I was about to give
up on him when, in the hour's final minutes, he abruptly addressed the audience
to thank it for the letters of condolence it had sent.  "These have not been the
most happy several weeks," Mr. Carson said, his mouth going slightly gummy. Then
he showed a picture of his son -- "I'm not doing this to be mawkish, believe me"
-- so that his audience could see that the young man looked nothing like the
driver's license photo that had widely accompanied news articles about his
death.

"Luckily," Mr. Carson continued, "he left some marvelous memories for the whole
family, and that's what you hang on to." He leaned back in his chair, his tongue
smacking in an uncharacteristic gesture, and, still in control and very much the
WASP patriarch, he asked the audience to "forgive a father's pride" as he ended
the hour with a slide show of his son's nature photographs, the last of which
was of a sunset.

It wasn't a revealing episode, exactly, yet it was a stellar performance in
keeping with the great, 30-year Carson tradition. Once again his reassuring
presence, unshakable no matter what, had the effect of relieving an audience's
anguish without leaving any psychic aftertaste.

That night Johnny Carson failed, as always, to invade my dreams. But isn't that
the real secret of his longevity? When he tucks us into bed, his role is to
soothe, never to provoke. It was not the first troubled night that I joined a
grateful nation in thanking Johnny Carson for a gift far more precious than
dreams: deep and untroubled sleep.

NAME: Johnny Carson

LOAD-DATE: May 10, 1992

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photos: An all-star musical jam during a February 1964 broadcast of the
"Tonight" show with, from left, James Stewart; Phyllis Diller; Sam Yorty, the
former Mayor of Los Angeles, and Mr. Carson. Johnny Carson with a marmoset in
1979, left, and above, with Miss Vicki and Tiny Tim, whose wedding was broadcast
live on the program in 1969 -- By his choice and treatment of guests, Mr. Carson
set a show-business pecking order. The young Carson as Moses--His commandment:
keep a distance. (Photographs by NBC)(pg. 26)

Drawing: Johnny Carson (Al Hirschfeld)(pg. 1)

TYPE: Biography

                   Copyright 1992 The New York Times Company


                              101 of 281 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                   May 10, 1992, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

THEATER;
'Death and the Maiden' Becomes a Tale of Two Cities

BYLINE: By BENEDICT NIGHTINGALE;  Benedict Nightingale is chief theater critic
for The Times of London.

SECTION: Section 2; Page 14; Column 3; Arts & Leisure Desk

LENGTH: 1682 words

DATELINE: LONDON


Talk about tall oaks growing from tiny acorns. Few plays have had humbler
origins than "Death and the Maiden," and none casts a longer shadow across
international theaterland. Too late to catch it in Seoul, where it has just
finished its run; but go to London, New York or Vienna, and there it still is;
plan a trip to Vilnius or Johannesburg, Buenos Aires or Tokyo, and there it will
soon be. Before long, 40 countries will have staged Ariel Dorfman's case study
of the aftereffects of political torture.

Each version will have its national biases; but it would be a foolish director
who did not ponder the starkly contrasting performances now on Broadway and in
the West End. Both are equally popular. Mike Nichols's production at the Brooks
Atkinson continues to do near-capacity business. So does Lindsay Posner's
version at the Duke of York's, even though Juliet Stevenson has just handed over
to Geraldine James the role of Paulina, the woman who captures and puts on
private trial the doctor she thinks abused her body and wrecked her psyche 15
years before.

But here the two productions' fortunes suggestively divide. "Death and the
Maiden" was recently named Play of the Year and Juliet Stevenson Best Actress in
London's Olivier Awards. Last week in New York, Glenn Close was nominated for a
Tony Award as Best Actress for her portrayal of Paulina. Ms. Close took the part
when Actors' Equity decided that Miss Stevenson was too obscure an actress to
merit a work permit for Broadway. The play was not nominated.

Why? Some of those who have seen both productions may feel that the play as it
was performed in London was markedly different from the New York production.
Certainly there are critics who think that the acorn that became a tough, stark
oak in Britain somehow ended up in America as a cherry tree beneath whose
blossoms audiences could take their ease. Why? Has a costlier production
resulted in a comfier "Death and the Maiden"? Has the presence of Ms. Close and
her fellow players, Gene Hackman and Richard Dreyfuss, turned a challenging play
into a celebrity event?

Or has the nature of the American theatergoing public forced Mr. Nichols to make
a dangerous drama less threatening?

That is Mr. Dorfman's own view. In a recent interview here, he said that the
Broadway production was the only one that had worried him. Even his loyalty to
Mr. Nichols and his stars could not stop him from admitting that "I am
presenting to the most apolitical audience in the world a deeply political play
with a director who deeply understands its human dimensions and shies away from
its politics."

"Death and the Maiden" began its life cycle with a not-very-well-received
workshop production in Chile in 1990. Then came a reading of the play at a
symposium on dissident drama at a London cultural center, the Institute of
Contemporary Arts. In the audience that fall evening was Harold Pinter. When he
heard that the Royal Court Theater was planning a season of international
political plays, but could not find work good enough to fill it, "Death and the
Maiden" was his instant recommendation. After that, success came quickly and
also inexpensively.

Last July the play opened in the shabby 60-seat attic the Royal Court calls its
Theater Upstairs. Michael Billington of The Guardian labeled it "stunning,"
Jeremy Kingston of The Times of London "a masterwork," and the production, which
had cost all of $19,000, promptly transferred to the main theater downstairs.
The price tag for that move, including the set, was $77,000. More critics came,
variously describing Miss Stevenson's contribution as "unforgettable," "awesome"
and "a perilous exploration of the human psyche well beyond the usual boundaries
of acting." I, too, found myself calling the play a "masterwork," when I
reviewed it for The Times of London. Four months later, "Death and the Maiden"
was in the West End, a yet more expensive transfer, but one still capitalized at
only $190,000. By now the critical superlatives were redundant, since the only
hotter ticket in town was "The Phantom of the Opera."

Since labor costs are much higher on Broadway than in the West End, plays are
always pricier to stage there. But the New York version of "Death and the
Maiden" that opened in March managed to be both more expensive and less
enthusiastically reviewed. The set alone cost $100,000, the production $1.3
million. Mr. Nichols was estimated to be making $32,000 a week, and the three
star performers to be receiving 6 percent of a gross likely to amount to
$320,000, or perhaps $19,000 each. At the Royal Court, Juliet Stevenson and her
fellow actors, Michael Byrne and Bill Paterson, were paid $350 a week. The wages
at the Duke of York's are undisclosed and certainly much higher; but it would be
surprising if Miss Stevenson had received more than $3,500 a week.

The question this raises is whether "Death and the Maiden" actually gains when
Scrooge is in artistic control and loses when Citizen Kane takes over. The less
lavish the production is, the less glamorous the actors are, the more powerful
the play may be.

The sets may be symptomatic. In London, Mr. Dorfman's "beach house" is a wooden
shack apparently flung together from a do-it-yourself kit. In New York, Tony
Walton has built a seaside castle, all towering pillars and heavy doors. The one
gives an impression of life precariously held together by tacks, the other of
opulence and security. The rough-hewn feel evident in London inevitably
disappears in New York. How, then, can the play retain the harshness it needs if
it is to confront the audience with the ugly aftermath of dirty events?

As for the actors, Mr. Dorfman himself calls his Broadway cast "wonderful,"
"extraordinary." But he also agrees that their roles aren't easy for them:
"Americans in general, not just actors, want to be loved. That means very often
they do not take the risk to offend people very deeply, and art has got to be
offensive. People should feel uncomfortable after this play. But maybe I'm
asking something impossible, given the tradition."

That's one problem. Another may be that Mr. Nichols sees "Death and the Maiden"
very differently from Mr. Dorfman. A comment the director has made, that the
play is not political but "a thriller about the intimate lives of three people
and the way their sexual natures are intertwined," has been quoted more than
once.

Last week in New York Mr. Nichols elaborated. "This was my point: a political
play is all about a thesis. 'Death and the Maiden' is about human nature and the
sickening ways people abuse power. Nobody ever said that 'Hamlet' was about the
Government of Denmark changing three times in rapid succession. 'Hamlet' is
about a human being. That's what I meant. That is the reason why capacity houses
are moved by the performance every night at the Brooks Atkinson Theater."

But for Mr. Dorfman, who was sent into exile during the Pinochet period in
Chile, the play is unquestionably political. It concerns, he says, the ability
of a community to deal with the traumas of the past -- "and especially about
what I think is the paramount issue of our time, the dilemmas of the transition
to a still very fragile democracy." If such matters are underemphasized, the
stakes become lower, the play blander. Some felt that happened in New York.

If so, the basic problem may be Broadway, its public, perhaps even American
culture itself. Mr. Dorfman believes that his play is relevant to an America
unsure of how to cope with violent, divisive events: one that has "done grievous
harm both to other countries and to many of its own people." Yet he also thinks
that, despite Vietnam, there is "not the same feeling as in Europe that
political decisions affect people's lives very deeply." Add the obvious fact
that plays about torture arrive on Broadway as often as yeti at the Bronx Zoo --
and what chance would the politically "terrifying" production Mr. Dorfman wants
have of finding a receptive audience?

At first he envisioned an Off Broadway production. But the prospect of reaching
a much larger public changed his mind. Yet there is evidence that, so far from
the play reshaping that public, that public reshaped the play. "I'd sometimes
say to Mike, 'This is the way we should go,' and he'd say, 'I think the audience
will be lost if we do so,' " recalled Mr. Dorfman. "His esthetic was: entice
them in, don't lose them, because if you don't cajole them along, they won't
bear with it, they'll leave. And nobody knows Broadway audiences better than
Mike Nichols."

Hence the set. Anything rougher might have put off spectators used to visual
excellence. Hence some cuts and adjustments. For instance, the doctor refuses at
first to write that the confession he eventually signs has not been coerced.
"You want pressure?" asks Paulina ominously. The first Broadway audiences
laughed uproariously here, less at the irony of a torturer's victim talking like
a torturer (both author and director concluded) than because they could imagine
nothing more awful than the relatively minor ordeal the doctor had just
experienced. So Mr. Dorfman simply cut Paulina's line. "I did violence to the
play for its own good," he says. "I tortured it."

Have all the efforts to insure that the audience enjoys itself left it with a
play scarcely worth enjoying? Mr. Dorfman insists that Mr. Nichols's production
is "extremely interesting, sophisticated, subtle." But he has been troubled by
what he sees as the "show-biz" atmosphere at the Brooks Atkinson. It has
depressed him to hear the set clapped, the stars applauded when they enter and
spectators spending the intermission talking about their dinner plans, not
justice and revenge. "Very few are asking whether anything in their lives has to
do with the sorrow that's being experienced on stage," he says.

Still, he adds, "you have to be true to your vision. There is a line you cannot
cross, and that line was not crossed in the United States. The production was a
translation into a language the audience could understand."

LOAD-DATE: May 10, 1992

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photos: Bill Paterson, left, Juliet Stevenson and Michael Byrne in the
London production of Ariel Dorfman's drama -- A stark contrast to the same play
on Broadway. (Allistair Muir/"Death and the Maiden")(pg. 14); Richard Dreyfuss
and Glenn Close in the Broadway production of the play "Death and the Maiden."
(Martha Swope/"Death and the Maiden")(pg. 34)

                   Copyright 1992 The New York Times Company


                              102 of 281 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                   May 10, 1992, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

At the Lehman Gallery, Social Commentary With a Pop Face

BYLINE: By VIVIEN RAYNOR

SECTION: Section 13WC; Page 22; Column 1; Westchester Weekly Desk

LENGTH: 868 words

DATELINE: KINGSBRIDGE HEIGHTS, the Bronx


IT would seem that for Jerry Kearns, as for so many of his contemporaries, there
is no art without politics, and it has been that way since 1968 when he was
radicalized by the sight of the Chicago riots on television.

The story is told in the catalogue to "The Deadly Art of Illusion: Deep Cover,"
which comes to the Lehman College Art Gallery here from the Tyler Galleries of
the Tyler School of Art, part of Temple University in Philadelphia.

Mr. Kearns himself saw action in the front lines in the 70's and 80's,
demonstrating with various organizations against, for example, police brutality
and sexual stereotyping; he also collaborated on numerous projects with the
activist critic Lucy Lippard.

Giving the details in his essay, Don Desmett, the curator of the show, credits
Ms. Lippard and Mr. Kearns with helping "to propel the intense collaboration of
socially concerned artists" at that time.

After this the artist reverted to the production of art, having a solo
exhibition in 1982 of mixed-media constructions that prompted the following
observation from the art critic Gerrit Henry:

"Kearns best succeeds when interpreted as a kind of Bernini of the left,
creating characters excruciated by their ideas" whose "ecstasies are agonies" --
but of Marxism rather than the Catholic Church.

Though the catalogue lacks illustrations of the Bernini phase, it has
photographs of such 1970's pieces as an armchair in a slipcover.

The artist exhibited the armchair at the American Academy during his time there
as a Prix de Rome recipient, explaining that the idea was to present the
armchair "as a place from which one could look out on the world."

Obliquely, Mr. Kearns also indulged in Body Art, producing a videotape of a
young man slamming himself against a wall (shades of early Barry Le Va) and on
another occasion piling up lifelike casts of disembodied fingers.

Since then, the artist has settled into a Neo-Pop style of painting. The Lehman
show, which differs slightly from the original version, includes 15 canvases,
the earliest from 1982 and 1983 and the latest from 1990.

Many of the paintings are indebted to Roy Lichtenstein. Mr. Kearns, however,
does the Benday shading by hand; his is a laborious method that starts with a
photograph or reproduced image on transparent plastic. Some of these are
official icons, like Marilyn Monroe; others are characters adapted from 1950's
comic books.

The figure is usually placed in an incongruous setting, although never with
frivolous intent. Thus, Elvis en garde with six-shooter is twice superimposed in
black over a scene in red combining the infamous photograph of the napalmed
Vietnamese child Kim Phuc with scenes of the Kent State incident.

As Eleanor Heartney explains in her catalogue essay (a heroic work of
interpretation), the parallel is between the "macho heroics" of the West and
those that led the United States "into the quagmire of Vietnam."

In "Affirmative Action," the black-and-white image of a woman shoveling ordure
is contrasted with a nocturnal cityscape in red and yellow. The message, Ms.
Heartney says, is that "the rhetoric of affirmative action has been less
effective in redressing genuine inequalities than in providing American
capitalism with an ever-growing source of cheap labor."

As the show progresses, the imagery gets more complicated. There are at least
three layers of it to be "read" in "Harvest Moon": One involves the blue
silhouettes of men in helmets and coveralls against a yellow glare; another a
red and green version of a Durer-style crucifixion. Superimposed on these are
the heads of a kissing couple outlined in black a la David Salle but with the
woman's lips highlighted in red. The work was a late addition to the show, so
Miss Heartney's essay is of no help here, but it seems reasonable to assume that
the artist is commenting on the gap between fantasy and reality, as he is in the
painting that combines the face of Marilyn Monroe with the figure of (again) the
Vietnamese child, a visual pun not unlike an Arcimboldi head made of vegetables.

Ironies include a yuppie couple on a raft gnawing on goldfish as the head of the
Statue of Liberty looms large and gray in the background and a cartoon woman in
a red dress posed seductively before the four Presidents that are portrayed on
Mount Rushmore.

A Numbing Familiarity

Whether the artist is correct in his diagnosis of what ails America, there is no
doubt as to its numbing familiarity. Mr. Kearns belongs to an opposition that
has grown calcified talking to itself. It is hard to doubt his sincerity but
harder still to be moved by protest that comes with a Pop face and in such
cheery colors, too.

Then again, Pop has been the sum of art history for several years now and,
thanks to the cultural revolution of the 1960's, the world abounds in artists
who know little else.

Sad to say, the show coincides with the end of Jane Farver's tenure as director
of the Lehman. This has been brief two-and-a-half years, but stimulating
nonetheless and, in the case of Mr. Kearns's art, provocative.

The show runs through May 29, and the telephone number to call for more
information is (212) 960-8731.

LOAD-DATE: May 10, 1992

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Drawing

                   Copyright 1992 The New York Times Company


                              103 of 281 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                   May 10, 1992, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

J.F.K. and Vietnam

SECTION: Section 7; Page 30; Column 3; Book Review Desk

LENGTH: 204 words


To the Editor:

As special assistant in 1963-64 to John T. McNaughton, the general counsel of
the Defense Department, I would like to respond to Arthur Schlesinger Jr.'s
review of "JFK and Vietnam" (March 29), John M. Newman's book on whether
President John F. Kennedy would have committed American combat troops to
Vietnam. Mr. Schlesinger certainly brings up some relevant historical
information. There are two factors, however, that undercut its significance.

First, the military situation in Vietnam deteriorated rapidly after the
assassination of Ngo Dinh Diem in early November 1963. So statements about
winning without American combat troops and plans for withdrawing American
advisers before that date are largely irrelevant. Moreover, as Mr. Schlesinger
points out, the number of advisers continued to grow in spite of such
statements.

Second, the men around President Kennedy whom he most admired in matters of
national security, especially after their great accomplishment in the Cuban
missile crisis -- namely, Robert McNamara and McGeorge Bundy -- were the very
same men who advised President Lyndon B. Johnson to commit American combat
troops to Vietnam in 1964-65.

ROLAND PAUL
Westport, Conn.

LOAD-DATE: May 10, 1992

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Letter

                   Copyright 1992 The New York Times Company


                              104 of 281 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                   May 10, 1992, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

J.F.K. and Vietnam

SECTION: Section 7; Page 30; Column 3; Book Review Desk

LENGTH: 222 words


To the Editor:

In his review of John M. Newman's "JFK and Vietnam," Arthur Schlesinger Jr.
implicitly blames The New York Times for encouraging the "overwhelmingly
hawkish" American mood in 1963.

It is a disservice to history as well as to The Times to ignore the fact that
The Times, editorially, was one of the earliest and strongest critics of the
increasing American role in Vietnam -- years before that point of view became
popular.

As early as October 1963, The Times editorially warned that the American
military buildup had been undertaken "to equip and train the Vietnamese to fight
their own war, not to fight it for them." Even then we argued that "American aid
and support are not open-ended and will not continue indefinitely." Hardly a
hawkish stance.

The Times coined the word -- and repeatedly urged -- "descalation," a steady
reduction instead of a steady increase in American combat forces in Vietnam. The
search for a negotiated and honorable peace was our constant aim. As a result,
we were attacked as pro-Communists, traitors or both.

Hawkish? No, I don't think so. And as I know from personal experience, as the
editor of The Times's editorial page from 1961 to 1976, neither did President
Johnson and his (and President Kennedy's) Secretary of State, Dean Rusk.

JOHN B. OAKES
New York

LOAD-DATE: May 10, 1992

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Letter

                   Copyright 1992 The New York Times Company


                              105 of 281 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                   May 10, 1992, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

Ban on Land Mines Is Urgently Needed

SECTION: Section 4; Page 16; Column 4; Editorial Desk

LENGTH: 241 words

DATELINE: CAMBODIA, May 5


To the Editor:

In "Make a Misstep and You're Dead" (Op-Ed, May 4), Flora Lewis calls on the
Japanese Government to take the lead in devising means to clear the millions of
land mines strewn around Cambodia and other countries. While it would be
wonderful if Japan took on this task, several other countries manufactured the
mines and profited from their dissemination. They have a responsibility to lend
a hand in removing these indiscriminate weapons.

"Land Mines in Cambodia," an Asia Watch-Physicians for Human Rights report
published last September, identified the Cambodia mines and their manufacturers.
The countries that principally supplied the combatants were the Soviet Union and
Vietnam to the Phnom Penh Government; and the United States, China, Italy,
Singapore and India to the Khmer Rouge and the two non-Communist resistance
factions.

Ms. Lewis refers to some countries where land mines continue to maim and kill
large numbers. Among places that belong on that list are Somaliland (the
northern half of Somalia, which has declared its independence) and Iraqi
Kurdistan generally and not just the border areas. Along with Cambodia, Angola
and Afghanistan, these may be considered competitors for the dubious distinction
of world land-mine capital. In recent years, they have generated a
disproportionate share of the world's refugee population. Land mines make it
extremely difficult and dangerous to repatriate these refugees.

This problem requires an international prohibition on the use of land mines
similar to the ban on poison gas that was agreed upon nearly 70 years ago. That
will not end their use, but it would stigmatize the users and suppliers, and
thereby help to reduce the injuries and deaths from future wars and the wars
that land mines continue long after the shooting has ended.

ARYEH NEIER
Exec. Director, Human Rights Watch
Washington, May 5, 1992

LOAD-DATE: May 10, 1992

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Letter

                   Copyright 1992 The New York Times Company


                              106 of 281 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                   May 10, 1992, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

South Korea's Vietnam Veterans Begin to Be Heard

BYLINE: By JAMES STERNGOLD,  Special to The New York Times

SECTION: Section 1; Page 12; Column 1; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 1221 words

DATELINE: SEOUL, South Korea


The tales of chaotic battles in Vietnamese jungles are much the same as those
heard in the United States. The anger at a government that some say used its
young men as pawns in a cold war power game is also familiar. But the faces of
these bitter Vietnam veterans are different: They are Korean, and after years of
bearing their hurt in near silence, they are finally being recognized for their
role in a war few know South Korea fought.

It is almost as little known here as it is in the West, but South Korea sent
312,853 solders to Vietnam from Sept. 22, 1963, to April 30, 1975, according to
the Defense Ministry. After the United States, South Korea had the largest
contingent of soldiers fighting Hanoi.

But with two big-budget movies on the Korean soldiers in Vietnam coming out here
shortly and the Vietnam Veterans Association battling for better treatment for
its members, South Koreans are starting to come to grips with their heavy
involvement in Vietnam and the toll the war took on many of the young men who
served there.

The veterans' stories are opening a little-explored chapter in South Korea's
history, and are becoming a symbol of how this scarred country may finally be
winning its own battle for free expression after years of authoritarian rule.
The rough-and-tumble process of democracy, just five years old, is slowly giving
South Koreans the chance to explore the difficult path they have taken to their
current prosperity.

Like Others, Alienated

"The Vietnam veterans in other countries who returned were very alienated," said
Hwang Myung Chul, vice president of the Vietnam Veteran's Association, seated
near the neat rows of jars filled with black and dun-colored Vietnamese earth
that he hopes one day to place in an official memorial. "We were no exception.
We wanted the media to relate our pain and difficulties, but they were told not
to. The Government virtually ignored our problems. That is what we are fighting
now."

For some, there is pride that South Korea, which was saved from Communist
domination only because of United States military intervention in 1950, answered
America's call for help. Soldiers from Thailand, the Philippines, Canada,
Australia and New Zealand also served in Vietnam.

But South Korea's Government had a number of reasons for responding so
energetically to America's call for assistance in Vietnam. The
military-dominated Government in power at that time had to maintain a constant
vigil against attack from Communist North Korea, bolstered by American troops
stationed in South Korea, and was resisting pressure from its own people for the
introduction of real democracy at home. It also was engaged in a struggle to
free the country from its grinding poverty -- tasks that all required some aid
or acquiescence from the United States.

Many South Koreans argue that their Government acted more out of a desire for
the hundreds of millions of dollars in aid the United States offered, or that
they feel shame because Koreans were killing and being killed in a land in which
they had no place. Some complain, too, that the Government has still not told
the whole story of South Korea's role in the war helping the United States
support South Vietnam's fight against the Communist North.

4,687 Koreans Reported Killed

According to the Defense Ministry, 4,687 Koreans were killed in the war, and
more than 5,000 others wounded, but some veterans insist that the casualty
figure is much higher, based on the death tolls in their own units. Also
unexplored are reports of the particularly brutal methods the Korean soldiers
were said to have used.

For the veterans, much of the focus now is on demands for greater Government
assistance, which they say has been in meager. One particular complaint is that
the Government neither recognizes nor offers treatment for problems related to
Agent Orange, the powerful chemical used to kill dense jungle foliage during the
war. The chemical is believed to have caused an array of health problems for
some of the soldiers exposed to it.

Studies in the West have been unable to turn up clear evidence of ill effects,
except for a temporary skin condition, called chloracne, and small increases in
rates of a kind of cancer, soft-tissue sarcoma. As a result, even American
veterans have been fighting with their Veteran Affairs Department, which limits
the claims that it will pay. American veterans groups, like their Korean
counterparts, continue to protest this policy.

American veterans, along with some Canadians, Australians and New Zealanders,
are eligible, however, for compensation from the manufacturers of Agent Orange.
Korean soldiers were not part of a 1984 court decision establishing the fund to
make these payments. And the Korean Government says it will not assist them in
efforts to qualify for the compensation.

Kim Young O, a director of the Ministry of Patriots and Veterans Affairs, said
the Government had no programs to treat veterans claiming problems from exposure
to Agent Orange because no illnesses have been detected.

Economic Benefits From War

The war provided tremendous economic benefits for South Korea, but it was a
political inconvenience. In the 1960's, South Korea had barely recovered from
war and was still one of the poorest nations in Asia.

The Vietnam War provided what were by Korean standards generous salaries for
soldiers. The Government also received huge amounts of aid, which helped
catapult South Korea into its status as a newly industrialized country.

But politically South Korea was not ready to permit open debate on a war said to
represent a battle between freedom and Communism, particularly when South
Koreans were struggling for freedom against their unelected, military-dominated
Government.

That, of course, has now changed. The first open presidential election was held
five years ago, and in elections for the National Assembly last month the voters
denied the governing party a majority.

Two Movies to Cost Millions

The two multimillion-dollar Vietnam movies, one being made for the cinema and
the other to be serialized on television, along with several new books depict a
grim, dispiriting war.

One of the new movies, "White Badge," is based on a novel whose serialization in
a magazine in 1983 caused the publication to be closed.

"Members of the younger generation do not even know that Koreans served in
Vietnam," said Ahn Jungyo, a veteran and the author of the book, which depicts
the horrors suffered by one group of soldiers. "Nobody talked about it. What the
Government has done is a kind of mass cheating of the people."

"White Badge" will cost $2.6 million, a high figure for the Korean movie
industry, and was filmed partly in Vietnam. The film being made for television,
whose preliminary title is "Farewell to Songba River," also cost $2.6 million.
This movie is described as a look at the relationship between two young soldiers
as they come of age.

One of the soldiers in "White Badge" ponders: "The blood money we had to earn at
the price of our lives fueled the modernization and development of the country.
And owing to our contribution, the Republic of Korea, or at least a higher
echelon of it, made a gigantic stride into the world market. Lives for sale.
National mercenaries."

LOAD-DATE: May 10, 1992

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1992 The New York Times Company


                              107 of 281 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                   May 10, 1992, Sunday, Late Edition - Final
                              Correction Appended

FILM;
In This Director's Story, Men Are Linked by Broken Bodies

BYLINE: By BERNARD WEINRAUB

SECTION: Section 2; Page 17; Column 1; Arts & Leisure Desk

LENGTH: 1496 words

DATELINE: HOLLYWOOD


By the time the screenwriter Neal Jimenez had reached his mid-20's, his career
seemed golden. A script that he had written in film school for what would become
the well-received "River's Edge" was set for production. Agents and studios
swarmed around dangling job offers even before he graduated from the University
of California at Los Angeles.

On a personal level, Mr. Jimenez's life was more complicated. He was having a
serious affair with a married woman who was considering leaving her husband.

Then one night in July 1984, while on a camping trip near Sacramento, he slipped
and fell into a shallow lake, breaking his neck. Within days, Mr. Jimenez, now
without the use of his legs, was wheeled on his back into a rehabilitation
center, where he found himself surrounded by other patients with similar
injuries. His life, he felt, was as shattered as his spine.

Mr. Jimenez, now a 31-year-old paraplegic, has drawn upon his experiences at the
center to create "The Waterdance," which opens Wednesday. The film, written and
co-directed by Mr. Jimenez, won an award as the most popular film at the
Sundance Film Festival in March and also received the festival's prestigious
Waldo Salt screenwriting prize. Its co-director is Michael Steinberg, a film
maker and friend of Mr. Jimenez's since student days, who was brought into the
project to add his personal perspective and, since Mr. Jimenez had never
directed before, to help with technical matters.

The movie is about the friendship of three men, all paraplegics, who must
grudgingly accept their fates and resolve problems about sex and relationships.
In some respects, the film can be likened to Oliver Stone's "Born on the Fourth
of July" (1989), which starred Tom Cruise as a paraplegic, and to "Coming Home"
(1978), with Jon Voight as a maimed veteran. But while both of these movies
depicted the lives of people who have lost the use of much of their bodies, they
were set against the political landscape of the Vietnam War. "The Waterdance,"
by contrast, focuses on its characters' struggles to re-establish their
masculinity and use one another to work out their biases about class and race.

Eric Stoltz, whose credits include starring in the critically acclaimed 1985
film "Mask," plays Joel Garcia, a young Hispanic writer thrust into a ward with
several newly paralyzed men. They include a bewildered and charming ladies' man
(Wesley Snipes) who is black and periodically tangles with a racist biker
(William Forsyth).

Despite their disparate lives and ambitions, the three men are linked by their
common panic, grief and desperation over their broken bodies. Also in the cast
are Helen Hunt, as a married woman involved with Garcia, and Elizabeth Pena as a
spirited nurse.

Mr. Jimenez is a thin, intense man with an air of quiet assurance. His father
owned a gas station in Sacramento, and from boyhood Neal made films with a
home-movie camera. "I would organize kids in the neighborhood to play parts I
wrote for them," he said. "I just loved making movies."

Mr. Jimenez lives alone in an airy apartment in the Hollywood hills. In a recent
interview he spoke of his film with a curious mixture of commitment and
dispassion. Originally, he intended that the story explore how one recovers from
such a trauma and accepts one's fate.  But then the film changed direction.

"We didn't realize it until halfway through," he said, "but it's very much about
men, and men having to redefine their manhood when their physical being is
entirely changed. The film, for me, is about three males who in some ways have
to come to terms with who they are as men and what defines their sexuality."

"The Waterdance," he acknowledged, remains painful for him to see and at one
early screening left him "extremely dizzy." Still, he accepts the fact, with a
shrug, that some intensely personal moments about his rehabilitation leave him
vulnerable to his emotions.

At the start of the film the writer is shown being wheeled into the
rehabilitation center. "Emotionally, that was the most affecting scene for me,"
Mr. Jimenez said. "That first image, opening on Eric's face the moment he
realizes what has happened to him, and we hear Helen's voice saying, 'Hi,
honey,' and we stay on Eric's face as tears come to his eyes. And we see her
face in the shadows kissing his hand. It was the first time after the accident
that they see each other. That's why it was so difficult."

Mr. Jimenez does not appear to be overly concerned about his privacy. "The film
is about five months of my life that happened seven years ago," he said. "Maybe
20 percent is true. I expect people to recognize that Eric is playing me. He's a
writer, he has a Mexican surname and doesn't really look Mexican and, in fact,
is playing both sides. He doesn't become friends with any of the other Mexican
or Salvadoran characters. He's accused of being neither fish nor fowl, and
that's not inaccurate. He's got a girlfriend visiting him in the hospital. We're
talking about me."

The film was written for Warner Brothers, rejected as too downbeat and
uncommercial, and finally produced by the Samuel Goldwyn Company for $2.7
million, a pittance for a feature film. Most of the shooting was done over a
five-week period at the Rancho Los Amigos Hospital, a Los Angeles rehabilitation
center for patients with spinal cord injuries where Mr. Jimenez spent some time
during his own treatment.

Mr. Stoltz, a New York actor who played a disfigured youngster in "Mask," spent
the entire five weeks in a wheelchair and devoted considerable time to talking
to doctors, nurses and patients to steep himself in Garcia's problems and
feelings.

"The one thing you realize is that people act strangely when you're in a
wheelchair," he said. "They are sometimes condescending, and sometimes they just
ignore you. It makes people uncomfortable. After a while, you realize that the
only difference between people walking and in a wheelchair is mobility. People
in wheelchairs have lives, a sense of humor, sexuality. Everything is the same.
The only difference is how they get from A to B."

Understandably, Mr. Stoltz was anxious about portraying the man who created the
film and was on hand every day as co-director: "I asked him, 'Look, am I playing
you?' and he assured me that the script was loosely based on what he
experienced. He allowed me to create my own character."

As the film proceeds, it becomes uncertain whether the relationship between the
writer and his married mistress can continue. As portrayed, the Helen Hunt
character is torn between her husband and the writer. Mr. Jimenez is reluctant
to discuss the relationship, saying only, "I had a girlfriend at the time.
Actually I had two women in my life. They were both visiting me. That would have
been a little unbelievable."

Both women, he said, remain friends of his. Of Ms. Hunt's character he added, "I
hope her dilemma is communicated well. It's very hard for her, too. She says the
accident does not only affect Garcia, it affects her."

She and Garcia make love in the film. Mr. Jimenez said, "I've had seven years to
deal with sexuality in a wheelchair. I'm able to deal with it as a writer. After
all, I've had quite bit of distance -- seven years. If I were to write a script
about my life now, it would be an entirely different matter. I'd have no
distance."

Mr. Steinberg helped Mr. Jimenez remain objective about the material.  The two
men agreed that their co-directing arrangements were highly unusual. The plan
was that Mr. Jimenez would deal with the actors, and his partner would work with
the crew and deal with technical matters. But the distinction quickly blurred,
and the two frequently strayed onto each other's turf.

"It's almost shocking how few disagreements we had," said Mr. Steinberg. "It
reached a point where we'd be finishing each other's sentences for the cast and
crew." Except for some disagreements in the editing process, both say the
arrangement worked smoothly, despite its relative novelty.

Since completing "The Waterdance," Mr. Jimenez has had plenty of work. Five of
his scripts have been made into films, including "River's Edge',' a work about
alienated teen-agers, which was produced in 1986, after his accident.

But his biggest movie to date, "For the Boys," with Bette Midler, which he
initially co-wrote with Lindy Laub, annoys him. The film, as he originally
envisioned it, was harder-edged, even cynical, about U.S.O. entertainers who
realize, in Vietnam, that their lives have been shams.

"It was, finally, a decent film, and I like Bette, but they went for the
sentimental every chance they got," Mr. Jimenez said. "It could have been a far
more interesting film."

Mr. Jimenez favors a clear-eyed view. At the close of "The Waterdance," Garcia
is seen holding a copy of a book he has written. His authorship is clearly a
triumph, but in the director's hands there is nothing sentimental about it.

NAME: Neal Jimenez

LOAD-DATE: May 10, 1992

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

CORRECTION-DATE: May 24, 1992, Sunday

CORRECTION:

Because of an editing error, an article on May 10 about the film "The
Waterdance" misidentified the producers. They are Gayle Anne Hurd and Marie
Cantin.


GRAPHIC: Photos: Neal Jimenez, director of the film "The Waterdance" --
Redefining manhood. (Jim Wilson/The New York Times)(pg. 17); Wesley Snipes,
left, William Forsythe and Eric Stoltz in "The Waterdance" -- A common
desperation. (Samuel Goldwyn Company)(pg. 19)

TYPE: Biography

                   Copyright 1992 The New York Times Company


                              108 of 281 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                   May 10, 1992, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

If You're Thinking of Living in: Parkchester

BYLINE: By JERRY CHESLOW

SECTION: Section 10; Page 7; Column 1; Real Estate Desk

LENGTH: 1299 words


RISING like a fortress of brick and steel in the south-central Bronx, the
171-building Parkchester complex was once one of the most populous planned
communities in the world.

Built by the Metropolitan Life Insurance Company at the end of the Depression,
it has 12,271 apartments in 7- to 13-story buildings, 100 stores and 35 offices.
The 129-acre site was bought from the New York Catholic Protectory, an orphanage
and reformatory, for $4 million.

The community, almost a city unto itself, has its own security force,
maintenance and recreation departments and a business district. It is divided
into four quadrants by the intersection of its two commercial streets --
Metropolitan Avenue and Unionport Road -- at the Metropolitan Oval, a landscaped
area with flowers, a fountain and monuments to residents who died in World War
II and in Korea and Vietnam.

More than half of the site is green space and recreational areas. Each quadrant
has a smaller "oval," around which benches, flowers and recreation areas are
concentrated.

"There are many places in New York City where you can't find three trees close
together," said Margaret Walsh, a resident since 1943. "Here we see robins in
spring and watch the leaves turn color in the fall."

The northern quadrant is now the Parkchester North Condominium, with 3,985
apartments. The three other quadrants make up the 8,286-apartment Parkchester
South Condominium. Together, they have an operating budget of $44 million, 600
full-time employees and a steam generating plant for heating.

The sponsor of the conversions, the Parkchester Apartments Company, a group
headed by Harry Helmsley, bought Parkchester from Metropolitan Life in 1968 and
still owns more than 7,000 apartments. Most units are rented out at market rates
-- one-bedrooms for $650 a month, two-bedrooms for $775 and three-bedrooms for
$875 -- although there are a few longtime tenants under rent control.

One-bedrooms bought from the sponsor are listed at $35,000 to $39,500,
two-bedrooms at $50,000 to $54,000 and three-bedrooms at $61,000 to $64,500.
This reflects a price drop of about 30 percent over the last year.

"Over the last two years, unit sales were down due to the general conditions of
the market," explained Amit Sikdar, executive vice president of the Parkchester
Management Corporation and the Helmsley organization's top official at the
complex. "So we dropped the price."

According to Rocky S. Narain, president of ERA Marland Real Estate on nearby
Castle Hill Avenue, resale apartments often sell for about $5,000 less than the
sponsor's offering price. Mr. Narain says that resale is difficult because the
sponsor has destabilized the market by dropping its prices so sharply.

"Who's going to pay $60,000 for a unit today when he feels that the sponsor
could drop the price by another $10,000 next month?" he asks.

Services provided by the condominium associations through the Parkchester
Management Corporation -- heat, hot water, security and maintenance -- are
covered by common charges of $215 to $380 a month.

Edward A. Watkins, a senior investigator at the Federal Equal Employment
Opportunity Commission and president of the board of directors of the
Parkchester South Condominium, said that many civil servants -- teachers, postal
employees, social workers and the like -- live in the complex and that several
thousand elderly people have lived there close to 50 years.

"The largest group of recent buyers seems to be from India, Pakistan and
Bangladesh," said Mr. Sikdar.

Barbara Terry, a single mother who who moved from Harlem in March, said she grew
up nearby and always felt Parkchester was "the garden spot of the Bronx."

"When I was a child, I couldn't live here," said Ms. Terry, a television
producer. "They [Metropolitan Life] wouldn't sell to anyone who wasn't white.
Now, the neighborhood is integrated, multicultural and exciting."

Ms. Terry said she would like to have her two-bedroom apartment air-conditioned.
But a recent study commissioned by the South Condominium found that the cost of
upgrading the electrical service for air-conditioning would range from $8,000 to
$9,000 a unit, which most residents found prohibitive.

Parkchester is not immune from the problems of surrounding areas. Phone booths
are marred by graffiti and many building fronts have been painted brown to hide
the graffiti. Mr. Watkins says his association recently bought a steam cleaner
to remove graffiti.

Many elderly residents say a recent rash of push-in robberies and a January
murder have made them feel insecure.

"IT'S scary," said 79-year-old Marion Payton, a retired teacher. "It seems like
everyone my age knows somone who has been mugged or robbed."

"A lot of senior citizens have been victimized," said Police Officer Elizabeth
Hein, a city officer assigned to Parkchester. "There have been 10 push-in
robberies in April alone. But a lot of the crime could be prevented if the
victims were more careful. Some still hold the door open for strangers or don't
call security if a suspicious person is hanging around their building."

Officer Hein said that the police hold seminars at Parkchester sites on ways to
avoid being victimized and help resident groups organize security patrols, which
she called effective in deterring crime.

"Often, when we have a wave of robberies," she added, "it is one perpetrator. We
catch him and the incidents drop off."

The largest store, Macy's, opened when the complex was completed. There are six
supermarkets, a movie theater, several clothing stores and restaurants. Among
the better-known eating places are the Metro Oval Restaurant on Metropolitan
Avenue and the 10-Star Restaurant on West Avenue, both with an American menu,
and Silvio's, an Italian restaurant on Metropolitan Avenue.

Assemblyman John Dearie, a Democrat, has his law and Assembly offices in
Parkchester and several doctors and dentists also practice in the business
district.

THERE are 22 recreation areas to accommodate the complex's more than 8,000
youths 12 to 18 years old, including basketball and volleyball courts,
playgrounds and a baseball field. A 23-member recreation staff organizes
tournaments and watches the playgrounds to prevent vandalism.

The Parkchester South Condominium Association recently contributed $40,000 to
the Police Athletic League, which runs a program at P.S. 127, just outside
Parkchester.

Parkchester's children attend schools near the community. They include Public
Schools 106 and 102, Junior High School 127 and Christopher Columbus High
School.

The high school last year was designated by the state Department of Education as
one of the 12 "New York City Schools that work." Of last year's graduating
class, 82 percent went on to college, according to the principal, Frank J.
Melia. Of a total student body of 2,850, all but 100 read at or above grade
level.

"That's really an accomplishment," Mr. Melia said. "Sixty percent of our
students report that English is not their first language. We have more than 30
different language groups, including Ethiopians, Russians, Bengalis, Koreans."

The school is just completing a $26 million renovation, including rewiring and
seven new computer laboratories, making a total of 12.

Some children also attend the Roman Catholic St. Raymond's Elementary School and
St. Raymond's Girls' Academy on East Tremont Avenue, St. Raymond's Boys' High
School on St. Raymond Avenue, and St. Helena's Elementary School on Benedict
Avenue. Our Savior Lutheran High School also serves Parkchester.

The two co-op associations and the Helmsley company are in the throes of a $13
million modernization program including upgrading playgrounds, repaving
walkways, reconstructing elevators and resurfacing the roofs.

LOAD-DATE: May 10, 1992

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo: Fountains spraying water in the Metropolitan Oval pool in
Parkchester; sculptures adorn some of the buildings. (Eddie Hausner for The New
York Times)

Chart: "Gazetteer"

Population: 47 (1991 estimate).

Area: 34 square miles.

Median household income: $60,000 (1991 estimate).

Median price of one-family house: $35,000.

Taxes on median-price house: $400.

Codes: Area, 819; postal, J0T-1A0.

Government: Mayor (J. Brian Clarke, unaffiliated) and eight-member Town Council,
all elected to four-year terms. Town manager (Robert Mearns), appointed by
Council.

Distance from midtown Manhattan: 385 miles.

Rush-hour commutation: Eighty minutes by car or three hours by Voyageur bus to
Dorval Airport ($21 round-trip) then 50-minute Air Canada flight to LaGuardia
($220 round-trip), then 25 minutes by Carey bus ($7.50) to midtown.

Heraus: When a German investor, Klaus Lang, bought 200 acres in 1975 and tried
to subdivide and develop the land in a terraced configuration, the town opposed
him and sued, taking the case as far as the Supreme Court, which ruled for the
town. The only structure Mr. Lang built -- a tool shed -- still stands.

Map of Parkchester

                   Copyright 1992 The New York Times Company


                              109 of 281 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                   May 11, 1992, Monday, Late Edition - Final

Under Marcos's Shadow, Filipinos Vote in Close Race

BYLINE: By PHILIP SHENON,  Special to The New York Times

SECTION: Section A; Page 6; Column 1; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 1163 words

DATELINE: MANILA, Monday, May 11


Millions of Filipinos voted for a new President today in an election seen as a
referendum on the legacy of the late President Ferdinand E. Marcos and of the
woman who ousted him, Corazon C. Aquino.

One of the leading candidates, Eduardo Cojuangco, was so close to Mr. Marcos
that he fled with the former President into exile. Another candidate, former
Defense Minister Fidel V. Ramos, is the army general who turned on Mr. Marcos
and became a hero of the 1986 "People Power" revolution.

Only hours after the voting began, there were reports of vote fraud, although it
was not clear how widespread the cheating, long a plague of Philippine politics,
might be.

The final weekend of the presidential campaign was marred by reports of
violence, with at least 3 civilians killed and 55 injured in two explosions at
or near rallies for supporters of Mr. Ramos.

Early on Sunday, 17 police officers were slain by Communist rebels in an ambush
in Cagayan Province in the north.

Specter of Insurgency

The attack was a reminder of the still unresolved 23-year-old insurgency by the
Marxist New People's Army, one of many issues left largely undebated in a
presidential campaign that has focused instead on personalities. There has been
scant attention paid to the candidates' views on how to end the nation's most
serious problem, its crushing poverty.

A traditional campaign issue, American influence and interference in the
Philippines, a former colony, was removed by the Pentagon's announcement that it
would close American military bases here this year.

The presidential race appears to be a tossup -- so close, it fact, that it may
take a week or more to gather enough ballots from around this vast archipelago
nation to make it clear who won.

While the election is being described as the freest in Philippine history,
election officials fear that even relatively limited instances of vote-buying or
other cheating could swing it.

There appeared to be at least some cheating this morning in Manila, the capital.


Some Ballots Not Delivered

In some of the city's precincts, voting materials, including the ballots
themselves, were not delivered, delaying voters for more than an hour. In other
precincts, voters were reported to be lingering in voting booths in an
orchestrated effort to prevent others from casting ballots.

"I won't be surprised if there is big cheating in this election," said Johnny
Tan, a 44-year-old businessman, as he waited to vote in the Manila neighborhood
of Ermita. "Absolutely, it will be a problem. It always is."

Opinion polls suggest that the next President will be elected with much less
than half of the vote, and perhaps as little as 20 percent. Since there will be
no runoff, the candidate gaining the most votes today wins.

"The next President probably won't have a real mandate for leadership, and in a
supremely volatile place like the Philippines, that's worrisome," said a Western
diplomat in Manila. "Even the President who had the clearest mandate of all,
Cory Aquino, couldn't or wouldn't capitalize on it."

After a six-year term tarnished by a string of coup attempts and by allegations
that she had wasted a remarkable opportunity to remake the nation, Mrs. Aquino
chose not to seek re-election, and her preferred candidate, Mr. Ramos, is only
one of four leading contenders.

'King of the Cronies'

That Mr. Ramos does not have a decisive edge in the race has raised the prospect
that Mrs. Aquino will be replaced instead by her estranged cousin, Mr.
Cojuangco, the so-called king of the cronies in the plunderous Marcos
dictatorship.

Mr. Cojuangco, who used his Marcos connections to make a fortune in a variety of
industries and is now reputed to be the wealthiest man in the Philippines, fled
into exile with the Marcos family in 1986.

He returned home three years later, and his election to the highest office in
the Philippines would not only be a rebuke to Mrs. Aquino but could also result
in a move away from democracy. Mr. Cojuangco has publicly questioned whether
democracy is the proper political system for the Philippines.

The other two major presidential contenders are the House Speaker, Ramon Mitra,
who is often derided as the quintessential "trapo," or traditional politician,
and Miriam Defensor Santiago, the acid-tongued former immigration chief who has
run a largely one-issue, anticorruption campaign.

While public opinion polls suggest that Mrs. Santiago and Mr. Ramos are the most
popular candidates, Mr. Cojuangco and Mr. Mitra have gargantuan political
machines to turn out the vote.

Backed by the Cardinal

Mr. Mitra also has the benefit of a de facto endorsement by the powerful
Archbishop of Manila, Jaime Cardinal Sin, who, without naming names, has made it
clear that he does not approve of Mr. Mitra's opponents.

Mr. Cojuangco has run a spare-no-expense campaign that appears to have picked up
momentum, especially after last month's endorsement of his candidacy by the
Iglesia Ni Cristo, a politically potent Christian denomination that tends to
vote as a bloc and has packed his rallies.

The other presidential candidates -- former Senate leader Jovito Salonga, Vice
President Salvador Laurel, and Imelda Marcos, the former First Lady, who
returned from exile last year -- are trailing badly in opinion polls. In an
election eve flourish, Mrs. Marcos went shopping on Sunday for her trademark:
shoes.

The weekend violence added to fears that, in its final hours, the campaign would
be overrun by the so-called three G's of Philippine politics -- guns, goons and
gold.

Deaths at Ramos Rallies

Two people were reported to have been killed and 41 injured on Saturday during a
rally by local candidates loyal to Mr. Ramos in General Santos City, about 650
miles south of Manila. Mr. Ramos's supporters also appear to have been the
target of a bomb that went off near a rally in Cotabato, 550 miles south of
Manila. One person died and 15 were injured in the blast.

Despite those attacks, the presidential campaign has been far more peaceful than
was expected by many Philippine political leaders, who had feared the worst
after elections in recent years in which hundreds were killed.

Election day is guaranteed to be chaotic, if only because voters will be
confronting a ballot nearly a foot and a half long, on which they must write in
the names of as many as 44 candidates.

The Philippine Supreme Court decided last year that, under the terms of what
seemed to be an ambiguous clause in the Philippine Constitution of 1987, all
national, provincial and local elections would have to be held on the same day
this year. After this, the elections will be staggered.

Under the court's decision, every major elective office in the Philippines is to
be filled in today's voting. That's one President, one Vice President, 24
senators, 200 members of Congress and nearly 17,000 local officials. There are
about 88,000 registered candidates.

LOAD-DATE: May 11, 1992

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photos/Chart: "Seven Who Would Succeed Aquino"

Eduardo Cojuangco, 56

Nationalist Peoples Coalition ... Businessman and ardent supporter of President
Ferdinand E. Marcos ... President Corazon C. Aquino is his first cousin ... used
Marcos connections to amass fortune in agriculture, banking, food processing ...
fled the country with Marcos in 1986 after popular uprising placed Aquino in
power ... returned in 1989.

 Salvador Laurel, 63

Nacionalista Party ... Vice President of the Philippines ... his father, Jose
Laurel, led Japanese collaborationist government in World War II ... masters and
Ph.D. in law from Yale ... as a legislator, became a leader of the Marcos
opposition ... announced candidacy for president in 1985 but stepped aside to
run as Mrs. Aquino's Vice President ... after falling out with Mrs. Aquino,
resigned as Foreign Minister in 1987 but remained Vice President.

 Imelda Marcos, 62

New Society Movement ... Widow of former President Marcos ... under her
husband's administration, served as governor of metropolitan Manila, among other
posts ... accused of helping pillage national treasury ... fled with her husband
in 1986 uprising ... tried and acquitted of federal racketeering charges in New
York in 1990 ... returned last November.

Ramon Mitra, 64

Struggle of the Democratic Filipino Party ... Speaker of the House of
Representatives ... illegitimate son of penal colony superintendent and poor
woman who died before he was a year old ... a former journalist and diplomat, he
became a legislator but left politics after being imprisoned by Marcos during
martial law from 1972-81 ... President Aquino's first Minister of Agriculture.

 Fidel V. Ramos, 64

People Power-National Union of Christian Democrats Party ... President Aquino's
nominee, former military Chief of Staff and Defense Minister ... Marcos's second
cousin ... graduate of West Point, with master's in engineering from the
University of Illinois ... served in Korea and Vietnam ... national police chief
during martial law ... leader of the 1986 mutiny that helped Aquino rise to
power ... defended Aquino through coup attempts.

 Jovito Salonga, 71

Liberal Party ... Veteran legislator ... most liberal of major candidates ...
holds law degrees from Harvard and Yale ... imprisoned and tortured by Japanese
during World War II until he escaped and joined guerrillas ... imprisoned by
Marcos ... lived for several years in California ... engineered defeat of new
lease for American naval base at Subic Bay.

 Miriam Defensor Santiago, 46

Peoples Reform Party ... Former judge, immigration commissioner and Agrarian
Reform Minister ... law degree from the University of Michigan ... served at
Philippine Embassy in Washington and with United Nations High Commissioner for
Refugees in Geneva ... known for verbal attacks on opponents. (Source:
Associated Press)

Map of the Philippines.

                   Copyright 1992 The New York Times Company


                              110 of 281 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                   May 11, 1992, Monday, Late Edition - Final

Discovering Justice: Russia and the Law -- A special report.;
Two Novelties in Russian Courts: Defense Lawyers and Jury Trials

BYLINE: By STEVEN ERLANGER,  Special to The New York Times

SECTION: Section A; Page 1; Column 1; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 1940 words

DATELINE: MOSCOW, May 9


In one courtroom of the Moscow City Court, the hammer-and-sickle emblems, carved
long ago into the wooden chairs of the three judges, have been chiseled off. In
a second courtroom, just down the hall, a hammer-and-sickle hangs on the wall
above the chief judge's head and two still adorn the chairs.

The great transition in Russian life, after the collapse of the Soviet Union and
Communist ideology, is also taking place in the courtroom.

President Boris N. Yeltsin of Russia, and Mikhail S. Gorbachev before him, vowed
to make the nation a "pravovoye gosudarstvo" -- a state based on law. And many
Western business executives believe a true market economy can function here only
when grounded in the law, and with a judicial system to support it.

The Many Contradictions

But as in all other aspects of the great transition under way, the exorcism has
been only partial, wrapped in ambivalence and contradictions:

*There has been no effort to remove judges who grew up under the old regime,
when justice was defined by the Communist Party.

*The acquittal rate at trial has grown, but remains less than 3 percent.

*People peddle goods on the street and dollars are common, but "economic crimes"
like private enterprise ("speculation") and possession of hard currency remain
on the books.

*Despite much talk of introducing jury trials and reforming the powerful and
self-regulating prosecutor's office, a new law has merely confirmed the office's
existing powers.

*In all of Russia, there are only about 50,000 lawyers -- including defense and
business lawyers, prosecutors and judges -- many of whom are badly trained and
still held in low regard. (There are about 770,000 lawyers in the United
States.)

*While various drafts of a new Russian Constitution have been floated, the
fundamental law remains a much-amended 1977 Constitution, written for a republic
within a larger Communist union.

"Oh, if we take our criminal code, we'll see lots of jokes," says Aleksei B.
Korzhikov, a Moscow City Court judge for the last 10 years, slapping a paperback
copy of the code down on his desk. "The law protecting socialist property, for
instance: Does it now cover only the property of Cuba, China and Vietnam, and
not our Russian property? It's foolishness. How can we work now? What law is to
be used?"

Olga A. Dyuzheva, associate professor at the law faculty of Moscow State
University, says: "You can find 'no' in one law and 'yes' in two others, which
is very convenient for these shady businessmen of ours."

The problem is equally acute for foreign businesses, which are caught up in
long-running confusions about their status and tax liabilities in a state where
corporate law remains weak.

Inconsistencies
Bright Ambition, Murky Reality

With the end of the Soviet Union, the legitimacy of its laws also died. But many
of the laws of the Russian Federation do not cover all the areas that Soviet law
once did, or they have not been revised to take account of new realities. In the
vacuum, judges and lawyers are applying old Soviet law, or new presidential
decrees, or whichever they please.

"It's a murky situation, and not a happy one," said Kaj I. Hobert, a lawyer with
White & Case, one of about 10 American firms representated here. "And it doesn't
tend to inspire confidence in Western investors."

And for all the attention paid to street markets, private enterprise and
hard-currency trading, they are all still against the law, sanctioned only by a
Yeltsin decree that has its own contradictions.

Even more important for Russia, as its leaders talk about creating a free market
and a democratic nation, is whether they will allow the growth of institutions
in which democracy itself can take organic root: representative political
parties, for instance, or a constitution that puts the rights of individuals
above those of the state, or an independent judiciary.

The Aura of the Law

At the heart of all these issues, says Mark I. Kogan, a Russian lawyer who
survived 12 years in Stalin's gulag, are the law and Russians' traditional
attitudes toward it.

Mr. Gorbachev -- the first lawyer since Lenin to become Soviet Communist Party
leader -- seemed to root in the law his vision of glasnost and perestroika, the
increased openness and political and economic restructuring that were his
watchwords. He equated law with civilization, and spoke often of a less
arbitrary state.

To Westerners who remember Stalin and the show trials of the 1930's or the
treatment of the dissidents of the 1970's, who remember "Darkness at Noon" or
even "Crime and Punishment," such an ambition seemed quixotic. But some progress
was made. For instance, defense lawyers are now allowed to take a more active
role in their clients' cases.

"But I agree with Marx that the law is simply a superstructure for the existing
system of power," Mr. Kogan said. "While our old bosses are still running that
system, either openly or hidden, and until the people's mentality changes, there
can be no real talk of a law-based state."

Genrikh P. Padva, a defense lawyer and now general director of Chadbourne,
Hedman, Raabe & Advocates here, said: "The old system was decorative. It
recognized its own illegal background, but it struggled to cloak itself in the
robes of the law, to acquire the fictional impression of legality."

Now people who support change talk of individual rights, he said, adding: "But
among those in power, who grew up in the old system, the attitude toward
individual and civil rights hasn't really changed."

The Proposals
Balancing State And Individual



For all the talk of constitutional and legal reform, there has not been very
much of it.

There are numerous drafts of a new, post-Soviet, post-Communist Constitution for
Russia, which is still getting by on one approved in 1977. That document, and
laws based upon it, make the state's interests supreme over those of the
individual and value the protection of state property much higher than
protection of individual property, which is barely recognized. Violations of
public order are punished more severely than any violation of individual rights.

In most of the drafts, these equations are altered. The state is recognized as
the servant of the individual, not the other way around. But the struggle over
this principle continues, said Aleksandr M. Yakovlev, director of the Institute
of State and Law of the Russian Academy of Sciences.

"Unfortunately, the population still equates disorder with democracy, and
equates its safety with a strong cop, not a wise judge," he said.

A Shortage of Lawyers

Mr. Yakovlev, a Russian legislator, has drafted a legal system that would
re-establish jury trials, strengthen judicial independence, abolish the death
penalty and reform the prosecutor system to separate investigative and
prosecutorial functions.

Part of the problem is the paucity of lawyers, many of whom are badly trained.
Miss Dyuzheva of Moscow State said the 25,000 or so defense lawyers in Russia
are one-tenth of what is needed, "and many of them are not really lawyers,"
having graduated from military or K.G.B. institutes. Others get their law
degrees through correspondence courses.

In 1913, a period of jury trials before the revolution, there were 20 times more
lawyers than today. Juries were introduced in the 1860's during the reforms of
Czar Alexander II, but the 1917 revolution put an end to all that. Mr. Yakovlev
is trying to bring juries back, but he is not very optimistic, especially since
the Parliament decided only two months ago to reconfirm the status and power of
the prosecutors.

The Goals of Reform

Robert E. Langer, a lawyer based here for Chadbourne, says that optimistically
seen, the Russians are trying "to re-establish the rule of law and develop an
objective, fair legal structure."

On the other hand, he said, "there is a school of thought that says what they're
trying to do, as they develop a market economy, is to create enough laws to
insure that the Government maintains its control."

Mr. Yakovlev said his greatest hope is in the growth of a large class of
business executives who will insist on working laws and courts to protect their
interests.

"They will demand the protection of the law, which will be beneficial to all of
us," he said. "Only to the extent that market relations become routine and
crucial to all, will the rule of law become crucial, too. It's easy to pass
laws, but they are forgotten unless they are needed and used."

The Obstacles
Getting Politics Out of the Courts

In a speech last month, President Yeltsin complained about the weak legal basis
of Russian life.

"For many years, the laws in this country played a decorative role," he said.
"Many of them contradicted both common sense and human nature. They were openly
violated or bypassed. Legal and state nihilism are deeply rooted in our minds.
An example was provided by those in power, whose life was subordinated to secret
orders issued by telephone and mutual cover-up."

What Mr. Yeltsin was describing is "telephone justice," when judges, who were
all party members, were called by party leaders and told how to rule.

In fact, said Mr. Padva, who defended many dissidents, "telephone justice was
much exaggerated." Judges understood what was required from them without the
need for many calls.

Now, post-Communism, there are fewer "concrete interferences," he said. "But the
system still exists," he added. "Even now the law of power exists here."

Letters Replace Phone Calls

Judge Korzhikov says that in his 10 years on the bench, he has had few such
calls. One he describes, under the old regime, involved an army marshal trying
to keep his driver out of jail, but the call came a day late, and the man had
already escaped a prison sentence.

"Now I get a lot of letters about ongoing cases from our so-called 'democrats,'
" he said. "Partycrats become democrats, but their nature stays the same."

His problems, he said, have more to do with his own low salary (3,000 rubles a
month, about twice what the Government calls the poverty level) and his
inability to get witnesses to appear if it means they must lose pay.

A former judge, Dmitri I. Plyushkov, is more open. In seven years on the bench
during the 1980's, he said, "the general principle for everyone -- police,
prosecutor, judge -- was that we were all colleagues in law enforcement."

It was always clear what cases "the higher-ups cared about," he said. "The
presumption about the defendant was always guilt, not innocence."

More important than changing the law, he said, is to change people's thinking.
"Inside every judge here is this assumption of guilt, and I do not separate
myself," he said. "It's difficult to change your attitude toward this person in
the dock and see an innocent person."

Mr. Padva, of Chadbourne, Hedman, says a state based on law in Russia is
unavoidable, even here: "Historically, it will happen. But for history, even a
century is not a long time."

Mr. Kogan is blunter: "You know, Stalin's Constitution was wonderful on the
surface. You could find any sort of rights in it."

After being released from the Gulag, he says, he considered it his duty to stay
here and work for a law-based state. "I'm old now and probably won't see it,"
said Mr. Kogan, who is 70. "I'm not sure my children will see it, but my
granddaughter, perhaps.

"I have a son and daughter, and I wanted them to be doctors. Why? Because they
could be doctors in any labor camp. It took me a long time to squeeze the fear
out of myself, and it's not really gone."

LOAD-DATE: May 11, 1992

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo: The great transition in Russian life since the collapse of the
Soviet Union is beginning to take place in the courtroom, but the legal system
still has a long way to go. The day-to-day experience of criminal law is a
tawdry string of drunken stupidities, momentary passions and unthinking greed,
as it is worldwide. A defendant waited recently in a holding cell surrounded by
armed guards in a Moscow courtroom. (Steven Erlanger/The New York Times) (pg.
A8)

TYPE: Special Report

                   Copyright 1992 The New York Times Company


                              111 of 281 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                  May 12, 1992, Tuesday, Late Edition - Final

THE 1992 CAMPAIGN: Candidate's Record;
Perot Stand on Prisoner Issue Left a Residue of Bitterness

BYLINE: By PATRICK E. TYLER,  Special to The New York Times

SECTION: Section A; Page 1; Column 1; National Desk

LENGTH: 1534 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, May 11


Five years ago George Bush, then the Vice President, and senior members of the
Reagan Administration had a bruising private confrontation with Ross Perot over
the Texas billionaire's effort to take command of the Government's investigation
of American servicemen missing in Southeast Asia.

The bitter residue explains some of the tension that exists today between
President Bush and Mr. Perot, who is considering an independent run for
President this year.

The episode demonstrates how Mr. Perot traded on his connections in Congress and
in the Reagan White House to seek an appointment as head of the prisoner-of-war
investigation, with extraordinary subpoena powers and access to sensitive
intelligence. The intention was to finally get to the bottom of an issue that
continued to strain United States relations with Vietnam long after the war
ended.

Political and Social Ties

When the commission he hoped to head failed to win broad support in Congress,
and later, when the White House selected John W. Vessey Jr., a retired Army
general and former Chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff, as its emissary to
Hanoi for P.O.W.-M.I.A. matters, Mr. Bush offered Mr. Perot a chance to review
Government intelligence files on American servicemen who had been prisoners of
war or were listed as missing in action. Mr. Bush was involved because of his
association with Mr. Perot in Texas politics and in social settings.

Former White House officials said Mr. Bush and other senior aides hoped that Mr.
Perot's review would validate efforts by the Reagan Administration to elevate
the issue of missing servicemen to a higher national priority.

But Mr. Perot's search of Government files led to contentious encounters with
aides from the White House, the National Security Council and the Defense
Department. In the end Mr. Perot went to Hanoi on his own in March 1987,
returned empty-handed, and again traded recriminations with Administration
officials.

A month later Mr. Perot said he was "finished" working with the Reagan
Administration on the P.O.W. question, and turned in a report that was all but
discarded. Mr. Perot accused the Administration of "arrogance."

Today former Bush and Reagan staff members still seethe about what they said was
Mr. Perot's inflexiblity and his use of bullying tactics to achieve objectives.

Some former Reagan Administration officials, as well as Democrats in Congress,
career military men and civil servants who dealt with Mr. Perot on the issue,
say he became fixated on the notion that a Government conspiracy was blocking
efforts to free prisoners who were still being held, and that he showed little
interest in answers that did not conform to his views.

One military man, who spoke on condition of anonymity, said he spent a month
unsuccessfully running down leads that Mr. Perot provided. He said Mr. Perot
"stood up and walked down the hall arguing with me and trying to intimidate me
by saying, 'You're obviously not doing your job if you can't get better
information than this.' "

Then, the official added, "He poked me in the chest and said, 'Realize this,
colonel: You and I have nothing in common on this issue anymore.' He declared me
part of the problem."

The Reagan Administration's effort to put a higher priority on the issue of
missing servicemen was attributed in part to pressure from families and from
various political groups. The 1987 negotiations begun by General Vessey were
aimed at fostering a humanitarian exchange that would lead to faster release of
the remains of American servicemen killed in Vietnam, and greater cooperation in
pursuing investigations about others possibly still being held there.

After almost a decade of intense efforts, Government experts today say they
still have no hard evidence that Americans are still being held in Southeast
Asia, but they do not dismiss the possibility and continue to pursue leads when
they arise.

C.I.A.-F.B.I. Warnings

In long years of advocacy on the prisoner-of-war issue, Mr. Perot has told
interviewers that sinister forces may be out to silence him. In answers to
written questions Friday, he said it was true that friends in the Central
Intelligence Agency had warned him that he "might quietly disappear" for pushing
his quest to find missing Americans.

He also said he received a warning from the Federal Bureau of Investigation that
Vietcong officials had told the Black Panther organization to assassinate him.

Mr. Perot said at the time he became involved with the White House in 1986 that
perhaps hundreds of Americans were still being held against their will in
Southeast Asia.

"He was determined to take over and he ran into a brick wall of serious Asian
specialists," said Richard Childress, the director of Asian affairs on the
National Security Council staff at the time, who was among those who clashed
with Mr. Perot.

Former officials who observed the battle up close say today that Mr. Perot's
actions were misguided and naive, and that they threatened at times to undermine
negotiations between Washington and Hanoi.

Perot Denies Improprieties

In an interview Friday and in the written responses to questions, Mr. Perot
denied that he had done anything improper. "I conducted a study that the Vice
President asked me specifically to do," Mr. Perot said.

He said Mr. Bush asked him to "make one more sweep" of P.O.W.-M.I.A. files in
intelligence agencies to determine if the Administration was doing a good job.
"I haven't said anything about the study," he said, adding that any criticism
today of his actions then was politically motivated.

Former Reagan Administration officials now say yhat Mr. Perot was bent on a
course of paying high ransoms to the North Vietnamese for missing Americans
while United States policy at the time was to convince Hanoi that it could not
put a price on humanitarian cooperation.

Conspiracy Theorists' Hero

They also say Mr. Perot made improper disclosures during his visit to North
Vietnam about General Vessey's appointment as emmisary and his mission. In
addition they say Mr. Perot used highly questionable tactics when he tried to
discredit Richard L. Armitage, a senior Pentagon official who had negotiated
with the North Vietnamese about missing Americans.

These officials say they did not criticize Mr. Perot at the time because he was
regarded as a hero by the politically active advocates of the P.O.W.-M.I.A.
issue in the United States, and public criticism could only fuel conspiracy
theorists.

Mr. Perot denied that he made any improper disclosures to the North Vietnamese.
He also denied that he ever offered to buy back American prisoners, an assertion
that has circulated widely among the former Reagan aides with whom Mr. Perot was
dealing at the time.

Armitage File Cited

With regard to his comments about Mr. Armitage, Mr. Perot said "an undercover
police officer brought me a complete file" on Mr. Armitage's relationship with a
Vietnamese restaurant owner who was convicted of running an illicit gambling
operation in Virginia.

Mr. Armitage, who now coordinates United States aid to the former Soviet Union,
has said he was a longtime friend of the woman and her family, and has
acknowledged that he erred in writing a recommendation of leniency for the woman
on Pentagon stationery.

The file on Mr. Armitage, Mr. Perot said, "included many documents and some
photographs." Reagan Administration officials said the photographs showed
nothing improper, but Mr. Perot used the connection between Mr. Armitage and the
women to suggest that the Pentagon leadership was "compromised."

David Remnick, a reporter for The Washington Post now on leave at the Council on
Foreign Relations in New York, disclosed in a March 29 editorial column that Mr.
Perot kept in his safe in Dallas a photograph of a Pentagon official in the
company of an Asian woman and that Mr. Perot brandished it in an interview to
bolster his assertion that a conspiracy existed at the highest levels of the
Pentagon.

Responding Friday, Mr. Perot said: "A journalist who was interviewing me on
another subject engaged me in a discussion on this issue. I discussed it with
him off the record."

Representative Stephen J. Solarz, a Brooklyn Democrat, has challenged Mr. Perot
to make good on his claim that he knew of Government officials with information
that Americans were still being held in Southeast Asia. Last week Mr. Solarz
renewed his challenge and, in an interview, criticized Mr. Perot's character and
judgment.

"After bringing potentially explosive information to our attention," Mr. Solarz
said, "he was missing in action himself, and we never heard from him again."

In response, Mr. Perot said Friday that there were two people with concrete
information on missing Americans, but that they did not have confidence in Mr.
Solarz, who held hearings on missing Americans before the House Foreign Affairs
Subcommittee on Asian Affairs, which he heads. Mr. Perot did not identify the
two, but said they had since testified secretly before a select Senate panel.

Mr. Solarz characterized Mr. Perot's attack on Mr. Armitage as "utterly
unwarranted and outrageous."

NAME: Ross Perot

LOAD-DATE: May 12, 1992

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Biography

                   Copyright 1992 The New York Times Company


                              112 of 281 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                  May 12, 1992, Tuesday, Late Edition - Final

When This Private Eye Shoots, It's in 8-Millimeter;
Camera in Hand, Today's Investigator Stalks Insurance Fraud, Not Maltese Falcons

BYLINE: By RALPH BLUMENTHAL

SECTION: Section B; Page 1; Column 2; Metropolitan Desk

LENGTH: 1380 words


Spade's face was white-yellow now. His mouth smiled and there were
smile-wrinkles around his glittering eyes. His voice was soft, gentle. He said:
"I'm going to send you over. The chances are you'll get off with life. That
means you'll be out again in 20 years. You're an angel. I'll wait for you." He
cleared his throat. "If they hang you I'll always remember you." -- Dashiell
Hammett, "The Maltese Falcon."

The door and transom were secured with a square black burglar alarm, and the
frosted glass panel was lettered "TC Lasky Associates Inc., Private
Investigations." Inside, the narrow interior was lighted by hanging glass globes
with pull chains.

At the window, Terry C. Lasky rubbed his long, high-browed face and looked down
three floors over a slush-gray Broadway. It was morning. Too early for a
tequila. Besides, the bottle on the bookcase was only a prop.

'What Clients Expect'

"This is what clients expect," said the impish Mr. Lasky, whose motto might be
"Investigation with a sense of humor."

But if the trappings are vintage True Detective, the technology and mission are
distinctly modern and serious. The mild-mannered Mr. Lasky is a Sam Spade for
the video age: a private eye hired by insurers and lawyers to uncover fraudulent
personal injury, medical malpractice and workers' compensation claims, schemes
more lucrative by far than the quest for a mere golden bird encrusted head to
foot with the finest jewels of Malta.

One industry estimate puts the amount of fraudulent casualty claims at $20
billion a year in the nation, a racket Mr. Lasky's six-person operation barely
dents. Nine out of 10 claims referred to him prove "mendacious" to some degree,
he says.

Licensed to pack heat -- he has a Smith & Wesson .38 revolver and a Walther PPK
.380 semiautomatic pistol -- he much prefers to shoot with a Sony videotape
camera and sleuth with a computer. Why gumshoe subjects all over creation if you
can track them at your desk with a personal computer and some good biographical
and geographical data bases?

No Limp From a Camera

A Sony, he says, doesn't make you walk with a limp or ruin the line of your
suits.

Armed with one of the $12,000, 8-millimeter television news cameras with its
16-to-1 zoom lens, investigators stalk claimants in multimillion-dollar medical
liability lawsuits, secretly videotaping them from a gray station wagon to
verify or debunk claims of injury.

The videos, which have caught supposedly incapacitated victims strolling around
and driving cars, shoveling snow and cutting down trees, have swayed juries and
persuaded claimants to drop or settle lawsuits mounting into the millions of
dollars. In cases in which claims proved genuine, the videos have persuaded
insurance companies to settle rather than go to trial and risk a large jury
award.

If there is a trial, the secretly shot tapes are rarely shown in court by the
defense. Because some courts have held that any such evidence gathered by the
defense must be shared with the plaintiff, the existence of videotape is usually
not advertised by the defense but rather used to provide material for
cross-examination in depositions or in court.

'Just Finders of Fact'

There is no law against videotaping in public, and Mr. Lasky says it is not
dirty work. "We're just finders of fact," said the 44-year-old Mr. Lasky, who
could pass for an Air Canada reservations clerk, which, in fact, he was for a
while between dropping out of Adelphi University and attending the Sorbonne in
Paris and Fordham University.

Nobody knows to what extent cheating of all kinds inflates Americans' medical
care bills, put at about $800 billion this year. But the insurance industry has
estimated that 10 percent of total billings and claims may be fraudulent,
yielding a figure of $80 billion. Of this, says one industry expert, James
Garcia, a director of health plans for Aetna Life and Casualty, fraudulent
disability claims may account for about one-quarter of the figure, or $20
billion.

This does not surprise Mr. Lasky, whose recent cases include these:

*A New York City police officer on permanent employment disability because of
what she claimed were disabling headaches that kept her homebound was videotaped
driving her family from Staten Island 1,200 miles to Florida, where she spent
her days at a shopping mall.

*A 79-year-old New Jersey man supposedly incapacitated by the slip of an
anesthesiologist's needle was videotaped playing golf -- and even cheating,
sneakily putting down a second ball when his opponent wasn't looking.

*An executive suing his doctor over a back operation that he claimed had left
him unable to sit or drive for extended periods, participate in sports or even
play with his children was videotaped chain-sawing a tree in his yard. He nearly
cut off a relative's finger in the process, and then ran out of the way as the
tree crashed down.

Spanning All Groups

"It doesn't make any difference if you're rich or poor; fraudulent personalities
span all groups," Mr. Lasky said the other day as his wife, Patricia, a
psychotherapist a.k.a. Honey, typed and took calls by the door and their two
dogs, Bonnie, an English pointer, and Jake, a terrier, prowled the office -- a
tableau out of "The Thin Man."

Mr. Lasky said that any time he solved a puzzle he was happy but that uncovering
fraud "makes me very happy." Of all the cases referred to him, he said, 60
percent involve overstated claims and an additional 30 percent "out-and-out
fraud." Ten percent stand up under scrutiny.

"I'm never surprised by the high degree of malingering," he said, "but I'm often
shocked and always amused."

On a snowy day this spring, the office swung into action. Mr. Lasky dispatched
two of his investigators, Vincent Dolan and Neil Caddell, 28-year-old buddies
from Carmel, N.Y., to the home of a New Jersey man who claimed that a botched
arteriogram had left him unable to work or have sex.

The client, an insurance-company lawyer, called. "We're still on surveillance,"
Mr. Lasky told him. "We're hoping he goes out and shovels his walk. There's no
footprints, so he's in there."

Successful Therapy

A few hours later his crew called in with good news. "You're kidding!" Mr. Lasky
blurted out. "Ha! So he was shoveling? Using the arm! Great!"

He called the client back. "You ready?" he asked. "He came out to shovel! We
have 10 minutes' worth of film. His occupational therapy has been maybe a total
success."

Another day, Mr. Dolan, with an Italian film-star stubble, and Mr. Caddell,
preppy in a college sweatshirt, reminisced as they staked out another subject
(he never showed up):

There was the stakeout when they called for Chinese food. As the deliveryman
passed their car they whistled him over and accepted delivery. There was the
time they stalked a plaintiff who owned an upstate bungalow colony. They checked
into the colony posing as film students and videotaped him at their leisure. And
there was the time they were tailing a plaintiff -- and one from another case
drove by.

To track down claimants and witnesses, Mr. Lasky often begins with "pretext
calls" in which he seems to be looking for someone else. But his bag of tricks
also includes skillful use of computerized records ranging from motor vehicle
licenses and registrations to property ownership and credit reports.

Mr. Lasky, who grew up in Sheepshead Bay, Brooklyn, and fled to Paris to avoid
the Vietnam draft, worked several years as an investigator for various concerns
before starting his agency in his West Side apartment in 1976 and winning
certification as one of the state's 1,500 licensed security agencies and
investigators.

A sucker for atmosphere, he was about to install a frosted glass door in his
apartment when he found the perfect office in an old building at 2315 Broadway,
at 83d Street.

He showed something of the same flair in finding a wife. He was sitting alone in
Sarabeth's Kitchen, the one on Amsterdam Avenue at 80th Street. When the waiter
asked, "You see anything you like?" his eye lit on a young woman dining with her
mother.

"That girl," he said. He got the waiter to pass her his business card after he
left. She called him and they got married. That was five years ago.

NAME: Terry C. Lasky

LOAD-DATE: May 12, 1992

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo: The trappings that make up Terry C. Lasky's private detective
office on Broadway have little in common with the props in vintage films about
legendary sleuths. He viewed evidence in a recent medical malpractice case.
(William E. Sauro/The New York Times)

TYPE: Biography

                   Copyright 1992 The New York Times Company


                              113 of 281 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 May 13, 1992, Wednesday, Late Edition - Final

NEWS SUMMARY

SECTION: Section A; Page 2; Column 5; Metropolitan Desk

LENGTH: 1043 words



International     A3-15

WILL THE VERY BAD GET WORSE?

As European officials withdrew in haste from Sarajevo, residents of the Bosnian
capital feared that the terrifying bombardment of the last five weeks would soon
give way to even more deadly efforts by Serbian guerrillas trying to carve the
area into ethnic enclaves.  A1

The United States recalled its Ambassador from Belgrade.  A10

The truncated Yugoslavia saw bias by the Europeans and the U.S.  A10

SLIME ISN'T MONEY

Decades of uncontrolled pollution in the Eastern Europe of Communist days are
haunting the new democratic governments, as foreigners find environmental
contamination a deterrent to investment.  A1

BUSH WILL GO TO RIO

As expected, President Bush said he would join more than 100 other world leaders
at the Earth Summit in Rio de Janeiro next month.  A8

A major ocean-level rise could force island-group evacuations.  A8

PHILIPPINE COUNTING CONTINUES

Miriam Defensor Santiago, an outspoken former official who campaigned on an
anti-corruption platform, continued to lead in early Philippine presidential
election returns. Former Defense Minister Ramos was also running strong.  A3

GERMAN EUROPHILIA EBBS

Preoccupied with problems of its own unification, Germany no longer seems so
intent on forging ahead with expansion of the European Community to include the
formerly Communist lands in the East.  A12

SENDING BACK THE BOAT PEOPLE

Britain and Hong Kong signed an agreement with Vietnam that will allow the
British colony to resume the forced return of Vietnamese boat people. Hong Kong
authorities said that next month, it could begin emptying camps where more than
54,000 exiles are housed.  A9

JERUSALEM OF THE SHADOWS

Israel's new tourist wave consists of people suffering from what doctors are
starting to call the Jerusalem syndrome. These traumatized visitors present many
faces -- messiahs, John the Baptists and King Davids wandering the narrow lanes
of the Old City and proclaiming that the end, or perhaps the beginning, is near.
A13

Arab delegates insisted on discussing Palestinian right of return.  A13

U.S. MAY HALT LEBANESE FOOD AID

The United States has decided to discontinue food aid to Lebanon at a time when
the country is suffering through its worst economic crisis in five decades,
officials associated with the aid program said.  A5

Moscow Journal: Street markets, a consumer smorgasbord.  A4
Iraqi Kurds prepare for elections in their northern region.  A14
Qataris petition Emir for greater freedom, and reap reprisals.  A15
National     A16-23

VAST OVERHAUL IN BANK INSURANCE

Defying pressure from the Administration and the banking industry, regulators
voted to increase the premiums paid by banks and savings associations and to
make fundamental changes in the way those premiums are assessed.  A1

WASHINGTON RESPONDS TO RIOTS

The White House and Congressional leaders announced broad agreement on a set of
modest programs that they said would bring relief to American cities.  A1

ARRESTS IN RIOT BEATING

Four black men linked to a violent Los Angeles street gang were arrested on
charges of assaulting a white truck driver whose beating was witnessed by
television viewers across the nation.  A1

For the last of 58 people who died, a quiet wake.  A21

RAISING FUNDS, AND EYEBROWS

While some members of Congress have refused campaign contributions from
executives entangled in the savings and loan and banking crisis, the Republican
Party is relying on several of them to help raise money for the re-election of
President Bush and others.  A1

The Bush campaign declined to commit to any debates.  A23

Clinton moved ahead in his search for a running mate.  A23

RADICAL CHILD-SUPPORT PLAN

Two unlikely Congressional allies urged that responsibility for collecting
child-support payments be transferred from the states to the I.R.S., that the
Government pay a mother if it failed to collect from the absent father and that
300,000 new public service jobs be created to give unemployed fathers a way to
make their payments.  A16

C.I.A. OPENING AN OSWALD FILE

In the first trickle of what could soon be a vast river of publicly disclosed
assassination documents, the Director of Central Intelligence ordered the
release of a secret C.I.A. file dealing with Lee Harvey Oswald's activities
before the Kennedy assassination.  A18

MILESTONE IN SPACE

After repeated failure to rescue a wayward communications satellite, ground
controllers agreed to a plan by the crew of the space shuttle Endeavour a
last-ditch plan that calls for space walks by three astronauts today. That many
astronauts venturing into space at one time would be a first.  A16

Indians thwarted a gaming raid by F.B.I. agents.A16
The Sierra Club Foundation faces an embarrassing legal dispute.  A16

Education Page   B7
Do women learn differently than men? Ursuline College thinks so.
California school "choice" proposal will provoke a ballot battle.
Campus Journal: Harvard Lampoon finds Dartmouth can't take a joke.

Metropolitan     Digest, B1

DISTRICTING APPOINTEE

A Federal court appointed a former Federal judge as a "special master" to draw
new Congressional district lines in New York State after the Legislature failed
to meet a court-ordered deadline to draw the lines itself.  A1

Business     Digest, D1

The Living Section  C1-10
A food marathon in Barcelona.  C1
A writer views the playground.  C1

Health Page   C12
Sorting out confusion about mammograms for women in their 40's.

Arts/Entertainment  C13-18
Art auctions at Christie's.  C13
New endowment chief vetoes two grants.  C13
Film: Tim Robbins at Cannes.  C13

Obituaries   D24

Sports   B8-13
Basketball: Bulls take 3-2 lead over Knicks.  B9

Editorials/Op-Ed  A24-25
Editorials A24
War Democrats, 1992 style.
Lean on Croatia, too.
Albany's hard choices.
Odor at Fulton Fish Market.

Letters A24
Anna Quindlen: The first stone.  A25
William Greider: Los Angeles do's and don'ts.  A25
Paul S. Grogan: Miami can teach L.A.  A25

LOAD-DATE: May 13, 1992

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo: In Washington, America's cities took center stage. (Paul
Hosefros/The New York Times) A1

TYPE: Summary

                   Copyright 1992 The New York Times Company


                              114 of 281 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 May 13, 1992, Wednesday, Late Edition - Final

Hong Kong Backs Expulsion of Boat People

BYLINE: By BARBARA BASLER,  Special to The New York Times

SECTION: Section A; Page 9; Column 1; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 397 words

DATELINE: HONG KONG, May 12


Britain and Hong Kong signed an agreement today with Vietnam that will allow the
British colony to resume the forced return of Vietnamese boat people who have
been living in detention camps.

The Hong Kong Government said the agreement meant that next month it could begin
the long process of emptying its camps, where more than 54,000 boat people are
housed.

While Vietnam had agreed in principle to the return of all boat people screened
out as nonrefugees last October, Hanoi actually accepted the forced return of
only two small, very specific groups of Vietnamese, totaling 123 people. They
were sent home on three separate flights, the last leaving three months ago.

Those two groups included "double-backers," who had volunteered to return home
and then came back to Hong Kong, and the handful of boat people who arrived
after the October agreement was signed.

Once those two groups were returned, Hanoi balked at opening its doors to the
thousands of boat people in detention camps here who have been found to be
economic migrants, not refugees fleeing persecution.

Vietnamese officials tried to negotiate more economic aid in exchange for
accepting large numbers of returnees. But Secretary for Security Alistair Asprey
said at a news conference today that the new agreement did not call for an
economic quid pro quo.

Aid Package Promised

He did say Hong Kong had promised to consider, at a later date, an aid package
to help Vietnam's returning boat people.

Vietnamese officials, faced with a crumbling economy, have grown increasingly
cooperative in their dealings with foreign countries as they seek economic aid
and court foreign investment.

Officials in Hong Kong pointed out that there were many trade agreements and aid
plans Hanoi would like to discuss with Hong Kong and with other European
countries, all of whom had made it clear they wanted the boat people problem
solved.

The forced returns are to be resumed next month, when 50 to 60 screened out boat
people are put on a chartered plane. The returnees will be taken from Nei Kwu
Chau, a small camp housing about 400 boat people, where virtually all inmates
have been screened out and denied refugee status.

Opposition to forced returns is strong in most of the camps here, and officials
ordered increased security today to head off any violence in response to the new
agreement.

LOAD-DATE: May 13, 1992

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1992 The New York Times Company


                              115 of 281 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 May 13, 1992, Wednesday, Late Edition - Final

COMPANY NEWS;
Puget Sound Power Promotes President to Chief Executive

SECTION: Section D; Page 5; Column 3; Financial Desk

LENGTH: 506 words


Richard R. Sonstelie takes the helm this week as chief executive of the
fast-growing Puget Sound Power and Light Company, which has entered the 1990's
on solid financial footing after some turbulent years of involvement in nuclear
plants.

He has been president and chief operating officer of the utility and will retain
the title of president. As chief executive he succeeds John W. Ellis, who
remains chairman. Mr. Ellis is also a principal partner in the Baseball Club of
Seattle, a group of investors, including executives from Nintendo of America
Inc., who are attempting to buy the Mariners team.

Puget Power, based in Bellevue, Wash., has been struggling for years to find
reliable sources of power for its customers, who now number 1.7 million. The
number is growing 3 percent a year, twice the national average for electric
utilities.

Nuclear Plants Abandoned

When Mr. Sonstelie, now 47 years old, joined the utility in 1974, regional
energy planners were warning that the Pacific Northwest faced power shortages.
As a result, the utility invested in five nuclear power plants. All were
eventually scrapped. But millions of dollars had gone into the plants, and
shareholder values were wrecked from the write-offs.

"Those were very combative times for us," Mr. Sonstelie said. "Our annual
meeting today was very peaceful. A dozen years ago, rate payer advocates would
buy one share just so they could come to annual meetings and confront us.

"But we've changed, too. We now try to get input from citizens before we make a
major decision, rather than announce what we intend to do and in return have
them fight us. This cooperation has helped us turn the corner on relationships
with customers. A decade ago there wasn't even a glimmer of this."

Today, the utility has recovered financially and reports nearly $1 billion in
revenue and $2 billion in assets. Shareholder equity rose 7 percent in 1991, and
per-share earnings by 2.3 percent.

Emphasis on Conservation

In the next decade, Mr. Sonstelie said, the company will rely on conservation,
and on small-scale hydroelectric units and other renewable energy resources. He
said it would also buy the output of plants built by independent power
producers.

He became interested in nuclear energy while at the United States Military
Academy because the Army was interested in building a nuclear power program.
After he graduated in 1966, the Army sent him to the Massachusetts Institute of
Technology, where he earned a master's degree in nuclear engineering. He then
went to Vietnam with the Army Corps of Engineers and he served as a combat
commander. He later received a master's degree from the Harvard Business School.

He began his civilian career in the early 1970's as a project manager at the Los
Alamos Scientific Laboratories in New Mexico. He joined Puget Power in 1974 as
an engineer and by 1980 headed engineering and operations. He was named
executive vice president in 1985, president in 1987 and chief operating officer
in 1991.

NAME: Richard R. Sonstelie

LOAD-DATE: May 13, 1992

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Biography

                   Copyright 1992 The New York Times Company


                              116 of 281 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 May 13, 1992, Wednesday, Late Edition - Final

Demanding Access in Desperate Ways;
Culture of Violence

SECTION: Section A; Page 24; Column 6; Editorial Desk

LENGTH: 151 words


To the Editor:

In "Life and Death" (column, April 23), Anthony Lewis has well said that
"executions worsen, not alleviate, our underlying problem: the culture of
violence in America."

That culture, I believe, runs very deep in our national psyche and comes far
more from the upper echelons of society than from the so-called criminal
element.

A leadership of arms peddlers who do not hesitate to bomb and kill babies in
Iraq, Panama or Vietnam is scarcely a wholesome example for our youth.

On April 4, 1967, Martin Luther King Jr. summarized our distorted priorities
very clearly:

"A nation that continues to spend more money on military defense than on
programs of social uplift is approaching spiritual death." Tragically, his
message seems to have fallen on deaf ears. Is it too late for new order of
nonviolence both at home and abroad?

JANICE DUREN
Newburgh, N.Y., April 27, 1992

LOAD-DATE: May 13, 1992

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Letter

                   Copyright 1992 The New York Times Company


                              117 of 281 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                  May 14, 1992, Thursday, Late Edition - Final

Communists in Laos Steer Economy By Capitalist Lights, Not the Red Star

BYLINE: By HENRY KAMM,  Special to The New York Times

SECTION: Section A; Page 6; Column 1; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 1323 words

DATELINE: VIENTIANE, Laos


"Socialism remains the goal," said the former official, one of the old guard of
Laotian Communism who began the struggle against France in the 1940's and
continued it from mountain caves in the north and during the heavy United States
bombardment until they took over this country in 1975.

"When will Laos be socialist?" he asked with a shrug. "It may take 20 years, 50
years, maybe 100. I don't know."

The former official, the companion at arms of President Kaysone Phomvihan,
insisted that his name not be used because the interview at his home had not
been officially arranged. Laos still strictly regulates the activities of the
rare visiting correspondent.

For the time being this small country, one of the world's least developed, has
done away with the outward trappings of Communism and opened its economy to
investment and trade by Laotians and foreigners. Last year it removed the word
"socialism" from its national motto and replaced it with "prosperity."

On the national emblem, the hammer and sickle was removed, then the five-pointed
Communist star; finally both were replaced by a revered Buddhist shrine.
"Showing the hammer and sickle today is illegal," says the Deputy Foreign
Minister, Soubanh Srithirath.

Economy Settles Down

The openness to new investment has helped reduce inflation from 76 percent in
1989 to 10 percent last year, to stabilize the currency, and to increase annual
growth in the gross national product to 4 percent last year despite a severe
drought and the total loss of assistance from the Soviet Union and its former
allies.

But Mr. Soubanh Srithirath, who is regarded as one of the most open-minded of
the younger leaders, still adamantly defends the maintenance of a one-party
state, as did the aged revolutionary and all officials questioned during a
10-day visit. All did so in almost identical phrases, indicating that
heavy-handed indoctrination continues, even of top officials.

Khamsay Souphanouvong, who is the Acting Minister of the Economy, Planning and
Finance, is a son of Prince Souphanouvong and a founder of the Communist Party.
He defended the ban on opposition parties.

"The people know the ability of our party to lead them," he said in an
interview. "They see who represents their interests. It is not we who impose
ourselves on the people. They impose leadership on us and want no other party."

The paradox of a country that has reverted to capitalism while maintaining a
rigorously Communist state was recently illustrated in a fashionable French
restaurant here.

Mr. Khamsay Souphanouvong's cousin, Prince Panya Souvanna Phouma, was eating
lunch with friends. The Prince, an international businessman and son of Souvanna
Phouma, the American-backed Prime Minister who led the struggle against the
Communists, was in town to look after his investment in tourism.

Little Tolerance for Pluralism

In contrast, three officials who late in 1990 advanced the idea of broadening
the nation's politics and who condemned the corruption that has been a product
of free enterprise, have been held without trial since. The three, who are being
detained in a remote and primitive mountain province, Houaphan, are the former
Deputy Minister of Science and Technology, Thongsouk Saisangkhi; the former
Deputy Agriculture Minister, Latsami Khamphoui, and Feng Sakchitthaphong, a
senior Justice Ministry official.

Western diplomats said aid-giving countries had regularly pressed the Government
on the detentions but had not made assistance conditional on the men's release.

Eight officials and military officers of the pre-1975 Government also remain in
exile, without their families, in Houaphan; they are the last of thousands who
were transported there for harsh "re-education" in 1975.

"Re-education was necessary for security and national defense," said the former
revolutionary leader, who met privately with a reporter. "But we did one thing
wrong -- we kept people there too long."

He contended that only Laotians who had fled the country were urging creation of
opposition parties and "so-called human rights."

"They do it to disturb our Government and our security," added the
ex-revolutionary, who still occupies an important public post.

The Constitution that Laos adopted last August, after 16 years without one,
enshrines the leading role of the Communist Party in Article 3, and in Article 5
places Parliament and "all organs of state" under the "principle of democratic
centralism." This is a Leninist doctrine that bans opposition to leadership
decisions. Both provisions remain targets of dissidents struggling against
Communist rule.

A Thousand Shops Bloom

However tight the political fetters, Laotians in Vientiane and the few other
major towns, all along the Mekong River, are living in an economic environment
that recalls the pre-Communist days. In the markets and along the main streets,
small shops of all kinds thrive. Soup and fruit vendors line streets. Consumer
electronics goods fill rows of shops in the Central Market in Vientiane, which
was built with American aid when the United States underwrote most of the
economy.

But most consumer goods, even food, are imported from Thailand. The road system
of Laos is so poor that Thai towns on the opposite bank of the Mekong supply
Laotian needs more efficiently than could cumbersome transport within this
country. A senior international economic official estimated the Thai share of
the consumer market at 80 to 90 percent. In addition to controlling most trade,
Thai investors are the most active in accepting the open invitation to foreign
capital.

The Deputy Minister of Foreign Economic Relations, Bountiem Phitsamay, said
investment committed so far amounted to more than $300 million in 180 authorized
projects, most backed by Thais. He and Mr. Khamsay Souphanouvong, at the
Economics Ministry, said there was no reason to worry that Thai influence might
become overbearing, and there is no ceiling on the share of total investment by
one country.

Such confidence is not shared by all Laotians, particularly because Thailand
holds the key to access to this landlocked country. Vietnam has not lived up to
hopes that its ports might reduce Laotian dependence on Thailand for transit.

But after years of fluctuating tension, Thai-Laotian relations have grown warm,
and Bangkok has pleased its smaller neighbor by reducing transit and customs
rates.

The bustling economic life of the towns tends to make many foreigners forget
that a large share of the population of perhaps four million still lives on a
subsistence economy and is barely included in a modern economic process.

A visit to remote Houaphan and Xiengkhouang provinces showed very few
manufactured or Thai goods in the local markets. The former revolutionary said
that those living largely from the products of their own toil make up about
two-thirds of the population.

Capitalism? 'No Comment'

He said that the transformation of a subsistence economy had proved impossible
under the all-out socialism, collectivization and state management of everything
that was introduced in 1975, and that the leadership had thus been forced to
return to earlier methods.

"Some people say Laos returned to capitalism," he said. "Is it true? I make no
comment."

Whatever the present system is called, international economic officials and
diplomats give the Government high marks for its realism in adopting
non-Communist economics. "In most of the world we need to cajole and threaten,"
an official of a lending organization told a diplomat. "Here they can't get
enough of our advice."

But despite the great economic freedom, when an adviser sent by the French
Treasury drafted a decree late in April stipulating the qualifications for
certain accounts, it was returned to her with a reminder that she had
"forgotten" to include Communist Party membership among the requirements.

LOAD-DATE: May 22, 1992

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Map of Laos.

                   Copyright 1992 The New York Times Company


                              118 of 281 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                  May 14, 1992, Thursday, Late Edition - Final

THE 1992 CAMPAIGN: Third-Party Candidate;
Perot Encounters Maze of Ballot Rules

BYLINE: By STEVEN A. HOLMES,  Special to The New York Times

SECTION: Section A; Page 18; Column 1; National Desk

LENGTH: 1439 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, May 13


It is easier, the Bible says, for a camel to go through the eye of a needle than
for a rich man to go to heaven. For Ross Perot, a very rich man who is thinking
about running for President, getting on the ballot in all 50 states is only
slightly less tricky.

The Dallas billionaire moved closer to accomplishing that feat today when
election officials in Maine certified that his volunteers had collected enough
names to place Mr. Perot's name on the ballot in that state. State officials
validated the signatures of 5,906 registered voters on petitions, comfortably
more than the minimum of 4,000 names needed.

In addition to Maine, Mr. Perot is now officially on the ballot in Delaware,
Tennessee and Utah. Petitions that Perot backers say contain the required number
of signatures have also been submitted in New Hampshire and New Jersey, and
officials with Mr. Perot's nascent campaign say they can now meet the petition
requirements in 20 other states.

In Texas, thousands of Perot supporters marched to the state Capitol in Austin
on Monday to deliver 90 cartons of petitions to put his name on the ballot.
Organizers said they had more than 225,000 signatures, more than four times the
54,275 needed to get Mr. Perot's name on his home state's ballot.

When Mr. Perot began his foray into Presidential politics in February by
declaring on a television talk show that if "the people" placed his name on the
ballot in every state he would become a candidate, he in effect beckoned his
supporters into a labyrinth of rules, regulations and procedures. They are
mind-numbing in their complexity, vary widely from state to state and, according
to some scholars and Perot aides, are designed by Republicans and Democrats to
thwart third-party candidacies like his.

Not only are the required numbers of signatures on petitions different in every
state, but there are different rules regarding who can sign them, who can
circulate the petitions and when and where the names can be collected.

"The point is you have to go and look carefully at every damn state," said
Thomas D. Barr, the New York lawyer who is advising Mr. Perot on ballot-access
questions. "There are all kinds of rules, even in some cases on what kind of
paper you use and how they are stapled together."

Perhaps because of the complexities involved, Mr. Perot has modified his
original pledge to run only if his name is placed on every state's ballot. He
now says he still may declare his candidacy even if he is not on every ballot.

As complex as the process of getting on every ballot is, it is not impossible.
Lenora B. Fulani, a candidate with little money, accomplished that feat in 1988.
John B. Anderson, a former Republican Congressman from Illinois who ran as an
independent in 1980, also made the ballot in every state, though he had to file
seven legal challenges to make his task easier.

Political analysts expect Mr. Perot, with his money and resources, to achieve
his goal. In two states where he is already on the ballot, Tennessee and Utah,
the qualifying requirements are relatively simple. In Tennessee a candidate
needs only 275 signatures on a petition. Utah asks for 300, although backers
there collected more than 8,100 signatures, according to Merit Craine, the
co-ordinator for the state.

Risk of Invalidation

Most states require that signers be registered voters. Some, like New York and
Texas, forbid people who have voted in a state's primary from signing a
petition. Several states, including Connecticut and Missouri, say a person who
signs a ballot petition must live in the same county or town in which he signs
the petition. In some cases a person who signs in another town risks
invalidating his name, and in other cases invalidating the whole petition.

A few states have no written rules at all, a situation that worries some Perot
aides who fear that the Democcrats or Republicans will invent some just to
frustrate them.

There are several states where access to the ballot is rather easy. New Jersey,
for example, requires only that 800 registered voters sign a petition, though it
does demand that electors who would cast votes for an independent or third-party
candidate in the Electoral College sign an "oath of allegiance" to the the
United States and New Jersey constitutions.

Other states are more demanding. North Carolina's rules say 2 percent of the
state's current number of registered voters, or 70,543, must be filed by June
12, one of the earliest filing deadlines of any state. There also is a filing
fee of five cents for each signature. The petitions must be filed in the
counties in which they are signed. After they are checked by county officials,
the campaign must submit them to the state with the names in alphabetical order.


High Signature Requirement



"It is among the most difficult states, if not the most difficult," Clay
Mulford, a Dallas lawyer who is general counsel to the Perot Petition Committee,
said of North Carolina. "It is the state most frequently missed by third-party
candidates because it is has a high signature requirement and has a relatively
early filing deadline."

In New York, Mr. Perot's task has become somewhat easier. Last Friday, Gov.
Mario M. Cuomo signed legislation that lowers the number of signatures required
to 15,000 from 20,000. But the State Legislature has kept a requirement that
independent candidates get at least 100 signatures from at least half the
state's Congressional districts to be placed on the ballot.

Mr. Mulford has been studying past attempts by independent candidates to get on
the ballot. He said Mr. Perot's committee has been getting advice from former
aides to Mr. Anderson.

As difficult it is for an independent Presidential candidate, some experts say
it is virtually impossible for new parties running a full slate of candidates to
get on the ballot in all 50 states. Some state's roadblocks are particularly
difficult. Florida, for example, requires a third party to submit a petition
signed by 3 percent of the state's registered voters for each candidate for
office; a separate one for governor, for United States senator and
representative and for state senators and representatives.

"That's up to 180,000 signatures on each petition," said Richard Winger, editor
of Ballot Access News, a San Francisco-based newsletter published every four
weeks. "Then they make you pay 10 cents a name to have the signatures checked."

Some of today's rules for independent Presidential candidates seem truly
bizarre. Maine requires only 4,000 signatures, but a candidate cannot submit
more than 6,000 names. In Oregon, a candidate can get on the ballot with 36,000
signatures -- or with 1,000 signatures if they are obtained at a "single
assembly."

4,200 Names -- in Black Ink

"You gather everyone together in a single room," Mr. Mulford said. "They all
have to sign while everyone is in the room. No one can leave."

In Hawaii, the requirement is for 4,200 names, but they must be written in black
ink. In Louisiana, an independent candidate's backers have to gather 5,000
signatures -- or pay a $500 fee.

And there are some states where the requirements are simply confusing. In Idaho,
for example, when voters sign a petition they must also certify they will
"support" the candidate. Perot aides say they are not sure what that means, and
an official at the Idaho Secretary of State's office says the state's election
laws do not define the term.

Mr. Mulford said one of the biggest headaches in the process involves the name
of the Vice-Presidential candidate. Some states require that the name of a
running mate be listed on the petition. To satisfy this requirement Mr. Perot
has selected a stand-in -- James Stockdale, a retired Navy vice admiral who was
a prisoner of war in Vietnam. This indicates that Mr. Perot reserves the right
to select another running mate once he announces his candidacy. But some states
take the position that once a petition is filed with a Vice-Presidential
candidate listed, the third-party Presidential candidate cannot change his mind.

Mr. Winger of Ballot Access News said Mr. Anderson also ran into the same
difficulty in 1980, but was able to overturn the rules through legal action.

Mr. Winger said he fully supports Mr. Perot's effort to get on the ballot and
would probably circulate a petition for him. But he will not vote for him.

"I'm always pleased when somebody with a lot of support runs outside the major
parties," he said. "Every time someone does that it makes it easier for someone
to follow. As for myself, I'll probably vote Libertarian."

LOAD-DATE: May 22, 1992

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo: The labyrinth of rules, regulations and procedures to get onto
the Presidential ballot in all 50 states are mind-numbing in their complexity.
Although the process began only a few months ago for Ross Perot, he has already
scored some early successes. In Austin on Monday, he addressed his supporters
after more than 225,000 signatures were presented to put his name on the ballot
in his home state. (Associated Press)

Table: "Earning a Spot on the Ballot"

Requirements in each state.

State                                Signatures            Deadline

Ala.                                      5,000             Aug. 31
Alaska                                    2,002              Aug. 4
Ariz.                                    10,555            Sept. 18
Ark.                           No written rules
Calif.                                  134,781              Aug. 7
Colo.                                     5,000              Aug. 4
Conn.                                    14,620             Aug. 12
Del.*                                     2,870             Sept. 1
D.C.                                      3,000             Aug. 18
Fla.                                     60,315             July 15
Ga.                                      29,500             July 14
Hawaii                                    4,200             Sept. 4
Idaho                                     4,090             Aug. 24
Ill.                                     25,000              Aug. 3
Ind.                                     29,909             July 15
Iowa                                      1,000             Aug. 14
Ky.                                       5,000              Aug. 4
La.                                       5,000             Sept. 1
Me.*                                      4,000              June 2
Md.                                      63,186              Aug. 3
Mass.                                    10,000             July 28
Mich.                                    26,000              May 12
Minn.                                     2,000            Sept. 15
Miss.                                     1,000             Sept. 4
Mo.                                      20,863              Aug. 3
Mont.                                     9,500             July 29
Neb.                                      2,500              Aug. 2
Nev.                                      9,392             June 10
N.H.+                                     3,000              Aug. 5
N.J.+                                       800             July 27
N.M.                                     12,334             Sept. 8
N.Y.                                     15,000             Aug. 18
N.C.                                     70,543             June 12
N.D.                                      4,000             Sept. 4
Ohio                                      5,000             Aug. 20
Okla.                                    35,132             July 15
Ore.                                     36,000             Aug. 25
(or 1,000 at one assembly)
Pa.                                      37,216              Aug. 3
R.I.                                      1,000             Sept. 4
S.C.                                     10,000              July 3
S.D.                                      2,567              Aug. 4
Tenn.*                                      275             Aug. 20
Tex.+                                    54,275              May 11
Utah*                                       300             Sept. 1
Vt.                                       1,000            Sept. 17
Va.                                      13,920             Aug. 21
Wash.                                       200    June 27 - July 4
(compiled at meetings of
at least 25 people)
W. Va.                                    6,533              Aug. 3
Wis.                                      2,000             Sept. 1
Wyo.                                      7,902             Aug. 24

*Ross Perot has qualified for a spot on the ballot in these states.

+He has submitted petitions in these states.

                   Copyright 1992 The New York Times Company


                              119 of 281 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                  May 16, 1992, Saturday, Late Edition - Final

WORKING NIGHTS: A Special Report;
Lives Upside Down to Help a World Go Round

BYLINE: By PETER T. KILBORN,  Special to The New York Times

SECTION: Section 1; Page 1; Column 2; National Desk

LENGTH: 2416 words

DATELINE: DULUTH, Ga.


At 11 P.M., or 1 A.M. on the many nights she must work overtime, Allison McClure
stops at her mother's house to retrieve her 3-year-old daughter, Mia, take her
home and put her back to bed. Then she packs Mia's bag for nursery school, does
the ironing, cleans house and takes a shower. "I'm in bed by 3 or 4," she said
during her 9-to-9:30 P.M. "lunch" break at a mail processing center.

Then she gets up at 6:45 A.M. "I get her up. I fix her breakfast, I feed her and
I take her to school. I'll lie down for about an hour and a half, and then I'm
up. Any business I have to do, I try to fit in between then and the time I have
to be at work at 3."

Ms. McClure is a shift worker. Thirty years old, paid around $30,000 a year, she
is hard at work for the United States Postal Service when most people take it
easy or sleep. Because of her personal obligations, she said: "I never sleep
eight hours. Sometimes you get tired, so you have to push yourself."

She has jet lag without the jet, and she has it all the time.

Ms. McClure and millions of others who work unconventional hours have become
objects of concern to psychologists and occupational-health specialists. While
some people, like police officers, nurses and factory workers, have always
worked unconventional hours, more and more do now. And among them new strains
have developed as two-earner families and single working mothers have displaced
one-earner, married-couple families.

Typically, statisticians define shift workers as people who spend less than half
of the daylight hours on the job or who work some hours in the morning and some
at night. Others put in long, dawn-to-dawn shifts or rotating schedules -- days
one week, nights the next. Growth in shift work, like the growth in part-time
and temporary jobs, is a part of a sea change in the labor force that has to
accommodate a global economy that runs around the clock.

Shift work accounts for a quarter to nearly half the jobs in the fastest-growing
occupations. It is built into 8 of the 10 occupations that the Bureau of Labor
Statistics predicts will add the most workers in the next decade: sales clerk
and cashier in stores, nurse, nursing aide, truck driver, janitor, waiter and
fast-food worker. Shift work, of course, also breeds shift workers. They work in
convenience stores, supermarkets and gas stations that stay open long after dark
to serve other people who work long after dark.

No one knows just how many shift workers there are. The last time it looked, in
1985, the Census Bureau found 20 million, or a fifth of the work force. It
counted them again last year, but the results will not be reported until later
this year.

Donald I. Tepas, an industrial psychologist at the University of Connecticut,
said, "Our society is demanding more and more round-the-clock operation at all
levels, from the working-class blue-collar guy to doctors in hospitals and
financiers."

The Burdens
Too Little Sleep, Too Many Cares

Occupational-health experts find that shift work exacts a toll beyond just
losing sleep. Years of research, assembled in a recent study of shift work and
health by the Congressional Office of Technology Assessment, show that shift
workers typically suffer from insomnia and chronic fatigue. They have more
trouble with their health and dispositions than other workers, more marital
problems, more strains rearing children.

Night workers, the study says, complain inordinately of gastrointestinal
disorders, including peptic ulcers. It says that pregnant shift workers,
according to some limited research, suffer more miscarriages, premature births
and lower birth weights than women who work regular hours.

The Congressional study says the health effects of shift work become more acute
with age, raising concern about the baby-boom generation, which is now the
largest part of the work force and whose oldest members are approaching 50.
Timothy H. Monk, director of a University of Pittsburgh program that studies
workers' hours, said he wondered how employers will manage with older, less
malleable workers, "when they don't have enough young people to shuffle."

Many foreign governments regulate shift work, but in the United States, neither
the Government nor the institutions that support workplace regulation, like
labor unions and advocacy groups, have fully addressed the issue.

Grogginess Can Be Deadly

In the interest of public safety, Federal agencies regulate shift work in public
transportation and in a few other areas, like operating nuclear power plants,
where a groggy employee can endanger a community. But no one protects the
community when a groggy employee hits the road for home.

For many people, shift work is all they can find. But for others, it holds some
advantages. It permits couples with young children, for example, to hold two
jobs, with one working while the other is home.

Night work also often pays more than day work in the same job. In addition to
base pay of about $10 to $16 an hour, postal workers get a 10 percent bonus for
hours they work between 6 P.M. and 6 A.M.

The Workplace
Dazzling Light In Sea of Dark

Ms. McClure's mail-processing center, 33 miles north of Atlanta, provides a
window on one of the nation's larger concentrations of shift workers. It is a
643,000-square-foot, single-story building surrounded by fields and trees at the
end of a rolling suburban road. At night it looks eerily alive, with its
truck-loading bays, largely windowless walls and parking lots basking in white
artificial light. It is a glistening, modern factory in all respects except that
it doesn't make anything.

About 1,700 people work there, and 1,400 of them are shift workers, starting
their jobs sometime between 2 P.M. and 1 A.M. Thanks to their toil, many letters
mailed in Atlanta one day can be picked up, processed, loaded in trucks and
delivered the next day.

Of nearly 200,000 postal employees assigned to mail-processing work nationwide,
Phillip Tabbita, an official of the American Postal Workers Union in Washington,
estimated that 75 percent work afternoons and nights, up from about half in the
1960's.

David C. Lamb, the head of human resources, procurement and finance at the
processing center, said the work "is all predicated on service standards."

"Our last collections are between 4 and 6," he said, "which means we really
can't start until after that time."

Second by Second

Inside the building, the people like Ms. McClure, Kathy Sanders and Kenneth
Beasley sit at sorting machines that shoot letters past their brows at a
mesmerizing rate of one per second.

In that second, the workers must read the letter's ZIP code and tap the last
three digits on their keyboards, dispatching the letter to the appropriate
delivery bin. Some workers say they periodically nod off or lose their rhythm
and start making errors.

For workers here, the greatest stress occurs in trying to meet the daytime
demands of their families -- caring for children or preparing meals that they
often cannot be home to eat. Ms. Sanders, 32, usually works from 5 P.M. to 1:30
A.M. During her 9-to-9:30 break she was having lunch -- popcorn. She has two
boys, 4 and 1. Her husband is a road manager for entertainment groups, so he is
away a lot.

"I have kind of dozed off at the wheel going home, but only when I have to work
until 3:30," she said. "I like the hours because they're convenient for getting
my kid to school and picking him up. But I don't get to spend any time with him
other than on the weekend."

The Workers
Relationships Are Worn Down

Donna Jones, the divorced mother of a daughter, 3, and a son 16, seems a happy,
spirited woman, darting about the lunch room. But she feels the pressure. "My
little girl has hair to here," she said, touching her hip. "I try to keep it
braided. My son, it was bad for him. He used to beg me every day, 'Momma, quit
the job. You don't have to have a job.' I told him, 'This job is keeping you in
the jeans you're wearing.' "

Ms. Jones said her marriage was solid until she started working nights. Her
husband worked for the Postal Service, too, from 4:30 A.M. to noon. She was
getting home then about 7 A.M. He would want to talk as soon as he got home, she
said, and she would want to sleep. "He still wanted me to be like I was before,
making meals, taking the kids to school. It was hard."

No one monitors changes in family relationships here, but clearly the work is
murder on marriages. "When young women come here to work," said Mr. Beasley, a
steward for the postal workers' union, "you know what the older women say? They
say, 'Honey, if you've got a man, you're not going to have him long.' "

Mr. Tepas, at the University of Connecticut, said that among the groups he has
studied the percentages of night-shift workers who are divorced, separated or
single are higher than for other workers.

Life as a 'Zombie'

Catherine Skolte, 24, got divorced last October. Before, she would get home at 9
A.M. She said that if she was beginning her two days off then, her husband, who
worked regular hours, wouldn't let her sleep. "I'd get stuck staying up 24 to 36
hours," she said. "I would be a zombie. When I would decide to get a rest, he'd
get mad."

The workers' health problems are insidious. Alana Farino, who works from 10 P.M.
to 6:30 A.M. on the letter-sorting machine, said her eyesight is beginning to
fail. Deborah Peterson, who works with her, said she is getting asthma, perhaps
from paper dust. Michele Barr, a 25-year-old sorting clerk and an asthmatic
before she started working here, said her asthma attacks are more frequent now.

Some people drive themselves to exhaustion. Tom Ditzenberger, 45, works from 3
to 11:30 P.M., driving an electric cart here, and, like some other workers, he
has another job. He delivers The Atlanta Constitution to about 250 homes.

"It takes me an hour to get home," Mr. Ditzenberger said. "Normally I get a cup
of coffee, sit down, watch the news, set my alarm, lie down on the couch, snooze
if I can and get up at 2.

"I leave at 2:30, go to the warehouse, put the papers in plastic bags and I'm on
the road by 4. I'm done by 5:30, and by then I'm really out of it. I turn the
phones off, close the curtains and go to sleep. I'm up by 11:30." He said he
took the second job so he could pay for his truck.

Linda Brown, the nurse at the center from 2 P.M. to 10:30 P.M, said: "They're
throwing their bodies completely out of kilter. I see a lot of people walking
around in a fog."

Lancy Rocker, the nurse who follows Ms. Brown on what the workers call the
"zombie shift," said she sees a lot of workers with stomach problems. "They have
real short patience," she said.

The Inner Clock
Trying to Fight Ancient Rhythms

Research supports much of what the nurses and the workers say. Mr. Tepas cited
two studies he had done, one of 1,400 Midwestern urban employees of a variety of
industries and one of 2,000 employees of factories in small Midwestern towns.

"People who work at night sleep less than anybody else," he said. "On their days
off, they cannot make up the loss. We call it chronic sleep deprivation, or
sleep debt."

David R. Liskowski, who directed the Office of Technology Assessment project,
says shift workers are sabotaging powerful biological processes that are
controlled in part by the rotation of the earth. The brain, in response to
changing amounts of light and dark, instructs the body to start cooling off at
night and warming up at dawn. It commands changes in digestion, breathing, the
heartbeat, sleeping, waking and the secretion of hormones.

The cycles of day-to-day changes are known as circadian rhythms. And shift work,
like flights across time zones, can upset the rhythms, sending conflicting
messages about when to sleep and when to stay alert.

Vital to the Economy

The Congressional study said shift work in the United States is almost entirely
undocumented, as well as unregulated. But because shift work is vital to the
economy, Mr. Tepas said, "The issue is not whether it should be done but how to
do it right."

Some countries restrict the hours people can work at a stretch at night. They
mandate extra hours of rest after a long stretch of night work or allow breaks
for a nap during a shift. In France, the Government pays 50 percent of a night
worker's cost of equipping a home to block out daytime intrusions. Australia
requires an extra week of vacation for night workers.

The Adjustments
Making the Best Of Odd Hours

Many postal workers here say what troubles them most is drowsiness driving home.
Kathy Wasson, 41, said she is content and healthy now working 3:30 to midnight.
Once, on a shift starting at midnight, she fell asleep driving to work.

She slammed into the back of a pickup truck, wrecking her car. She suffered only
bruises.

It is close to impossible to find anyone who truly likes the latest shifts,
those beginning after 11 P.M., but some say they thrive starting work in the
afternoon. They tend to be single or married to people who keep similar hours.
They like beating the crowds and shopping when most people are asleep or at
work.

A few workers on even the latest shifts say they have found ways to keep
families intact and bodies sound. They say they do it by paying heed to their
circadian rythms. Biologists say the rhythms can be adjusted to make night
people of day people, particularly when they sleep in dark rooms in the day and
work in bright light at night.

Fooling One's Body

Rick Harris, a 45-year-old supervisor of the letter-sorting teams, said 20 years
in the Air Force taught him that self-control is needed.  "I learned in Vietnam
that you can fool our body clock for maybe 24 hours," he said. "But you have to
discipline yourself."

On weekends, Mr. Harris said, he stays up most of Saturday, when he arrives home
around 7 A.M., to be with his wife, who works days during the week, and their
children, who are 7 and 12. He goes to bed at 8 P.M. and sleeps 12 hours. Then
on Sunday, before his biological clock can put him on a daytime cycle, he starts
working back into his weekly routine.

"I go to bed at 5 P.M., take a nap and get up at 10," he said. "I get on my
computer until 2 or 3, and then I go back to bed." He sleeps another 12 hours
and is then ready for dinner with the family and the start of his shift at 10
P.M. "You have to put your priorities right," he said.

LOAD-DATE: May 16, 1992

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photos: Allison McClure, who works a shift of unconventional hours at
the United States Postal Service, picking up her 3-year-old daughter, Mia, from
her mother's house after work to take her home and put her back to bed. (Alan S.
Weiner for The New York Times)(pg. 1); Donna Jones, a night-shift worker for the
United States Postal Service, feeding breakfast to her daughter, Leah Respres,
3, at 1:15 in the afternoon. Occupational-health experts find shift workers are
more prone to suffer from medical and stress-related problems. (Alan S. Weiner
for The New York Times)(pg. 8)

TYPE: Special Report

                   Copyright 1992 The New York Times Company


                              120 of 281 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                  May 16, 1992, Saturday, Late Edition - Final

THE 1992 CAMPAIGN: Candidate's Record;
CLINTON IS QUERIED ON DRAFT NOTICE

BYLINE: By GWEN IFILL,  Special to The New York Times

SECTION: Section 1; Page 7; Column 6; National Desk

LENGTH: 460 words

DATELINE: LITTLE ROCK, Ark., May 15


Gov. Bill Clinton of Arkansas was forced again today to deal with unresolved
questions about his draft status during the Vietnam War, but this time the
criticisms came from veterans in his home state.

In response to questions raised at a meeting of the Arkansas Veterans'
Coalition, Mr. Clinton said he was still searching for records that would
document how he received a draft induction notice before enrolling in the
Reserve Officers Training Corps in 1969, a decision he described today as "the
honorable way not to be drafted at the time."

Mr. Clinton, who has faced exhaustive inquiry into his military record, said the
gist of his explanation of how he avoided the draft has not changed, but that he
would not clarify the sequence of events that led to his receiving the induction
notice until "We finally get notification from everybody that I've gotten every
record that anybody in the world has" on the subject.

Mr. Clinton has repeatedly tripped over his own explanations of the manner in
which he avoided the draft. The existence of the induction notice became an
issue during the New York primary campaign because he had not previously
disclosed it.

He said then that he recalled receiving the notice, which he said was voided
because it arrived after the scheduled induction date, but draft officials say
they do not know if such a letter was ever sent.

Mr. Clinton has said he sought to join the R.O.T.C. to avoid being drafted, but
later had second thoughts and asked to be placed back into the induction pool.
When the draft lottery was held that fall, he got a high number and he was not
called for service.

Expending 'Enormous Effort'

"I have gone back and I have written to everyone trying to find all the records
I could get," Mr. Clinton told the veterans' group today. "And I have expended
enormous effort. I don't know yet whether my staff has been notified from every
place we've sought records whether they do or don't have records. When we get
final notification from everybody we've asked for records from, I will then try
to determine whether everything I have said is entirely accurate."

The veterans who attended the meeting at a downtown hotel offered mixed
reactions to Mr. Clinton's statements.

"I'm still embarrassed to go back to the membership of my organization and say
he's still looking into it," said Paul Howell, the president of the Arkansas
State Council of Vietnam Veterans. "I'm getting heat from both ends. I'm asking
the questions and still not getting an answer."

But Paul Egan, the executive director of the Vietnam Veterans of America, from
Washington, said it was a "cheap shot" to hold Mr. Clinton responsible for a
decision that was difficult for many of those in his generation.

LOAD-DATE: May 16, 1992

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1992 The New York Times Company


                              121 of 281 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                   May 17, 1992, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

Which Way Out?;
The Civil Rights Battle Was Easy Next to the Problems of the Ghetto

BYLINE: By JASON DEPARLE

SECTION: Section 4; Page 1; Column 2; Week in Review Desk

LENGTH: 1467 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON


IN the aftermath of the Los Angeles riots, many Americans feel some shame about
the inner cities and most have at least some desire to see them improve.

But the country has watched passively for more than a generation as its urban
cores have devoured the people who live there. And Washington politics last week
offered little reason to think that things are about to change.

Jack F. Kemp, the Secretary of Housing and Urban Development, was racing about
with plans for what he calls a conservative War on Poverty and a second civil
rights revolution.

"This is my way of redeeming my existence on this earth," Mr. Kemp told a group
of reporters at breakfast on Friday. "I wasn't there with Rosa Parks or Dr. King
or John Lewis, but I am here now and I am going to yell from the rooftops about
what we need to do."

But until recent days, Mr. Kemp's enthusiasms made him an outcast in his own
Government. And for more than a decade, the more persuasive politicians have
been telling themselves and the voters that the slums simply cannot be fixed. In
Ronald Reagan's famous phrase: We fought a war on poverty "and poverty won."

Stasis, of course, is the norm in American social policy, and innovations -- a
New Deal or a Great Society -- are the exceptions. The first was forced by
catastrophe. The second was born during unparalleled prosperity. Neither fortune
nor misfortune so abounds today.

Some Americans dream of seeing another Martin Luther King, Jr., step forward and
offer deliverance. And yet the problem of ghetto poverty is, in some ways at
least, a harder one to fix: the more Dr. King himself ventured into the slums,
the more his movement faltered. Civil rights could be conferred by an act of
Congress. What stroke of Presidential pen could abolish teenage pregnancy, patch
the family, chase out drugs, or bring back good jobs?

Budgets are busted, movements are missing, and all the solutions seem open to
question. If black leadership has fractured, so has white leadership. And
reformers get little encouragement from the White House. President Bush speaks
resoundingly about what is or is not a racial quota, but he has had little to
say about the sorrows of the inner city. Hanging over the broken political
edifice is a thick cloud of doubt about Government itself. It cannot even insure
banks without losing hundreds of billions of dollars; how can it conquer
poverty?

But to some it seems an odd moment for America to feel impotent. Communism
falls. Apartheid follows. Why should the comparatively small problems of the
American cities seem beyond solution? "If democracy can work in Eastern Europe,"
Mr. Kemp was insisting last week, "it can work in east L.A."

The riots were barely quelled when political gridlock seemed assured. Marlin
Fitzwater, the President's press secretary, set off a Washington titter when he
blamed the Great Society for the flames.

On Slippery Common Ground

Fearful of adding to the public disgust with politicians, both parties gathered
at an unusual White House meeting last week and pledged to work together. But it
quickly became clear just how tenuous was the show of unity.

Even with White House backing, the emergency aid bill only squeaked through the
House. Republicans opposed it by more than 2 to 1, attacking it as a reward to
rioters; some Democrats denounced it as too mild a palliative. The more telling
activity may have been in the nation's gun shops , where record numbers of
people waited to arm themselves.

America has always stood out among industrial democracies for its aversion to
social policy: Germany enacted widows' pensions and other forms of social
insurance 50 years before America followed with the New Deal.

James Patterson, a historian of social policy at Brown University, cites several
reasons. In part, he argues, it stems from the country's success ethic, the
undergirding assumption that anyone can make it. In part it comes from long
traditions of localism, which hold that the poor are their neighbors' problem.

Perhaps most of all, the aversion to Federal activity grows from the country's
unique diversity -- racial, ethnic and regional. People support programs when
they imagine the beneficiaries look a lot like themselves.

"To put it bluntly," Mr. Patterson said, "an awful lot of people oppose programs
for the poor, in the past and now, because they think they benefit undeserving
black people."

Representative John Lewis, the Georgia Democrat among Mr. Kemp's heroes, was
arrested 40 times in the 1960's and beaten without mercy. So it meant something
last week when he said that desegregating the South was a modest goal compared
to saving the underclass.

"It was easier to go and sit in at a lunch counter all day and let a lighted
cigarette get put out in your hair," he said. "It was easier to march across the
bridge in Selma and get tear-gassed."

The civil rights crusaders did in some ways face an environment more conducive
to change. They had an expanding economy whirring beneath them, giving the whole
society a confidence about the future it lacks today. They could coax support
from Federal officials who were open to change. And since segregation affected
all blacks, the movement could more easily harness the passion and talent of the
middle class.

Segregation could be framed in pictures of school girls and police dogs; the
images of today's underclass tilt toward gold chains and guns.

The awful 81-second bludgeoning of Rodney King seemed to have that old power of
firehoses in Birmingham. Yet its moral force somehow blurred: he was a criminal
suspect with a record, not a preacher. While it riveted the country, it failed
to move a jury.

A Dream of a New Dr. King

The last years of Dr. King's life were spent wrestling with these same
questions: how to devise a solution to ghetto poverty and harness the political
will to do so?

"He was baffled," said Senator Harris Wofford, then a King adviser and now a
Pennsylvania Democrat. Senator Wofford said that during their last conversation,
Dr. King even speculated about torching the worst slum in America, as a way of
dramatizing its cruelty. "In the end, I don't think he would have done it,"
Senator Wofford said.

Those who dream of a new Dr. King often forget how reviled the old one was. And
the lack of mythic successors is, at one level, a measure of his success. It is
jail cells that produce Kings and Havels and Mandelas; enfranchisement produces
congressmen and mayors, ordinary actors in the banal processes of politics. It
is not just leadership that is lacking, but also and perhaps more importantly,
the country's faith in Government itself. This has been eroded by its own
failures in Vietnam and Watergate, by its mixed record in social policy, and by
two decades of concerted efforts by conservatives to discredit it.

"To go from the Johnson landslide to the Reagan landslide in 16 years is a
pretty fundamental shift in attitude about the role of Government," said
Clayborne Carson, a historian at Stanford University.

The complaint that "there are no ideas," is deeply believed. But it is only
partly true. Many social service models do seem tired. No one can claim to have
the solution to teenage pregnancy and drug abuse. But the country basically
knows how to shelter and provide health care to its citizens. Money is the
stopper here.

Employment and welfare policies fall in between: no strategy promises to end
dependency, but many have a chance at reducing it. Job-training efforts have
broad support. So do calls for tax credits for the working poor and better
child-support collection.

In Mr. Kemp's case, skepticism about Government bureaucracies and confidence
about solutions both abound: In his plans for tenant management and ownership of
public housing; for vouchers that let parents send their children to the public
or private school of their choice; for tax breaks to lure businesses toward the
slums.

Every idea has its weaknesses and enemies, but innovations always do. The New
Deal and the civil rights movement -- each in its day was called the work of
subversives. "What's missing is the coalition to put the ideas together," said
Theda Skocpol, a Harvard sociologist.

If the history of American social policy offers any lessons, it is that
breakthroughs will not come without strong Presidential effort.Here, argues
Roger Wilkins, a historian at George Mason University, the charge that President
Bush has neglected the poor gives him a unique opportunity.

Just as Richard Nixon had the anti-Communist credentials to go to China, he
says, it is Mr. Bush who could lead the nation back to finish the work within
its ghettos.

"There's one man in America who could make it happen," Mr. Wilkins said, "and
his name is George Bush."

LOAD-DATE: May 17, 1992

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo: At a housing project in Red Hook, Brooklyn. (Eugene
Richards/Magnum)

Graph: "What Is Needed?" shows poll results to questions about money spent to
assist the poor and to help solve problems in the cities

                   Copyright 1992 The New York Times Company


                              122 of 281 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                   May 17, 1992, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

Russians Not What They Used to Be in Laos, Too

BYLINE: By HENRY KAMM

SECTION: Section 1; Page 15; Column 1; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 560 words

DATELINE: VIENTIANE, Laos


A senior Russian diplomat received a visitor at his modest embassy with a rueful
smile. "You are probably the last to visit us here," he said. "We are moving to
our big new embassy today."

The new chancellery was designed for a relationship that no longer exists. While
there was a Soviet Union, it was this impoverished country's main source of
economic, technical and military sustenance. "Now our relations are at bottom,"
the diplomat said.

When the new embassy was designed, Soviet diplomats, military advisers and
technical specialists here, together with their families, numbered 5,000. Today,
the diplomat said, 400 remain, and most will leave when work on the new building
is completed.

Military and civilian aid has been canceled. Since Communist Laos came into
being in 1975, Moscow provided Laos with hundreds of millions of rubles in
grants and loans that it did not expect to be repaid. "Now we are looking for
aid ourselves," said the diplomat, who insisted on anonymity.

In addition to providing development assistance, three hospitals, several
schools and technical installations, the Soviet Union trained 7,000 young
Laotians in its schools and technical institutes. Other Eastern European
countries trained thousands more.

"We prepared a mass of specialists, but gave no thought to where they would
work," the Russian said. "We trained railroad engineers for a country that has
no railroads."

Products of Soviet or East German education can be found in many places in this
somnolent capital, few practicing the art or science they studied. The waiter
spent six years learning printing technology in Leipzig; an English-language
interpreter at the Foreign Ministry studied East German law for six years; an
automotive technician trained in Rostov-on-Don drives a taxi.

"Some of our aid was useless," the Russian said. The Soviet Union built a
truck-rebuilding and repair garage at Savannakhet in the southern panhandle. It
was capable of rebuilding 1,200 trucks a year, when there were fewer than 1,000
in the entire country.

The diplomat found the highest paradox in the Higher Party School, an
institution of all Soviet-oriented countries, where party functionaries of
leadership potential received their ideological backbone. "We gave them their
party school last November, when it was finished, and we ourselves no longer
even had a party," he said.

The Russian found some consolation in the fact that his American colleagues are
also rattling about in an embassy that is far too big for present needs. It
dates from the period when the United States was to Laos what the Soviet Union
became in its succession -- the power behind the throne.

Today, the three countries that once formed French Indochina are for the first
time since the last century free of the domination of countries far to the West.
Laos, Vietnam and Cambodia are free from the decisive role that France, then the
United States and finally the Soviet Union played in their destinies.

Laotian officials are still waiting for the United States to follow through on
President Bush's announcement last November that he would raise relations to
full ambassadorial status with the only Indochinese country that did not break
with its former enemy. For now, Charles B. Salmon Jr., is heading the United
States Embassy without the rank of ambassador.

LOAD-DATE: May 17, 1992

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Map of Laos, indicating Vietiane

                   Copyright 1992 The New York Times Company


                              123 of 281 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                   May 17, 1992, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

Washington Marchers Demand Attention to the Cities

BYLINE: By CLIFFORD KRAUSS,  Special to The New York Times

SECTION: Section 1; Page 22; Column 1; National Desk

LENGTH: 1147 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, May 16


Warning that the riots in Los Angeles were a symptom of widespread anger, tens
of thousands of city dwellers marched through the capital today to demand that
President Bush and Congress focus their attention -- and money -- on the cities.

As high school bands played marching tunes and buses arrived from cities along
the East Coast, politicians, labor leaders and civil rights advocates criticized
the Government. They said that while the Defense Department had received money
for major weapons programs throughout the 1980's, Federal aid for urban programs
was cut by almost two thirds to less than $15 billion.

"We don't want to have to burn our cities," said Mayor Kurt Schmoke of
Baltimore. He said that he and several mayors were forced to go to Congress "tin
cup in hand" this week as lawmakers were discussing building new B-2 Stealth
bombers. "This is all about turning the national leaders around," he said.

Benjamin L. Hooks, executive director of the National Association for the
Advancement of Colored People, said, "We have not had an urban policy in a
number of years, and while we have squandered hundreds of billions of dollars on
every conceivable kind of convoluted fashion, we have left our cities with their
increasing burden of the homeless, jobless, hopeless and helpless."

Banners Call for Action

Carrying banners that read, "Bail out neighborhoods, not banks," and "Health
care for people, not profits," the marchers walked from Capitol Hill to the
Washington Monument. Their messages reflected their frustration and their belief
that while the Federal Government has money to prop up the wealthy, the foreign
allies and the military, it cares little about the urban poor.

But the impact of the rally was diminished by the fact that it attracted far
fewer people than its organizers had predicted. Only 35,000 people took part,
according to the United States Park Police; the organizers had predicted more
than 100,000.

Most of the people who attended the march were members of labor unions or were
there as a result of the efforts of nonprofit organizations involved in social
causes, from helping the homeless to the elderly. Many of the marchers were poor
and unemployed. Typically, they woke up before dawn to travel to the rally.

There was little official Republican presence at the march. When asked to
respond to the demands of the marchers, the White House spokesman, Marlin
Fitzwater, who was with the President in Texas, said: "I don't know anything
about it. We have marches every weekend."

Rodney King's Words in Song

In the shadow of the Washington Monument, the crowd grew more festive. Peter
Yarrow, of the singing group Peter, Paul and Mary, played the guitar and sang a
song he composed based on the words that Rodney G. King had used when he asked
that the people of Los Angeles cool their anger at the acquittal of the police
officers who had beaten him. "People, I just want to say: You know, can we all
get along?" Mr. Yarrow sang, and the crowd joined along.

But even as some in the crowd threw Frisbees and baseballs on the sloping lawn,
the words from the stage grew more impassioned.

"The flames that rose in Los Angeles have died, but dust from the city's ashes
remains on each of us," said Mayor David N. Dinkins of New York. "We knew how
close we were to the fire, and we must stop the anger and the pain before it is
too late."

'Listen Up, America'

Representative Maxine Waters, a Democrat who represents the Los Angeles district
that suffered the most from the rioting, chanted: "Jobs, jobs, jobs, jobs.
Listen up America." She added, "No justice, no peace. No justice, no peace. No
justice, no peace. Listen up, America."

Plans for the march began months before the Los Angeles riots, but organizers
and politicians say it has become enmeshed in the negotiations between President
Bush and Congress over a response to the disturbances in Los Angeles. The Bush
Administration appears ready to invigorate its efforts to promote an urban
policy anchored by a plan for developing inner cities with tax breaks for
businesses willing to invest there.

Congressional Democrats would like to push a much more ambitious program,
emphasizing creation of jobs with public works programs.

Both Democratic leaders and Administration officials have publicly called for
conciliation, but their ability to reach a consensus proved limited on Thursday,
when the House could only narrowly pass a modest program of disaster relief
grants and small business loans for Los Angeles and Chicago. Most House
Republicans voted against the measure, with those from rural areas arguing that
rioters would interpret new financing and programs as a reward for their
violence.

Representative Charles E. Schumer, Democrat of Brooklyn, who attended the rally,
said the march would help urban legislators make their case, because "the
squeaky wheel gets greased and cities haven't squeaked in a while."

He said the somewhat disappointing turnout was a symptom of the "anger and
apathy in the cities," adding, "People in Brooklyn say, 'Nobody's going to
listen to me.' "

Mr. Schumer also noted that urban people had less money and fewer ties to
organizations than more privileged suburbanites, who are more likely to march on
the capital to promote their interests.

Motivated in Manhattan



Those here were the highly motivated. Some said they had marched in the capital
before for civil rights or against the Vietnam War.

"I wanted to make a statement, to change the priorities of the country," said
Pat Caldwall, 60 years old, director of a private senior citizens center on the
Lower East Side of Manhattan. She and three friends carried a long sheet painted
with the words: "Cut the military budget. Save our cities. Save our kids."

Jay Weaver, 53, an elementary school teacher from Baltimore, said: "The Federal
Government is supposed to protect the states. If the foreign countries want
Federal aid from our Federal Government, then let them become the 51st state and
pay taxes to our Federal Government the same as we do."

Speakers at the rally were long on oratory but short on specific proposals,
while their allies in Congress in the crowd agreed that they need to come up
with strategies that differ from those tried in the 1960's and 70's.

Joseph Lowery, president of the Southern Christian Leadership Conference, tried
to place the verdict in the King trial in the context of a broader moral crisis
gripping the country.

"It's not just 12 jurors and a verdict, but 12 years of politics and exporting
jobs overseas and losing jobs at home," he said. "What good does it do to
protect oil in the Middle East and lose your soul in the Far West? If the
Government can spend $8 million for Desert Storm, then it ought to spend eight
times $8 million for the storm raging in the ghettoes."

LOAD-DATE: May 17, 1992

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo: Marleana White of Baltimore, right, surveying the crowd at the
beginning of a march yesterday in Washington to demand that President Bush and
Congress focus attention and money on the cities. (Jose R. Lopez/The New York
Times)

                   Copyright 1992 The New York Times Company


                              124 of 281 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                   May 17, 1992, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

Saigon, in Transition and in a Hurry

BYLINE: BY STEVEN ERLANGER;  Steven Erlanger, Moscow correspondent for The New
York Times, was Southeast Asia correspondent from 1988 to 1991. He has visited
Vietnam often, most recently in Dec. 1991.

SECTION: Section 6; Part 2; Page 18; Column 1; Sophisticated Traveler Magazine

LENGTH: 2949 words


Sunday evening in Ho Chi Minh City. At first it sounds like the beginning of
"Apocalypse Now," with the growling whumf-whumf of American helicopters prowling
across the paddy fields, reconning raw material for the ultimate body count.

But standing outside the Majestic Hotel, at the beginning of Dong Khoi Street by
the sinuous Saigon River, these days, one sees an almost stranger phenomenon:
countless motorbikes, motor scooters and motorcycles, like enraptured
mosquitoes, their little motors revved as high as possible, carrying neatly
dressed young men and women in a continuous formation down Dong Khoi toward the
river, then up Nguyen Hue and around again, for hours at a time.

It seems familiar, merely boy-meets-girl, or boy-shows-off-for-girl, the way
American teen-agers used to drag Main Street in their parents' Chevrolets. But
many of these young faces look bored, even unhappy, and finally one realizes
this is a form of demonstration: gilded youth driving home the lack of
entertainment and opportunities in this transitional regime, which still talks
of revolutionary socialism but fosters dreams of blue jeans.

Vietnamese recount "The Fable of the Year 2000," wherein a young goat and an old
goat meet at a narrow bridge into the future. The old goat says he should go
first; age must be respected, and besides, he hasn't much time. The young goat
says the old one has had his chance, and "I'm in a hurry." It's true: these kids
don't much care about doctrine. Their ideology is "song voi," or living quickly,
and they are once more looking to the West for their models.

This tension between young and old, East and West, North and South, socialism
and capitalism, is what makes a visit to Saigon, the name once more in vogue for
the former capital of what was once South Vietnam, so stimulating. It is
especially so for Americans, who left their innocence here.

THE COSMOPOLITAN CITY

Even in the year since I last visited, the changes are extraordinary, at least
on the city's surface. Billboards, the graffiti of capitalism, are everywhere:
for Sharp, Seiko, Kenwood, Daewoo and Goldstar, for Joy! and Souvenir and
Tourism cigarettes and even for Visa cards. (Americans, still limited by
Washington's ongoing economic embargo against Vietnam, are the only people
unable to use credit cards here.)

But the billboards look down on the old, essentially French colonial city, where
you can still take a pedicab, called a cyclopousse, or cyclo, through streets
lined with acacia and flame trees, overtaken by motorbikes driven by long-haired
young women wearing white trousers and elbow-length gloves to protect their skin
from the sun. Cafes serve baguettes and thick cafe filtre; old men wear berets;
the schoolboys carry French-style book bags, and only later, at night, sport
American-style shades.

The rooftop bars are still brilliant with parrots and tropical sunsets bleeding
in the fragrant, humid air. The garden restaurants, still French-influenced,
offer everything from crabe farci, lobster ravioli, eel, cobra and venison to,
in one establishment, "easy over fried frog" and "snakehead fish in hot sprayed
fat" -- which turns out to be superb, lightly fried monkfish. The city's best
and most expensive French restaurant, Le Mekong, was begun by a
Vietnamese-American who lives in California, but calls himself "Alain."

The streetside stalls for pho, or soup, with their compelling smells of broth
and spring onion, still open at dawn. And the dance halls and casinos, the
markets and pagodas, the bookshops and junk shops, even the winding river, still
provide insights into a place that has absorbed Chinese, French, American,
Soviet and, yes, North Vietnamese influences, yet remains true to its own
pleasure-seeking heart.

On the River

It is the river that supports the life of this bustling, business-mad city, but
it can also afford the visitor a chance to catch his breath.

Just across from the Majestic Hotel, you can rent a small boat with a wooden
sunshade for between $5 and $10 an hour, depending on your bargaining skill --
or your cyclo driver's connections. Your pilot will measure out just enough
gasoline, stick in the plank rudder, and head out past the flowering, floating
weeds and the ancient, rusty hulks that ferry Vietnamese -- some in conical hats
and some in pink polyester, with pink polish on their toenails -- to work.

One day, go upriver, past the Russian merchant ships being painted at their
moorings, while young men fish and collect reeds on the opposite bank. Take the
Thi Nghe channel past the zoo, to see urban life on the river: bathing, clothes-
and dish-washing, fishing with large nets on bamboo poles attached to a small
dock at the back of the house.

Another day, take the boat into Cholon, Saigon's Chinatown, due west of the city
center. Cholon, which means "Big Market," is thick with ornate temples, more
richly decorated than their counterparts elsewhere in the city. One of my
favorites, always fine in port towns, is the Chinese temple to the Goddess of
the Sea, who protects sailors, fishermen and merchants. At 710 Nguyen Trai is
Saigon's best example, the Thien Hau, built at the end of the 18th century, with
particularly intricate ceramic friezes in the interior courtyard and numerous
representations of the Goddess, her servants, her guardians and her bed.

Cholon's secular temples are the markets. On An Duong Vuong Street there is a
new one arising, called An Duong Market, which has the first working escalator
open to the public since 1975. It's worth a visit simply to watch Vietnamese
schoolgirls, hand-in-hand in their pure white ao dais -- the traditional dress
of slacks and high-necked tunic, slit high up the side -- take their first ride.


NEW ENTREPRENEURS

Vietnam now welcomes tourists and investment from the capitalist world, both
East and West, and money is pouring in. Despite renewed inflation, the lives of
many urban Vietnamese are improving. Even as their tiny official salaries lose
purchasing power, they find new ways of doing business. Teachers, who make the
equivalent of about $5 a month, tutor; mechanics open repair shops; doctors make
private appointments.

"Life is better and the Government is lighter now," said an old Vietnamese
friend, a trader. "Even poor people find money more easily in Saigon than
before."

The engine of the change is Asian. Vietnamese who now live or have connections
in Hong Kong, Singapore and especially Taiwan, are creating joint ventures with
the state or investing in small businesses. So are the Japanese and Thais,
taking advantage of low labor costs, prompting some Vietnamese to fear that
Asian neocolonialism will exploit them more than the West ever did.

Of course, in a city increasingly devoted to businessmen and tourists, there are
inevitably more establishments catering to foreigners. Businessmen who need the
most modern communications in the city frequent the Saigon Floating Hotel,
moored in the river and symbolically cut off from the city by a pier.
Australian-managed and hugely bland, with small rooms and high prices, the
Floating Hotel is a place for reassurance. Traverse the pier, and you could
almost be in Adelaide.

An open storefront at 42 Dong Du, just off the main tourist drag of Dong Khoi
(the former Tu Do Street before 1975, and Rue Catinat for Graham Greene and the
French), is an even stranger re-creation. An expatriate bar called "Apocalypse
Now," with matte black walls, it offers T-shirts with such messages as "Lift the
Embargo Now." The music is from the 1960's, and young Germans who seem to have
watched Oliver Stone's movie about The Doors too many times hang about in the
haze of strong Southeast Asian marijuana. This is a place for the "Lonely
Planet" crowd, named after the popular series of budget and backpacker guides to
exotic destinations. Even the new generation of Vietnamese bar girl stays away
from "Apocalypse Now," which may be its best feature.

In another indication of official relaxation or exhaustion, "Scarlett," the
cobbled-up sequel to "Gone with the Wind," is already translated into
Vietnamese, about $1.25 for both volumes. Danielle Steel, too. And in the large
bookstore on Nguyen Hue Street, near the river, budding Vietnamese entrepreneurs
who know English can buy Rosabeth Moss Kanter's "When Giants Learn to Dance,"
cover price $10.95, for about $1.80.

There has also been an increase in petty crime -- pickpocketing, camera- and
watch-snatching, as well as more open begging, prostitution, drug use and
gambling. These were phenomena retarded, after 1975, by the heavy hand of the
socialist state. Now all the principal hotels pay the police a monthly cash
"supplement" for protection.


ELEPHANTS, GODS AND PONIES

Some hints for visitors:

Spend a Sunday afternoon at the Saigon Zoo if you want to watch local families.
Entrance is about 7 cents, and you get a ticket charmingly printed with a
blue-haired monkey. The lions look scrawny, but the tigers are magnificent, and
there are falcons and monkeys and creatures of many strange hues, whose names my
Vietnamese friends couldn't translate. You can buy sugar cane to feed to the
elephants, who will stretch their trunks an amazing distance to snatch it from
your hand. There are also, still, skillful makers of silhouettes (for all of 35
cents), who love to speak as much French as they remember.

The guidebooks list dozens of pagodas and temples, but the one not to miss is
the Emperor of Jade Pagoda. From the zoo, walk toward the river to 73 Mai Thi
Luu. The pagoda, built in 1909, is among Saigon's most colorful, full of carved
and painted papier-mache statues of fantastical gods and heroes, ranging from
the Goddess of Mercy to Thanh Hoang, the Chief of Hell, and his horse. A
bas-relief shows the Guardian Spirit of Mother and Child, to whom women pray and
burn incense to assure male children. Phat Mau Chuan De, the mother of the five
Buddhas, is also well represented. Above all, be sure to see the graphic Hall of
Ten Hells, to know what's in store.

Another day, go to the races on Le Dai Hanh Street -- young boys from the
countryside, in silks, ride tiny ponies while their mothers watch. The Saigonese
love to gamble, and with the approval of the authorities, who get their
percentage, the public may once more bet on the ponies 10 days a month. At this
stage, all bets are exactas -- one must correctly chose both the winner and the
runner-up. Entrance to the track is 4 cents, and there are windows for bets of
from 7 cents to about $1.45, which attracts the high rollers. Hawkers work the
crowd, selling fruit, snacks, nuts, individual cigarettes and the Vietnamese
version of The Racing Form. Bring a hat for the sun and watch your wallet.


A WAR REMEMBERED

Americans can still find reminders of their presence, from the concrete airplane
shelters standing empty at Tan Son Nhut airfield to the bomb craters, now mostly
fishponds, that dot the countryside and the rebuilt De Soto buses that ply
Saigon's streets.

The war seems vivid in the Cu Chi tunnels, some 20 miles from the center of
Saigon. Two sections of tunnels, one at Ben Duoc, run by the Vietnamese Army,
and one at Ben Dinh, run by the local party committee, are now open to the
public. The Ben Dinh tunnels may be skipped; the Army exhibit, despite tunnels
widened to accommodate Western hips, is sufficiently terrifying.

The Viet Cong dug some 125 miles of carefully disguised tunnels in three levels
around and under a large American military base. The tunnels are about 4 feet
high and between 21 and 27 inches wide. This was enough space for the Viet Cong
troops to run through, but I found it easier to get on my hands and knees. The
second level down was deep enough in the earth to leave me clammy and panting.

The Ben Duoc installation includes a newly opened lecture hall, video displays,
trained guides and a working toilet. There are souvenirs for sale: North
Vietnamese helmets and caps, hammocks, the inevitable T-shirts, oil lamps made
from a shell or lighters made from rounds of ammunition -- either M-16 or AK-47.
There is also a firing range, where visitors may, for $1 a round, shoot an M-16
or AK-47 at targets representing tigers or antelopes. Even the guides find this
a little bizarre.

In the center of the city, the war may be revisited in the two old American
embassies, the Museum of the Revolution and the former Presidential Palace, now
called Reunification Hall. I find Reunification Hall the most interesting, in
part because of its architecture, which is a fine Vietnamese version of Edward
Durrell Stone. The interior is also redolent of the 1960's, especially the
Entertainment Room, which lacks only lava lamps. Here, on April 30, 1975, North
Vietnamese tanks broke down the gates and the South Vietnamese government
surrendered. It is preserved as it was on that day.

The indispensable visit, however, is to the Museum of American and Chinese War
Crimes, sometimes known as the War Museum and housed in the building on Vo Van
Tan Street once occupied by the United States Information Service. The exhibits
are propaganda, but can be shocking nonetheless, even if only for the sight of
two young Vietnamese girls kneeling and whispering as they count the many arms
and legs of a bottled fetus, said to show the effects of U.S. defoliants.

In October, after Vietnam and its traditional enemy, China, resumed diplomatic
relations, the enormous room devoted to 1,000 years of Chinese atrocities was
quietly closed. This pleases Anh Duc, a writer of old acquaintance and a party
member. "We must look to the future," he said. "A time will come, not very far
off, I hope, when the American rooms are also shut."

Americans who once fought here tend, when they return, to rediscover their
younger selves, first to mourn them, but usually, then, to forgive. They are
helped by the essential sweetness of the Vietnamese, who are nearly all glad to
see us. It's easier to win, of course, but the winning has been painful too, and
now the need to make a living in a time of peace is more important than old
wounds. The Vietnamese are desperately eager to rejoin the world from which
they've been isolated too long, by both their own folly, and by ours.



SAIGON AND BEYOND

With the easing of restrictions on travel to Vietnam, American tour operators
have begun offering tours there. What follows is a highly selective sampler;
most of the companies listed can also arrange individual travel. All prices
quoted are for one person in double occupancy.

ABERCROMBIE & KENT, 1520 Kensington Road, Oak Brook, Ill. 60521(800-323-7308),
has an 17-night "Images of Indochina" tour that includes three nights in Ho Chi
Minh City and three nights in Hanoi in addition to stops in Bangkok, Laos and
Cambodia. Departures are scheduled for Oct. 22, Nov. 12, Dec. 3 and Dec. 17; the
price, $4,980 a person, includes some internal air fares, but does not include
air fare between the United States and Bangkok.

DIVA WORLDWIDE, 123 Townsend Street, Suite 245, San Francisco, Calif. 94107
(415-777-5351), has several itineraries, including an 11-night "Vietnam North to
South" program that departs from Bangkok to visit Ho Chi Minh City (two nights),
Dalat, Nha Trang, Hue and Hanoi; the price, $2,760 a person, includes air fare
from the West Coast. Tours depart once a month, and the next are scheduled for
June 24, July 22, Aug. 26, Sept. 23 and Oct. 21. A weekend excursion to Ho Chi
Minh City from Bangkok (weekly departures) is $212 a person, including air fare.

PEARL CRUISES, 1510 Southeast 17th Street, Fort Lauderdale, Fla. 33316
(800-556-8850), is offering a 17-day package that includes a 10-night cruise on
the 480-passenger Ocean Pearl, calling at Haiphong (the port for Hanoi), Danang,
Nha Trang and Saigon (Ho Chi Minh City). The tour leaves from the United States
on July 11, and includes three nights in Hong Kong and two nights in Manila,
from which it returns. Prices range from $2,495 to $5,850 a person, excluding
shore excursions and air fare from the United States (an additional $895 a
person from New York).

SEAQUEST CRUISES, 600 Corporate Drive, Suite 410, Fort Lauderdale, Fla. 33334
(800-223-5688), is offering a cruise on the 164-passenger Frontier Spirit from
Hong Kong to Singapore calling at several Vietnamese ports, including Haiphong,
Danang, Nha Trang and Saigon. The cruise, which is scheduled for Nov. 6 to Nov.
21, costs from $5,800 to $10,700 a person, including all shore excursions, two
nights in Hong Kong, one night in Singapore and round-trip air fare from the
West Coast.

TRAVEL CORPORATION OF AMERICA, Post Office Box 2630, Newport Beach, Calif.,
92658 (800-992-2003), has a 17-night tour from Bangkok to Laos, Cambodia and
Vietnam, including three nights in Ho Chi Minh City and two nights in Hanoi. The
price, $4,195 a person, represents land arrangements only; air fares are
approximately $430 additional. The tour departs on Thursday, two to four times a
month.

A number of travel companies in Bangkok also offer trips to Vietnam. A
Thailand-based company with a New York office is ADVENTURES IN PARADISE, 155
West 68th Street, Suite 525, New York, N.Y. 10023 (212-595-5782 or
800-736-8187), which has several tours, among them a three-night "Saigon
Stopover," departing from Bangkok daily, which costs $910 a person, including
air fare between Bangkok and Ho Chi Minh City. A nine-night "Vietnam Explorer"
tour leaves Bangkok every Thursday and visits Dalat, Nha Trang, Danang, Hue and
Hanoi in addition to Ho Chi Minh City; the price, $2,225 a person, includes air
fare from Bangkok.

LOAD-DATE: May 17, 1992

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photos: A young jockey weighs in at the race track. The bustling market
of Cholon, the Chinese quarter. The entrance to the Ben Duoc tunnel, now open to
the public. The banner reads "Nothing more precious than independence and
freedom," a quotation from Ho Chi Minh. A Buddhist monk in a Cholon alleyway.
(pg. 18-19)(Photographs by Jacques Langevin/Sygma for The New York Times); A boy
stands outside the War Museum, in a building formerly occupied by the U.S.
Information Service. (Jacques Langevin/Sygma for The New York Times)(pg. 80)

Map of Ho Chi Mihn City. (pg. 50)

                   Copyright 1992 The New York Times Company


                              125 of 281 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                   May 17, 1992, Sunday, Late Edition - Final
                              Correction Appended

THEATER;
Thespis and Frisbee: The Play's the Thing

BYLINE: By Michael Kuby

SECTION: Section 2A; Page 6; Column 1; Arts & Leisure Desk

LENGTH: 10142 words


The following list, which includes events through mid-September, is selective.
Performances rarely occur every day of the week, and programs are subject to
change.

Alabama

MONTGOMERY Alabama Shakespeare Festival (205-277-BARD). Through July 12: "The
Comedy of Errors"; "Shadowlands"; "King Lear"; "Arms and the Man"; "Lend Me a
Tenor"; "Richard II."

 Arizona

FLAGSTAFF CAA Theater, Northern Arizona University (800-266-7740). In repertory,
July 8-Aug. 9: "Cole"; "The Foreigner"; "Rehearsal for Murder."

PHOENIX Herberger Theater (602-252-8497). June 9-14: "Side by Side." July
28-Aug. 2: "I'm Getting My Act Together and Taking It on the Road."

Symphony Hall (602-262-7272). June 16-21: "A Chorus Line." July 8-12: "Les
Miserables." Sept. 1-6: "Cats."

TUCSON Arizona Theater Company at Randolf Park (602-621-1162). In repertory,
June 10-28: "Hay Fever"; "Light Up the Sky."

 Arkansas

LITTLE ROCK Arkansas Repertory Theater (501-378-0405). June 11-28: "Godspell."
July 16-Aug. 2: "Oil City Symphony."

 California

COSTA MESA Orange County Performing Arts Center (714-556-2787). June 18-21: "The
Magic of David Copperfield." Aug. 18-23: "The Secret Garden."

GARDEN GROVE Grove Shakespeare Festival (714-636-7213). Through June 13: "The
Dining Room." June 24-July 25: "The Tempest." July 29-Aug. 29: "Macbeth." Sept.
2-26: "The Merry Wives of Windsor."

LA JOLLA La Jolla Playhouse (619-534-3960). Through June 14: "The Glass
Menagerie." June 10-July 12: "Le Petomane," starring the Flying Karamazov
Brothers. June 30-Aug. 9: "Tommy," directed by Des McAnuff. July 21-Aug. 30:
"What the Butler Saw," directed by Michael Greif. Aug. 25-Oct. 4: "Playland,"
written and directed by Athol Fugard. Sept. 8-Oct. 18: "The Swan" by Elisabeth
Egloff; "Marisol" by Jose Rivera.

LOS ANGELES Ahmanson at the Doolittle Theater (213-365-3500). Through June 28:
"It's Only a Play." June 30-Sept. 27: "Lost in Yonkers."

Mark Taper Forum (213-972-7373). Through June 7: "Richard II," starring Kelsey
Grammer and Robert Jason, directed by Robert Egan. June 14-July 26: "Unfinished
Stories" by Sybille Pearson, directed by Gordon Davidson. Aug. 2-Sept. 27: "Fire
in the Rain . . . Singer in the Storm," starring Holly Near.

U.C.L.A., at Royce Hall (310-825-2101). Sept. 15-27: "Richard III," with the
Royal National Theater of Britain, directed by Richard Eyre, starring Sir Ian
McKellen.

MISSION VIEJO McKinney Theaters at Saddleback College (714-582-4656). July
2-July 19: "Funny Girl." July 9-Aug. 2: Cabaret theater with Weslia Whitfield.
July 31-Aug. 16: "Ain't Misbehavin'." Aug. 6-16: Cabaret theater with Beth
Baker.

ORINDA California Shakespeare Festival, Bruns Amphitheater (510-548-9666). June
10-Aug. 20: "The Merchant of Venice." July 1-Aug. 23: "The Tempest." Aug.
5-Sept. 5: "Macbeth." Sept. 9-Oct. 4: "Two Gentlemen of Verona."

PASADENA Pasadena Playhouse (818-356-7529). Through June 28: "Closer Than Ever."
May 28-June 7: "Kirbysomething," cabaret with Kirby Tepper. July 10-Aug. 23: "A
Cup of Coffee" by Preston Sturges. Sept. 11-Oct. 25: "David's Mother."

SACRAMENTO Music Circus (916-557-1999). July 6-12: "Chess." July 13-19:
"Oklahoma!" July 20-26: "Fiddler on the Roof," starring Theodore Bikel. July
27-Aug. 2: "The Sound of Music." Aug. 3-8: "Funny Girl." Aug. 10-16: "Hello,
Dolly!" Aug. 17-23: "Cabaret."

SAN DIEGO Civic Theater (619-236-6510). Wed.-May 31: "Gypsy." July 14-19:
"Lettice and Lovage," starring Julie Harris. July 28-Aug. 2: "Ziegfeld -- A
Night at the Follies."

Old Globe and Lowell Davies Theaters and Carter Center Stage (619-239-2255).
June 26-Aug. 9: "Two Gentlemen of Verona." July 1-Aug. 23: "Breaking Up." July
7-Aug. 23: "Interior Decoration." Aug. 23-Oct. 4: "Lost Highway: The Music and
Legend of Hank Williams." Sept. 3-Oct. 25: "Spite for Spite." Sept. 9-Oct. 25:
"The Winter's Tale."

Starlight Bowl in Balboa Park (619-544-7827). June 17-28: "No, No, Nanette."
July 8-19: "Chess." July 29-Aug. 9: "Paint Your Wagon." Aug. 19-30: "Camelot."

SAN FRANCISCO Golden Gate and Curran Theaters (415-474-3800). June 3-28: "Lost
in Yonkers," starring Mercedes McCambridge and Brooke Adams. July 21-Aug. 16:
"Lettice and Lovage," starring Julie Harris. Aug. 19-Sept. 13: "Richard III,"
with the Royal National Theater of Britain, directed by Richard Eyre, starring
Sir Ian McKellen. Aug. 25-Oct. 4: "The Will Rogers Follies," directed by Tommy
Tune, starring Keith Carradine.

South-of-Market District (415-957-0233). Opens July 14: "Saltimbanco," performed
by Cirque du Soleil.

SAN JOSE San Jose Repertory Theater (408-291-2255). July 8-Aug. 2: "Cole! In the
Still of the Night."

West San Fernando, between Second and Third Streets (408-279-6314). Opens Aug.
27: "Saltimbanco," performed by Cirque du Soleil.

SANTA CRUZ Shakespeare Santa Cruz, Performing Arts Complex (408-459-2121). In
repertory, July 17-Aug. 29: "The Taming of the Shrew"; "A Doll's House";
"Macbeth."

SANTA ROSA Burbank H.S. Auditorium (707-527-4342). June 23-Aug. 9: "Annie Get
Your Gun"; "The Odd Couple"; "The Three Musketeers"; "The Children's Hour"; "La
Cage aux Folles"; "Cat on a Hot Tin Roof."

SONOMA Odyssey Theater Company, at Gundlach-Bundschu Winery (707-996-2145). In
repertory, July 11-Sept. 27: "The Merry Wives of Windsor"; "Pericles"; "Wild
Oats."

Sonoma Vintage Theater, at Andrews Hall (707-938-3988). June 5-20: "Nunsense."
July 9-18: "Sleuth."

WEST HOLLYWOOD Matrix Theater (310-289-2999). Through July 26: "One of Those
Days."

Tiffany Theater (213-289-2999). Opens June 6: "A Woman in Mind," starring Helen
Mirren and Paxton Whitehead.

 Colorado

BOULDER Boulder Repertory Co., at the Guild Theater (303-449-7258). July 17-Aug.
23: "Mrs. Klein."

Colorado Shakespeare Festival, University of Colorado (303-492-8181). In
repertory, June 23-Aug. 16: "All's Well That Ends Well"; "Henry V"; "The
Winter's Tale"; "The Rivals."

COLORADO SPRINGS Theaterworks Shakespeare Festival, Monument Valley Park
(719-593-3232). July 17-Aug. 8: "The Winter's Tale."

CRIPPLE CREEK Imperial Hotel (719-689-2922). June 6-Sept. 7: "My Partner."

DENVER Buell Theater, at the Center for Performing Arts (303-893-4100). Aug.
11-16: "Richard III," with the Royal National Theater of Britain, directed by
Richard Eyre, starring Sir Ian McKellen. Aug. 25-30: "Cats."

DURANGO Diamond Circle Theater, at the Strater Hotel (303-247-4431). June
6-Sept. 7: "Forbidden Fruit" and "Flying Scud."

GREELEY Little Theater of the Rockies, University of Northern Colorado
(303-351-2200). June 25-26: "Rumors." July 2-3: "Deathtrap." July 9-10:
"Romance/Romance." July 16-17: "Other People's Money." July 30-Aug. 2: "My Fair
Lady."

PUEBLO Arena Theater, University of Southern Colorado (719-549-2181). In
repertory, June 25-July 25: "Painting Churches"; "The Star-Spangled Girl";
"Rebecca"; "The Female Odd Couple"; "The Mousetrap."

 Connecticut

BRIDGEPORT Polka Dot Playhouse (203-333-3666). June 5-27: "Prelude to a Kiss."
Sept. 11-Oct. 10: "Italian-American Reconciliation."

Downtown Cabaret Theater (203-576-1636). Through Aug. 8: "The Rocky Horror
Picture Show"; "Oil City Symphony."

DARIEN Connecticut's Broadway Theater (203-655-7667). May 27-Aug. 2: "Joseph and
the Amazing Technicolor Dreamcoat." June 22-Sept. 29: "Nunsense." Aug. 5-Nov.
29: "42d Street."

EAST HADDAM Goodspeed Opera House (203-873-8664). Through July 3: "It's a Bird,
It's a Plane, It's Superman." July 9-Sept. 18: "Paint Your Wagon." Sept. 23-Dec.
20: "Animal Crackers."

IVORYTON Ivoryton Playhouse (203-767-8348, after May 25). June 23-July 4: "Arms
and the Man." July 7-18: "Nunsense." July 21-Aug. 1: "I Hate Hamlet." Aug. 5-22:
"Into the Woods." Aug. 25-Sept. 6: "Ten Little Indians."

NEW FAIRFIELD Candlewood Playhouse (203-746-6531). May 26-June 13: "Peter Pan."
June 16-July 4: "Singin' in the Rain." July 7-25: "Gypsy." July 28-Aug. 15:
"Mame." Aug. 18-Sept. 5: "Oklahoma!"

NEW HAVEN Summer Cabaret at Yale (203-432-1567). June 16-27: "Criminals in Love"
by George F. Walker. June 30-July 11: "The Baltimore Waltz." July 14-July 18:
"Slave Island." July 21-Aug. 1: A play by Mac Wellman. Aug. 4-8: "Outside the
Door."

SIMSBURY Westminster School (203-658-4444). June 24-27: "Vanities." July 1-11:
"Present Laughter." July 15-25: "Lend Me a Tenor."

STORRS Nutmeg Summer Theater, University of Connecticut (203-486-3969). June
5-20: "The Fantasticks." June 26-July 11: "Tintypes." July 16-25: "Same Time
Next Year."

WESTPORT Music Theater of Connecticut (203-454-3883). June 25-Aug. 2: "Cole!"

Westport Country Playhouse (203-227-4177). July 6-18: "Don't Dress for Dinner."
Aug. 3-15: "The Fourth Wall." Aug. 17-29: "And the World Goes 'Round." Aug.
31-Sept. 12: "Park Your Car in Harvard Yard."

 District of Columbia

Arena Stage, Arena and Kreeger Theaters (202-488-3300). Through June 14: "The
Visit." Through June 14: "Mrs. Klein."

Kennedy Center (202-467-4600). Through June 14: "Buddy: The Buddy Holly Story."
Fri.-July 19: "Once on This Island." June 23-July 19: "Richard III," with the
Royal National Theater of Britain, directed by Richard Eyre, starring Sir Ian
McKellen.

National Theater (202-628-6161). Through June 6: "Lettice and Lovage," starring
Julie Harris. June 9-July 19: "City of Angels." July 21-Aug. 15: "Cats."

Shakespeare Theater at the Folger at Carter Barron Amphitheater (202-547-3230).
May 26-June 14: "As You Like It."

 Florida

BOCA RATON Florida Atlantic University Theater (407-367-3808). In repertory,
June 4-July 5: "Eastern Standard"; "Some Americans Abroad."

FORT LAUDERDALE Parker Playhouse (305-761-5374). Aug. 8-16: "Candide" by Leonard
Bernstein.

JUPITER Jupiter Theater (407-746-5566). Through May 31: "Carousel." June 2-July
19: "Phantom." July 21-Aug. 22: "I Hate Hamlet." Aug. 25-Oct. 4: "Singin' in the
Rain."

MIAMI Coconut Grove Playhouse (305-442-4000). May 29-June 28: "Too Short to Be a
Rockette!" starring Pia Zadora. June 19-July 30: "The Lady From Havana."

TAMPA Tampa Bay Performing Arts Center (813-287-8844). May 26-31: "Les
Miserables." June 9-14: "Lettice and Lovage," starring Julie Harris.

 Georgia

ATLANTA National Black Arts Festival (404-730-7319; 404-249-6400, after June 8):

 At Seven Stages. July 31-Aug. 23: "Vivisections From the Blown Mind."
 At the Fox Theater. Aug. 4-9: "The Wiz."
 The Crossroads Theater Company, at the Alliance Theater. Aug. 2-9: "Sheila's
Day."
 At Theater Emory. Aug. 5-9: Emory University-University of Ibadan, Nigeria,
co-productions, "The Oraki of a Grasshopper" and "The Engagement."
 Jomandi Productions, at the 14th Street Playhouse. Aug. 5-9: "She'll Find Her
Way Home."
 Just Us Theater Company, at the Civic Center. Aug. 4-8: "Live at Club Zebra"
and "Late Bus to Pearl."

 Idaho

IDAHO SHAKESPEARE FESTIVAL Boise (208-336-9221). In repertory, June 19-Sept. 5:
"Romeo and Juliet"; "The Taming of the Shrew"; "Richard III"; "Scapino."

 Illinois

BLOOMINGTON Illinois Shakespeare Festival, Ewing Manor (309-438-2535). In
repertory, June 26-Aug. 2: "Macbeth"; "As You Like It"; "The Winter's Tale."

CHICAGO Goodman Theater (312-443-3800). June 12-July 26: "Riverview: A Melodrama
With Music."

Remains Theater (312-335-9800). June 19-Aug. 9: "Once in Doubt."

Shubert Theater (312-977-1700). June 16-July 5: "Lettice and Lovage," starring
Julie Harris. July 7-26: "Buddy: The Buddy Holly Story."

CHICAGO INTERNATIONAL THEATER FESTIVAL (312-644-3378 or 1-800-545-3378):
 At the Blackstone Theater. May 27-June 7: The English Shakespeare Company in
"Macbeth" and "Twelfth Night." June 10-14: Circus Oz, from Australia. June
16-21: Gate Theater, from Ireland, in "Waiting for Godot" and "Krapp's Last
Tape."
 At Steppenwolf. May 26-31: Compagnie Philippe Genty, from France, in
"Driftings." June 2-7: Fundacion Rajatabla, from Venezuela, in "No One Writes to
the Colonel." In Spanish, with English translation. June 10-14: Yakut Drama
Theater of Siberia, in "My Beloved Blue Coast." In Yakut, with English
translation. June 16-21: Daisan Erotica, from Japan, in "A Man Called Macbeth."
In Japanese, with English translation.
 At UIC Theater. May 29-June 7: Theatre Repere of Canada in "The Dragons'
Trilogy." June 10-14: Rites and Reason Theater, from Brown University, in
"Letters From a New England Negro." June 16-21: Academia Ruchu, from Poland, in
"English Lesson," "Carthage" and "Everyday Life After the Revolution, Part Two."


 Indiana

BLOOMINGTON Indiana University, Musical Arts Center (812-855-7433). July 11-25:
"Carousel."

MICHIGAN CITY Canterbury Theater (219-874-4269). June 24-27: "Company." June
27-July 3: "Charley's Aunt." July 8-18: "Bye, Bye, Birdie." July 22-Aug. 1: "No,
No, Nanette." Aug. 5-15: "Into the Woods." Aug. 19-22: "Steel Magnolias."

NASHVILLE Brown County Playhouse (812-988-2123). June 11-July 5: "Dames at Sea."
July 9-Aug. 2: "Driving Miss Daisy." Aug. 6-29: "Lu Ann Hampton Laverty
Oberlander."

SOUTH BEND Firefly Festival, St. Patrick's County Park (219-288-3472). July 11:
"The Taming of the Shrew." July 17-18: "The Mikado."

WEST LAFAYETTE Experimental Theater at Purdue University (317-494-3933). June
11-20: "The Immigrant." June 25-July 3: "The Real Inspector Hound." July 9-18:
"The Odd Couple."

 Iowa

AMANA Old Creamery Theater, the Amana Colonies (800-352-6262). Through May 31:
"First Ladies of the Stages." June 4-July 26: "Alone Together." July 30-Sept.
20: "Squabbles."

CEDAR FALLS Strayer-Wood Theater, University of Northern Iowa (319-273-6386). In
repertory, June 11-Aug. 1: "Frankie and Johnny in the Clair de Lune"; "The
Balcony Scene"; "Other People's Money"; "The Art of Dining."

GARRISON Old Creamery Theater (800-234-6282). June 25-July 26: "Squabbles." July
15-Sept. 20: "First Annual Cowchip Jamboree and Tall-Tale Tellin' Extravaganza."
July 30-Aug. 24: "Alone Together." Aug. 27-Sept. 20: "Lend Me a Tenor."

IOWA CITY Iowa Summer Rep, University Theater (319-335-1160). In repertory, June
24-July 25: "Painting Churches"; "Coastal Disturbances"; "The Art of Dining";
"Museum."

 Kansas

WICHITA Music Theater, at Century II Concert Hall (316-265-3107). June 10-14:
"Paint Your Wagon." June 24-28: "The Desert Song." July 1-5: "Les Miserables."
July 8-12: "Gypsy." July 22-26: "Into the Woods." Aug. 5-9: "Singin' in the
Rain."

 Kentucky

BARDSTOWN Talbott Amphitheater (800-626-1563). June 6-Sept. 6: "The Stephen
Foster Story."

LOUISVILLE Kentucky Shakespeare Festival in Central Park (502-634-8237). June
17-July 11: "Much Ado About Nothing." July 15-Aug. 2: "Othello." July 28-Aug. 2:
"The Worthy Farce of Master Pierre Patelin."

 Maine

BERWICK Hackmatack Playhouse (207-698-1807). June 23-July 5: "42d Street." July
7-18: "No Sex Please, We're British." July 21-Aug. 2: "Kismet." Aug. 4-15:
"Arsenic and Old Lace." Aug. 18-Sept. 6: "The Music Man."

BLUE HILL New Surry Theater (207-374-5057). In repertory, July 11-Aug. 30: "The
House of Blue Leaves"; "Shirley Valentine"; "Nunsense."

HALLOWELL Gaslight Theater (207-626-3698). June 25-July 4: "The Odd Couple."
Aug. 20-29: "Oklahoma!"

MADISON Lakewood Theater (207-474-7176). June 11-20: "Break a Leg." June 25-July
4: "Inherit the Wind." July 9-18: "Fiddler on the Roof." July 23-Aug. 1: "Up the
Down Staircase." Aug. 6-9: "H. M. S. Pinafore." Aug. 13-22: "Whose Life Is it,
Anyway?" Aug. 27-Sept. 5: "The Incredible Murder of Cardinal Tosca." Sept.
10-19: "Lend Me a Tenor."

MONMOUTH Cumston Hall (207-933-2952). June 5-Aug. 30: "Waiting for Godot";
"Saint Joan"; "Macbeth"; "The Playboy of the Western World."

OGUNQUIT Ogunquit Playhouse (207-646-5511). June 29-July 11: "Funny Girl." July
13-25: "Lettice and Lovage." July 27-Aug. 8: "Damn Yankees." Aug. 10-22:
"Breaking Legs." Aug. 24-Sept. 5: "Nunsense."

SOMESVILLE Acadia Repertory Theater at Masonic Hall (207-244-7260, after June
1). June 19-28 and Sept. 22-27: "The Gin Game." June 30-July 12 and Sept. 8-13:
"Stage Struck." July 14-26 and Sept. 15-20: "Mary, Mary." July 28-Aug. 9 and
Sept. 1-6: "The Sunshine Boys." Aug. 11-30: "Black Coffee."

 Maryland

ANNAPOLIS Summer Garden Theater on the dock (410-268-0809). May 29-July 18:
"You're a Good Man, Charlie Brown." July 24-Sept. 6: "Chicago."

BALTIMORE Essex Community College (301-522-1269). June 12-21: "Romeo and
Juliet." June 19-28: "Man of La Mancha"; "1940's Radio Hour." July 10-19:
"Pinocchio." July 24-Aug. 2: "Jesus Christ Superstar"; "Amadeus."

OLNEY Olney Theater (301-924-3400). Through next Sun.: "Prelude to a Kiss." June
2-28: "Illegal Motion." July 7-Aug. 2: "I Hate Hamlet." Aug. 11-Sept. 6: "The
Miracle Worker."

WESTMINSTER Western Maryland College (410-857-2599). In repertory, June 26-Aug.
8: "Fiddler on the Roof"; "Lend Me a Tenor"; "Alice in Wonderland."

 Massachusetts

AMHERST Hampshire Shakespeare Company, at the Lord Jeffery Inn (800-473-7396).
June 23-July 19: "A Midsummer Night's Dream." July 23-Aug. 16: "Twelfth Night."

BEVERLY North Shore Music Theater (508-922-8500). June 4-20: "Funny Girl." June
22-27: "Little Shop of Horrors." July 2-18: "Damn Yankees." July 23-Aug. 8: "How
to Succeed in Business Without Really Trying." Aug. 20-Sept. 5: "Gypsy." Sept.
10-26: "Phantom.".

BOSTON Huntington Theater (617-266-0800). Fri.-June 21: "The Way of the World."

Lyric Stage (617-437-7172). May 27-June 21: "The Man Who Came to Dinner."

Publick Theater (617-782-5425). June 3-28: "As You Like It." July 8-Aug. 2: "H.
M. S. Pinafore." Aug. 12-Sept. 6: "Cyrano de Bergerac."

Wang Center (617-931-2222). Aug. 4-Oct. 10: "The Phantom of the Opera."

CHATHAM Monomoy Theater (508-945-1589). June 22-July 4: "My Fair Lady." July
7-11: "Broadway Bound." July 14-18: "Charley's Aunt." July 21-25: "The Heiress."
Aug. 4-8: "The Sound of Music." Aug. 11-15: "Luther." Aug. 18-22: "Steel
Magnolias." Aug. 25-29: "The Merry Wives of Windsor."

CHESTER Miniature Theater at Town Hall (413-354-6565). July 15-19: "Wits,
Rogues, Dreamers." July 22-Aug. 2: "The Belle of Amherst," starring Kim Hunter.
Aug. 5-9: "I Must Be Mr. Boswell." Aug. 12-23: "Last Tag." Aug. 26-Sept. 6: "The
Best of Friends."

DENNIS Cape Playhouse (508-385-3911, after June 11). June 29-July 4: "The
Fantasticks." July 6-11: "Lettice and Lovage." July 13-25: "Funny Girl." July
27-Aug. 1: "Don't Dress for Dinner." Aug. 3-8: "Butterflies Are Free," starring
Phyllis Newman. Aug. 10-22: "Damn Yankees." Aug. 24-29: "The Fourth Wall." Aug.
31-Sept. 5: "Double, Double." Sept. 7-12: "Nunsense."

FALMOUTH College Light Opera Company at Highfield Theater (508-548-0668). June
30-July 4: "Patience." July 7-11: "West Side Story." July 14-18: "Can-Can." July
21-25: "The King and I." July 28-Aug. 1: "H. M. S. Pinafore." Aug. 4-8: "On the
Town." Aug. 11-15: "Naughty Marietta." Aug. 18-22: "The Sound of Music." Aug.
25-29: "Candide."

GLOUCESTER Gloucester Stage (508-281-4099). Through next Sun.: "Punch Me in the
Stomach!" May 27-June 7: "Love Is Hell" and "Letters." June 3-5: "Adult Children
of . . . Parents." June 12-July 5: "I'm Not Rappaport." July 10-Aug. 2: "The
Caretaker." Aug. 7-Sept. 6: "North Shore Fish."

LENOX Music Theater Group (413-637-3353). July 17-18: "Palm Court," cabaret
songs by Stanley Silverman. Aug. 26, 28: "Songs," excerpts from "The Mother of
Us All," Virgil Thomson opera set to text by Gertrude Stein.

Shakespeare and Company at the Mount (413-637-3353). In repertory, Fri.-Sept. 6:
five plays adapted from short stories by Edith Wharton: "The Inner House"; "The
Mission of Jane" and "A Love Story"; "Manners and More"; "Maisie." In repertory,
Fri.-Sept. 6: "Shirley Valentine"; "Duet for One"; "Custer Rides"; "A Life in
the Theater"; "Women of Will"; "The Tale of the Tiger." In repertory, July
1-Sept. 6: "Julius Caesar"; "Two Gentlemen of Verona"; "Troilus and Cressida";
"Richard II"; "Much Ado About Nothing." July 19-Aug. 29: "The Taming of the
Shrew." Sept. 2-6: "Romeo and Juliet."

MARTHA'S VINEYARD Tisbury Amphi theater and Vineyard Playhouse (508-696-7333).
June 17-July 4: "Enter Laughing." July 8-25: "I Hate Hamlet." July 14-Aug. 1:
"Romeo and Juliet." July 29-Aug. 15: "Noel Coward in Two Keys." Aug. 19-Sept. 5:
"How the Other Half Loves."

NANTUCKET Folger Hotel and the Methodist Church (508-228-6325). Fri.-next Sun.:
"Chopin Lives!" June 19-Sept. 6: "The Actor's Nightmare" and " 'Dentity Crisis."
July 21-Aug. 15: "The Princess and the Pea." Aug. 3-8: "Moby Dick." Sept. 9-12:
"Mamet, Twain and Pinter," selected works.

Theater Workshop of Nantucket, at Bennett Hall (508-228-4305). Thur.-July 18:
"Little Shop of Horrors." Aug. 19-Sept. 12: "Rumors."

NORTH DARTMOUTH University of Massachusetts Dartmouth (508-999-8893). In
repertory: July 15-Aug. 23: "The Marrano: Columbus . . . the Secret Mission."

ORLEANS Academy Playhouse (508-255-1963). June 11-27: "Lloyd's Prayer." July
1-18: "Kismet." In repertory, July 21-25: "A Midsummer Night's Dream"; "Scarlet
Letter." In repertory, July 29-Aug. 8: "Our Country's Good"; "The Recruiting
Officer." Aug. 12-29: "West Side Story." Sept. 2-6: "Eleemosynary."

PITTSFIELD Berkshire Public Theater (413-445-4634). In repertory, Fri.-Sept. 6:
"Starting Here, Starting Now"; "Prelude to a Kiss"; "Death of a Salesman"; "The
American Dream"; "Rock and Roll VI -- the Girl Groups."

PLYMOUTH Priscilla Beach Theater (508-224-4888). Through next Sun.: "H. M. S.
Pinafore." June 12-13: "The Best of Broadway." June 19-20: "Endgame." June
24-28: "Birdsong at Midnight." July 2-3: "The Wake." July 10-18: "Equus." July
24-Aug. 1: "Lend Me a Tenor." Aug. 7-15: "Long Day's Journey Into Night." Aug.
21-22: "Beauty and the Beast." Aug. 28-29: "Richard III." Sept. 3-6: "Jesus
Christ Superstar."

SOUTH HADLEY Mount Holyoke College (413-538-2406). June 23-27: "The
Fantasticks." June 30-July 4: "Steel Magnolias." July 7-11: "Hay Fever." July
14-18: "School for Wives." July 21-25: "The Boys Next Door." July 28-Aug. 1:
"Fools." Aug. 4-8: "Wait Until Dark." Aug. 11-15: "Charley's Aunt."

STOCKBRIDGE Berkshire Theater Festival (413-298-5576, after June 1). June
22-July 11: "Ain't Misbehavin'." July 14-25: "Mountain." July 28-Aug. 8: "The
Cocktail Hour." Aug. 11-29: "Charley's Aunt."

WELLFLEET Wellfleet Harbor Actors Theater (508-349-6835). Thur.-June 21:
"Speed-the-Plow." July 1-26: "Reckless." Aug. 5-Sept. 6: "The Artificial Jungle"
by Charles Ludlam.

WILLIAMSTOWN Williamstown Theater Festival (413-597-3400, after June 10). June
24-July 4: "The Threepenny Opera." July 1-12: "The Will and Bart Show" by Jim
Lehrer. July 8-19: "The Guardsman," by Ferenc Molnar. July 15-26: A new work by
Jane Anderson. July 29-Aug. 9: "Black" by Joyce Carol Oates. Aug. 5-16: "2" by
Romulus Linney. Aug. 12-23: "Reader" by Ariel Dorfman. Aug. 19-30: "The Sweet
Bye 'n' Bye" by Frank Higgins.

 Michigan

ANN ARBOR Power Center for the Performing Arts (313-747-2278). July 7-8: Reno.

KALAMAZOO Festival Playhouse, at Kalamazoo College (616-383-8567). In repertory,
July 16-Aug. 2: "American Buffalo"; "Faithful and her Friends."

MIDLAND Midland Center (517-631-8250). June 11: "Dear Liar." July 16-18: "The
Brides of March." July 24-26: "The Pirates of Penzance." Aug. 6-8: "The Pajama
Game." Sept. 11-26: "Lend Me a Tenor."

 Minnesota

MINNEAPOLIS Guthrie Theater (612-377-2224). In repertory, June 5-Sept. 6:
"Iphigenia at Aulis"; "Agamemnon" and "Electra." Beginning July 3: "Private
Lives."

MOORHEAD Straw Hat Players, Moorhead State University (218-236-2271). June
23-27: "Carousel." July 1-11: "Hay Fever." July 15-18: "Grease." July 22-Aug. 1:
"Amadeus." Aug. 5-9: "Guys and Dolls."

ST. PAUL Ordway Music Theater (612-224-4222). June 13-21: "Meet Me in St.
Louis." June 23-28: "Buddy: The Buddy Holly Story." July 1-12: "The Secret
Garden." July 22-Aug. 9: "Richard III," with the Royal National Theater of
Britain, directed by Richard Eyre and starring Sir Ian McKellen. Aug. 18-30:
"City of Angels."

 Missouri

KANSAS CITY Johnson County Community College (816-421-7500). June 16-21: "Side
by Side." July 14-19: "I'm Getting My Act Together and Taking It on the Road."
Aug. 11-16: "The Wonder Years."

Unicorn Theater (816-531-7529). June 4-27: "Falsettoland."

ST. LOUIS Civic Center Theater, Kirkwood (314-821-2407). June 3-21: "Anything
Goes!" July 8-26: "Gypsy." Aug. 12-30: "South Pacific."

 Nebraska

OMAHA Nebraska Shakespeare Festival, Elmwood Park (402-280-2391). In repertory,
June 18-July 5: "The Comedy of Errors"; "Richard III."

 New Hampshire

ENFIELD Lower Shaker Village (603-643-3445). July 25-26: "Shaker Revels."

GILFORD Lakes Region Theater at Gunstock (603-293-2827). June 24-July 5:
"Godspell." July 8-19: "Kiss Me, Kate." July 22-Aug. 2: "West Side Story." Aug.
5-16: "No, No, Nanette." Aug. 19-30: "Can-Can."

HAMPTON Hampton Playhouse (603-926-3073). June 13-28: "Lend Me a Tenor." June
30-July 12: "Hello, Dolly!" July 14-26: "Burlesque Follies of 1992." Aug. 4-16:
"The Most Happy Fella." Aug. 18-30: "It Runs in the Family."

HANOVER Dartmouth College Summer Repertory (603-646-3991). July 12: "Casina."
July 22-Aug. 1: "You Can't Take It With You." Aug. 7-15: Readings by the New
York Theater Workshop. Aug. 19-29: "A Flea in her Ear."

LYME Crossroad Theater (603-643-3445). June 25-28: "Country Revels."

LINCOLN Mill at Loon Mountain (603-745-2141). Through June 21: Spring Cabaret.
July 1-11: "Nunsense." July 15-25: "The Music Man." July 29-Aug. 8: "A Midsummer
Night's Dream." Aug. 12-22: "The Pirates of Penzance." Aug. 26-29: "Herein Lies
a Tale II." Sept. 2-6: "Nunsense." Sept. 10-Oct. 25: Fall Cabaret.

MANCHESTER Palace Theater (603-669-5511). In repertory, July 17-Aug. 29:
"Annie"; "Lend Me a Tenor"; "The King and I."

MILFORD American Stage Festival (603-673-7515). May 26-June 7: "Shirley
Valentine." June 16-28: "Jacques Brel Is Alive and Well and Living in Paris."
July 7-19: "The Break." July 28-Aug. 9: "The Children's Hour." Aug. 18-30:
"Malice Aforethought."

NEW LONDON Barn Playhouse (603-526-4631). June 9-21: "Straw Hat
Revue"/"Godspell." June 23-July 5: "Kiss Me, Kate." July 7-19: "West Side
Story." July 21-Aug. 2: "No, No, Nanette." Aug. 4-16: "Can-Can." Aug. 18-30:
"Oklahoma!" Sept. 1-6: "Arsenic and Old Lace."

PORTSMOUTH Prescott Park Festival (603-436-2848). July 1-Aug. 21: "Godspell."

TAMWORTH Barnstormers Theater (603-323-8500, after June 15). July 7-11:
"Rumors." July 14-18: "Affairs of State." July 21-25: "An Inspector Calls." July
28-Aug. 1: "Uncle Vanya." Aug. 4-8: "The Unexpected Guest." Aug. 11-15: "When We
Are Married." Aug. 18-22: "Bedroom Farce." Aug. 25-29: "Silent Night, Lonely
Night."

WHITEFIELD Weathervane Repertory Theater (603-837-9010). In repertory, July
4-Sept. 5: "Annie Get Your Gun"; "Lend Me a Tenor"; "MooseCapades Cabaret";
"South Pacific"; "Three Musketeers"; "Our Town"; "Me and My Girl"; "Pump Boys
and Dinettes."

 New Jersey

BEACH HAVEN Surflight Theater (609-492-9477). Wed.-May 31: "They're Playing Our
Song." June 3-14: "Do Black Patent Leather Shoes Really Reflect Up?" June 16-28:
"Mame." June 30-July 12: "42d Street." July 14-26: "Brigadoon." July 28-Aug. 9:
"Chicago." Aug. 11-23: "Meet Me in St. Louis." Aug. 25-Sept. 6: "A Chorus Line."
Sept. 8-20: "Sugar."

CAPE MAY Cape May Institute (609-884-7117, ext. 13). July 8-11: "The Awakening."
July 15-Aug. 1: "Their Wife"; "A Way Out"; "The Girl." Aug. 5-8: "Tales,
Whoppers and Downright Lies." Aug. 12-29: "Charles II." Sept. 2-5: "Magic
Maestro Please," with Robert Aberdeen. Sept. 9-26: "Old Love Letters"; "Bride
Roses."

EDISON Roosevelt Park Amphitheater (908-548-2884). June 30-July 11: "Little Shop
of Horrors." July 22-Aug. 1: "Dracula." Aug. 12-22: "Annie Get Your Gun."

HOLMDEL Holmdel H.S. (908-946-0427). July 9-18: "Side by Side." Aug. 13-22: "Tom
Jones."

LINCROFT Thompson Park (908-842-4000). June 18-July 4: "Mame." Aug. 6-15:
"Cinderella."

LONG BRANCH Guggenheim Theater at Monmouth College (908-571-3483). June 18-28:
"Deathtrap." July 9-12: "Social Security." July 23-Aug. 2: "I Do! I Do!"

MADISON New Jersey Shakespeare Festival, Drew University (201-408-5600). June
10-July 3: "Macbeth." July 8-31: "The Importance of Being Earnest." Aug. 5-22:
"Henry IV, Part I." Aug. 26-Sept. 12: "Camino Real"; "The Seagull."

MILLBURN Paper Mill Playhouse (201-376-4343). Wed.-June 28: "Chess."

MONTCLAIR Weiss Arts Center, Kimberley Academy (201-256-0576). June 23-July 4:
"Shirley Valentine." July 7-11: "I Hate Hamlet." July 14-18: "Prelude to a
Kiss." July 21-25: "Stepping Out." Aug. 4-15: "Nunsense."

NEW BRUNSWICK Repertory Espanol, at Rutgers Art Center (908-932-7511). June
11-12: "The House of Bernarda Alba," in Spanish.

OAKLYN Ritz Theater (609-858-5230). Through June 13: "The Nerd." July 9-26:
"Annie." Aug. 21-30: "42d Street." Sept. 11-Oct. 10: "Dracula."

PEMBERTON Foundation Theater at Burlington County College (609-894-2138). June
17-28: "The Fantasticks." July 8-19: "Driving Miss Daisy." July 22-Aug. 2: "What
I Did Last Summer."

SUMMIT Kent Place School (908-273-9383). July 9-Aug. 8: "The Graduate."

TRENTON Passage Theater Company (609-392-0766). May 26-31: "Roebling Steel."
June 12-13: "Thin Air: Tales From a Revolution."

UPPER MONTCLAIR Montclair State College (201-893-5112). June 16-21: "Carol
Channing in Concert." June 24-July 5: "Ma Rainey's Black Bottom." July 2-12:
"Burn This." July 8-19: "Steel Magnolias." July 16-26: "A Lie of the Mind." July
22-Aug. 2: "Evita."

WAYNE William Paterson College Theater at Shea Center (201-595-2371). July 9-12:
"The Odd Couple," female version. July 23-26: "The Sunshine Boys."

 New Mexico

ALBUQUERQUE AND ESPANOLA El Teatro Campesino, various sites (505-277-4332). May
30-June 6: new works by Josefina Lopez, Evelina Fernandez and Luis Valdez.

New York

 New York City

Judith Anderson Theater (212-873-3767). Opens Wed., through June 7: "Dream of a
Common Language," by Heather McDonald.

British-American Youth Festival Theater, at Belvedere Castle in Central Park and
Tisch School for the Arts, N.Y.U. (212-567-8058, after July 25). Aug. 1-2: "A
Midsummer Night's Dream."

Chain Lightning Theater, at Tribeca Lab Theater (212-219-2085). Opens today:
"Miss Julie" and "The Ghost Sonata."

Cherry Lane Theater (212-989-2020). Opens May 28: "Hauptmann," by John Logan,
starring Denis O'Hare.

Circle in the Square (212-239-6200). In repertory, May 25-July 18: "Salome," by
Oscar Wilde, starring Al Pacino, Sheryl Lee and Esai Morales and "Chinese
Coffee," by Ira Lewis, starring Mr. Pacino and Charles Cioffi. June 29-Sept. 20:
"Anna Karenina," book and lyrics by Peter Kellogg, music by Dan Levine.

Ensemble Studio Theater (212-247-2405). May 28-June 7: Marathon '92, final
program in a festival of one-act plays. "Emma Keeps Talking," by Lise Erlich;
"The Onliest One Who Can't Go Nowhere," by J. E. Franklin; "Give the Bishop My
Faint Regards," by Frank D. Gilroy; "Angels in the Men's Lounge," by Oyamo;
"Blue Stars," by Stuart Spencer.

45th Street Theater (212-921-9341). Opens June 18: "James Dean/A Dress
Rehearsal," written and directed by Patricia A. Leone.

The Kitchen (212-255-5793). June 11-14: Karen Finley-Jerry Hunt collaboration.

La Mama E.T.C. (212-475-7710). May 28-June 14, "God's Country," by Steven Dietz,
performed by the Barrow Group. June 18-28: "Kanashibetsu," directed by Soh
Kuramoto, performed by the Furano Group (in Japanese, with projected subtitles).

Lehman Summerstage, Bronx (212-960-6096). July 16-26: "The Inspector General."

Light Opera of Manhattan, at Playhouse 91 (212-831-2000). Opens June 24:
"Columbus."

Manhattan Theater Club (212-581-7907). Tues.-June 21: "The Extra Man," by
Richard Greenberg, starring Adam Arkin, Boyd Gaines, Laila Robins and John
Slattery. June 2-July 5: "The Innocents' Crusade," by Keith Reddin, starring
Debra Monk.

New York Theater Workshop, at Theater Off Park (212-302-6989). May 27-June 27:
"Punch Me in the Stomach!"

Playwrights Horizons (212-279-4200). Opens June 21: "Flaubert's Latest," by
Peter Parnell.

Roundabout Theater Company, at Criterion Center Stage (212-869-8400). June
10-July 12: "The Price," directed by John Tillinger, starring Eli Wallach and
Hector Elizondo. Aug. 13-Sept. 20: "The Real Inspector Hound."

Royal National Theater of Britain, at Brooklyn Academy of Music (212-307-4100).
June 9-21: "Richard III," directed by Richard Eyre, starring Sir Ian McKellen.

Second Stage (212-873-6103). Opens June 4, through July 4: "Spike Heels" by
Theresa Rebeck, directed by Michael Greif, starring Kevin Bacon, Tony Goldwyn
and Saundra Santiago.

Theater for the New City (212-254-1109). June 4-28: "Anna, the Gypsy Swede,"
starring Viveca Lindfors.

Ubu Rep (212-679-7562). Opens May 30: "Nowhere," by Reine Barteve.

WPA (212-206-0523). Opens June 16: "Weird Romance," score by Alan Menken, lyrics
by David Spencer, book by Alan Brennert. Directed by Barry Harman, starring
Ellen Greene and Jonathan Hadary.

Vineyard Theater (212-353-3366). Opens Aug. 5: "Juno."

NEW YORK SHAKESPEARE FESTIVAL Del acorte Theater in Central Park (212-861-7277).
July 2-26: "As You Like It," directed by Adrian Hall.

Aug. 6-30: "The Comedy of Errors," directed by Caca Rosset.

SERIOUS FUN! Lincoln Center (212-875-5050, after June 8). July 7-9: "Dr. Faustus
Lights the Lights," by Gertrude Stein; directed and designed by Robert Wilson.
July 14-15: "The Flash and Crash Days," by Gerald Thomas, starring Fernanda
Montenegro and Fernanda Torres. July 16-17: "Dog Show," written and performed by
Eric Bogosian. July 18: "49 Blues Songs for a Jealous Vampire," by Keith Antar
Mason, performed by the Hittite Empire. July 21-22: Karen Finley. July 23: John
Kelly. July 24-25: David Shiner and Bill Irwin. July 28: "My Mathematics,"
written and performed by Rose English.

Long Island

BELLPORT Gateway Playhouse (516-286-1133). Through May 31: "Groucho." June 3-21:
"Gypsy." June 24-July 12: "Oklahoma!" July 15-Aug. 9: "Nunsense." Aug. 12-Sept.
6: "Peter Pan." Sept. 9-27: "Once on This Island."

BETHPAGE Swan Theater (516-796-5666). July 10-Aug. 2: "Barefoot in the Park."
Aug. 7-30: "Bye, Bye, Birdie."

BOHEMIA Airport Playhouse (516-589-7588). Through next Sun.: "Noises Off." May
29-June 28: "The Music Man." July 3-Aug. 2: "The Musical Comedy Murders of
1940." Aug. 7-Sept. 6: "St. Louis Blues."

EAST FARMINGDALE Arena Players, Main and Second Stage Theaters (516-293-0674).
Through June 7: "Red, Hot and Cole." Through June 7: "Murder Duet." June 11-July
5: "What the Butler Saw." June 12-July 19: "Six Women With Brain Death, or
Expiring Minds Want to Know." July 9-Aug. 2: "Everything in the Garden." July
24-Aug. 30: "T-Bone and Weasel." Aug. 6-30: "Murderer." Sept. 3-27: "The Play's
the Thing." Sept. 4-Oct. 11: "The Perfect Crime."

EAST HAMPTON Guild Hall (516-324-4050). June 30-July 12: "I Ought to Be in
Pictures." July 16-19: "Shakespeare's Women," a one-woman show starring Claire
Bloom. July 23-25: "Cabariety." Aug. 18-30: Lee Strasberg's Actors Studio
performs two one-act plays by Joyce Carol Oates and a premiere of a one-act play
by Arthur Miller.

EAST ISLIP Bayway Arts Center (516-581-2700). Fri.-June 20: "The Pleasure of His
Company." June 26-July 25: "The Pajama Game." July 31-Aug. 29: "The Mousetrap."
Sept. 4-Oct. 3: "How to Succeed in Business Without Really Trying."

FARMINGDALE Broadhollow Theater (516-752-1400). Fri.-Sat.: "The Education of
H*Y*M*A*N K*A*P*L*A*N." May 29-June 27: "I'll Be Back Before Midnight." July
3-Aug. 1: "Legends." Aug. 7-Sept. 5: "See How They Run."

St. Kilian Church (516-249-0127). Aug. 8-16: "Fiddler on the Roof."

FLORAL PARK Floral Palace (516-775-1783). Through next Sun.: "Italian-American
Reconciliation." June 5-28: "Godspell."

LINDENHURST Studio Theater (516-226-1833). Fri.-June 6: "The House of Blue
Leaves." June 12-July 11: "Weekend Comedy." July 17-Aug. 15: "The Lady in
Question." Aug. 21-Sept. 19: "The New Odd Couple."

PORT JEFFERSON Theater Three (516-928-9100). June 27-Aug. 8: "Anything Goes."
July 8-Aug. 5: "The Good Woman of Sichuan." Aug. 15-Sept. 19: "M. Butterfly."
Aug. 19-Sept. 23: "Much Ado About Nothing."

PORT WASHINGTON Harbor Theater Company, at the Guggenheim H.S. Auditorium
(516-767-0365). July 30-Aug. 2: "Cabaret."

ROCKVILLE CENTRE Center Stage at Molloy College (516-581-7529). Fri.-June 14:
"La Cage aux Folles." June 19-July 12: "The Rainmaker." July 24-Aug. 16: "The
Pleasure of His Company."

STONY BROOK International Theater Festival at Staller Center, University at
Stony Brook (516-632-7230). July 1-5: "The Gravity Swing," performed by the
English circus Ra Ra Zoo. July 8-12: "The Taming of the Shrew," performed by the
Riverside Shakespeare Company. July 15-19: "Mrs. Warren's Profession," performed
by the Riverside Shakespeare Company. July 22-26: Theater Litsedei, Russian
clowns. July 29-Aug. 2: "Up 'N' Under," performed by the Hull Truck Theater
Company.

 Upstate

ALBANY Actors Shakespeare Company, Washington Park (518-783-1971). In repertory,
July 8-Aug. 23: Moliere's "Don Juan"; "Much Ado About Nothing"; Thomas
Middleton's "Changeling."

AUBURN Merry-Go-Round Playhouse in Emerson Park (800-457-8897). June 2-13:
"Nunsense." June 16-27: "A Day in Hollywood/A Night in the Ukraine." June
20-July 18: "Mame." July 21-Aug. 8: "Cabaret." Aug. 11-29: "42d Street."

BUFFALO Delaware Park (716-831-3742). June 23-July 12: "Richard III." July
21-Aug. 9: "The Comedy of Errors."

Park School (716-839-0370). In repertory, June 11-Aug. 23: "A . . . My Name Is
Alice"; "Pippin"; "A Funny Thing Happened on the Way to the Forum"; "Personals."

CHATHAM Mac-Haydn Theater (518-392-9292). Wed.-May 31: "Nunsense." June 3-14:
"The King and I." June 17-28: "Desert Song." July 1-19: "Evita." July 22-Aug. 9:
"La Cage aux Folles." Aug. 12-30: "Camelot." Sept. 2-13: "Oliver!"

CHAUTAUQUA Chautauqua Institution (800-836-ARTS). Aug. 1-15: "Night of the
Iguana."

ELLENVILLE Shadowland Theater (914-647-5511). June 12-27: "The Rainmaker." July
10-25: "Dracula." Aug. 21-Sept. 5: "The Effect of Gamma Rays on Man-in-the-Moon
Marigolds." Sept. 11-26: "The Woolgatherer."

ELMIRA The Domes, at Mark Twain State Park (800-395-6275). June 30-Aug. 30:
"Mark Twain Musical Drama."

ELMSFORD Westchester Broadway Theater (914-592-2222). Through July 12: "Sugar."
July 16-Oct. 18: "Phantom."

ENDICOTT Cider Mill Playhouse (607-748-7363). June 24-July 12: "Dames at Sea."
July 12-July 26: "The Rainmaker." July 29-Aug. 9: "Other People's Money." Aug.
12-30: "Nunsense."

FORESTBURGH Forestburgh Playhouse (914-794-1194). June 22-July 4: "Greater
Tuna." July 6-18: "Two by Two." July 20-Aug. 8: "South Pacific." Aug. 10-22:
"Baby." Aug. 24-Sept. 5: "The Nerd."

GARRISON-ON-HUDSON Shakespeare at Boscobel (914-265-9575, after June 1). July
9-Aug. 2: "The Taming of the Shrew."

ITHACA Hangar Theater (607-273-4497). June 10-20: "The Heidi Chronicles." June
25-July 11: "Man of La Mancha." July 15-25: "The Miracle Worker." July 29-Aug.
8: "A Life in the Theater." Aug. 12-22: "M. Butterfly."

KINGSTON Driftwood Showboat at Eddyville Landing (914-331-0400). June 19-July 5:
"The Golden Fleecers." July 10-26: "City Wives and Country Relations." July
22-23: "Cavalcade!" July 31-Aug. 16: "More Sinned Against Than Usual." Aug.
21-Sept. 6: "Love Will Find a Way." Sept. 11-27: "Will the Real Mrs. Feinberg
Stand Up."

LEWISTON Artpark (716-754-9001). May 28-30: "The Old Maid and the Sea." June
10-20: "Annie." July 5-Aug. 30: "Nunsense." July 7-Aug. 30: "Dames at Sea." July
22-Aug. 1: "Cabaret." Aug. 12-22: "West Side Story."

MILFORD Leatherstocking Theater (607-286-3456). July 2-11: "Educating Rita."
July 23-Aug. 1: "On Borrowed Time." Aug. 13-22: "Inherit the Wind." Sept. 4-12:
"Other People's Money."

NEW PALTZ Mohonk Festival of the Arts, at Mohonk Mountain House (914-255-4500).
July 10: "The Other Side of Paradise." July 13: "The Belle of Amherst." July 16:
"Dylan." July 20: "Love Letters." July 23: "Cecil B. DeMille Presents."

OSWEGO Lakeside Dining Center, SUNY (315-341-3999). June 26-July 23: "Mack and
Mabel."

POTSDAM Music Theater North, at Snell Theater, SUNY (315-265-3070). June 18-27:
"A Day in Hollywood/A Night in the Ukraine." July 2-11: "West Side Story." July
16-25: "Joseph and the Amazing Technicolor Dreamcoat." July 30-Aug. 8: "Anything
Goes." Aug. 13-22: "Oliver!"

POUGHKEEPSIE Powerhouse Theater at Vassar (914-437-5907). July 1-11: "Three
Hotels." July 15-25: "Dark Rapture." July 14-19: "A Midsummer Night's Dream."
July 28-Aug. 2: "Lysistrata."

PURCHASE Phoenix Theater (914-251-6200). June 24-July 12: "Mornings at Seven."
July 15-Aug. 2: "The Old Boy." Aug. 5-23: "Twelfth Night."

ROCHESTER Geva Theater (716-232-4382). In repertory, June 2-July 5: "Peephole";
"Ellen Universe Joins the Band"; "Barbecue in 29 Palms."

SARANAC LAKE Pendragon Theater (518-891-1854). In repertory, July 1-Sept. 5:
"The Boys Next Door"; "Our Country's Good"; "Crimes of the Heart"; "In the
Charge of an Angel."

STERLING Sterling Renaissance Festival (315-947-5783). Weekends, July 4-Aug. 16:
"The Taming of the Shrew"; "A Midsummer Night's Dream"; "The Flying Doctor"; an
original commedia dell'arte play.

STONE RIDGE Ulster County Community College (914-687-5086). July 10-25: "Annie
Get Your Gun."

STONY POINT Penguin Repertory Company (914-786-2873). Through May 31:
"Eleemosynary." July 9-Aug. 2: "Hard Times."

TUXEDO Renaissance Festival, Sterling Forest (914-351-5171, after June 1).
Weekends Aug. 1-Sept. 20: "The Winter's Tale"; "Scapin."

WESTPORT Depot Theater (518-962-4449). June 26-July 12: "Lend Me a Tenor." July
24-Aug. 9: "Broadway Bound."

WOODBURY Home for Contemporary Theater and Art at the Rushmore Estate
(212-529-9218). June 19-28: "A Midsummer Night's Dream." July 4: "Independence,"
performance art.

WOODSTOCK River Arts (914-679-2100): Fri.-June 14: "Ain't Misbehavin'." June
19-20: "What Fools These Mortals Be." July 3-Aug. 8: "The Illusion." July 22-26:
"Reno Once Removed," starring Reno. July 30-Aug. 15: "Three Tall Women" by
Edward Albee. Aug. 20-Sept. 7: "And Where She Stops Nobody Knows."

 North Carolina

BOONE Daniel Boone Amphitheater (704-264-2120). June 19-Aug. 15: "Horn in the
West."

HIGHLANDS Highlands Playhouse (704-526-2695, after June 1). June 24-July 12:
"George M!" July 15-26: "Rumors." July 29-Aug. 16: "Gypsy." Aug. 19-30:
"Spider's Web."

HIGH POINT North Carolina Shakespeare Festival (919-841-6273). In repertory,
July 24-Oct. 3: "The Merry Wives of Windsor"; "The Front Page"; "Oedipus
Tyrannus"; "Two Gentlemen of Verona."

 Ohio

CHILLICOTHE Sugarloaf Mountain Amphitheater (614-775-0700). June 12-Sept. 5:
"Tecumseh!"

CINCINNATI Cincinnati Playhouse in the Park (513-421-3888). Tues.-June 14: "Hot
'n Cole." June 18-July 12: "Lady Day at Emerson's Bar and Grill."

CLEVELAND HEIGHTS Cain Park (216-371-3000). June 19-Aug. 2: "The Mystery of
Edwin Drood." Aug. 6-16: "Man of La Mancha." Aug. 15: "The Race."

COLUMBUS Schiller Park Amphitheater (614-444-6888). June 12-27: "The Tempest."
July 3-Aug. 1: "1776." Aug. 7-22: "King Lear."

CUYAHOGA FALLS Porthouse Theater Company at Blossom Music Center (216-929-4416).
June 19-July 4: "Inherit the Wind." July 10-25: "Quilters." July 31-Aug. 16:
"T-Bone and Weasel."

NEW PHILADELPHIA Schoenbrunn Amphitheater (216-339-1132). June 16-Aug. 30:
"Trumpet in the Land."

OXFORD Miami University (513-529-6031). In repertory, July 2-Aug. 1: "Gypsy";
"Talley's Folly"; "Rumors."

WESTERVILLE Otterbein Summer Center Theater (614-898-1109). June 23-July 3:
"Nunsense." July 8-19: "Play It Again, Sam." July 22-Aug. 2: "The Heidi
Chronicles." Aug. 5-16: "The Passion of Dracula."

 Oregon

ASHLAND Oregon Cabaret Theater (503-488-2902). Through Aug. 1: "Nunsense." Aug.
7-Oct. 31: "Working."

Oregon Shakespeare Festival (503-482-4331). In repertory, through Nov. 1: "All's
Well That Ends Well"; "Toys in the Attic"; "The Playboy of the Western World";
"La Bete"; "The Ladies of the Camellias"; "Othello"; "Henry VI"; "As You Like
It"; "Restoration"; "The Firebugs"; "Heathen Valley."

JACKSONVILLE Britt Festivals (503-773-6077). July 24-27: "Guys and Dolls."

PORTLAND Center for Performing Arts (503-248-4496). Through June 6: "Richard
II," performed by the Tygres Heart Shakespeare Company. June 20-27: "My Fair
Lady," performed by the Portland Opera. July 23-Aug. 2: "The Merry Widow,"
performed by the Musical Company. Sept. 1-12: "Les Miserables."

Firehouse Theater (503-274-1717). July 9-Aug. 16: "Hamlet."

Oregon Stage Company (503-690-7328). Sept. 4-Oct. 18: "Uncle Vanya"

 Pennsylvania

ALLENTOWN Empie Theater (215-821-3333). June 17-28: "The House of Blue Leaves."
July 15-Aug. 9: "Of Thee I Sing."

BOALSBURG State College Community Theater, at Boal Barn Playhouse
(814-466-7141). June 16-27: "Seventeen." July 1-11: "Dracula." July 15-25: "The
Heidi Chronicles." July 29-Aug. 8: "You Can't Take It With You." Aug. 12-22: "A
Funny Thing Happened on the Way to the Forum."

BOILING SPRINGS Allenberry Playhouse (717-258-6120). May 20-June 14: "Blithe
Spirit." June 17-July 12: "Nunsense." July 15-Aug. 9: "The Sound of Music." Aug.
12-Sept. 6: "Kiss Me, Kate." Sept. 9-27: "Uproar in the House."

CENTER VALLEY Allentown College, Labuda Center (215-282-3192). June 10-27: "The
Taming of the Shrew." June 17-25: "Pinocchio." July 8-25: "Romeo and Juliet."

COOKSBURG Cook Forest Sawmill Theater (814-927-6655): Thur.-Sat.: "Greater
Tuna." May 28-30: "The Foreigners." June 4-6: "The Emperor's New Clothes." June
11-20: "To Kill a Mockingbird." June 25-July 4: "Dames at Sea." July 9-11: "42d
Street." July 16-25: "Barnum." July 30-Aug. 1: "The Butler Did It." Aug. 6-15:
"Olympus on My Mind." Aug. 20-29: "Guys and Dolls." Sept. 2-6: "Nunsense." Sept.
10-12: "Star-Spangled Girl."

CRESSON Allegheny Highlands Regional Theater (814-472-4333). June 11-27: "The
Foreigner." July 16-Aug. 1: "Quilters." Aug. 13-29: "A Streetcar Named Desire."

EPHRATA Playhouse in the Park (717-733-7966). June 18-27: "Chicago." July 2-11:
"Cemetery Club." July 16-25: "Dames at Sea." July 30-Aug. 8: "Night of the
Iguana." Aug. 13-22: "Man of La Mancha."

FAYETTEVILLE Totem Pole Playhouse (717-352-2164). May 30-June 14: "What I Did
Last Summer." June 16-28: "No Sex Please, We're British." June 30-July 19:
"Anything Goes." July 21-Aug. 2: "Visit to a Small Planet." Aug. 4-16: "Murder
Among Friends." Aug. 18-30: "Luv."

GETTYSBURG Kline Theater, at Gettysburg College (717-337-6064). June 18-27: "A
Gathering of Fools." July 2-11: "As Is." July 16-25: "Dracula."

LANCASTER Dutch Apple Dinner Theater (717-898-1900). Thur.-June 27: "Big River."
July 2-Aug. 22: "Annie." Aug. 27-Sept. 19: "Lend Me a Tenor."

LATROBE Saint Vincent College (412-537-8900). Thur.-June 6: "Cobb." June 11-July
4: "How the Other Half Loves." July 9-Aug. 1: "Lend Me a Tenor." Aug. 6-30:
"Opal's Husband."

MALVERN People's Light and Theater Company (215-644-3500). May 27-Aug. 2: Short
Stuff Festival.

MILL HALL Millbrook Playhouse (717-748-8083, after June 12). June 17-28: "La
Cage aux Folles." June 24-28: "Patio/Porch." July 1-5: "Deathtrap." July 8-19:
"Damn Yankees." July 15-19: "The Mystery of Irma Vep." July 22-Aug. 2: "In the
Mood." July 29, Aug. 2: "Luv." Aug. 5-9: "Prelude to a Kiss." Aug. 12-16: "Lend
Me a Tenor."

MOUNT GRETNA Mount Gretna Playhouse (717-964-3322). June 17-27: "Broadway
Bound." July 1-11: "Pump Boys and Dinettes." July 15-25: "The Melville Boys."
July 29-Aug. 8: "Noises Off."

MURRYSVILLE Sherwood Forest Theater (412-733-8222). May 28-June 6: "Something's
Afoot." June 11-20: "Lend Me a Tenor." June 24-27: "Let Me Hear You Smile." July
2-11: "Alice Through the Looking Glass." July 16-25: "A Midsummer Night's
Dream." July 30-Aug. 15: "Bye, Bye, Birdie." Aug. 20-29: "I Ought to Be in
Pictures." Sept. 3-12: "A Walk in the Woods."

NEW HOPE Bucks County Playhouse (215-862-2041). Through next Sun.: "West Side
Story." May 26-June 7: "The Phantom of the Opera." June 10-21: "Love Letters."
June 24-July 5: "Driving Miss Daisy." July 8-19: "Meet Me in St. Louis." July
22-Aug. 2: "My Fair Lady." Aug. 5-16: "Camelot." Aug. 19-30: "West Side Story."
Sept. 2-13: "The Phantom of the Opera."

PHILADELPHIA Philadelphia Festival Theater for New Plays (215-898-6791). Through
May 30: "The Play of Lights." June 3-20: "A Small Delegation."

PITTSBURGH Carnegie Mellon Drama at Kresge and Studio Theaters (412-268-2407).
In repertory, July 3-26: "To My Chagrin"; "What Comes to Those Who Wait"; "The
Rehearsal"; "Joined at the Head"; "Body's in the Garden"; "Monte Carlo"; "The
Living".

Civic Light Opera (412-456-6666). June 9-21: "Brigadoon." June 23-28: "Me and My
Girl." June 30-July 12: "Jesus Christ Superstar." July 14-19: "Carousel." July
21-26: "Oliver!" July 28-Aug. 9: "Showboat." Aug. 25-30: "The Wiz."

Three Rivers Shakespeare Festival at Stephen Foster Memorial Theater and the Pit
(412-624-7529). Through June 6: "Two Gentlemen of Verona." June 12-July 4:
"Steel City." June 19-July 11: "Ophelia," with Noh dance. July 24-Aug. 15:
"Twelfth Night." Sept. 4-26: "Pericles."

READING Meridian Theater, at Albright College (215-921-7547, after June 15).
July 9-Aug. 2: "Big River."

WARREN Library Theater (814-723-7231). June 18-21: "A Little Night Music." July
2-5: "Gigi." July 16-19: "Lend Me a Tenor."

WILLIAMSPORT Arena Theater, Lycoming College (717-321-4048). June 18-28:
"Arsenic and Old Lace." July 2-12: "Prelude to a Kiss." July 16-26: "The
Mikado."

Rhode Island

BLOCK ISLAND Oceanwest Theater, New Harbor (401-466-2971). July 1-23: "Dames at
Sea." July 28-Aug. 15: "The Apple Tree." Aug. 28-Sept. 5: "I Ought to Be in
Pictures."

MATUNUCK Theater-by-the-Sea (401-782-8587). June 2-28: "Hello, Dolly!" June
30-July 26: "Annie Get Your Gun." July 28-Aug. 23: "South Pacific." Aug.
25-Sept. 13: "Little Shop of Horrors." Sept. 15-Oct. 4: "Nunsense."

NEWPORT Rhode Island Shakespeare Theater at St. George's School (401-849-7892).
Thur.-June 20: "As You Like It." June 26-Aug. 1: "The Cocktail Hour." Aug.
7-Sept. 12: "The Fantasticks."

PROVIDENCE Leeds Theater, at Brown University (401-863-2838). June 16-July 4: "I
Hate Hamlet." July 7-18: "What the Butler Saw." July 21-Aug. 8: "Accomplice."

Trinity Repertory Company (401-351-4242). Through June 7: "Burn This." Aug.
8-Sept. 6: "Lend Me a Tenor."

WESTERLY Colonial Theater (401-596-0810). June 19-July 12: "Greater Tuna." June
30-July 12: "As You Like It." July 17-Aug. 9: "Rumors." July 28-Aug. 9: "The
Tempest." Aug. 14-Sept. 6: "Chicago."

 South Carolina

CHARLESTON Spoleto Festival, Dock Street Theater (803-577-4500). May 21-June 7:
"The Gigli Concert."

 Texas

CANYON Pioneer Amphitheater (806-655-2181). June 10-Aug. 22: "Texas."

DALLAS Theater Three (214-871-3300). May 30-June 11: "Assassins." July 25-Sept.
5: "Born Yesterday."

FORT WORTH Casa Manana Theater (817-332-2222). June 11-28: "Damn Yankees." July
9-26: "Singin' in the Rain." July 30-Aug. 16: "La Cage aux Folles." Aug.
20-Sept. 6: "Phantom."

Trinity Park Playhouse (817-923-6698). June 24-July 3: "Hamlet." July 9-19: "The
Taming of the Shrew."

GRANBURY Granbury Opera House (817-573-9191). Through May 31: "Ladies Night in a
Turkish Bath." June 4-28: "Once Upon a Mattress." July 2-Aug. 2: "Kiss Me,
Kate." Aug. 6-Sept. 7: "Gypsy."

HOUSTON Alley Theater (713-228-8421). Thur.-June 14: "One Flew Over the Cuckoo's
Nest." Through Aug. 29: "Forever Plaid."

Miller Outdoor Theater (713-743-3003). In repertory, July 31-Aug. 15: "Much Ado
About Nothing"; "Romeo and Juliet."

Houston Grand Opera (713-227-2787). July 15-Aug. 2: "Annie Get Your Gun."

Jones Hall (713-629-3700). June 16-21: "Les Miserables."

INGRAM Point Theater (512-367-5122). June 3-20: "Gypsy." June 24-July 11:
"Charley's Aunt." July 15-Aug. 1: "Big River." Aug. 5-22: "Noises Off."

SAN ANTONIO Sunken Garden and Majestic Theaters (512-226-1759). June 15-21:
"Romeo and Juliet." June 23-28: "Les Miserables."

 Utah

CEDAR CITY Southern Utah University (801-586-7878). In repertory, June 25-Sept.
5: "Blithe Spirit"; "Cyrano de Bergerac"; "Julius Caesar"; "The Merchant of
Venice"; "The Merry Wives of Windsor"; "King Lear."

SALT LAKE CITY Capitol Theater (801-355-2787). July 15-Aug. 9: "Les Miserables."


 Vermont

BENNINGTON Oldcastle Theater Company at Southern Vermont College (802-447-0564).
June 2-21: "Smoke and Mirrors." July 6-26: "Taffettas." Aug. 10-30: "The Boys
Next Door." Sept. 7-20: "Homeward Bound."

BRATTLEBORO Whetstone Theater (802-257-2600). In repertory, June 19-Sept. 5:
"Illuminati"; "Eleemosynary"; "Spare Parts."

BURLINGTON Atlantic Theater Company, at Contois Auditorium (802-658-9300). July
8-11: "Rosemary for Remembrance." July 15-25: "Trust."

COLCHESTER Saint Michael's Playhouse (802-655-0122, after June 8). June 23-July
4: "Postmortem." July 7-18: "Prelude to a Kiss." July 21-Aug. 1: "Scapino." Aug.
4-15: "I Hate Hamlet."

DORSET Dorset Playhouse (802-867-5777, after June 9). June 18-27: "Saving
Grace." July 2-19: "Godspell." July 23-Aug. 8: "Other People's Money." Aug.
13-22: "The Country Club." Aug. 27-Sept. 6: "Write Me a Murder."

KILLINGTON Killington Playhouse (802-422-9795). In repertory, July 1-Aug. 29:
"Man of La Mancha"; "Yours, Anne," "The Rink"; "On the Twentieth Century";
"Princess Ida."

SAXTONS RIVER Saxtons River Playhouse (802-869-2030, after June 20). June
25-July 6: "Groucho: A Life in Revue." July 9-20: "Oliver!" July 23-Aug. 3: "The
Spider's Web." Aug. 6-17: "The Mikado." Aug. 20-31: "Oklahoma!"

WAITSFIELD Valley Players (802-496-3485). July 3-19: "I Do! I Do!"

WESTON Weston Playhouse (802-824-5288, after June 15). June 30-July 12: "A Life
in the Theater." July 16-26: "Where's Charley?" July 30-Aug. 9: "Cabaret." Aug.
13-23: "Lend Me a Tenor." Aug. 27-Sept. 6: "You're a Good Man, Charlie Brown."

WHITE RIVER JUNCTION Briggs Opera House (802-296-2505). July 1-18: "Evita." July
12-Aug. 30: "Clarence Darrow." July 22-Aug. 8: "Twelfth Night." Aug. 12-29:
"Amadeus."

 Virginia

ABINGDON Barter Theater and Playhouse (800-368-3240). Through May 31: "The
Gospel According to St. Mark." May 27-June 20: "Quilters." June 2-14: "Ruth
Draper's Cast of Characters." June 16-28: "Escoffier: King of Chefs." June
24-July 18: "As You Like It." June 30-July 12: "Love Letters." July 17-26: "Walt
Whitman: Liberal and Lusty as Nature." Aug. 5-30: "Bittersuite: Songs of
Experience." Aug. 19-Sept. 12: "Peg o' My Heart."

CHARLOTTESVILLE Heritage Repertory, on the University of Virginia Campus
(804-924-3376). July 13-Aug. 8: "The Roads to Home," directed by Horton Foot,
starring Jean Stapleton. In repertory, June 17-Aug. 8: "Rumors"; "La Bete"; "The
Mousetrap"; "A Moon for the Misbegotten."

LEXINGTON Theater at Lime Kiln (703-463-3074). May 26-30: Water Puppets of
Vietnam. June 4-13: "Apple Dreams." June 18-July 11: "Stonewall Country." July
16-Aug. 8: "Tale of Cymbeline," adapted from Shakespeare. Aug. 13-Sept. 5:
"Roadside."

RICHMOND TheaterVirginia (804-367-0840). In repertory, June 5-27:
"Eleemosynary"; "Two Rooms"; "Down the Road." July 10-12: Young Virginia Writers
contest, staged readings.

ROANOKE Mill Mountain Theaters (703-342-5740). June 24-July 19: "110 in the
Shade." July 31-Aug. 23: "All I Really Need to Know I Learned in Kindergarten."

VIENNA Wolf Trap at Filene Center (703-255-1868). Sept. 1-6: "Evita."

 Washington

OLYMPIA Washington Shakespeare Festival (206-753-8586). In repertory, Aug.
14-22: "Romeo and Juliet"; "A Midsummer Night's Dream."

SEATTLE A Contemporary Theater (206-285-5110). Through next Sun.: "Trust." May
30-June 28: "Shadowlands." In repertory, July 9-Aug. 30: Parts I and II of "The
Revengers' Comedies." Sept. 12-Oct. 11: "Eleemosynary."

Intiman Theater at Seattle Center (206-626-0782). Through June 13: "Macbeth."
June 19-July 18: "Catherine: Concerning the Fateful Origins of Her Grandeur,
With Diverse Musical Interludes, Three Elephants and No Ballet." July 24-Aug.
22: "Antigone." Aug. 28-Sept. 26: "How the Other Half Loves."

Paramount Theater (206-628-0888). July 21-26: "Camelot," starring Robert Goulet.
Sept. 15-20: "Lettice and Lovage," starring Julie Harris.

 Wisconsin

MADISON Broom Street Theater (608-244-8338). Through June 7: "Iron Bitch." June
19-July 26: "Bon Voyage, Brendan." Aug. 7-Sept. 13: "Die, Lover, Die." Sept.
25-Nov. 1: "Come Back to the 711, Elvis Presley, Elvis Presley."

SPRING GREEN American Players Theater (608-588-2361). In repertory, June 23-Oct.
4: "A Midsummer Night's Dream"; "Othello"; "Much Ado About Nothing"; "Our Town."


 Wyoming

LARAMIE Fine Arts Theater, University of Wyoming (307-766-3212). June 10-13:
"Pajama Tops." June 24-27: "Squabbles." July 8-11: "The Good Doctor." July
22-25: "Rumors."

 Canada

BANFF Banff Center, Greenham Theater (403-762-6300). Aug. 6-16: "Twelfth Night."

NIAGARA-ON-THE-LAKE Shaw Festival, various theaters (416-468-2172). Through Nov.
1: "Pygmalion"; "Counselor-at-Law"; "Charley's Aunt"; "Widowers' Houses"; "Drums
in the Night"; "Point Valaine"; "On the Town"; "Ten Minute Alibi"; "Overruled."

ORILLIA Sunshine Festival Theater Company at the Orillia Opera House
(705-326-8011). June 25-July 11: "Wait Until Dark." July 16-Aug. 8: "Oklahoma!"
Aug. 13-29: "On Golden Pond."

STRATFORD Stratford Shakespeare Festival (800-567-1600). In repertory, "The
Tempest" (through Nov. 14); "Romeo and Juliet" (through Nov. 15); "Love's
Labor's Lost" (through Oct. 18); "Measure for Measure" (Aug. 14 through Nov.
14); "World of Wonders" (through Aug. 9); "H. M. S. Pinafore" (through Oct. 18);
"Entertaining Mr. Sloane" (July 31 through Oct. 17); "The Wingfield Trilogy"
(June 6 to 28); "Uncle Vanya" (June 14 through Sept. 19); "Bonjour, la, Bonjour"
(June 27 through Sept. 19); "Shirley Valentine" (July 1 through Aug. 22); "Two
Gentlemen of Verona" (Aug. 2 through Sept. 20).

TORONTO St. Lawrence Center (416-366-7723). Sat.-June 20: "The Goodbye People."
June 27-July 25: "Le Bal." Aug. 1-29: "Crimes of the Heart." Sept. 5-Oct. 3:
"Martin Guerre."



A SHAKESPEARE FOR 40 SEASONS

Stratford, Ontario, may not be as historic, say, as Stratford-on-Avon, but the
cultural mecca midway between Toronto and Detroit draws up to 4,000 theatergoers
a night, with productions in three theaters.

This year, the Stratford Shakespeare Festival is celebrating its 40th season by
producing a full lineup of Shakespeare in the main Festival Theater. Currently
in repertory are "The Tempest," "Romeo and Juliet" and "Love's Labor's Lost."
"Measure for Measure," starring Brian Bedford, joins the schedule in August.

Last night, the festival was to honor a native son, Robertson Davies, with the
premiere of an adaptation of his novel "World of Wonders," staged at the smaller
Avon Theater. The play, about the life of a magician, runs in repertory with "H.
M. S. Pinafore" and Joe Orton's ribald "Entertaining Mr. Sloane."

The smallest of Stratford's theaters, the Tom Patterson, will offer the
"Winfield Trilogy" by Dan Needles, Chekhov's "Uncle Vanya," "Bonjour, la,
Bonjour" by Michel Tremblay, "Shirley Valentine" by Willy Russell and a
production of "Two Gentlemen of Verona" by Stratford's company of younger
actors.



FROM A PULITZER TO A NEW PREMIERE

The Intiman Theater Company of Seattle was basking in glory this past April as
it prepared to open its 20th season. The Pulitzer Prize for drama had just gone
to Robert Schenkkan's "Kentucky Cycle," a six-hour historical epic about America
that received its world premiere at the Intiman last June and may be the first
play to win the prize before being seen in New York.

In her seventh and final year as the theater's artistic director, Elizabeth
Huddle will stage another world premiere in an eclectic summer program that
includes Shakespeare's "Macbeth," Jean Anouilh's "Antigone" and a comedy by the
British satirist Alan Ayckbourn. Ms. Huddle will direct a comic drama by Louisa
Rose: "Catherine: Concerning the Fateful Origins of Her Grandeur, With Diverse
Musical Interludes, Three Elephants and No Ballet." In it, the Empress of Russia
oversees a rehearsal of an autobiographical play that depicts her life up to the
1762 coup she led against her husband, Czar Peter III. The second program of the
summer, it runs from June 19 through July 18.

The first offering, "Macbeth," directed by Susan Fenichell, holds the fort in
the 424-seat theater at Seattle Center (celebrating its 30th season) through
June 13.

"Antigone," the third production, is scheduled from July 24 through Aug. 22.
Translated by Barbara Bray, it will be directed by Daniel Renner.

"How the Other Half Loves," Mr. Ayckbourn's 1971 comedy about infidelity,
completes the summer schedule, running Sept. 2 through 26. Warner Shook, who
staged "The Kentucky Cycle," will direct.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

CORRECTION-DATE: June 4, 1992, Thursday

CORRECTION:

A theater listing on May 17 in the special Summer Arts section misidentified a
company performing at Guild Hall in East Hampton, L.I., and referred incorrectly
to the scheduled plays. The company is the Actors Studio; it will present only
one play by Joyce Carol Oates, and the Arthur Miller play to be presented is not
a premiere.

Another listing misidentified a theater company in Tucson, Ariz., that will
present "Hay Fever" and "Light Up the Sky." It is the University of Arizona
theater arts department, not the Arizona Theater Company.


GRAPHIC: Drawing

TYPE: Schedule

                   Copyright 1992 The New York Times Company


                              126 of 281 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                   May 18, 1992, Monday, Late Edition - Final

THE 1992 CAMPAIGN: Undeclared Candidate;
How Perot Took Wrong Turn In Effort to Bail Out Wall St.

BYLINE: By SETH FAISON Jr.

SECTION: Section A; Page 1; Column 5; National Desk

LENGTH: 1694 words


While Ross Perot has gradually become known to voters across the country, his
name has long had a familiar ring on Wall Street, that bustling intersection of
money and information.

Wall Street enabled Mr. Perot to make his first $1 billion, from selling stock
in his computer services company in 1968. Wall Street also handed Mr. Perot, who
is considering a run for the Presidency, the biggest failure of his career --
what came to be known as "the duPont debacle."

Fear of a Run on Brokerages

In 1970, responding to an appeal by leaders of the New York Stock Exchange, Mr.
Perot rode in from Dallas to tackle the problems of a stock brokerage, duPont
Glore Forgan. Although it was the nation's third-largest brokerage, duPont, like
many family-run firms, was plagued by lax management and was largely unprepared
for a cash shortage that followed a plunge in stock prices in 1969-70.

The stock exchange knew of Mr. Perot's deep pockets and a data-processing
contract he had recently signed with duPont, which he would lose if the firm
failed. Dozens of smaller brokerages had already fallen that year, and the Big
Board's leaders told Mr. Perot that a duPont failure might lead to a run on
other brokerages. Many of those firms could fall like dominoes, they said,
raising the threat that the exchange might close.

With a weakness for challenges that are scented with altruism and an eye for the
lucrative possibility that other stock brokerages might sign up with his
expanding computer company, Mr. Perot accepted the call. He invested millions of
dollars in duPont, assumed its ownership and appointed new managers. With his
talk about technology and heads-up management, Mr. Perot gained a reputation as
the man who could save Wall Street from its antiquated ways.

Yet what seemed like a good idea turned out to be far more complicated than
anyone had expected. In January 1974, Mr. Perot shut duPont, taking a loss of
$60 million. The would-be savior became the butt of jokes that ricocheted around
the stock exchange.

Asked why he had been singled out as the man who could save Wall Street, Mr.
Perot replied tartly, "They were looking for a sucker."

In response to written questions last week, Mr. Perot said that he would not
make the same investment today and implied that Wall Street's titans had
exaggerated the potential disaster.

"I have more experience and would know that the U.S. Government would not let
the New York Stock Exchange cease activity," Mr. Perot said in his written
response. He attributed duPont's eventual failure to a declining stock market
and the firm's pre-existing problems.

In dozens of interviews, Wall Street executives past and present debated whether
anyone could have saved duPont. And while some say that Mr. Perot was somewhat
misled by the market officials who lured him to duPont, many agree that once he
got there, Mr. Perot's brash, authoritarian manner and inexperience on Wall
Street made him vulnerable to the politics of the financial industry. In the
end, those politics proved as important as cost-cutting and efficiency.

"Ross is not overly endowed with humility," said Walter E. Auch, who as chief
executive of duPont Walston, one of two successor firms created by a 1973
merger, worked with Mr. Perot. "He did not have a high regard for management on
the Street, and was not reluctant to say so. He paid for that."

As with his effort to change General Motors and his attempt to rescue prisoners
of war from Vietnam, Mr. Perot found that as an outsider on Wall Street zeal and
hard work are not always a match for the politics and personalities of
entrenched institutions.

Ken Langone, chairman of Invemed Associates Inc., remembered how duPont fell
victim to raids in 1971 from the same brokerage leaders who had pleaded with Mr.
Perot to save the firm less than a year earlier.

"They wanted to take him down a peg," said Mr. Langone, who was Mr. Perot's
first investment banker in New York. "He was a newly rich Texan. They were happy
to see him go down, even if duPont's survival would have helped them in the long
run."

Mr. Perot said last week that he agreed with those who called him naive to think
that because he had responded to pleas from brokerages to save duPont, his
competitors would not undermine him.

"They are correct," Mr. Perot said of the critics. "Prior to my investment, the
leaders of the major firms assured me they would be helpful and supportive
during the critical rebuilding phase of duPont. As soon as our money was
invested, the atmosphere changed."

Turmoil on Wall Street

There were broad changes in Wall Street's atmosphere in the late 1960's and
early 1970's, and duPont was one of dozens of brokerages threatened by them.
Chris Welles, who chronicled the era in his 1975 book, "The Last Days of the
Club," said the old-boy methods of doing business and lax self-regulation that
flourished in the bull market in the 1960's were not keeping pace with the needs
of a changing market.

For one thing, stock trades were still processed by hand, and growing volume
started to tangle trading firms in stacks of paper so deep that backroom
bookkeepers could not find stock certificates for some trades.

In July 1970, Mr. Perot's Dallas-based computer services company, Electronic
Data Systems, took on duPont's data processing needs. Later that year, when
duPont fell $5 million short of cash, Mr. Perot was an obvious person to seek
help from.

Mr. Perot had dazzled the financial world in 1968 when he sold shares in E.D.S.
to the public. Relying on its reputation as a well-run company with a bright
future, E.D.S. became one of the hottest stocks of the year. Its value grew
tenfold in 18 months, as did Mr. Perot's net worth -- from $150 million in
September 1968 to nearly $1.5 billion in early 1970.

When duPont turned to him for financial support, Mr. Perot saw a chance to use
his computer and management skills on Wall Street, which badly needed both. But
the deeper Mr. Perot looked into duPont's back office, the clearer the size of
the firm's debts became. The $5 million that was apparently needed quickly
became $10 million, and the amount threatened to climb.

Mr. Perot then wavered, in part because he was becoming disgusted by Wall
Street's shoddy management practices.

"I remember seeing him at a meeting when he came back from visiting one of the
big brokerages," said a former duPont partner. "He said, 'They ought to hang a
red light on that place. I've never seen such a whorehouse.' "

Mr. Perot came under pressure from the late Bernard J. Lasker, then chairman of
the New York Stock Exchange, and from friends in the Nixon Administration, not
to retreat. Felix G. Rohatyn, the New York financier who was then chairman of
the Big Board's crisis committee, warned that a default by duPont on customer
accounts could cost investors millions and undermine confidence in brokerages.

Mr. Perot bargained for 51 percent of duPont in exchange for the $10 million he
had put into the firm. He then installed a team of managers headed by Morton H.
Meyerson, his longtime lieutenant, whose focus on efficiency and results
sometimes offended the firm's brokers.

Paul Fitzgerald, now chief of Reich & Company, recalled that more than 500
stockbrokers had deserted duPont in eight-months, taking their clients, and much
of the firm's revenue.

"The more successful a broker is, the less he takes to authority," Mr.
Fitzgerald said. "And Perot was perceived as a real authoritarian."

Shaves and White Shirts

For one thing, former duPont employees recalled, Mr. Perot had asked
stockbrokers to wear white shirts to work and cut the long hair and beards that
were coming into fashion on Wall Street in 1971. Annoyed by the lack of loyalty
and obedience among the brokers, Mr. Perot set up a boot-camp style training
school in Beverly Hills, Calif., to teach mostly ex-Marines how to sell stock.

Mr. Auch, the former duPont official, remembered that two or three times in
1973, Mr. Perot asked him on a Thursday evening to call the firm's 140-odd
branch managers to Dallas for a weekend meeting that was important, but not
urgent.

"I told Ross, 'You can't do this, you've got to give these people some notice,'
" Mr. Auch recalled. "He just looked me in the eye and said, 'Wally, if you want
to share this burden with me, then you'll do this.' "

Mr. Perot said he could not recall such a meeting and maintained that any
gathering on such short notice would have been called only because a problem
needed immediate attention.

Only One Way Out

Mr. Perot and Mr. Meyerson were credited with streamlining duPont's management.
But in 1973 stocks fell into one of the worst bear markets in history, and a
merger with another brokerage, Walston & Company, did not stanch duPont's
losses.

By early 1974, with the outlook murky, Mr. Perot was convinced in a meeting with
Mr. Meyerson and Mr. Auch that liquidation was the only way to avoid further
losses. Last week, Mr. Perot said his duPont-related losses totaled "around $60
million."

But before agreeing to close the firm, Mr. Perot wanted to be sure that no
duPont customer lost money because, Mr. Auch said, he felt both a moral
obligation to the customers and concern about possible litigation.

"Promises were made and kept," Mr. Fitzgerald said.

Looking back, supporters of Mr. Perot see the duPont failure as something he
could not have avoided.

"It was a hopeless situation," said Alan C. Greenberg, chairman of the Bear
Stearns Companies. "He was taking on a dinosaur. Did he underestimate the
problem? Maybe. Did he handle it in the best way? Probably not. But he tried."

Others say Mr. Perot failed to grasp factors that do not necessarily show up on
a balance sheet but are part of Wall Street -- and of Washington.

"You have to win confidence, develop loyalties, get people to make personal
sacrifices for the good of the firm," said John H. Goldsmith, chief executive of
John Hancock Freedom Securities of New York. "He's very set in his ways. He does
things militarily. I don't think that will work in government. It didn't work at
duPont."

NAME: Ross Perot

LOAD-DATE: May 18, 1992

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo: Ross Perot, center, found that on Wall Street hard work was no
match for the politics of entrenched institutions. With him at the Big Board in
1971 were Richard B. Howland, left, and Bernard J. Lasker, the exchange's
executive vice president and chairman, respectively. (The New York Times) (pg.
A14)

TYPE: Biography

                   Copyright 1992 The New York Times Company


                              127 of 281 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                  May 19, 1992, Tuesday, Late Edition - Final

Deaths Mount as Troops Fire on Thais

BYLINE: By PHILIP SHENON,  Special to The New York Times

SECTION: Section A; Page 1; Column 6; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 1099 words

DATELINE: BANGKOK, Thailand, Tuesday, May 19


Thai Army troops fired into crowds of pro-democracy demonstrators gathered in
Bangkok on Monday night, killing at least 10 people and wounding scores of
others in a second day of protests. The unrest reflected the public's
long-suppressed fury over military rule.

The attacks on civilians failed to intimidate many demonstrators, and as dawn
broke today, young protesters were rampaging through the streets of the Thai
capital. They set fire to Government offices and chanted their demand that the
nation's former army commander, Suchinda Kraprayoon, step down from his new job
as Prime Minister.

"No more Suchinda," went one of the chants. "No more army."

Protests Appear to Spread

Medical volunteers estimated that as many as 100 people had been killed across
the city since the violence erupted on Sunday night, when troops crushed what
had been a peaceful anti-Government demonstration near the city's Democracy
Monument. This estimate, however, could not be independently confirmed.

Despite increasingly desperate efforts by the Government of Prime Minister
Suchinda to restore order, the protests instead appear to be spreading, with
many Thais seeing the first real opportunity in their lifetimes to end 60 years
of military domination of their country.

[To the army, the prospect of civilian rule in Thailand threatens not only the
privileges that have made generations of officers rich but also their
involvement in dealings like narcotics trafficking. Page A10.]

Surgery in Hotel Lobby

The Royal Hotel's dingy lobby, close to the site of the worst clashes between
soldiers and protesters on Monday night, was turned into a makeshift surgery
ward and morgue. Doctors and nurses, struggling to tend to wounded protesters
who had been dragged to safety along the hotel's blood-smeared gray marble
floor, reported that at least 10 people had died before they could be moved from
the Royal.

The doctors reported that most of those who died at the Royal had suffered
gunshot wounds in what witnesses described as random bursts of gunfire by
jittery soldiers.

"It was crazy," said Wiva Jikan, a 26-year-old office worker who was in the
hotel seeking help for a 14-year-old boy hit in the right shoulder by a
soldier's bullet. "They don't look. They just shoot."

At dawn, soldiers firing into the air rushed the demonstrators, sending
thousands fleeing into the Royal Hotel, The Associated Press reported. Soldiers
dragged 2,000 men from the hotel after a room-by-room search and arrested them,
some of whom were beaten, the A.P. said.

"I feel so sad for Thailand," said Pongkasem Khaimook, a 28-year-old doctor who
was among the medical volunteers this morning at the hotel. As he waited for
ambulances to arrive at the hotel with new casualties, there were fresh bursts
of gunfire outside.

'Many Dead People'

"The Government is acting like it is at war with the common people," he said,
slowly shaking his head. "There have been many dead people."

With rare interruptions, the military has had the final say in the operations of
the Thai Government since 1932, when the army forced the monarchy to give up
absolute rule. The Democracy Monument was built to commemorate the 1932
constitution, the first of 11 that have been imposed here.

Many Thais say the question is not so much what becomes of Mr. Suchinda as an
individual, but whether Thailand, an increasingly developed and prosperous
nation, should continue to be governed at the whim of a handful of generals.

Lotena Prasitiem, a 26-year-old schoolteacher, held up a copy of Monday's front
page of one of Bangkok's daily newspapers and pointed to a large photograph of
Thai soldiers savagely beating an already bloodied, cowering protester.

"This is Thailand. We are not Burma. We are not Vietnam," Mrs. Lotena said of
Thailand's authoritarian neighbors. "The people want democracy. They want to be
able to control their lives. But the soldiers, they just want power."

Most of the protesters are young students, although increasingly they are being
joined in their demonstrations by Thais from all walks of life -- from the
impoverished day laborers to well-off businessmen who today could be seen using
their cellular phones to relay information from one pro-democracy protest to
another.

The broader support for the demonstrations is a important difference, many Thais
say, from the violent anti-Government street protests in 1973, which were almost
entirely by students. More than 75 people died in those demonstrations.

This year's demonstrations are becoming more violent by the hour. Bands of
motorcycle-riding protesters cruised the city before dawn this morning, using
metal bars to smash the windows and rip the doors off of police stations.

Offices Are Ransacked

Across the street from the Royal Hotel, demonstrators ransacked the offices of
the Thai national radio station and the state lottery, while nearby a military
fuel truck had been overturned and set on fire to the cheers of the protesters.
Moments later, the tanker exploded.

Buildings housing the nation's public relations and tax offices also were
reported to be on fire.

The appointment last month of Mr. Suchinda as a non-elected Prime Minister is
what provoked the pro-democracy demonstrations. Before he retired from the army,
Mr. Suchinda was the architect of a February 1991 coup that toppled Thailand's
last democratically elected government, and his appointment as Prime Minister
little more than a year has been derided as "Suchinda's second coup."

The demonstrators, led by Chamlong Srimuang, are calling on Mr. Suchinda and his
political allies to amend the Constitution to require that prime ministers be
selected from among elected members of Parliament -- an amendment that could be
applied to Mr. Suchinda and force him from office.

Mr. Chamlong, a Buddhist ascetic, a retired army general and a member of
Parliament who is Thailand's most popular politician, has emerged as Mr.
Suchinda's chief foe.

He was arrested on Monday near the Democracy Monument and placed in handcuffs as
his followers, forced to lie down on the sun-baked asphalt, were told to prepare
themselves for arrest.

"This is how dictators act," Mr. Chamlong said of his arrest.

Soon after Mr. Chamlong was arrested, demonstrators returned to the streets.

Prime Minister Suchinda, his face drawn and pale, appeared on television on
Monday and promised "to restore order as soon as possible." He said the
Government "had no choice but to use force" since protesters were marching
toward Government buildings.

LOAD-DATE: May 19, 1992

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photos: Demonstrators huddling on the ground as Thai troops fired shots
on the second day of protests in Bangkok (pg. A1); During the second day of
violent anti-Government protests, Thai soldiers prepared to remove arrested
demonstrators from a Bangkok street. Despite attacks from troops that have left
scores dead and wounded, the protesters showed no signs of quitting their calls
for democracy. (pg. A10) (Reuters)

Map of Thailand showing location of Bangkok; map of central Bangkok. (pg. A10)

                   Copyright 1992 The New York Times Company


                              128 of 281 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 May 20, 1992, Wednesday, Late Edition - Final

AFTER THE RIOTS;
Tumult of Los Angeles Echoed in Long Beach

BYLINE: By SETH MYDANS,  Special to The New York Times

SECTION: Section A; Page 20; Column 1; National Desk

LENGTH: 942 words

DATELINE: LONG BEACH, Calif., May 19


Once again, Cambodian refugees here have been made the victims of a sideshow,
their adopted city largely ignored in its copycat wave of rioting last month,
much as the fighting in their homeland was overshadowed in the 1970's by the
Vietnam War.

Three hundred forty fires were set, 1 person died, 361 were injured and 1,200
people were arrested in the worst civil disorders in the history of Long Beach.
But residents watching on television for news of their city found mostly the
flames of Los Angeles, 20 miles north.

"I was watching all night but they didn't show Long Beach very much," said
Satoshi Seta, who owns a row of small shops here in the nation's largest
Cambodian-American community. "The only way for me to find out what happened was
to come down and look."

He was one of the luckier ones. A grocery store he owns had been looted bare and
a bullet had been fired through the window of his small medical center, but his
jewelry store and barber shop had survived intact.

More than 17,000 Cambodians live in this city of 440,000, and much of the
destruction affected their small businesses, including restaurants, grocery
stores and other small shops in the neighborhoods along Anaheim Street.

When the Indochina war spilled over from Vietnam into Cambodia, the fighting in
the smaller country was treated as a sideshow until 1975, when Phnom Penh fell
to the Khmer Rouge and four years of mass killings followed.

On April 29, when four white police officers were acquitted in the beating of a
black man, Rodney G. King, Los Angeles burst into flame and 58 people, including
Matthew Haines of Long Beach, were killed. Grumblings of anger were felt in a
number of other cities in the days that followed, but only Long Beach suffered
its own serious outbreak of burning and looting.

Police today announced the arrests of seven Long Beach residents in connection
with the death of Mr. Haines, 32 years old, who was pulled from his motorcycle
and shot on the night of April 30.

Bandwagon of Vandalism

City officials and residents now agree that the Long Beach riot, as destructive
as it was, erupted mostly in imitation of the city's big neighbor and sometimes
seemed as much a party as a protest. "I think they did it just to be doing it,
just because Los Angeles was doing it," said Anthony Clarke, 14, as he leaned on
his bicycle and surveyed the damage to the store where he used to buy candy.

Troy Fitzgerald, 21, said he had watched from his porch as scores of people
gathered outside a row of shops across 10th Street chanting, "Break it open,
break it open."

"They just went wild," he said, "taking everything they could and laughing in
the street. When the police came, they just laughed and dropped everything. I
think they saw what was going on in L.A. and figured they could get away with
it."

Police Chief William C. Ellis noted that it took 24 hours for his city to erupt.
"There was not the initial reaction to the verdict," he said. "I think people
were being bombarded by visions of looters essentially walking out of stores
untouched, and what we had here was a spillover."

Rotha Sieng, the owner of Khmer Market, fled the devastation of her country in
1979 as most of her fellow refugees did and settled here two years later. She
said she had not realized that she had lost all her merchandise to looters until
she arrived for work that Friday morning.

A refugee experienced in devastation, she seemed to have learned to ration her
emotions. "When I saw that my door was broken and everything was gone," she said
simply, "I said to myself, 'Oh, my.' "

Although the Cambodians suffered a heavy toll in the Long Beach damage, City
Manager James C. Hankla said he did not believe they had been singled out by
rioters, as Korean shop owners were in Los Angeles.

"I feel that it was more an issue of geography than an issue of ethnicity," he
said, a view that was repeated by other residents and officials. The Cambodian
shops are clustered in poor, ethnically mixed areas of the city where much of
the looting took place.

Nevertheless, some Cambodian merchants said the rioting had fed their concerns
over security. A violent rivalry between Hispanic and Cambodian gangs and
extortion by a Cambodian underworld have already led some refugees to again seek
safer cities.

"There is a lot of mixed feelings," said Julian Kim, a Cambodian refugee who
owns a jewelry store. "Some people are thinking of moving somewhere else."

Behind the counter in her grocery store, Sokha Leng said, "It's hard to do
business around here because too much stuff is going on -- gangs, drive-by
shootings."

Mr. Hankla said that up to $20 million in damage occurred in Long Beach, far
less than the hundreds of millions of dollars in damage suffered in Los Angeles.
Swift and forceful police action helped contain the damage, he said, and
officials have aggressively sought to recover stolen goods and pushed to collect
private videotapes that could identify rioters.

Peter V. Ueberroth, who has been appointed by Los Angeles to oversee a long
rebuilding effort, said today that Long Beach was being included in his plans
for economic improvements.

But some residents, as they surveyed the blackened buildings in their
neighborhoods, say they feel their city is still being treated as an
afterthought.

"One thing I'm upset about is they're cleaning up Los Angeles but they're not
cleaning up here," said Tamera Howard, who lives on 10th Street across from the
ashes of a dry cleaner, pool hall, bakery and grocery store. "I realize Los
Angeles is their priority now, but it was really horrible here, too."

LOAD-DATE: May 20, 1992

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo: For the 17,000 Cambodians living in Long Beach, Calif., reaction
to the rioting in the city set off by violence in Los Angeles includes
frustration and stoicism. Two young girls passed a burned-out building on 10th
Street that is indicative of the damage many Cambodian businesses suffered.
(Monica Almeida/The New York Times)

                   Copyright 1992 The New York Times Company


                              129 of 281 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 May 20, 1992, Wednesday, Late Edition - Final

Korea-Vietnam Oil Contract

BYLINE: Reuters

SECTION: Section D; Page 19; Column 2; Financial Desk

LENGTH: 186 words

DATELINE: HANOI, Vietnam, May 19


A South Korean consortium of eight companies signed a contract today with
Vietnam's state oil company, Petrovietnam, to explore for oil off the south
coast.

The contract was signed by the heads of Petrovietnam and the Korea Petroleum
Development Corporation, the lead company in the South Korean group.

The agreement covers one of several offshore blocks formerly controlled by a
Vietnamese-Soviet joint venture. The fields have attracted bidding by Western,
South Korean and Japanese oil concerns.

The agreement is the first major investment in Communist Vietnam by Seoul, which
until recently had followed a United States trade embargo against Hanoi.

Last month Petrovietnam signed a production-sharing contract with Shell Vietnam
Exploration B.V., a subsidiary of the Royal Dutch/Shell Group, for another of
the sought-after blocks.

A Petrovietnam official said the company would sign three more oil-exploration
contracts in June with foreign partners.

Vietnam produced 27 million barrels of crude oil in 1991 and plans output of 37
million barrels this year. Most of it is exported to Japan.

LOAD-DATE: May 20, 1992

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1992 The New York Times Company


                              130 of 281 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                  May 21, 1992, Thursday, Late Edition - Final

THE 1992 CAMPAIGN: Primaries;
PEROT'S STRENGTH SHOWN IN OREGON

BYLINE: By R. W. APPLE Jr.,  Special to The New York Times

SECTION: Section A; Page 1; Column 5; National Desk

LENGTH: 1020 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, May 20


In a startling demonstration of electoral strength, Ross Perot captured a
significant portion of Republican and Democratic votes in Tuesday's Oregon
primary, according to interviews with voters leaving polling places, and he may
have done the same thing in Washington State.

Mr. Perot's exact totals are not known because all his support was from write-in
votes, which Oregon law does not require to be counted in primaries, except in
special circumstances. And in Washington, where the primary was a popularity
contest unrelated to convention delegates, write-ins need not be tallied for a
week after an election day.

But a survey of voters leaving the polls in Oregon by Voter Research and
Surveys, a consortium of four television networks, indicated that Mr. Perot, a
Texas billionaire who plans an independent Presidential candidacy, had won 13
percent of the vote in the Democratic primary and 15 percent in the Republican
primary. In remote San Juan County, Wash., a group of islands in Puget Sound
where the relatively few votes were tabulated quickly, Mr. Perot gathered enough
write-in votes to lead both parties' primaries.

"I've seen nothing like it since Vietnam," said Senator Bob Packwood, an Oregon
Republican who easily won renomination. "Public alienation from politics as
usual is just about complete. After the check-bouncing business, everyone said:
'That's it. No more.' And of course that feeds Perot's fire."

Mr. Perot has been shown leading President Bush and Gov. Bill Clinton of
Arkansas, the likely Democratic nominee, in several state polls and, last
weekend, in a national poll taken by Time magazine and CNN. But not until
Tuesday had he attracted any number of actual votes from actual voters -- and it
happened in Oregon and Washington without any campaigning by Mr. Perot, without
appeals for votes from his backers and without advertising.

Now that it has happened twice, similar or even larger protests may develop in
the remaining primary contests. They conclude with contests in California and
five other states on June 2. And while Mr. Bush and Mr. Clinton remain all but
certain of nomination, every Perot vote erodes the credibility of their
candidacies in the general election and increases that of his own.

Results in 2 States

The apparently spontaneous protest vote considerably tarnished easy victories
for Mr. Bush and Mr. Clinton. Mr. Bush took 76 percent of the Oregon vote to 22
percent for Patrick J. Buchanan, his conservative challenger. In Washington, the
count was 83 percent for the President and 13 percent for Mr. Buchanan.

On the Democratic side, Mr. Clinton captured 50 percent of the Oregon vote. His
only active rival, former Gov. Edmund G. Brown Jr. of California, took 35
percent -- a solid showing that could portend a strong run for Mr. Brown in his
home state.

The Arkansas Governor picked up 28 delegates in Oregon, pushing his total to
1,788, or 83 percent of the 2,145 he needs for nomination. Mr. Brown gained 19
delegates, giving him 374.

Mr. Clinton also won in Washington, with 51 percent to 29 percent for Mr. Brown.
Delegates there are allocated in caucuses and conventions.

Perhaps the most surprising finding of the survey of voters leaving the polls in
Oregon, even more than the large number of write-in votes for Mr. Perot, was
that more Democratic primary voters said they thought well of the Texan (57
percent) than of Mr. Clinton (49 percent). Among Republican primary voters, the
same number (59 percent) expressed favorable views of Mr. Perot as did so about
President Bush.

The voter survey also included hypothetical three-way races. Among Democratic
primary voters, Mr. Perot did at least as well as Mr. Clinton, pulling 45
percent to 42 percent for Mr. Clinton, with a margin of sampling error of plus
or minus 4 percentage points. Among Republicans, Mr. Bush pulled 51 percent to
40 percent for Mr. Perot.

Among Oregon voters who turned out for the primary, in other words, Mr. Perot
has greatly weakened partisan ties without announcing his candidacy. If Mr.
Perot, a computer entrepreneur, can fight the two major-party candidates to a
draw among their own fellow party members this fall, he will be very difficult
to stop.

In comments in Austin, Tex., Mr. Clinton seemed to be trying to link himself
with the insurgency of Mr. Perot and thus to buttress his claim to be an agent
of change.

As far as voters' "positive feelings for Ross Perot, I can't blame them," Mr.
Clinton said. "I agree with a lot of what he says," he added. "I think the
system needs to be shaken up, and I'm willing to compete with anyone who wants
to run for President. I have no negative feelings about what happened in
Oregon."

Election officials in Oregon said that casting write-in votes was difficult in
that state because it used a punched-card system in most precincts. Voters must
take other steps beyond merely writing in a name. In such cases, write-in
campaigns usually distribute palm-sized instruction cards to be taken into the
voting booths, but there apparently was no official or unofficial campaign on
Mr. Perot's behalf in Oregon.

Ted Thomas, the Texan's state coordinator, said he had told supporters to forget
about the primaries and concentrate on collecting petitions to put his name on
the general-election ballot. He added, "They didn't listen."

Vote Termed Spontaneous

"It was not organized at all, to my knowledge," said Carol Auger, executive
director of the Oregon Democratic Party. "It's a very significant vote, not to
be taken lightly. People are tired of Republicans blaming Congress and Democrats
blaming the White House, so they find it appealing when Perot talks about using
the best people of both parties."

Next Tuesday, primaries will be held in Kentucky and Arkansas, which is Mr.
Clinton's home state but also the state where Mr. Perot was born. On June 2,
Alabama, Montana, New Jersey, New Mexico and Ohio will vote, along with
California. A leading New Jersey Democrat said the Perot campaign had already
set up tables, looking for volunteers, at every mall in his area.

LOAD-DATE: May 21, 1992

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo: In elections in which his name was not even on the ballot, Ross
Perot captured a significant number of votes in state primaries in both Oregon
and Washington. While the write-ins were being counted yesterday, a Perot
volunteer, Happy Ford, left, handed a petition form to Gary Hertz in the
continuing effort to get the Texas billionaire's name on the November
Presidential ballot. (Associated Press) (pg. A22)

Table: "The Oregon Primaries and Ross Perot"

Percent with a favorable opinion of:

Candidate          Democratic     Republican
George Bush               12%            59%
Bill Clinton              49%            13%
Ross Perot                57%            59%

 If these are the Presidential candidates in November, who would get your vote?


Candidate          Democratic     Republican
George Bush                6%            50%
Bill Clinton              42%             4%
Ross Perot                45%            41%

(Based on exit polls conducted by Voter Research and Surveys; 1,295 Democratic
voters and 830 Republican voters leaving 30 polling places throughout the state
on Tuesday.) (pg. A22)

Chart: "The Democratic Delegate Tally"

Current breakdown of Presidential preference of delegates to the Democratic
National Convention as compiled by The New York Times. Total delegate vote:
4,288.

Total delegates to needed to win nomination: 2,145
Delegates to be chosen in remaining primaries: 788

Clinton*: 1,788 (Oregon primary: 28)
Uncommitted: 813
Tsongas: 525
Brown: 374 (Oregon primary: 19)

*Clinton needs 357 more delegates for the nomination. He has 83% of the
delegates he needs.

Preferences are based on state laws, party rules and projections from early
results in states where there are caucuses. The tally includes preferences of
superdelegates who are members of Congress, Democratic National Committee
members, governors and former elected officials. (pg. A22)

                   Copyright 1992 The New York Times Company


                              131 of 281 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                  May 21, 1992, Thursday, Late Edition - Final

DISORDER IN THAILAND;
Thai King Uses His Scepter Sparingly

BYLINE: By BARBARA CROSSETTE,  Special to The New York Times

SECTION: Section A; Page 8; Column 1; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 1214 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, May 20


Through four decades of intermittent crises, the people of Thailand have turned
again and again to the soft-spoken, somber, enigmatic man who occupies one of
the world's most powerful yet mysterious thrones. Today King Bhumibol Adulyadej,
Rama IX of the Chakri dynasty, placed himself between the army that redefined
the monarchy's role and the people who want his moral force behind their
peaceful political revolution.

"We are fighting in our own house," he told two equally uncompromising
politicians, Prime Minister Suchinda Kraprayoon and the populist leader Chamlong
Srimuang, as they sat at his feet. "It is useless to live on burned ruins."

For King Bhumibol (pronounced POH-mee-pahd) as much as for the Thai people, the
political future of Thailand now hangs in the balance, as it did in 1957, 1973,
1976 and 1981. But this time, the American-born King, who has turned a limited
constitutional mandate into an immense fount of personal power, may find a new
political base growing to support him, according to a leading scholar on
Thailand, David K. Wyatt of Cornell University.

Courting the Bourgeoisie

"All through this period from the late 50's to the present, the royal family and
the King in particular has assiduously cultivated relations with many people in
society, especially the middle and upper class," Mr. Wyatt said in an interview
today. "The best symbolic representation of that is that every university
diploma in the country is handed to the graduate by the King or a member of the
family.

"The really interesting and exciting thing about what's going on right now is
that that middle class is finally coming of age," Mr. Wyatt said. "One of the
hopeful signs of the last few weeks is that an amorphous constituency for
civilian government is finally beginning to take shape."

"The King has used his power wisely," he said.

King Bhumibol, who is 64 years old and the world's longest-reigning monarch,
inherited the throne through a series of tragedies. When he was born in
Cambridge, Mass., on Dec. 5, 1927, his father was a royal prince studying
medicine at Harvard, and his mother a Thai commoner learning nursing.

Military Coup in '32

His father, Prince Mahidol, the founder of modern Thai medicine, was not
directly in line to the throne. He died in 1929, while his brother, King
Prajadhipok, was ruling what was then Siam as an absolute monarch.

Three years after a bloodless military coup in 1932 sharply reduced the royal
family's power, King Prajadhipok abdicated without an heir, and the crown passed
to Bhumibol's older brother, Prince Anand, who was only 10. A regency was
installed and both boys returned to Switzerland to finish their schooling.

On June 9, 1946, Bhumibol's brother, then a 20-year-old King, Anand Mahidol, was
found dead with a bullet through his head in the palace in Bangkok. The death
has never been publicly explained.

In the tumultuous postwar period, when Thailand was extricating itself from the
ignominy of having sided with the Axis powers in World War II, King Bhumibol
Adulyadej -- the name means "strength of the land, incomparable power" -- was
formally crowned the ninth in the Chakri dynasty in June 1950. He had recently
completed studies in law and political science.

King Bhumbol is the great grandson of King Mongkut, the monarch fictionalized in
"The King and I," and he resented what he called the "fairy tales" that had
grown up around the opulent throne of Siam by the time he became King.

"At first it was all this rubbish about the half-brother of the moon and of the
sun and master of the tide and all that," he said in an interview in 1988.

The King had more serious problems, however. The military government under Field
Marshal Luang Pibul Songgram had become accustomed through a long regency to
ruling without a royal figure who exercised power.

"When I opened my mouth, they'd say, 'Your Majesty, you don't know anything,' "
he recalled. "So I shut my mouth. I know things, but I shut my mouth."

The King adopted a two-track policy that was to serve him and Thailand well. He
threw himself into national development, promoting projects like alternate fuel
development, water treatment, agricultural research and eventual crop
substitution in areas where opium poppies are grown.

He also decided on a "middle way" for dealing with his limited powers, he said
in the interview. He rejected the role of a do-nothing, ceremonial king and
began to make decisions without consulting with the generals and field marshals
when he knew he was within his constitutional rights. But he stopped short of
overstepping a line of confrontation except on rare occasions, carefully
selected.

"I think it is a good technique that we have found," he said in 1988.

As the military increasingly sought to use his popularity as a prop while hiding
behind the world's toughest lese-majeste laws to curb dissent, the King built up
a reputation for hard work and total dedication to the people of Thailand. No
military leader or civilian politician has been able to rival it.

In 1957, the young King intervened in a political confrontation for the first
time, apparently backing a rival to Field Marshal Pibul, who was duly overthrown
in a coup.

In 1973 and 1976, during student riots, the King intervened again, the first
time backing an early democracy movement and the second time coming down on the
side of a right-wing law-and-order movement.

Mr. Wyatt said he believes the 1976 policy can be explained by a fear of
Indochinese Communism, which had recently taken hold in Vietnam, Cambodia and
Laos, wiping out the Laotian royal family. But the rightist policy proved to be
a mistake in the long run, the professor said, because it encouraged
conservative military leaders.

Gave Refuge to Premier

In 1981, when a group of army colonels tried to overthrow Prime Minister Prem
Tinsulanond, the King saved the Government with gestures: he gave refuge to the
Prime Minister at one of his palaces, and the coup collapsed.

The reclusive king, who manages to live in relative austerity in some of the
world's most magnificent palaces, has by most accounts had a turbulent family
life. His wife, Queen Sirikit, has withdrawn from public view from time to time,
apparently suffering bouts of depression. Their only son, Crown Prince
Vajiralongkorn, is feared by many Thais for his hot temper.

The age-old protocol requiring traffic to stop and people to sink to the ground
in the royal family's presence has magnified the distance between the Prince and
the people.

In his development work, the king has found a close companion in his second
daughter, Princess Sirindhorn, who appeared on television today in Bangkok to
urge restraint. In 1977, when she was 22 years old, her father named her a Crown
Princess, making her eligible to inherit the throne. Many Thais would welcome
that. Photographs of Princess Sirindhorn hang in homes, shops and gas stations
all over Thailand.

In the last few years, Princess Sirindhorn, an expert on classical Thai culture
who also studied engineering and archeology, has been lecturing at the Thai
military academy.

"The king is maintaining contact with an enormous number of military officers
through his daughter," Mr. Wyatt said.

NAME: Bhumibol Adulyadej (King)

LOAD-DATE: May 21, 1992

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photos: King Bhumibol Adulyadej (Agence France-Presse)

TYPE: Biography

                   Copyright 1992 The New York Times Company


                              132 of 281 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                  May 21, 1992, Thursday, Late Edition - Final

CBS Is Silent, but Then There's the Next Season

BYLINE: By BILL CARTER

SECTION: Section B; Page 16; Column 5; National Desk

LENGTH: 861 words


Murphy Brown's newborn son has not yet been named, but there is not much chance
he will be J. Danforth Brown.

Though the comments of Vice President Dan Quayle about the television show
"Murphy Brown," single motherhood and morality set off a storm of reaction
around the country yesterday, very few of those involved with the program had
much to say. Only the creator of the series, Diane English, who issued a
statement on Tuesday, has responded publicly. Ms. English said that if Mr.
Quayle opposed the decision made by the show's title character to have her baby
out of wedlock, "he'd better make sure abortion remains safe and legal."

None of the show's principal producers responded to requests for comment
yesterday. Gary Dontzig and Steven Peterman, the co-producers of the series who
will become the executive producers of "Murphy Brown" next year when Ms. English
leaves the series to create a new comedy for CBS, declined through the show's
publicist to add to Ms. English's statement. Korby Siamis, who wrote the birth
episode with Ms. English, also said through her agent that she would allow Ms.
English's statement to be the show's only response.

Candice Bergen, who plays Murphy Brown, was traveling and not available for
comment, her publicity office said.

Surprise Expressed Privately

Nor was anyone at CBS willing to comment on the record about Mr. Quayle's attack
on the series, though privately several executives expressed incredulity that
Mr. Quayle would go after the network's most popular entertainment show.

Several CBS executives indicated that they were disappointed with Mr. Quayle's
timing. If only he had attacked the show before it was broadcast on Monday
night, they said, CBS might have won the May ratings sweep. All CBS needed to
take the special monthlong ratings period that ended last night was a few
additional ratings points.

Mr. Quayle, who said yesterday that he has never watched the program, was
apparently one of very few people upset with Monday night's episode of "Murphy
Brown."

The show was the second-highest-rated episode the the series has had; it was
viewed by more than 38 million people, CBS said.

Only a Few Calls

But fewer than a half-dozen called the network to complain about the subject
matter, said a CBS spokeswoman, Ann Morforgen. That figure is minuscule by
standards of previous network shows that have been deemed sexually or morally
irresponsible by conservative or religious groups.

"Murphy Brown" has been among the most popular series on television for four
years, and has won many awards, including an Emmy as the best comedy on
television.

The character is the star reporter for a television newsmagazine, called "FYI,"
set in Washington. That format has allowed the show to blur the line between
fact and fiction in the past.

The series has made many jokes at the expense of real-life politicians,
including Mr. Quayle. This season one episode was an elaborate satire on the
Supreme Court confirmation hearings of Clarence Thomas, with Murphy Brown
subjected to an interrogation by a group of Senators cast to look uncannily like
the members of the Senate Judiciary Committee holding the Thomas hearings.

More recently, a group of prominent newswomen, including Katie Couric of NBC and
Paula Zahn of CBS, played themselves in an episode about giving a baby shower
for their fictitious colleague, Murphy.

Comedians Pounce on Quayle

This use of real characters opens the possibility that the show could
incorporate Mr. Quayle's criticism of Murphy's unwed status in its storyline
next season.

If nothing else, Mr. Quayle's foray into criticism of television comedy
immediately reintroduced him as fodder for other comedy on television. Long a
favorite target for the late-night comedians who depend heavily on the behavior
of politicians for inspiration, Mr. Quayle had recently been able to step out of
the center of the satirical bull's-eye.

S. Robert Lichter, the director of the Center for Media and Public Affairs, an
organization financed by conservative political groups mainly to conduct
sociologicial studies of the media, has made an extensive survey of political
jokes on television.

He said yesterday that Mr. Quayle, who had never fallen below the rank of the
No. 1 or the No. 2 most-joked about politicians in America in his first three
years as vice president, had in the first four months this year dropped all the
way out of the top five.

"He had been relegated to occasional use as the symbol of any stupid or
childlike behavior," Mr. Lichter said. "Clearly he had worked hard to try to
rehabilitate his image. But his face just went back up on the dartboard."

David Letterman, for one, lost no time last night. The subject of his nightly
top 10 list: "Dan Quayle's top 10 other complaints about TV."

Among the selections were these:

"Not enough positive portrayals of really dumb guys."

"Too much liberal news coverage; not enough golf and cartoons."

"Practically have to be a brain surgeon to figure out how to turn it on and
off."

" 'China Beach' failed to show Vietnam War contribution of Indiana National
Guard."

LOAD-DATE: May 21, 1992

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1992 The New York Times Company


                              133 of 281 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                  May 21, 1992, Thursday, Late Edition - Final

North Korea Asks Investors to Look Beyond Bleakness of Communist Decay

BYLINE: By DAVID E. SANGER,  Special to The New York Times

SECTION: Section A; Page 10; Column 1; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 1824 words

DATELINE: RAJIN, North Korea


In his youth, Kim Il Sung fought his way to the leadership of this country, or
so the legend goes, by fearlessly battling Japanese occupiers in guerrilla
warfare in the scrubby hills of this cold and seemingly forgotten corner of the
Korean peninsula.

Now those hillsides, here near the borders of China and Russia, are being
stripped bare, presumably by villagers who are increasingly desperate for
firewood and food.

And at age 80, with North Korea's economy near collapse, President Kim has
haltingly begun a campaign as daunting as his efforts to drive the Japanese out:
persuading them to come back.

A trip this month through sections of North Korea that have been closed to
foreigners for decades left little question about why Mr. Kim's dictatorial
Government is suddenly, if gingerly, seeking to end its isolation from Japan and
the West.

Rot and Ruin

But it is an odd kind of effort, because despite a new economic era, North
Korean officials feel no need to loosen their iron grip on the society, or even
to bring about broad market-economy reforms of the kind now under way in Russia
or southern China.

In grimy port towns like this one, with its once-busy wharf fallen into
disrepair, the price North Korea is paying for its past decisions seems hard to
miss. Unable to buy raw materials from its former Communist sponsors, North
Korea's factories seem to be slowly grinding to a halt, its docks here strangely
idle.

Fertilizers rot in the rain, and the streets, while clean and orderly, seem
oddly empty. There is too little electricity to keep many lights on at night.
Outside of town, old women pull plows through the hard brown earth by hand;
there is little livestock. There are almost no cars or tractors.

The Pluses

It is hard to see what investors would find attractive. Nonetheless, Mr. Kim's
Government insists that it has avoided the pitfalls that brought about the
collapse of many of its allies, and that investors will eventually come to see
the wisdom of its Communist philosophy or "juche" -- the ideology of
self-reliance.

So far, with North Korea's suspected efforts to build nuclear arms still
unresolved and the country's totalitarian Government as repressive as ever, the
appeals for investment have fallen on deaf ears.

But with the gradual collapse of North Korea's economy already forcing subtle
changes here, its wealthy neighbors, including South Korea, are eying the
North's disciplined workers, who are paid under $50 a month, its natural
resources and its strategic location.

The North's decision to overcome its xenophobia and open the doors this month to
a group of 145 Japanese, Chinese, American and South Korean academics and
business executives, accompanied by a score of journalists, was only the most
obvious evidence that North Korea's leadership has decided that the country can
no longer go it alone.

At times during the trip, North Korean officials even dropped, if momentarily,
the usual bravado that surrounds any discussion of their nation's economic
condition: They conceded that Mr. Kim's Government is facing its most critical
tests since the end of the Korean War four decades ago.

'The World Is Changing'

"There are now only a few countries following the socialist ways," Kim Dal Hyon,
the Deputy Prime Minister, said in Pyongyang, the capital, when asked to explain
the sudden drive for investment. "We are one of these. But we want to develop
our technology."

Conceding that the country now needs foreign help to do so, he added: "It is for
our own survival. The world is changing."

Even after a tour of the countryside aboard a slow, clanking old train, it is
difficult to assess the true state of the economy, and virtually impossible to
find any signs that economic decay is leading to political unrest. Though the
group of potential investors was shown far more than any group of foreigners in
decades, their mobility was greatly restricted by nervous North Korean security
officials.

Almost no contact was permitted with ordinary North Koreans outside the capital.
At one point the visitors were locked into a port area in Chongjin, one of the
region's larger cities, for fear they would wander into the city's May Day
celebrations.

But to the passing eye, there are hints that North Korea's economy outside of
Pyongyang is faltering badly. The countryside is dotted with factory
smokestacks, but few were smoking; by some estimates, factories are running at
only 50 percent or 60 percent of capacity.

North Korea was never rich, of course; its gross national product is estimated
at just under $1,000 per capita, or less than a fifth of that in South Korea.

But its crisis began when the Soviet Union demanded in 1989 that all goods be
paid for in hard currency instead of rubles. Since then imports, particularly
fuel, are reportedly down by at least a quarter, maybe far more.

Standing on the railway bridge spanning the Tumen River, the main trading
connection across North Korea's border with Russian and China, Li Song Pil, the
Tumen stationmaster, said that until a few years ago, "six trains came across
this bridge in each direction" each day, carrying cargo and workers.

Now, he said, "about one" goes by.

North Korea provides almost no reliable economic statistics, but foreign
diplomats based in Pyongyang say that almost everything except a few
domestically grown staples, like rice, are in short supply. Often goods cannot
be delivered because of gasoline shortages.

Though the trip yielded no evidence of starvation, foreign diplomats say that
malnutrition is a growing problem and that most people cannot even obtain their
allotment of 2.2 pounds of meat each month. Most houses in the North are
surrounded by wooden poles where the residents grow beans.

Such realities appear to lie behind the half-hearted openings to the West. But
Government officials bridle at any suggestion that they are carving an exception
to the "juche" ideology, which is still hailed here in giant posters at train
stations, in song and in the legends built up around President Kim, known to
North Koreans as the Great Leader.

"Some people think that this is contradictory with the philosophy of
independence," said Mr. Kim, the Deputy Prime Minister. "But this is not so. We
have long encouraged foreign investment. But we have been isolated by the world
community because of pressure from some world superpowers."

Indeed, North Korea may be more isolated these days than any nation on earth.
The United States has long banned trade of any kind under the Trading With the
Enemies Act. Japan is holding out on establishing diplomatic relations or
providing aid until the nuclear issue is resolved.

Still, many ethnic Koreans living in Japan send money and goods home, a vital
source of revenue for the country. But there is little trade. Russia and China,
traditionally the country's biggest trading partners, have made it clear they
will no longer subsidize what was once their healthiest ally.

Hints From the South

So far, the appeal to investors has attracted few takers. The Tumen River area,
which North Korea recently turned into a special economic zone and free trade
area, is still heavily militarized, and the river itself appears far too narrow
and shallow to carry the kind of sea-bound traffic that North Korean officials
are promoting.

Moreover, with North Korea's intentions over nuclear weapons still in doubt, no
one expects money to be flowing in anytime soon.

Seoul officially bans most trade or free travel to the North. But quietly, its
business leaders are already laying plans to gain access to the North Korea's
work force and its plentiful resources.

Several "chaebols," the South's big industrial conglomerates, quietly sent
representatives on the recent tour, mostly under the guise of academic titles.
They were scouting the North's ports, talking about how to rebuild them as soon
as economic ties are permitted or the long-divided country is reunified -- a day
some think could arrive soon after Mr. Kim's death.

Clearly, though, the South is already dangling the carrot: Kim Woo Chong, head
of the Daewoo group, traveled to the North not long ago to make plans for half a
dozen plants, though none have yet received approval in Seoul.

There has even been a first step toward trade across the Demilitarized Zone,
more for political symbolism than anything else: Seoul sold the North some rice,
and Pyongyang sold the South some coal.

Source of Cheap Labor

Indeed, both Japan and South Korea are already jockeying for position, both
seeing the North as a source of cheap and hard-working labor -- but both still
caught in their old cold-war relationships with Kim Il Sung.

If the nuclear issue is cleared away soon, Japan is expected to provide North
Korea with considerable aid under the guise of war reparations, similar to what
it negotiated with the South in the 1960's. Seoul used that money to finance its
huge steel industry, the engine of much of its economic growth, and in many ways
that opened the huge gap in wealth and productivity that divide North and South
today.

Like Vietnam, the Japanese already view North Korea as a potential market: The
city's best hotel is well equipped with Toshiba television sets, Hitachi
elevators and Oki telephones. Over time, said many of the experts who joined the
jolting, three-day train tour though tiny villages and languishing industrial
complexes, the lure of Korea will prove irresistible.

"They will look around for a while and act cautiously, but it is inevitable that
the Japanese will come in," said Cho Lee Jay, the chairman of the North-East
Asia Economic Forum, one of the organizers of the tour. "Remember, they have
been here before."

Reminders of Occupation

The reminders of those days are everywhere. Japan's brutal 40-year occupation of
Korea, beginning in the early 1900's, left more than deep scars and lasting
resentments: It left a huge network of roads, buildings and hardware, much of it
still in use.

"This is all exactly the same," Keisuke Kumai, a retired Japanese executive who
lived in this region of northeast Korea until he was 16, said as he surveyed the
port in Rajin. Mr. Kumai was one of a number of former residents who, under the
hastily arranged title of "consultants" to Japanese economic organizations, paid
$4,000 each to return.

The former Japanese residents gathered on the wharfs, reminiscing about the
Japanese who once ran these towns, the military ships with the Japanese flags
that used to make calls to the busy ports and the distant sounds of shooting
when their troops clashed with Soviet forces. They walked around old brick
buildings put up by the Japanese occupiers.

But with a quick look around, Mr. Kumai concluded that the country probably had
little to offer Japan then, and less today. "I'm glad I came back," he said,
"but once is enough. It's plenty."

LOAD-DATE: May 21, 1992

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo: While rice is still abundant, most commodities are in short
supply as North Korea's economy falters. A woman farming in a rice paddy outside
Pyongyang represents the productive aspect of a nation seeking Western
investment for the first time in its history. (Associated Press)

Map of North Korea showing location of Rajin.

                   Copyright 1992 The New York Times Company


                              134 of 281 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                  May 21, 1992, Thursday, Late Edition - Final

Cuomo Sides With Disabled Veterans Who Peddle

BYLINE: By JAMES BENNET

SECTION: Section B; Page 3; Column 1; Metropolitan Desk

LENGTH: 925 words


Nine months after their peddling stands were banned from midtown, disabled
veterans contend that they have not received the training or jobs they were
promised by the upscale businesses that sought their ouster, and Gov. Mario M.
Cuomo has taken their side.

Unless Mayor David N. Dinkins makes "substantial progress" toward compensating
the vendors by Friday, Governor Cuomo said he would seek to overturn the ban,
one of his top aides informed the Mayor's office on Monday.

Many of the veterans have continued to hawk their ties and earrings in defiance
of the ban.

In exchange for the ban by the State Legislature last summer, the Fifth Avenue
Association, an organization of businesses in midtown, promised to create a
$400,000 fund to train and educate the 176 disabled veterans then licensed by
the city as peddlers. The assocation also promised to offer them all jobs at
twice the minimum wage.

Jobs for Only Four

But in a letter on Monday to Deputy Mayor Norman Steisel, Andrew J. Zambelli, a
top Cuomo aide, said, "The promises have not been met."

"Apparently only four veterans have received jobs from the Fifth Avenue
Association," Mr. Zambelli wrote, adding that the association had been slow to
come up with the $400,000 and that "the available funds have not been used to
help the displaced vendors."

Robert Greene, director of the Mayor's Office of Veterans Affairs, said in a
telephone interview yesterday that the Parks Department would announce a pilot
program next week to allow 13 disabled veterans to sell their goods on city
property near City Hall.

Mr. Greene said the ban was enacted before programs were in place to help the
veterans.

"This takes time, and the cooperation of a lot of organizations," he said. "I
feel very confident that the city is acting in good faith, and I wish I could
convey that to the Governor."

Asked about steps to aid the veterans, Thomas P. Conroy, a spokesman for the
Governor, said Mr. Cuomo was concerned that efforts to help the veterans were
failing, not that they had not been made. "What matters here is what has
occurred, not what has been tried," he said.

The assocation contends that it was on schedule to raise the $400,000, that only
8 of the 176 eligible peddlers had applied for jobs and that 4 of them turned
down the jobs they were offered. The veterans concede that jobs were made
available but argue that they were menial and paid too little to make up for the
loss of their own businesses.

"I can't support my family on $7 an hour," said Albert Cervile, a 55-year-old
Vietnam War veteran, as he illegally sold costume jewelrey and ties on the
corner of 56th Street and Madison Avenue yesterday afternoon. "Besides, I'm in
business. You're putting me out of business to go to work for someone else."

Mr. Cervile, who was wearing a green camouflage cap decorated with an American
flag, dug into his wallet and pulled out a pink $250 ticket he received
yesterday morning for selling his goods in forbidden territory.

"It's like years ago when you went out on patrol and the sergeant said, 'You're
the point man,' " Mr. Cerville said. "The point man was the guy to get it.
Today, we're the point men."

Mr. Cervile said he had lost two-thirds of his business since the ban, since he
can no longer sell on Fifth Avenue, where he said the new rules are enforced
most stringently.

Retail businesses along Fifth Avenue argued last year that the disabled veterans
and their rickety stands clogged the sidewalks and detracted from the elegant
air they tried to present to tourists.

"Do we want to have Fifth Avenue and the theater district operate in a fashion
that is distinctive, is unique?" Tom Cusick, president of the Fifth Avenue
Association, said in an interview yesterday. "Or do we want it to be a flea
market? That's what this is all about."

After a vigorous lobbying campaign by the Fifth Avenue Association, the
Legislature last summer amended an 1894 law that allowed disabled veterans to
work as sidewalk vendors without regard for municipal rules.

The veterans, like other general vendors, were then banned from most of an area
stretching from Lexington Avenue to Eighth Avenue, and from 34th Street to 59th
Street, said Pat Cohen, a spokeswoman for the city's Consumer Affairs
Department.

Mr. Cusick said the terms of the Fifth Avenue Association's agreement with the
city called for it to provide $100,000 last summer to help the veterans, which
it did, and then $300,000 over the next 18 months.

Taking New Pledges

"I already had $70,000 when the Governor's letter was sent," Mr. Cusick said. "I
have spent my entire day calling people and asking for pledges of funds. I now
have an additional $70,000." Mr. Cusick repeatedly interrupted a telephone
interview yesterday in order, he said, to take new pledges of $5,000 and $10,000
from stores like Cartier, Tiffany, and Saks Fifth Avenue.

He said the association was prepared to offer more jobs for veterans. "I'm
prepared and situated to hire more, and the main theme I get is that they don't
want the jobs, except for the crazy jobs," he said. "One wants a tractor-trailer
job; one wants me to hire his daughter."

Mr. Greene, the veterans affairs director, said that the Fifth Avenue
Association had delivered the $100,000 on schedule but that none of the money
had been spent yet. He said that some of it would be used to finance the pilot
project and that $35,000 had been allocated to pay a consultant to plan and
coordinate programs to help the disabled veterans.

LOAD-DATE: May 21, 1992

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo: Having lost two-thirds of his business since a ban last summer
initiated by retail businesses along Fifth Avenue, Albert Cervile, a Vietnam
veteran, was still out selling ties and jewelry yesterday. Gov. Mario M. Cuomo
will seek to overturn the ban if the veterans are not compensated. (Ed Quinn for
The New York Times)

                   Copyright 1992 The New York Times Company


                              135 of 281 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                  May 21, 1992, Thursday, Late Edition - Final

CHRONICLE

BYLINE: By NADINE BROZAN

SECTION: Section B; Page 14; Column 5; Style Desk

LENGTH: 299 words


YELENA G. BONNER, the widow of Andrei D. Sakharov, the Soviet dissident and
human-rights crusader, was in Washington yesterday for an announcement that a
new major prize was being established in her husband's name.

The Sakharov Award, $100,000 and a sculpture by Maya Lin, the creator of the
Vietnam Veterans Memorial, will be given every two years by the Gleitsman
Foundation to individuals living outside the United States who have served as
catalysts for positive social change in their homelands or beyond. The first
award will be given next May.

The foundation, which has its offices in Los Angeles and is headed by ALAN
GLEITSMAN, a retired television program distributor, has presented honors for
activism in this country for three years. Yesterday, its 1992 Gleitsman Award
went to LOUIS CLARK, the executive director of the Government Accountability
Project, and WILLIAM WASSMUTH, the executive director of the Northwest Coalition
Against Malicious Harassment in Seattle.

Ms. Bonner said yesterday that it was important to become increasingly vigilant
about fostering human rights. Her remarks were translated from Russian by her
daughter, TATIANA YANKELEVICH: "In view of the collapse of the totalitarian
world, mother feels it is important to pay greater attention to the rights of
nations to self-determination. She feels that to some degree the founding of
this award will serve to create a new concept of human rights that will include
not only the defense of the rights of the individual but the protection of the
rights of nations."

Though in frail health, Ms. Bonner, 69 years old, lives in Moscow, where she
writes and works at preparing Mr. Sakharov's documents for publication. "I write
my own books," she said. "I have no journalist who writes for me."

LOAD-DATE: May 21, 1992

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1992 The New York Times Company


                              136 of 281 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                   May 22, 1992, Friday, Late Edition - Final

Tongues New to English, Eyes Fresh to the Capital

BYLINE: By SARA RIMER

SECTION: Section B; Page 3; Column 1; Metropolitan Desk

LENGTH: 854 words


America has not been all that she had hoped, but as she got off the bus on
Pennsylvania Avenue in Washington, Ewa Lis, a Polish immigrant, was not
disappointed. The building before her was big and white, "exactly as I imagined
it," she said.

Smiling, Ms. Lis handed her camera to her friend Joseph Veninger, who is from
Czechoslovakia. "Take a picture of me and my White House."

Mr. Veninger wanted to go inside, and maybe get a glimpse of "the person who
runs this big system," but it was Sunday, and the White House was closed. Still,
Mr. Veninger said he was glad just to be in this mythic town that he knew only
from books and television.

"This is for me the main office for America," he said.

More Than English Lessons

Monday through Friday, Mr. Veninger and the other 22 immigrants in Donna
Harkavy's class in English as a second language meet in a basement in Brooklyn,
offered free by the New York City Board of Education. The subject is not just
English, but America, and so on Sunday, after earlier trips to New York
landmarks like the Statue of Liberty, the Metropolitan Museum of Art and the
Brooklyn Public Library, the class convened in the nation's capital.

It was the culmination of the year and, for all but one or two of them, their
first trip to Washington. After the trials of real life in their new home, New
York, Washington was a place they had to see, a chance to visit the dream
America. "Washington is a mecca for immigrants," Ms. Harkavy said.

The Washington they saw -- in six whirlwind hours, for the bargain price of $21,
round trip -- amazed them. It was, they said, so clean, so peaceful, so full of
flowers.

Another Side of Town

Maria Charles, from Puerto Rico, tried to tell her classmates that beyond the
White House and the Lincoln Memorial was another side of the nation's capital
that she had read was as poor and dangerous as the city where they lived.

Sunday in Washington reminded Mr. Veninger of being a newcomer in New York six
years ago. "At first you're like a tourist, and you see all the museums and big
buildings," he said. "But after a while you see what life really looks like --
the killing, the depression, all the sad things that happen in the big city.

"When I came here, my friend said, 'Joe, in New York you have to have special
locks, two, three locks, and gates on your window.' I said, 'What for?' Then
they robbed my apartment. They take everything, my cheap TV, my mattress, my
clothes, even my shoes. Now I have three locks, two Medeco and one regular. I
have big gate on my window."

In New York, Mr. Veninger, who was a mechanic in Czechoslovakia, is unemployed.
Ms. Lis, who taught psychology in a Polish university, has a job taking care of
an elderly woman.

A Rare Day Off

Hawa Jibral, who seven years ago was tending sheep in Somalia and now stocks
shoes in a discount store, got a rare day off. "I'm sick of shoes," Ms. Jibral
said, boarding the brown and yellow bus at 6:30 A.M. outside the Brooklyn Public
Library. "Every day I'm looking at shoes."

But on this day, Ms. Jibral, in a beautiful gold and green African dress and
black patent leather shoes, looked at monuments, memorials, gardens and space
shuttles at the National Air and Space Museum. A life-size reproduction of the
lunar landing of the Apollo II reminded her, she said, of moonlit nights with
her sheep in the Somalian desert.

She and her classmates, who were the subject of several articles in The New York
Times during the school year, made the trip with another English class, taught
by Ms. Harkavy's friend, as well as with friends and relatives. Sam Barq, from
Pakistan, brought his wife, his mother-in-law, his two sisters-in-law, his baby,
and homemade, hot Pakistani food for half the bus.

They were 49 in all, from Haiti, Thailand, Mali, Senegal, Russia, Peru, El
Salvador, Nicaragua, the Dominican Republic and seven other countries. The motto
of these travelers was "Speak English," but when the bus hit Maryland, Ms.
Harkavy put out a call for international singing. Ms. Charles stepped to the
front of the bus, took the driver's microphone and, in a clear soprano, sang in
Spanish about an old man who longs to return to San Juan.

Her father and his classmates were concentrating on their new vocabulary words:
memorial, monument, Congress, Senate, House of Representatives, Supreme Court,
enshrined (at the Lincoln Memorial "the memory of Abraham Lincoln is enshrined
forever"). And goose bumps.

"I have goose bumps," Mr. Veninger said, standing before the black marble wall
of names at the Vietnam Veterans Memorial ("I thought goose bumps were just from
cold, not emotions," Meyer Sadigurskiy, from Russia, said as the class reviewed
the words Tuesday).

On the trip home, these tourists watched a video on the bus that Ms. Nolan had
selected just for them -- "Green Card," a movie about a French immigrant who
marries a New York woman to get that coveted document. At 10 P.M., as the bus
approached Brooklyn under a full moon, Ms. Jibral was wistful.

"I want to get a transfer to Washington," she said.


LOAD-DATE: May 22, 1992

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo: Donna Harkavy took her class in English as a second language
from Brooklyn to the nation's capital on Sunday. The six-hour visit by the group
of immigrants included a stop at the Vietnam Veterans Memorial. (George Tames
for The New York Times)

                   Copyright 1992 The New York Times Company


                              137 of 281 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                   May 22, 1992, Friday, Late Edition - Final

A Changing Asia;
Economic Growth, Especially, Fosters Demands for Political Liberalization

BYLINE: NICHOLAS D. KRISTOF,  Special to The New York Times

SECTION: Section A; Page 2; Column 3; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 1120 words

DATELINE: BANGKOK, Thailand, May 21


The turmoil in Thailand this week has been about politics, but more
fundamentally it is rooted in demographic, economic and social changes that have
caused unrest elsewhere in Asia -- and that are likely to continue to do so
through the 1990's.

For many years now, Asia has experienced the highest economic growth rates in
the world, and the result has been a surge in the numbers of politically
impatient and self-confident professionals, students and members of the middle
class. Probably nowhere in the world, at any time, has the middle class grown so
rapidly as in Asia in the last dozen years.

Ever since 1986, when "people power" street demonstrations overthrew Ferdinand
E. Marcos in the Philippines, demands for political liberalization have raced
throughout Asia. South Korea, Taiwan, Bangladesh and Mongolia have all had
successful democracy movements and substantial change, while similar movements
in Burma and China buffeted the regimes but were crushed. In Thailand, the
tussle for democracy is still under way, and it is too early to predict a
result.

One measure of the potential for instability is that three of the most populous
countries in East Asia -- China, with 1.1 billion inhabitants; Indonesia, with
180 million, and Vietnam, with 70 million -- still have not fully faced the
uncertainties and sometimes violence of political transitions that tore Thailand
apart in the last week.

'Middle Class on the Streets'

"This is the middle class out here," Charnwit Sukihame, a 44-year-old architect,
said Wednesday as he joined a crowd in Bangkok protesting in front of grim army
troops with submachine guns. "That's the important thing -- the middle class is
on the streets."

Newly assertive business owners, government employees, professionals and
university students have been distressed by the gap between economic growth and
political development, and often by the corruption and nepotism that to many
citizens are as aggravating as repression itself. It has been efforts to catch
up politically that have led to clashes such as the ones early this week in
Bangkok that left at least 40 people dead and hundreds wounded.

In the Soviet Union and Eastern Europe, people took on the system in part
because it was not working. But in countries like Thailand, which has had
economic growth rates averaging nearly 10 percent a year since 1986, the process
is different.

The protests seem to arise from a system that works very well economically and
then fosters yearnings for political participation -- for freedom of expression
as well as freedom from hunger, for votes as well as motorcycles.

The Thai countryside is still very traditional and poor in many places, but
Bangkok is a huge, modern city with high-rise office towers, traffic jams and
well-stocked shops offering European clothes and French perfumes. When a society
reaches the point that people worry about fashions or fragrances, they are also
likely to ponder democracy.

Effects of Economic Success

"The Asian system gets to a market economy and a democracy, even if the leaders
don't intend to," said William H. Overholt, an executive director of Bankers
Trust Company in Hong Kong. "Economic success creates a broad middle class and a
huge education system, and it creates factories filled with large numbers of
educated workers who form unions."

"Economic success also forms ties with the outside world, so that liberal
foreign ideas penetrate," Mr. Overholt added. "These social glaciers break up
any dictatorship."

Still, the linkage between economic growth and political change is far from
clear-cut. In Thailand and other countries, rising incomes and educational
levels nurture demands for change, but there are countervailing pressures at
work as well, and it is too soon to know which will prevail.

In Thailand, for instance, there is a longer and richer history of military
participation in politics than of popular participation, and the army feels the
same sense of entitlement as does the middle class. A traditional passivity in
politics, derived in some cases from a history of being subjects of a king or
emperor, is fading in the cities but remains stronger in the countryside.

Some Ideal Soldiers

This passivity makes peasants ideal soldiers for armies like Thailand's or
China's, for such troops are relatively unaffected by the tides sweeping the
cities and are willing to obey orders -- even orders to shoot. As the Chinese
Communists have shown since the Tiananmen Square confrontation in 1989, tanks
and machine guns can outweigh demographic and economic trends in the short run.

Ian Scott, chairman of the political science department at the University of
Hong Kong, points to another obstacle for political development: Countries in
the region have made more headway in establishing democratic governments than in
fostering tolerant societies. The result is sometimes authoritarian democracies:
governments that are freely elected but that try to curb freedom of expression.

"You have conditions in many countries for democracy -- Singapore is a good
example -- but without the liberal, tolerant environment to go with it,"
Professor Scott said.

Japan provides an Asian model of democracy that many countries in the region
find alluring: It is dominated by a single party that seeks consensus, without
noisy daily clashes of adversarial politics or passionate defenses of absolutist
individual rights.

The economic pressures in Asia for change, whether or not they prevail
immediately, are underscored by statistics in the latest World Bank report,
released this month. South Korea, which was desperately poor in the 1950's, is
now wealthier per capita than Portugal and has less than one-third the
illiteracy. Hong Kong and Singapore are richer than Spain or Ireland, and people
in Hong Kong have a longer life expectancy than those in either the United
States or Britain.

Other East Asian countries like Malaysia, Thailand and Indonesia, while not at
the same income level, have had per capita growth rates in the last 25 years of
between 4.0 percent and 4.5 percent, about twice the level of most countries in
other regions. The boom continues, and last year those three countries had real
economic growth of between 7 percent and 9 percent.

One result of this prosperity is that it has tended to give people a stake in
the system, so citizens seek to take part in the political order rather than to
destroy it. Only the Philippines now has a serious guerrilla movement.

China, Indonesia, Vietnam, Burma and North Korea may all face political and
generational transitions in the 1990's, and each has a record of bloody domestic
turmoil in the past 50 years.

LOAD-DATE: May 22, 1992

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: News Analysis

                   Copyright 1992 The New York Times Company


                              138 of 281 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                  May 23, 1992, Saturday, Late Edition - Final

TEXAN EXECUTED FOR WIFE'S DEATH

BYLINE: AP

SECTION: Section 1; Page 9; Column 1; National Desk

LENGTH: 306 words

DATELINE: HUNTSVILLE, Tex., May 22


A former Marine captain was executed by lethal injection at the state prison
here early today for hiring a killer through a magazine advertisement to murder
his wife.

The 45-year-old former officer, Robert Black, was put to death after raising in
late court appeals an issue that had never been brought up at his trial. Those
appeals argued that Mr. Black had been led to have his wife killed because he
was suffering from post-traumatic-stress syndrome that he said had been brought
on by his combat service in Vietnam.

The issue reached the United States Supreme Court, which voted on Thursday
night, 6 to 3, to deny Mr. Black a stay of execution. The dissenters were
Justices Harry Blackmun, Sandra Day O'Connor and John Paul Stevens.

$175,000 Insurance Policy

Mr. Black's wife, Sandra, was shot to death at their home in Bryan, Tex., on
Feb. 21, 1985. Testimony at his trial showed that in order to collect the
$175,000 benefit from her recently purchased life insurance policy, he had paid
$10,000 to a gunman, John Wayne Hearn, to kill her.

Mr. Black had found Mr. Hearn through a classified advertisement that Mr. Hearn
had placed in Soldier of Fortune, a military magazine aimed at an audience of
mercenaries. The ad had offered Mr. Hearn's services for "high-risk
assignments."

Mr. Hearn later admitted killing Mrs. Black and, in exchange for a life prison
term, testified against Mr. Black.

In 1988, a jury found Soldier of Fortune liable for Mrs. Black's death and
ordered the magazine to pay $9.4 million to the Blacks' son and Mrs. Black's
mother. But a year later, a Federal appeals court threw out the award, saying
that the verdict had imposed too high a standard on the magazine and that if it
were upheld, other publishers could be discouraged from accepting ambiguously
worded advertisements.

LOAD-DATE: May 23, 1992

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1992 The New York Times Company


                              139 of 281 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                  May 23, 1992, Saturday, Late Edition - Final

New York Memorial Day Parade Fades Away

BYLINE: By ROBERT D. McFADDEN

SECTION: Section 1; Page 1; Column 2; Metropolitan Desk

LENGTH: 1023 words


After years of decline, a venerable New York tradition, the Memorial Day parade
up Broadway and Riverside Drive to the Soldiers' and Sailors' Monument
overlooking the Hudson, has faded away like the aging veterans who have been its
stalwarts since World War I and will not be held this year.

In other boroughs, in other cities, in suburbs and hamlets across the land,
Americans will still remember the nation's war dead tomorrow and on Monday with
thundering parades, band concerts, fireworks displays and other events draped
with the battle flags of Guadalcanal and Normandy, of Inchon and Chu Lai.

But just a year after the gigantic emotional outpouring of millions of people in
the Desert Storm Parade up the Broadway Canyon of Heroes, the organizers of an
event that has been the city's symbolic centerpiece on Memorial Day since 1919
have decided to forgo a parade that might have drawn only a handful of veterans,
many of whom would have hobbled with age or infirmity along an all-but-deserted
route.

Instead they will muster their dwindled numbers at 10:30 A.M. on Monday at the
end of the old line of march, the Grecian-style marble monument at Riverside
Drive and 89th Street, and mark the day and the passing of an era with wreath
laying, a few dignified speeches and the mournful final strains of taps.

"Years ago, Manhattan was like the core of the world," said Frank D'Amico, a
66-year-old World War II Army Air Corps combat veteran who has helped organize
the parade for the New York County American Legion since 1946. "Everybody came
from all over to participate in our parade, and the marching would go on for
four or five hours.

"But as the years passed people moved out and began holding their parades in the
suburbs. People stopped coming in. Members got older. Many died, and others
don't have the ability to march anymore. I've watched the parade diminish to a
point where it was almost an insult to the memory of those who fought. And that
hurt. People now seem preoccupied with everything in the world but those who
made the supreme sacrifice."

Anthony F. Tuccillo, 70, adjutant of the New York County American Legion who was
a sergeant with an antiaircraft battery and fought in New Guinea, the Solomons
and the Philippines in World War II, remembered the prouder days 30 or more
years ago when he first began organizing and marching in the parade.

'Feeling of Being Appreciated'

"Oh, it was inspiring," he said in a faint echo of the voice that roared orders
into the whine of enemy dive bombers. "It was glorious. The flags, the bands,
everybody in uniform with ribbons and medals, the legionnaires with their caps,
the spectators cheering you on. There was that feeling of being appreciated for
what we did when we went away."

Lawrence Totaro, 49, a Vietnam War veteran who is commander of the New York
County American Legion, also recalled an earlier, more ebullient era for
legionnaires and their Manhattan parade, when his organization had 45,000
members -- it now has 7,000 -- and Memorial Day was a time to dwell on
sacrifice, liberty and other themes that rarely found expression in everyday
life.

"This was the big one," Mr.  D'Amico said of the parade on the West Side. "There
was so much enthusiasm." He noted that there would still be a few small parades
in Manhattan neighborhoods like Inwood and Greenwich Village sponsored by
individual legion posts.

And Michael Kharfen, director of the Mayor's Community Assistance Unit, which
coordinates street events, said there would be many parades and other events in
all the boroughs over the weekend, including fireworks at the South Street
Seaport; a parade for 10,000 people in Little Neck and Douglaston, Queens, and a
parade for 5,000 people in Bay Ridge, Brooklyn.

'Getaway Weekend'

But this year the legionnaires did not apply to the police for a parade permit,
but just a permit for a gathering at the monument. City officials and veterans'
leaders said that seemed to reflect no abrupt change of heart or demographics,
just the aging of veterans who were the mainstays of the parade, population
shifts that have moved paradegoers and their celebrations to the suburbs and,
perhaps, a fading of the day's traditional patriotic values.

"Now Memorial Day has become a getaway weekend for the city or a rush to a
Caldor's sale for 50 percent off," Mr. Totaro said. "Its meaning has changed. It
has lost some of its spirit. There's little interest on the part of young
people. They see war on TV, and it's so far removed from Vietnam. They don't
know the real heartache."

Mr. Kharfen had a different view. "Maybe we have lost a little of the solemnity
of the day," he said. "It's more of a family day, people enjoying the beginning
of summer, as opposed to the solemnity of honoring the country's war dead. But
there is still plenty of old-fashioned patriotic spirit. On the Fourth of July
there are hundreds of block parties and street fairs."

Legislators and Mayor

Mr. Tuccillo said much of the Manhattan parade's support used to come from
military organizations whose units would march with arms and colors and from
high school bands and other marching groups.

"And we always had lots of politicians, legislators and Congressmen and the
mayor," he said. "Some of them still get involved, but many of them say they
have other commitments and can't make it. Over the years our parade got smaller
and smaller. The spectators became fewer and fewer, and participation by vets
fell off. Guys were getting old. Some moved away, retired to the Sun Belt. The
younger ones were not too interested. You couldn't seem to get them out."

Mr. Totaro said the legion had faded in Manhattan and other central-city areas,
but was still the largest organization of its kind in the nation, with more than
three million members, and was still fighting for veterans' rights and
traditional values.

"If you go out to the suburbs, to the little hamlets and towns," he said, "the
American Legion post is the center of life. They hold weddings, baseball games,
Fourth of July picnics and parades. It's still alive and well."

LOAD-DATE: May 23, 1992

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photos: About 20,000 people marched on Riverside Drive in the 1935
parade, above. "I've watched the parade diminish to a point where it was almost
an insult to the memory of those who fought," said Frank D'Amico, below, a World
War II veteran. "And that hurt." (The New York Times)(pg. 26)

                   Copyright 1992 The New York Times Company


                              140 of 281 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                   May 24, 1992, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

THE WORLD;
Across Southeast Asia, Awakenings to Democracy

BYLINE: By BARBARA CROSSETTE

SECTION: Section 4; Page 3; Column 1; Week in Review Desk

LENGTH: 1036 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON


AN announcer on an army-run television channel in Bangkok tried to explain last
week why several hundred thousand Thais were in the streets demanding that an
unelected Prime Minister resign. Evildoers, the announcer said, had "planted
time bombs in the minds of the people."

Time bombs have indeed been going off with some regularity over the last decade
in minds in much of Southeast Asia, but there are more credible causes than
"evildoers." In areas of rapid economic growth, political liberalization has not
in general kept pace; in other countries, autocratic regimes have thwarted
economic growth.

So it is not just in Thailand that large groups of people are asking if economic
progress will be accompanied by democratic reforms, as supporters of democracy
throughout the area grow disdainful of the argument that Asians are somehow
different, that they prefer the stability of even corrupt authority over the
uncertainties that come with free expression and elections.

In 1986, the Philippines felt the effect of this when its "people power"
revolution sent the late President Ferdinand Marcos into exile. In the same
year, violence racked Sabah, a Malaysian state where an elected administration
was under siege from Prime Minister Mahathir Mohamad and his dominant political
party. Then a short-lived challenge to General Suharto's choice for vice
president was mounted in Indonesia, where even military officers were beginning
to chafe under the general's virtual presidency-for-life. And in 1988, gentle
Burma erupted in rage when the military crushed a pro-democracy movement.

Each time such things happen, Southeast Asians, part of a coalescing community
of nations despite their cultural differences, plunge into introspection about
what Asians really want. And each time, the answers become clearer. Although the
circumstances and settings are different, the aims of popular movements are
pretty much the same as in other parts of the world. These people want the right
to conduct business in an environment reasonably free of stifling corruption,
and they want real power in choosing their leaders.

When middle class Thais joined the ad hoc revolution on Bangkok's streets last
weekend, they challenged the assertions made by Southeast Asia's many intolerant
governments that order and consensus are more important there than freedom.

A Widely Held Notion

"The popular outrage against Suchinda and demand for democracy indicate that the
notion, widely held in Administration circles, that Asians are somehow more
comfortable with authoritarianism is utterly false," said Sidney Jones,
executive director of the human rights group Asia Watch. "The Thai pro-democracy
movement should also send a warning signal to Indonesia and Malaysia, who say
that the developed countries focus too much on civil and political rights when
the real priority of Asians is economic development."

Not all Southeast Asians argue that the philosophical underpinnings of the
region dictate that societies will be essentially passive. When tensions were
rising in Singapore a few years ago, the Confucian scholar Wu Teh Yao said in an
interview that individualism may not rank high in his philosophical system, but
that this did not mean an acceptance of authoritarianism, especially amid
prosperity.  "In all human societies, once the tummy is full, the mind begins to
think," he said. "So whoever is going to rule, even in Japan or China, will have
to pay attention to the people's needs and wishes."

The argument that there is a Southeast Asian way of interpreting democracy is
another matter, and it has some validity -- as shown last week by the longing of
the Thai people for King Bhumibol Adulyadej to intervene in the crisis to calm
it. He did so a manner rich in symbolism, making the antagonists kneel at his
feet. The concept of a ruler acting in the best interests of the people has been
part of political life from Vietnam to Java. There is also a genuine desire for
consensus and a talent for smoothing away potential clashes. But big problems
arise when these natural or traditional instincts are appropriated by
politicians or military strongmen and twisted to justify their unwillingness to
allow pluralism to develop.

Evelyn Colbert, a former Deputy Assistant Secretary of State for Asia and the
Pacific, said in an interview last week that she was struck by trends in the
Philippine election.  "The influence of the church on people's voting patterns
has been much less than one might have expected," she said. Also, she noted, "in
both the Philippines and Thailand, the issue of corruption has been very potent
politically."

Ms. Colbert added that success by the Thais in forcing the military-dominated
government to make concessions "in some constructive way" would encourage
democrats in Burma to continue their campaign.

A Jolt to Neighbors

James Clad, a senior associate at the Carnegie Endowment for International
Peace, said: "What happened in Thailand has jolted Indonesia and the region far
more than the Philippine revolt in 1986, far more than Burma's savagely
repressed riots." The Philippines and Burma "were seen as places that were
failing in many ways," he said in a telephone interview from Singapore.
"Thailand is different. It was a place that had everything going for it."

In Indonesia, where the military has wielded great political influence since
independence in 1949, Mr. Suharto has been in power with army backing since
1965; now word has slipped out in Jakarta that he will more than likely seek
another five-year term next year, after parliamentary elections choose his
indirect electors in June. Many Indonesians are tired of this closed system,
though, and several parties have begun to explore ways of pushing the limits of
the carefully controlled process.

In Indochina, the prospects for democracy seem more distant; it is hard to know
what odds to give the United Nations' efforts to build representative democracy
in Cambodia, and Vietnam is fighting to keep Communism alive. In Vietnam, in
fact, what one hears from the leadership has a familiar ring: that Asians are
simply not enamored of messy multiparty political systems.

LOAD-DATE: May 24, 1992

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Map of Southeast Asia

                   Copyright 1992 The New York Times Company


                              141 of 281 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                   May 24, 1992, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

THE 1992 CAMPAIGN: Personal Finances;
Perot Reneged on Pledge to Reagan

BYLINE: By MICHAEL KELLY,  Special to The New York Times

SECTION: Section 1; Page 22; Column 4; National Desk

LENGTH: 734 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, May 23


A little more than a year after pledging $2.5 million to support President
Ronald Reagan's official library, in thanks for the President's "years of
outstanding leadership and service," Ross Perot reneged on most of the pledge in
1987 because he apparently was angry over what he saw as a lack of interest in
American servicemen missing in Southeast Asia.

The episode suggests the importance of Mr. Perot's experiences with the
prisoner-of-war and missing-in-action issue in changing his feelings toward the
Reagan Administration and then Vice President George Bush, whom Mr. Perot now
seeks to replace in the White House.

Mr. Perot's financial involvement with the $60 million Ronald Reagan
Presidential Library began March 6, 1986, when he wrote a letter to President
and Mrs. Reagan at the White House, saying that his family had decided to
support the privately financed library because Mr. Reagan had been "such a great
President."

A Letter of Superlatives

His family, Mr. Perot wrote to Mr. Reagan, had asked him to:

"Thank you for making us proud to be Americans again.

"Thank you for your leadership in lifting our nation's sense of destiny above
the day-to-day problems that surround us.

"Thank you for reminding us that we are our brothers' keeper, and that we must
help one another.

"As the leader of the free world, thank you for keeping us at peace.

"Thank you for stabilizing the economy, dramatically reducing inflation, and
interest rates and creating an environment where most Americans have secure,
stable jobs."

Mr. Perot went on to thank Nancy Reagan for her "great work in caring for the
families of the men who were prisoners of war in Vietnam and for mobilizing the
nation to protect children from drugs."

He then wrote that "the Perot family pledges $2.5 million to the Reagan Library
to thank and honor both of you for your years of outstanding leadership and
service to our nation and the world,"

Pressing Interest in P.O.W.'s

Mr. Perot donated $500,000 as an initial payment toward his pledge, James
Squires, the spokesman for Mr. Perot Presidential drive, said today and left $2
million outstanding.

At the time, Mr. Perot was passionately concerned with the P.O.W.-M.I.A. issue.
For years he had held a strong view that American servicemen, perhaps hundreds
of them, were secretly held prisoner in Southeast Asia and that American
officials knew this but were unwilling, for various reasons, to act on it.

Mr. Perot discussed the matter with Vice President Bush, and he has said, in
interviews, that Mr. Bush asked him to conduct a study of Government
P.O.W.-M.I.A files, to determine if American officials were doing a good job.
His search led him into confrontations with Federal officials over the best
strategy for negotiating with Vietnam to win the release of any Americans still
held captive and the remains of those American prisoners who had died in North
and South Vietnam.

Crucial Visit to Hanoi

In March 1987, Mr. Perot went to Hanoi, Vietnam, to continue his work on the
issue, a trip he has said in previous interviews that he undertook with the
blessing of the White House.

That trip, and his disappointment in the Government's reaction to it, was the
turning point in Mr. Perot's relationship with the Reagan Administration and led
directly to the cancellation of his pledge to the Reagan library.

"Perot came back convinced that we could deal effectively with the Vietnamese,"
Mr. Squires said, "but he found when he returned that the Reagan Administration
would not take the trip seriously. He gave a report to the Reagan Administration
criticizing its policies and soon after that he canceled his pledges."

Mr. Perot could not be reached today to discuss the issue. According to an
account in The Washington Post last month, he has said he reneged on the pledge
because of his disgust over the Iran-contra affair, which began to come to light
in November 1986, and not because of the P.O.W-M.I.A. issue

Mr. Squires said Mr. Perot "became unhappy with Reagan and Bush" for several
reasons, including the matter of arms sales to Iran and undercover aid to the
Nicaraguan rebels. But he added that Mr. Perot's anger over the Administration's
handling of the P.O.W.-M.I.A. issue and its response to his trip to Hanoi were
central to his turning against the President he had so highly praised the year
before.

LOAD-DATE: May 24, 1992

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo: Ross Perot reneged on most of the $2.5 million he pledged to
support President Reagan's official library in 1987 because he was angry over
the lack of interest in American servicemen missing in Southeast Asia. The
former President was congratulated after he spoke during the dedication of the
library in 1991 by, from left, Barbara Bush, President Bush and Nancy Reagan.
(Jim Wilson/The New York Times)

                   Copyright 1992 The New York Times Company


                              142 of 281 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                   May 24, 1992, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

THE 1992 CAMPAIGN: Personal Finances;
Perot Reneged on Pledge to Reagan

BYLINE: By MICHAEL KELLY,  Special to The New York Times

SECTION: Section 1; Page 22; Column 4; National Desk

LENGTH: 733 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, May 23


A little more than a year after pledging $2.5 million to support President
Ronald Reagan's official library, in thanks for the President's "years of
outstanding leadership and service," Ross Perot reneged on most of the pledge in
1987 because he apparently was angry over what he saw as a lack of interest in
American servicemen missing in Southeast Asia.

The episode suggests the importance of Mr. Perot's experiences with the
prisoner-of-war and missing-in-action issue in changing his feelings toward the
Reagan Administration and then Vice President George Bush, whom Mr. Perot now
seeks to replace in the White House.

Mr. Perot's financial involvement with the $60 million Ronald Reagan
Presidential Library began March 6, 1986, when he wrote a letter to President
and Mrs. Reagan at the White House, saying that his family had decided to
support the privately financed library because Mr. Reagan had been "such a great
President."

A Letter of Superlatives

His family, Mr. Perot wrote to Mr. Reagan, had asked him to:

"Thank you for making us proud to be Americans again.

"Thank you for your leadership in lifting our nation's sense of destiny above
the day-to-day problems that surround us.

"Thank you for reminding us that we are our brothers' keeper, and that we must
help one another.

"As the leader of the free world, thank you for keeping us at peace.

"Thank you for stabilizing the economy, dramatically reducing inflation, and
interest rates and creating an environment where most Americans have secure,
stable jobs."

Mr. Perot went on to thank Nancy Reagan for her "great work in caring for the
families of the men who were prisoners of war in Vietnam and for mobilizing the
nation to protect children from drugs."

He then wrote that "the Perot family pledges $2.5 million to the Reagan Library
to thank and honor both of you for your years of outstanding leadership and
service to our nation and the world,"

Pressing Interest in P.O.W.'s

Mr. Perot donated $500,000 as an initial payment toward his pledge, James
Squires, the spokesman for Mr. Perot Presidential drive, said today and left $2
million outstanding.

At the time, Mr. Perot was passionately concerned with the P.O.W.-M.I.A. issue.
For years he had held a strong view that American servicemen, perhaps hundreds
of them, were secretly held prisoner in Southeast Asia and that American
officials knew this but were unwilling, for various reasons, to act on it.

Mr. Perot discussed the matter with Vice President Bush, and he has said, in
interviews, that Mr. Bush asked him to conduct a study of Government
P.O.W.-M.I.A files, to determine if American officials were doing a good job.
His search led him into confrontations with Federal officials over the best
strategy for negotiating with Vietnam to win the release of any Americans still
held captive and the remains of those American prisoners who had died in North
and South Vietnam.

Crucial Visit to Hanoi

In March 1987, Mr. Perot went to Hanoi, Vietnam, to continue his work on the
issue, a trip he has said in previous interviews that he undertook with the
blessing of the White House.

That trip, and his disappointment in the Government's reaction to it, was the
turning point in Mr. Perot's relationship with the Reagan Administration and led
directly to the cancellation of his pledge to the Reagan library.

"Perot came back convinced that we could deal effectively with the Vietnamese,"
Mr. Squires said, "but he found when he returned that the Reagan Administration
would not take the trip seriously. He gave a report to the Reagan Administration
criticizing its policies and soon after that he canceled his pledges."

Mr. Perot could not be reached today to discuss the issue. According to an
account in The Washington Post last month, he has said he reneged on the pledge
because of his disgust over the Iran-contra affair, which began to come to light
in November 1986, and not because of the P.O.W-M.I.A. issue

Mr. Squires said Mr. Perot "became unhappy with Reagan and Bush" for several
reasons, including the matter of arms sales to Iran and undercover aid to the
Nicaraguan rebels. But he added that Mr. Perot's anger over the Administration's
handling of the P.O.W.-M.I.A. issue and its response to his trip to Hanoi were
central to his turning against the President he had so highly praised the year
before.

NAME: Ross Perot

LOAD-DATE: June 10, 1992

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo: Ross Perot reneged on most of the $2.5 million he pledged to
support President Reagan's official library in 1987 because he was angry over
the lack of interest in American servicemen missing in Southeast Asia. The
former President was congratulated after he spoke during the dedication of the
library in 1991 by, from left, Barbara Bush, President Bush and Nancy Reagan.
(Jim Wilson/The New York Times)

TYPE: Biography

                   Copyright 1992 The New York Times Company


                              143 of 281 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                   May 24, 1992, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

FILM;
Nicole Kidman, From Down Under to 'Far and Away'

BYLINE: By TOM KENEALLY;  Tom Keneally, the Australian novelist, is the author,
most recently, of "Flying Hero Class."

SECTION: Section 2; Page 9; Column 1; Arts & Leisure Desk

LENGTH: 1991 words

DATELINE: LOS ANGELES


I know well the sorts of Australian summers that the actress Nicole Kidman used
to flee. Cicadas screamed with brief life in the gum trees of the northern
Sydney suburb she grew up in. Other Australian children stripped themselves down
for the bright day. The young Ms. Kidman covered up. Big hat, long sleeves. She
would have loved to conform to the national obsession with reddening,
blistering, getting bronzed, this Celt far from the headwaters of her gene pool.

To the misfortune of complexion was added the misfortune of her parents'
uncomfortable politics. The liberal opinions of these genial people abashed the
child Kidman in the conservative suburb of Longueville. Her mother, Janelle, was
a member of the Women's Electoral Lobby, her father, Antony, active in Labor
politics in an electorate Labor never won. "There was always political
discussion at our table," says Ms. Kidman, now 24 years old. "We had a sit-down
dinner every night, and politics was sort of the thing to discuss."

To the child of such a family fell the doomed duty of handing out Labor Party
how-to-vote cards on polling day. "I'd have a cap on hiding my face, in case any
of the kids saw me," she says.

And a third misfortune: being 5 foot 9 inches at the age of 13.

From an early age, Ms. Kidman began to spend weekends indoors at the small but
fashionable Phillip Street Theater in the business and legal center of Sydney.
She assisted the stage manager and did odd jobs. Safe from the embarrassments of
height, politics and sun, she says, "I just loved it. I absolutely loved it."

In these ways young Ms. Kidman got practice in being her own woman, a craft that
anyone who meets her now can see still exercises her. The weekend journeys over
the Harbor Bridge to downtown Sydney were votes for a future in Australian
theater and film. They were of a piece, however, with the energy, resolution and
shifts of chance that have now brought her to America and to the lead role in
Ron Howard's "Far and Away." In the movie, which opened Friday, she plays the
daughter of an Anglo-Irish Protestant landlord who willfully abandons her
privileges to travel to America with a game and muscular Irish peasant, played
by Tom Cruise, her husband of a year and a half.

The movie is Mr. Howard's version of what the British call a ripping tale. Mr.
Howard, whose great grandfathers participated in the 1893 Oklahoma land race,
wanted to recount a story based on that huge scramble for land grants -- a
story, he says, of the kind "your grandfather told your father about how your
great grandparents met."

Mr. Howard has long been a champion of Ms. Kidman's work. Although she was
reserved at first in rehearsals, he said, Ms. Kidman had in the end "about as
much range as any actor and is extraordinarily talented for her age."

Ms. Kidman is not a product of any drama school but of a self-motivated
experience in the theater. The brief period she spent in high school was at a
renowned state school, North Sydney High, a great producer of talent, perhaps
especially of talented women, including a swathe of politicians. The atmosphere
of the place was, she says, "O.K., you're having a career."

In a nation that is sometimes touted as a kind of South Africa for women, she
felt few inhibitions. "That's what the women before us fought for, and now I
reap the benefits of it, and I don't even think of it."

Her first professional performance came at 13: Sylvia in "The Women." Then the
Princess in "Sweet Bird of Youth." By the age of 15, she was known locally for
doing "older, sexually frustrated women." This early typecasting sits oddly with
the ice-cold young seductress Ms. Kidman would play in Robert Benton's 1991 film
"Billy Bathgate."

Her parents were academics and presumed that she would go to college. But she
had already starred in "Bush Christmas," an Australian Yule classic, and then
she got a part in a series for the Disney Channel, "Five Mile Creek," which took
eight months to film. From the enormous elevation of her 24 years, she believes
that "Five Mile Creek" is what made her a pro.

"It was working on camera 6 days a week, 12 hours a day," she says. "I'd always
been intimidated by the camera. But it became like second nature. I didn't have
to worry about hitting marks. The camera wasn't this ominous creature. I didn't
worry about it ever again."

She had tutors and returned to school intermittently, but her formal education
was near an end. She claims, however, that she read voraciously, especially
plays. She seems to emit the sense of a lively, even a hyperactive intelligence.
But because people are fixated on her marriage to the supereminent Mr. Cruise
and may view her as a handmaiden, she gets little credit for it. (Ms. Kidman and
Mr. Cruise apparently see their careers as separate; each employs a different
publicist. Mr. Cruise, in a week during which he was busy arranging to leave for
Cannes, certainly saw little need to speak for an article about the forthright
Ms. Kidman.)

As an early sign of the viability of her choices, the actress wanted to buy her
own apartment, cash down, before the age of 21. She got the apartment at 19. Her
mother still wanted to protect her from the disappointments of auditioning and
not getting roles. "Gosh, you're a tenacious creature!" is the maternal cry that
now most sweetly resonates with Ms. Kidman.

In any case, Ms. Kidman was long gone in her addiction to theater and film.
"It's that thing of always having to go back to the heat again, or through the
rejection again, and then you win," she says. "Suddenly you get a part, and it
is the most incredible thing, when you get a role you really wanted. It's
unrivaled. That's one of the things I'm addicted to -- wanting to get the part.
I always liked the audition process. Most actors don't like it, but I do."

In her late teens, Ms. Kidman worked with a repertory company called the
Australian Theater for Young People. It allocated tasks cyclically: actor for
one production, stage manager for another, costume designer for a third. The
Australian Theater for Young People, she says, was her entire social life.

The Australian soap operas that dominate British and Irish television auditioned
her but didn't accept her. In her case, it proved a fortunate escape, for she
could have been sidelined there for crucial years.

Instead, at 17, she worked in the mini-series "Vietnam," directed by the
Australian director John Duigan and produced by Kennedy-Miller, the same group
that introduced Mel Gibson's apocalyptic "Road Warrior" movies to the world.
This was the first instance of what has been a consistent Kidman phenomenon: her
ability to induce in producers and in directors as diverse as Phillip Noyce, Mr.
Benton and Mr. Howard a sort of conviction-against-the-odds about the range Ms.
Kidman is capable of.

Kennedy-Miller cast her in Mr. Noyce's "Dead Calm," a stylish 1989 psychological
thriller. If it had not been set off the kaleidoscopic Australian Barrier Reef,
one could have seen more clearly its antecedents, including the grim classic
"Knife in the Water." In it, Sam Neill played opposite Ms. Kidman, Billy Zane
supplied the villain, the bearlike Mr. Noyce set the tone.

"Phil Noyce actually changes and becomes each character," says Ms. Kidman. "You
see him acting your part behind the camera, and have to yell at him, 'Phil,
you're doing it again.' He gets obsessed with the film, and there's nothing else
occurring in the world except this movie."

Mr. Noyce and Kennedy-Miller had taken yet another risk. "I was 19 when I did
'Dead Calm,' " Ms. Kidman says, "and I was supposed to be 24 and have a
3-year-old kid."

Misplaced in the American film market, "Dead Calm" was still a critical success.
The 19-year-old in Sydney was pursued by American agents and directors, some of
whom flew to Australia to try to recruit her. Among those who were impressed by
her at the time was Brian Grazer, Ron Howard's partner in Imagine Films, the
producers of "Cocoon," "Backdraft" and "Far and Away."

Mr. Howard says, "Brian told me about 'Dead Calm' and said we had to use this
young woman." By the time they contacted Ms. Kidman, Mr. Grazer and Mr. Howard
were well into the nine years they spent getting "Far and Away" produced.

Meanwhile, Mr. Cruise also saw "Dead Calm" and wanted to act with Ms. Kidman.
Two American directors were, in fact, competing simultaneously to get her into
films waiting to be shot. She was beset from every direction by gratuitous
advice. Mr. Cruise urged her to consider his projected film, "Days of Thunder."
There was no screenplay yet for it. But she says that "the ingredients were
right." Not least, of course, the chance to act opposite Mr. Cruise in what was
planned to be a paean to stock-car racing.

"As it was, there wasn't a screenplay yet, and we got caught up in getting a
movie up by a certain release date, and the best interests of the film sort of
got mixed up." Ms. Kidman says.

The film, which was released in 1990, did, however, lead to her marriage to Mr.
Cruise.

Ms. Kidman considers as crucial her experience in her next film, "Billy
Bathgate," drawn from the E. L. Doctorow novel about the Depression-era gangster
Dutch Schultz. Her memory of making the film is very much at odds with that 1991
movie's public image as doomed by conflict.  Admittedly, the film did have the
innate peril of deriving from a book almost "impossibly rich and wonderful," Ms.
Kidman says. "I would have liked my character to be closer to the one in the
book. Robert Benton really threw the ball in my court. He put a lot of trust in
me. I was an Australian actress who came in and said, 'Oh, I can do it with an
American accent, absolutely.' "

She speaks of working with Mr. Benton and Dustin Hoffman, who played Schultz, as
a coming of age. Mr. Hoffman was such an icon of the drama schools, she says,
that she believed his performances could be achieved only through intense and
painful mental transformations. She was astounded by "his sense of fun when he
makes a movie."

"Now I think that fun is the key, that that's where some of the best stuff comes
out," she says. "The atmosphere that lets people take a risk, and it doesn't
matter that people laugh at you, because everyone's laughing already. Dustin
really creates that on a set, and so does Tom -- Tom Cruise does that as well.
And Rob Reiner, who I'm doing a film with next." (This will be "Damages," a
thriller directed by Harold Becker.)

The other wing of her education with Mr. Benton and Mr. Hoffman was that she
sometimes found them waiting for her to express an opinion. "I wondered if I'd
done enough work," Ms. Kidman says. "But Benton says that in the end no one has
the exact solution. That film gave me the confidence to speak my mind."

The film raises the usual ill-informed surmises about Ms. Kidman's career, the
surmise, for example, that her part in "Far and Away" was in some way a
condition of Mr. Cruise's participation. Mr. Howard is emphatic that Mr. Cruise
made no bid for Ms. Kidman's inclusion. "I'm not going to tell you how to cast
your movie," Mr. Cruise told Mr. Howard.

Given his enthusiasm for her performance in "Dead Calm," Brian Grazer had
independently sent Ms. Kidman the screenplay early in the process.

Thus far, Ms. Kidman has emerged from all her films with her professional
reputation intact. Her well-wishers in the film industry hope that that -- at
least -- can be expected from Mr. Howard's tale of Ireland and America.

Meanwhile, the Sydney Theater Company at the Opera House is looking for a
vehicle for Ms. Kidman, perhaps for next winter. And she looks to the overdue
but imminent development of a new generation of Australian directors -- of whom
Jane Campion ("Sweetie") and Jocelyn Moorhouse ("Proof") are harbingers -- to
provide roles in the future. She does not seem to see herself as hostage to
America.

NAME: Nicole Kidman

LOAD-DATE: May 24, 1992

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photos: John Malkovich in "Of Mice and Men" -- Movie directors are
beginning to read. (M-G-M)(pg. 9); Nicole Kidman -- "As much range as any
actor," said Ron Howard. (Graham Shearer)(pg. 14); Ms. Kidman in "Dead Calm," a
stylish 1989 psychological thriller set in Australia. (Warner Brothers); The
actress in "Billy Bathgate," a film that gave her "the confidence to speak my
mind." (Brian Hamill/Touchstone Pictures)(pg. 15)

TYPE: Biography

                   Copyright 1992 The New York Times Company


                              144 of 281 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                   May 24, 1992, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

Women March Home To Recognition at Last

BYLINE: By ROBERT A. HAMILTON

SECTION: Section 13CN; Page 4; Column 5; Connecticut Weekly Desk

LENGTH: 1302 words


WHEN the New Haven Memorial Day Parade steps off today, a woman will be at the
head of the march for the first time in its history. Dr. Doris Troth Lippman of
Westport, a professor of nursing at Fairfield University and a Vietnam veteran,
will lead the parade down Chapel Street at 2 this afternoon.

"Since the Gulf War, I think, more people are aware of women veterans," Dr.
Lippman said.

Robert D. Fodero, co-chairman of the Veterans Affairs Council in New Haven, said
that having the parade's first woman as grand marshal has generated more
interest than usual.

"We usually get one or maybe two Vietnam veterans' organizations marching," said
Mr. Fodero, a retired colonel with the Health Service Corps in Vietnam. "This
year we've gotten six. Dr. Lippman is very articulate, very dynamic and very
sincere. The Vietnam veterans are looking for someone like that, and they've
zeroed in on her."

Official Recognition

It is not just their male counterparts who are starting to recognize women who
served in war. These women are starting to receive official recognition as well.

Dr. Lippman is the vice chairwoman of the Vietnam Women's Memorial Project,
which is seeking to raise $2 million nationally for a statue to be installed
near the Vietnam Memorial Wall in Washington. The statue depicts a nurse
cradling a dying soldier as she sits on a wall of sandbags, as another female
soldier looks out over the barrier.

At the Rocky Hill Veterans Home and Hospital, administrators are gearing up to
provide the kind of care female veterans are going to require, said the state's
Commissioner of the Department of Veteran Affairs, Hamilton D. Harper Jr.

Mr. Harper said with women making up 20 to 25 percent of the soldiers on active
duty status, "I think you're going to see that kind of recognition grow at a
steady pace."

And with the dedication of a Vietnam Women's Memorial anticipated next year,
women might finally come to grips with their war service themselves, said Heidi
Baruch, a nurse in Fairfield who also served in Vietnam, and who is a state
coordinator for the project.

"I didn't begin to deal with being a veteran until five or six years ago," Ms.
Baruch said. "In fact, I rarely even told anyone I was a veteran."

Images of Women

While the images of women's roles in the Persian Gulf war brought home clearly
how close to the fighting they were in the Middle East, there was little
recognition of their role in the Vietnam War.

An estimated 265,000 women served in the military in noncombat roles all over
the world during the Vietnam War. About 11,000 were stationed there as nurses,
and thousands of others served in Japan, Guam, the Philippines and Hawaii,
caring for some of the 350,000 soldiers wounded in the war. The names of eight
women are inscribed on the black granite wallin Washington, D.C. that is a
memorial to soldiers who died in Vietnam.

"For a long time, even the Red Cross denied our existence," said Jeanne M.
Christie of Milford, who was in the Red Cross unit of Supplemental Recreational
Activities Overseas. "Their premise was, 'we did not send women into combat
zones,' so they couldn't recognize us."

'It Was Psychological Health'

Ms. Christie said women in auxiliary organizations were issued military
identifications and standard ranks, and they were called to do badly needed
support. "It wasn't unusual for a commander to call and say, 'we just lost have
the company, could you come out and do your thing?' " Ms. Christie said. "It was
psychological health and welfare."

"But women weren't supposed to be in combat zones, so it was sort of done on the
quiet," Ms. Christie said. After the war, she said, the organizations, and the
military, might have conveniently forgotten because of the liabilities involved.

"God forbid any of us got hit," Ms. Christie said. "There was medical coverage
for us over there, and for some it continued over here."

But for others, the medical coverage stopped once they came home , and the
military might be worried about claims being reopened if the service is
recognized, she said. "Any problems that come up, they don't want to be
responsible," Ms. Christie said.

As a result, Ms. Christie said, it took a long battle with the Red Cross to get
authorization for her unit to march in a parade to dedicate the Vietnam Memorial
in 1983.

Ms. Christie said as a result of the problems that year, women in non-military
units began to work together.

"It has really grown to quite a network," Ms. Christie said. "A lot of
recognition has come out of it. Today, at last, the Red Cross recognizes us, and
the job we did."

'Harder to Explain'

Female veterans say it is harder to explain why they have received little
recognition. "When you think about veterans, you think about men," said Dr.
Lippman. She once took part in a memorial service in Milford, dressed in
fatigues and carrying a helmet. After the service, she said, news reporters
rushed to interview the men, but none talked to her.

"I talked to someone later who said they probably thought I was a veteran's
wife," Dr. Lippman said. "Women need to do a better job of speaking out, of
saying 'we are veterans,' to tell our story. I still don't go out and say, 'hey,
I'm a veteran,' but I'm a lot less shy."

Vietnam veterans, in general, were treated far differently than veterans of
other wars, Ms. Baruch said, but still, a male Vietnam veteran was recognized as
a veteran.

Until recently, Ms. Baruch said, a female veteran could not be treated at a
Veterans Administration hospital. Perhaps it is because women have not pressed
their case, she continued, because after viewing the wounds inflicted by war,
women who came back physically intact were reluctant to seek credit for their
efforts.

Maybe 'I Wasn't Unscathed'

"Women are just now beginning to say, 'maybe after two years of war I wasn't
unscathed,' " Ms. Baruch said.

She said a memorial would make a difference, just by providing recognition for
the role women played in the war. "I hope the national memorial will bring more
women to deal with it," Ms. Baruch said. "Or, at least, to deal with it better
than they are now."

Legislation authorizing the women's memorial was introduced by United States
Representative Sam Gejdenson, Democrat of Bozrah, in November 1987, and was
unanimously approved by Congress. In addition, the project is conducting a
"Sister Search" that has located 8,000 women who served during the Vietnam era ,
Dr. Lippman said.

The statue is to be completed next year, the 10th anniversary of the dedication
of the the original Vietnam monument.

"I think after next year, there will be even more of a focus on women veterans,"
Dr. Lippman said. "Our sense is that this will bring men and women together at
the memorial, to complete the healing. There are still a lot of women who
haven't come to grips with that very important part of their life."

Another memorial is to be built honoring women who served in all wars. Money is
being raised for that monument by the Women in Military Service for America, a
Washington-based group formed in 1986.

Dr. Lippman said she was also encouraged when the City of New Haven recently
unveiled its Vietnam memorial, showing three men and a woman, the first she
knows of in any major city dedicated to women as well as men.

Mr. Fodero added: "I think the movement has come from within the veterans'
groups themselves. They want to see that women are recognized for their
contributions." In the medical corps, Mr. Fodero said he had worked side by side
with women, so he knows first hand the importance of their contribution.

"It's like so many other things, in and out of the military: women have not
gotten credit for what they've done," he commented. "It's about time."

LOAD-DATE: May 24, 1992

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1992 The New York Times Company


                              145 of 281 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                   May 25, 1992, Monday, Late Edition - Final

SWITCHING POLICY, U.S. WILL RETURN REFUGEES TO HAITI

BYLINE: By MICHAEL WINES,  Special to The New York Times

SECTION: Section 1; Page 1; Column 6; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 1067 words

DATELINE: KENNEBUNKPORT, Me., May 24


The White House significantly toughened its efforts today to discourage a flood
of Haitian refugees to the United States, saying it had authorized the Coast
Guard to halt all boats carrying the refugees from their homeland and to escort
them back to Haiti.

The decision, issued in the form of an executive order by President Bush,
departs from a policy adopted only on Thursday to stop picking up Haitians from
boats unless the vessels were in imminent danger of sinking.

Administration officials have said the United States naval base at Guantanamo
Bay, Cuba, the holding site for Haitians seeking asylum in this country, is
already overflowing with more than 12,000 refugees.

Order Issued From Maine

The President issued the order from his vacation home here after concluding that
no alternatives for housing additional Haitian refugees were available, the
White House said.

It is widely assumed that Mr. Bush acted out of concern that southern Florida
would be overwhelmed by a surge in Haitian boat people and that some unseaworthy
boats would sink unless they were forced back to port.

Tens of thousands of people have tried to flee from Haiti since September, when
the military overthrew the democratically elected President, the Rev.
Jean-Bertrand Aristide.

The exodus increased, as did the poor Caribbean country's economic misery, after
the Organization of American States imposed an embargo against Haiti in October
to press for Father Aristide's return to power.

Not Likely a Deterrent

The new policy seems unlikely to deter departures by the Haitians, who appear
determined to escape widening military repression and the food shortage
resulting from the embargo. [Page 4.]

The White House action was immediately challenged by human rights groups and by
legal groups representing Haitian refugees. Its practical effect may be to
return fleeing Haitians without first determining whether they have good cause
to be granted political asylum, a principle enshrined in a United Nations
convention on the treatment of refugees and forcefully advocated by the White
House in the past.

Arthur C. Helton, director of the refugee project of the Lawyers Committee for
Human Rights, called Mr. Bush's order a "gross violation of international law."

"This is as wrong as it gets in terms of international refugee law," Mr. Helton
said. "Congress must intervene to provide recourse to the boat people."

A White House spokeswoman, Judy Smith, said the new order covered all Haitians
trying to flee to the United States without permission.

Commanders of Coast Guard vessels will also have discretion to take aboard
Haitians who are experiencing medical emergencies or have what are believed to
be legitimate claims for asylum.

Haitians who are escorted home will be told to apply for entry at the United
States Embassy in Port-au-Prince, the Haitian capital, once they are returned to
the island, the White House said.

The policy of allowing Haitians to apply at the embassy for refugee status and
direct resettlement in the United States has existed since January. When it was
first announced, diplomats expressed concern that the embassy's staff would be
overwhelmed.

Refugee advocates said the policy would not help Haitians who live far from the
capital because the fuel shortage caused by the embargo had crippled public
transportation. Further, they said, people trying to reach the embassy would be
vulnerable to reprisals by the authorities because their intent to leave would
be obvious.

Haiti's military-backed Government has said it would not persecute refugees who
follow those procedures. Ms. Smith said surveys by American officials in Haiti
indicated that the Government was living up to that promise, but Haitians have
told journalists of brutal repression at the hands of policemen and soldiers
after being returned.

More than 10,000 Haitians have been picked up at sea by the Coast Guard this
month, more than in any month since Father Aristide was ousted.

Until Thursday, the Government had rescued all boatloads of Haitians found in
the Caribbean and escorted them to Guantanamo Bay, where they were held until
their requests for asylum could be processed.

Immediate Criticism

But that policy was abandoned on Thursday after Guantanamo was filled with more
than 12,000 of the refugees. The order issued that day to assist only those
boats that appeared to be in distress quickly led to charges by human rights
groups that the Administration was acting heartlessly toward the fleeing
Haitians, abandoning them to the elements instead of addressing the conditions
that caused them to seek refuge.

Administration officials disputed that tonight, saying that Haitians could seek
asylum in nations around the world or could walk across the border, to the
Dominican Republic, Haiti's neighbor on the island of Hispaniola, if they
genuinely feared persecution.

Ms. Smith said the order gives Attorney General William P. Barr the option to
grant asylum to selected refugees.

The Administration finds itself caught in an unpleasant political and diplomatic
predicament over the situation in Haiti, unwilling to easily accommodate the
huge influx of refugees streaming toward Florida, but hesitant to tempt further
criticism by refusing to give them at least temporary asylum.

The majority of Haitians seeking refuge here are looking to escape crushing
poverty, not political persecution.

The White House sought today to cast its actions in humanitarian terms, saying
that the Coast Guard had picked up 34,000 Haitians in the Caribbean since
September. Of those, about 9,000 have been allowed to pursue claims of political
asylum, 6,000 of them in the United States.

The action today does not change American policy toward Haiti, the White House
spokeswoman asserted, because "we have long sought to discourage Haitians from
taking to unseaworthy vessels to emigrate to the United States," she said.

Hong Kong Comparison

Only last week, the Administration noted, 18 Haitians had drowned when their
leaky boat sank during an attempt to make the arduous sail to the American
mainland.

But the new American position is likely to be compared to the White House's own
recent condemnations of the British in Hong Kong and of some Asian nations, like
Malaysia, for their refusal to accept as refugees boatloads of people fleeing
Vietnam.

LOAD-DATE: June 3, 1992

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo: Haitian refugees being held on Saturday aboard the Coast Guard
cutter Thetis at Guantanamo Bay, Cuba. (Associated Press)

                   Copyright 1992 The New York Times Company


                              146 of 281 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                  May 26, 1992, Tuesday, Late Edition - Final

Yugoslav Strife: Challenge for Europe

BYLINE: By ALAN RIDING,  Special to The New York Times

SECTION: Section A; Page 6; Column 4; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 1008 words

DATELINE: PARIS, May 25


Aware of their dismal peacemaking record in Yugoslavia, European Community
Governments have chosen to blush and remain silent after Secretary of State
James A. Baker 3d lectured them this weekend for not acting more forcefully to
stop the fighting in Bosnia and Herzegovina.

Nudged by Mr. Baker's public admonition, they have also decided to do sooner
what they were thinking of doing later -- to impose new economic sanctions
against the Serbian dominated Government in Belgrade and to propose that similar
measures be ordered by the United Nations Security Council.

Yet, while accepting the need to step up pressure on Belgrade, there was little
confidence in major European capitals today that the new strategy would force
Serbia to end its military intervention in Bosnia and Herzegovina.

As a result, almost by default, the notion of sending an international military
force to impose a cease-fire in the war-torn republic has for the first time
become part of the debate. It has been raised, though, largely to be discounted
as politically unacceptable.

At an international conference on aid to the former Soviet republics this
weekend in Lisbon, Mr. Baker did not rule out some American involvement in a
military force to insure delivery of humanitarian assistance to Sarajevo and
other affected areas. But European governments worry about being sucked into a
Vietnam-like quagmire.

"I think everyone is reluctant to get into peacemaking," one British Government
official said today. "Peacemaking would be a rather dramatic step. We have often
reminded our partners of our own experience in Northern Ireland -- it's much
easier to get in than to get out."

While Mr. Baker grabbed the headlines this weekend by denouncing the
"humanitarian nightmare" in Bosnia and Herzegovina and by criticizing those who
were "looking for reasons not to act," there is still broad international
support only for new economic sanctions against Belgrade.

Until now, European Community Governments have suspended the trade privileges of
Serbia and Montenegro and withdrawn their Ambassadors from Belgrade. Senior
officials from the community are also to meet in Brussels on Tuesday to discuss
a list of further sanctions drawn up by its executive commission.

These include an embargo on exports from Serbia and Montenegro, a freeze on
financial assets held abroad in the name of the former Yugoslav federation and a
possible oil embargo. The Security Council is also expected to review the
viability of similar sanctions this week.

But the European Commission's report noted that Belgrade had so far not proved
"sensitive" to economic pressure, choosing to see its economy tumble into chaos
rather than make political concessions. Instead the report suggested that the
best approach was to seek Belgrade's total international isolation.

This could include refusal to recognize Serbia and Montenegro as the successor
state to Yugoslavia, thus preventing it from taking Yugoslavia's seat at the
United Nations, the International Monetary Fund, the World Bank and the European
Bank for Reconstruction and Development.

Washington's example of banning flights to the United States by Yugoslavia's
airline may also be followed by community governments. Germany has already
banned all commercial air, rail and road traffic with Serbia and Montenegro,
although Greece, which is a community member, worries that a full trade embargo
against Belgrade will hurt its exports.

Europe Lacks a Mandate

European officials nonetheless recognize that if the new sanctions do not force
Serbia to change its policy and public opinion continues to be inflamed by
television images of women and children fleeing the war in Bosnia and
Herzegovina, the debate about a multinational peace force will return.

With the community itself lacking both a mandate and the troops to act, the
responsibility would again pass to the United Nations, which already has a
14,000-member peacekeeping force assigned to Serbian-populated areas of Croatia.
In the case of Bosnia and Herzegovina, though, the aim would be to put an end to
the fighting.

The Secretary General of the United Nations, Boutros Boutros-Ghali, has warned
that a new Security Council resolution would be required if the existing force
were to play a humanitarian role in Bosnia and Herzegovina. And there is no
certainty that even European governments would back such a resolution.

"One has to remember that the U.N. role always has to be peacekeeping rather
than peacemaking," Britain's Defense Secretary, Malcolm Rifkind, said today.
"One could not expect U.N. forces, involving British servicemen, to actually go
into the middle of the war and try to sort that out."

A Role for NATO Troops?

In theory, there also exists the possibility that the North Atlantic Treaty
Organization might offer to send troops to Yugoslavia since the alliance has
decided to make its peacekeeping services available to the 52-nation Conference
of Security and Cooperation in Europe. But the necessary consensus for such a
move seems unlikely to emerge.

Given the limited options available to the international community, then, some
European governments have questioned Mr. Baker's motives in suddenly bidding for
leadership on the Yugoslav crisis, above all since Washington has until now
preferred to keep its distance from a problem that was resisting solution.

One French Government official suggested that, following televised images of
Muslim women and children being held hostage by Serbian militias, Washington was
simply anxious to be seen doing something. "The build-up of questions about
Yugoslavia in the White House and State Department briefings last week almost
obliged a response," the official said.

A British government official said he did not expect the United States to take
over the responsibilities for a Yugoslav settlement assumed by the European
Community 11 months ago. "I think Baker was just encouraging the Europeans to
take the lead a bit more than they have been," he said.

LOAD-DATE: May 26, 1992

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: News Analysis

                   Copyright 1992 The New York Times Company


                              147 of 281 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                  May 26, 1992, Tuesday, Late Edition - Final

Sun and Fun Yield to a Day of Reflection

BYLINE: By MICHEL MARRIOTT

SECTION: Section B; Page 1; Column 2; Metropolitan Desk

LENGTH: 1091 words


As a time to remember Americans fallen in battle, Memorial Day was fittingly
gray and somber in the New York region yesterday. Temperatures seldom reached 60
degrees, and the sun played peek-a-boo in overcast skies.

But as a day off from work, as a day to celebrate the traditional, if
unofficial, first day of summer, the holiday offered as chilly a reception as
did the area's parks and beaches.

"It certainly wasn't a beach day," said Anthony Gigi, a meteorologist for the
National Weather Service, who noted that Memorial Day last year was 89 degrees.

But many managed to make the best of the weather. Diehard beach combers dug
their heels into the sand to the restful roar of the surf. The parks, while less
crowded than usual for this time of year, had determined bicyclists, joggers and
sunbathers, and cookout chefs were standing in a haze of sumptious smoke.

At Yankee Stadium, about 20,000 fans showed up for a game between the Yankees
and Brewers.

"It's just a Monday with nothing to do," said Danny Mastro, 27 years old, of
Manhattan, one of the fans. "If it were sunny, I'm sure a lot more people would
be here."

Shoppers, of course, flocked to area malls, lured by the promise of Memorial
Day-sale bargains.

Yet throughout the day, the nation's war dead were honored in public and private
ceremonies. There were stirring speeches and flag waving, patriotic songs and
salutes, and neighborhood parades in which veterans marched with prideful
strides and children, too young to learn any lessons from war, were delighted by
the rumble of drums and the blare of bugles.

Attendance at Ceremonies Low

Sadly for many who attended the memorial gatherings, attendance was often
sparse, as veterans of the so-called great wars have died or have grown too old
to march.

This year there was no grand Memorial Day parade up Broadway in Manhattan, and
the parade down the Grand Concourse in the Bronx was smaller and with fewer
spectators than those of the past.

At the Soldiers' and Sailors' Monument in Riverside Park in Manhattan, a dozen
or so uniformed men and women, some white-haired and frail, walked a short
distance to place flowered wreaths of respect and remembrance at the foot of the
old granite landmark.

A Different Call to Arms

Then, for almost an hour, more than 600 people, some holding American flags and
bearing metals and ribbons of honor on their chest, listened quietly to brief
speeches, prayers and patriotic music.

Until this year, there had been a parade up Broadway and Riverside Drive leading
to the monument on every Memorial Day since 1919. The New York County American
Legion, which organized the parade over the years, did not apply for a parade
permit this year, sensing that the years of declining attendance and
participation called for a different, less showy symbol of remembrance.

William Hay, 45, a Vietnam veteran who spoke during the ceremony, said the
question to ask was what the war dead would want.

"It is probably good for us who organize these things that the dead cannot
speak, because we probably wouldn't like what they had to say," he told the
audience. "Most of all they would ask us to stop adding to their rolls."

The dead do not need parades and marches, Mr. Hay said. He said that they would
prefer to have Americans answer a call to arms to defeat poverty, drug addition,
child abuse and other social problems that he said plague the country.

Tribute To a Downed Major

In Mount Vernon, N.Y., as many as 400 spectators, some cheering heartily, lined
downtown Gramatan Avenue to watch the teen-age pompom girls, the proud aging
veterans and strutting school bands march in the city's annual Memorial Day
parade.

"This is a small town and small towns have a characteristic that is the strength
of nation," said Irwyn Nelson, a Jewish war veteran and president of Mount
Vernon's Central Committee of Veterans, which sponsored today's parade. "It's
very beautiful and very natural and very worthwhile."

In Oradell, N.J., the hometown of Maj. Marie Rossi, the first female commander
to fly into battle, and the first to die while doing it, Gov. Jim Florio and the
friends and family of Major Rossi gathered. There were also veterans of a
half-century of American wars, including her husband, who served with her in the
Persian Gulf.

Governor Florio unveiled a monument, an piece of granite bearing a plaque with
her likeness, surrounded by a grove dedicated to her honor.

"In the deepest part of my heart, I believe Marie is with me," said her husband,
Chief Warrant Officer John Cayton. "And when she is smiling I feel it the
deepest part of my body, and I believe she is smiling today."

Some Crowds Were Found

Major Rossi and two crewmen died last March when the Army Chinook helicopter she
was piloting crashed in Northern Saudi Arabia in a non-combat accident the day
after the cease-fire was announced.

Only days previously, before the ground assault began, she had been interviewed
on the Cable News Network. "What I am doing," she said then, "is no greater, or
less, than the man who is flying next to me."

The Governor said yesterday, "It was part of Marie's magic that somehow we all
thought we knew her."

All thoughts yesterday did not turn to duty and honor.

In Central Park, Charles Gifford and his wife, Jerrilynn Dodds, both 41, sat
playing with their two sons, Sandy, 7, and Theo, 2, on the patio of the Zoo
Cafe.

Ms. Dodds, an architectural history professor at City College, said they chose
to stay in the city this year because everybody else had gone away.

At the Roosevelt Field mall on Long Island, Steven and Talin Dosttur said they
had thought they would beat the Memorial Day crowds by staying close to their
Long Island home, putting off their vacation to Hershey, Pa., until next week.

But as Mrs. Dosttur measured a blue-and-white striped polo shirt against her
husband's back, getting jostled by passing customers in the men's department of
Macy's, it became clear the crowds had found them.

Much of the rest of Long Island took one look at this morning's overcast skies
and surrendered any hope of tasting summer's traditional pleasures: sunbathing,
swimming and cooking out.

At Jones Beach, where parking tickets usually go on sale at 6 A.M., Cara
O'Connor, who sells the tickets, said she did not bother opening the ticket
window until 11:15.

The three lifeguards there said they did not mind the cloudy skies and quiet
day. "It's nice," said Kevin Doherty, 17. "We kind of needed a break."

LOAD-DATE: May 26, 1992

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photos: A memorial was dedicated yesterday in Oradell, N.J., for Maj.
Marie Rossi, a helicopter pilot who died during the war in the Persian Gulf. At
left was her husband, Chief Warrant Officer John Cayton. (F. N. Kinney for The
New York Times); Jeanne Penfold of Oceanside, L.I., left, talked with Regina
Wilk of Silver Spring, Md., as they stowed a flag after a Memorial Day ceremony
yesterday at Arlington National Cemetery. Both are members of American Gold Star
Mothers, an organization of women whose children died in war. (Stephen
Crowley/The New York Times); Honoring Americans who have died in wars, American
Legion members participated in a Memorial Day observance yesterday at the
Soldiers' and Sailors' Monument at Riverside Park in Manhattan. (Dith Pran/The
New York Times) (pg. B6)

                   Copyright 1992 The New York Times Company


                              148 of 281 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                  May 26, 1992, Tuesday, Late Edition - Final

With the Income Tax Achieved, a Legislator Leaves Hartford

BYLINE: By ANDREW L. YARROW,  Special to The New York Times

SECTION: Section B; Page 4; Column 1; Metropolitan Desk

LENGTH: 809 words

DATELINE: NEW HAVEN


Even as Irving J. Stolberg prepares to return to private life at a time of
intense anti-tax sentiment, the longtime income-tax advocate, one of
Connecticut's most powerful politicians in the 1980's, remains an unabashed
liberal and defender of public service.

"Others are packing it in because of the low pay and the aggravation," said Mr.
Stolberg, referring to the rash of politicians in Connecticut and throughout the
country who have opted not to seek re-election this year. But that is not his
cause for announcing that he will not run for his 12th term as a state House
member.

"In the last 22 years," he said, "I have accomplished most of my goals,
especially now with an income tax in place for the 21st century in Connecticut."

Mr. Stolberg, 55, a New Haven Democrat and former geography professor, was state
House Majority Leader for two two-year terms and ruled the 151-member General
Assembly forcefully, leading some colleagues to call him "the emperor." Never
one to shy from political battles or play down his accomplishments, he enhanced
his reputation with flowery speeches and rulings.

In announcing his retirement, Mr. Stolberg pointedly differentiated himself from
other legislators who are trying to avoid responsibility for last year's
decision to enact Connecticut's first income tax.

Convincing His Constituents

"The income tax has been my primary plank for 11 elections," he said. "When I
came into office, most of my constituents were opposed to an income tax. But my
polls show that I have convinced a majority that I was not using the income tax
to increase taxes, but rather to raise revenues more equitably and efficiently
than with sales or business taxes."

Arguing that sales taxes impose a disproportionate burden on low- and
middle-income families and that business taxes hurt the state's economy, Mr.
Stolberg's message has been that "a balanced tax structure should be an equal
mix of sales tax, property tax and income tax."

Tom Scott, Connecticut's leading income-tax opponent, does not agree and has
said that Mr. Stolberg was a principal target of his Connecticut Taxpayers'
Victory Committee, which is raising money for 70 anti-tax candidates. Mr. Scott,
who is running against Representative Rosa L. DeLauro for Congress, has taken
credit for forcing Mr. Stolberg to bow out.

Mr. Stolberg is among several income-tax supporters in the Assembly -- including
House Speaker Richard J. Balducci and the current Majority Leader, Robert F.
Frankel -- who were the object of threats after the tax was approved last year,
other legislators say. All three have announced that they will not seek
re-election.

A Reduction in Debt Service

But Mr. Stolberg emphatically denied that his retirement had been hastened by
Mr. Scott. "Anyone with any sense in Connecticut knows that what Scott says
about me is a joke," he said. "He's the only hatemonger I've encountered in
Connecticut politics."

Mr. Stolberg said that he understood voters' frustrations and conceded, "There
is legitimacy to the anti-tax sentiment because of legislators' pork-barrel
projects."

Nonetheless, using his own career as a model, he challenged the notion that
liberalism could automatically be equated with spendthrift big government.

"We reduced the state's debt service from 15 percent to 10.5 percent in four
years," he said, referring to his tenure as chairman of the assembly's finance
committee between 1979 and 1983. "I was more fiscally responsible than all these
loud-mouthed conservatives who preach one thing and bring pork barrel back to
their districts."

A 60's Recruit to Politics

Mr. Stolberg, who was born in Philadelphia and grew up in Los Angeles, taught
geography at Southern Connecticut State University and worked for several
foreign-exchange programs before beginning his political career as a delegate
for Eugene McCarthy in his bid for the Democratic Presidential nomination in
1968. Two years later, Mr. Stolberg was elected in what is now Connecticut's 93d
Assembly District by five votes.

During his years in office, Mr. Stolberg introduced or supported legislation to
convert defense industries to nondefense production, to increase housing and
welfare benefits and to bolster services for the elderly and Vietnam veterans.

In 1989, after his second term as House Speaker, Mr. Stolberg was ousted by a
coalition of Republicans and conservative Democrats in favor of Mr. Balducci.

"He led the Legislature forcefully, but that forcefulness also turned out to be
his downfall," said Representative Jonathan Pelto of Mansfield, an assistant
majority leader under Mr. Stolberg.

But Mr. Pelto added: "Stolberg set out to do two things -- to professionalize
the Legislature, getting it on an equal footing with the executive branch, and
get an income tax -- and he's done both."

LOAD-DATE: May 26, 1992

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo: State Representative Irving J. Stolberg, who is retiring from
public office. (Steve Miller)

                   Copyright 1992 The New York Times Company


                              149 of 281 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 May 27, 1992, Wednesday, Late Edition - Final

THE 1992 CAMPAIGN: Republicans;
Abortion Issue Rips Away Veil Of G.O.P. Unity

BYLINE: By DAVID E. ROSENBAUM,  Special to The New York Times

SECTION: Section A; Page 1; Column 5; National Desk

LENGTH: 1166 words

DATELINE: SALT LAKE CITY, May 26


Abandoning their cherished public unity and sounding like the normally fractious
Democrats, Republicans turned to name-calling today and challenged one another's
moral values over the question of whether abortion should remain legal.

A daylong hearing of the Republican Platform Committee on social issues and
"family values" turned into something of a bazaar where Republicans for and
against legal abortion presented their wares. There were rallies and pickets,
handouts and news conferences. The "Eleventh Commandment" -- that no Republican
should speak ill of another in public -- was thrown to the wind.

Phyllis Schlafly, the president of Eagle Forum, a conservative group opposed to
abortion, told reporters that Ann E. W. Stone, chairman of Republicans for
Choice, was interested only in money and would "come out of this a rich woman."

The Rug Is Raised

Ms. Stone, an experienced fund-raiser for Republican and conservative causes,
called Mrs. Schlafly a "religious zealot."

Over the last generation, Democrats have often clashed on divisive issues like
the Vietnam War, civil rights and gun control. Sharp language was routine and
sit-ins and walkouts were not beyond the realm.

Republicans have generally managed to sweep their doctrinal differences under
the rug. Not since Senator Barry Goldwater of Arizona, who represented the
conservative wing of the party, was challenged by Gov. Nelson A. Rockefeller of
New York in 1964 has there been a vote on a platform issue at a Republican
convention.

Since 1980, the Republican platform has advocated a constitutional amendment to
protect "unborn children," opposed government financing of any organization at
home or abroad that supports abortion and favored appointment of Federal judges
who believe abortion is not a constitutional right. "The unborn child has a
fundamental individual right to life which cannot be infringed," the 1988
platform stated. While some Republicans have openly objected to those planks,
the opposition was always muted.

But the likelihood that the Supreme Court will erode, if not completely
overturn, abortion rights in the next few weeks has made the question a much
more political one than in past years. The Supreme Court is reviewing a
Pennsylvania law that restricts abortions, requiring among other things that
wives notify their husbands of planned abortions. The possibility that the High
Court will use that case to further curb access to abortion has led Republicans
who favor legal abortion to begin questioning in earnest whether their party's
stand on the issue is politically wise.

Governor's Sharp Remarks

For example, Gov. William F. Weld of Massachusetts, one of several prominent
Republicans who is outspoken in support of abortion rights, sent a statement to
the platform committee asserting that "if the party retains its inflexible,
anti-choice position, I fear we run the risk of shutting out potential leaders,
losing touch with mainstream America and forfeiting our role as the bulwark
against government intrusion and the champion of individual freedom."

Still, nothing is likely to happen, at least not by the time the Republican
National Convention is held in Houston this August. Ultimately, every plank,
every sentence, every comma in the Republican platform will be written the week
before the convention by President Bush's staff, and the President is adamantly
against any change in the party's position.

William E. Bennett, the former Secretary of Education, argued today that a rigid
stance against abortion was both morally and politically the right one. The
source of political discontent in the country, he said, is not that politicians
have clung too carefully to principles, but that they have strayed from them.

Ms. Stone and her followers hope they can at least force a floor vote on the
issue at the convention to exhibit their strength and perhaps pave the way for a
change in the 1996 platform. But even that seems improbable.

Under Republican rules, a vote will take place in only two circumstances: if at
least 25 percent of the 107-member platform committee wants one, or if a
majority of at least six state delegations call for a vote.

How Important Are They?

The Bush camp has stacked the platform committee, so a call for a vote there is
out of the question. Ms. Stone says she has four state delegations locked up and
seven or eight others that she may be able to persuade, but others on her side
say they doubt that is the case.

Unlike the situation in some parliamenary democracies, American party platforms
are binding on no one, so some politicians say they are unimportant. Others say,
however, that platforms do outline in the broadest strokes the basic differences
between the parties and thus are important.

What all this will mean in the November election is anyone's guess. Despite
complaints of a few party leaders like Gov. Robert P. Casey of Pennsylvania, the
Democratic platform is certain to endorse legal abortion and government payments
for abortions for women who cannot afford them. Ross Perot, who is considering
running as an independent, has also said he supports abortion rights.

Polls show consistently that a majority of voters favor legal abortion. But no
one knows how that converts into votes. Most voters, presumably, do not cast
their votes entirely on the basis of their view on that one issue.

Is Compromise Possible?

Senator Don Nickles of Oklahoma, the chairman of the platform committee,
suggested at today's hearing that some compromise was possible, say a
requirement that parents be notified before a minor could have an abortion or
limits on abortions a certain number of months into a pregnancy. But neither the
supporters nor the opponents of abortion rights said they saw room for
compromise, and Senator Nickles declared in the end, "I don't see these sides
coming together."

The Bush camp's agreement to allow the hearing on abortion to take place was a
concession to the political strength of the forces that favor legal abortions.
On no other issue addressed today, not health or education, not welfare or aid
to the cities, was anyone allowed to testify who disagreed fundamentally with
the President's position.

But that itself led to criticism of the President. Angela Buchanan, the sister
and campaign manager of Patrick J. Buchanan, the conservative columnist who has
challenged Mr. Bush in many primaries this year, called a news conference here
to attack Mr. Bush for being so open-minded.

"You do not see the Republican party establishment bringing in rabid pro-taxers
to argue the need for increasing the marginal income tax rate," she declared.
"Only on the matter of gravest principle does the establishment of our party see
an open question."

But Richard N. Bond, the Republican national chairman, took the stance that the
party should be big enough for all comers. "There is no litmus test on any issue
in the Republican Party," he said.

LOAD-DATE: May 27, 1992

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photos: Republicans for and against access to abortion demonstrating in
Lake City, where the Republican Platform Committee held a hearing. (Photographs
by Don Grayston for The New York Times) (pg. A18)

                   Copyright 1992 The New York Times Company


                              150 of 281 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 May 27, 1992, Wednesday, Late Edition - Final

INSIDE

SECTION: Section A; Page 1; Column 3; Metropolitan Desk

LENGTH: 118 words



New York Redistricting Plan

A new proposal for redrawing New York's Congressional districts would help
Hispanic candidates and hurt several incumbents. Page B1.

School Network: Long Road

Having hired Yale's president, Christopher Whittle still faces hard questions in
creating a private-school network. News analysis, page B8.

Family Fare at Northwest

Defying the industry's new simplified fare structure, Northwest plans a leisure
fare to allow an adult and a child to fly for the price of one. Page D1.

Philip Habib, Diplomat, Dies

Philip C. Habib, a State Department troubleshooter in Vietnam, the Middle East
and and the Philippines, is dead. He was 72 years old. Page D21.

LOAD-DATE: May 27, 1992

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Summary

                   Copyright 1992 The New York Times Company


                              151 of 281 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 May 27, 1992, Wednesday, Late Edition - Final

Philip C. Habib, a Leading U.S. Diplomat, Dies at 72

BYLINE: By CATHERINE S. MANEGOLD

SECTION: Section D; Page 21; Column 1; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 1148 words


Philip C. Habib, a Brooklyn-born Lebanese-American who was one of the United
States policymakers in the Middle East and Asia for decades, died Monday while
vacationing in France. He was 72 years old.

Mr. Habib died of a heart attack, the United States Embassy said. He lived in
Belmont, Calif.

Mr. Habib served in the Foreign Service for nearly three decades, and many years
in retirement as a trouble-shooter, crafting for himself a reputation as a tough
and shrewd negotiator. He is credited with helping to arrange the cease-fire in
Lebanon and the Palestine Liberation Organization's withdrawal from that country
in 1982 following the Israeli invasion. He also played an important role in
persuading President Ferdinand E. Marcos of the Philippines to go into exile in
1986.

Advisor to 3 Administrations

A former Ambassador to South Korea, he helped craft foreign policy across the
region both in that capacity and later as a top advisor to three
Administrations. Although he officially retired from the Foreign Service in
1978, citing health problems, he was recalled just a year later to work as a
special adviser to Secretary of State Cyrus R. Vance.

He became known as a tough trouble-shooter on behalf of the United States. His
final assignment came in 1987, when he was called upon by President Reagan to be
a special envoy in Central America. He resigned that post, and severed his ties
with Government in August of that year.

Just before his death, Mr. Habib had travelled to Evian, France to give a speech
at the Bilderberg Conference, an annual meeting of European and United States
scholars and intellectuals. Dr. Henry A. Kissinger, who also spoke at that
conference, yesterday recalled Mr. Habib as "every Secretary of State's idea of
a great foreign service officer."

Dr. Kissinger first met Mr. Habib in Vietnam in the mid 1960's and recalled
having been immediately impressed with his acumen and irreverence.

"I was taken to meet him by Ambassador Lodge," Dr. Kissinger said in a telephone
interview, referring to Henry Cabot Lodge, who was then United States Ambassador
to Saigon. "And when I met him, he said, 'I bet you are one of those Harvard
smart alecs who knows everything.' Then he told me to go to the provinces and
'see what was really going on.' "

In his speech at the Bilderberg Conference, Mr. Habib spoke about the need to
maintain the North Atlantic Treaty Organization and the importance of America's
ties with Europe. Then, according to those who attended, in a departure from his
usual preoccupations with foreign affairs, he spoke at length about United
States domestic issues, stressing the need for America to stand by its moral
principles.

Friends said his involvement in that conference was typical of the elder
statesman who, despite near fatal heart attacks dating to the late 1970's and
two open-heart surgeries, never abandoned his interest in world affairs.

"He had no business going to these things," said Leslie H. Gelb, a former
Pentagon and State Department official who worked with Mr. Habib in the 1960's
at the height of the Vietnam conflict. "But he wanted to live, not just stay
alive." Mr. Gelb is now a columnist with The New York Times.

Mr. Habib was remembered yesterday by friends as a man of zest, creativity and
relentless earnestness in the face of great odds.

"He was the guy everybody knew," said Morton Abramowitz, the president of the
Carnegie Endowment for International Peace, and a veteran of 30 years in the
State Department. "Phil's career runs the gamut of all U.S. foreign policy. But
he was particularly involved in the transformation of Asia. He contributed
fundamentally to the shaping of foreign policy in that area."

Although Mr. Habib's expertise in the Foreign Service was mostly in Asia,
particularly in Vietnam in the 1960's, where he was involved in the
behind-the-scenes politics in Washington that eventually led President Johnson
in 1968 to press for a negotiated end to the war, he was perhaps best remembered
in later years for his work in the Middle East.

Lebanese From Bensonhurst

A Lebanese Maronite Christian who grew up in a predominantly Jewish section of
Bensonhurst, Mr. Habib became Undersecretary of State for Political Affairs in
1976. He remained in that post in the new Carter Administration and continued
until he suffered the first of his heart attacks in December 1977.

In retirement, he became a popular trouble-shooter for President Reagan. He was
called upon to help hammer out a peace settlement in Lebanon, which later
collapsed. For that work, he was awarded the Presidential Medal of Freedom, in
1982.

In fact, his diplomatic career started almost on a whim. According to his
daughter, Phyllis, Mr. Habib had planned a career as a forest ranger. A graduate
of the College of Forestry and Wildlife and Range Sciences at the University of
Idaho, Mr. Habib was studying for his Ph.D. in agricultural economics at the
University of California at Berkley when spotted a notice for a test to enter
the State Department. "He decided to take the test," said Ms. Habib. "And he
passed it." His first assignments took him to postings Canada and New Zealand.

The Vietnam War changed his life, however, and established his career as a
diplomat.

"He was one of my heroes," Mr.  Kissinger said. "The great thing about him was
that he was a terrific soldier." Inside the State Department he won a reputation
as a man who would fight over issues about which he cared deeply. Yet he was
known, too, as a professional who followed orders.

During his tenure as Secretary of State, Mr. Kissinger said he relied heavily on
Mr. Habib's advice. "I might not do what he said," he recalled. "But I wouldn't
make a move without finding out what he thought."

Mr. Habib, a gourmet and connoisseur of fine wines, was on a vacation with
friends in Puligny-Montrachet, in the Cote d'Or region, when he collapsed, his
daughter, said. Agence France-Presse, the French news agency, reported that he
suffered a heart attack at his hotel and could not be revived by a medical team.

Mr. Habib was living in retirement in the family's home of 17 years in Belmont,
California. He was a Senior Research Fellow at the Hoover Institution at
Stanford University, and was on the Board of Directors of the American
University in Beirut. He also served on the Board of Directors of the Audi Bank
of California, according to his daughter.

After his retirement, Mr. Habib remained an active alumnus of the University of
Idaho where he set up the Philip Habib Endowment for the Study of Environmental
Issues and World Peace.

Among other honors, Mr. Habib was decorated commander of France's Legion of
Honor in 1988.

He is survived by his wife, Marjorie W. Habib; two daughters, Phyllis, and Susan
W. Michaels of Vestal, N.Y. and a granddaughter, Maren K. Michaels.

NAME: Philip C. Habib

LOAD-DATE: May 27, 1992

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo: Philip C. Habib (The New York Times, 1982)

TYPE: Biography; Obituary (Obit)

                   Copyright 1992 The New York Times Company


                              152 of 281 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 May 27, 1992, Wednesday, Late Edition - Final

Review/Television;
Subtle Changes in Jay Leno's 'Tonight Show'

BYLINE: By JOHN J. O'CONNOR

SECTION: Section C; Page 15; Column 3; Cultural Desk; Word and Image Page

LENGTH: 915 words


You take an opening monologue, some kibitzing with the band, a guest or two, a
singer or comic thrown in, and there you have it: NBC's "Tonight Show," created
in 1954 by a wily programming genius named Sylvester (Pat) Weaver. Today he's
probably better known as the father of Sigourney. Time moves on, friends. Just
ask Johnny Carson, and then just watch Jay Leno trying to put his own imprint on
a formula written in late-night concrete.

After more than a month of media blitz counting down to Mr. Carson's departure
last Friday, Mr. Leno took over the franchise on Monday evening at 11:35 P.M.,
and responded to the standard enthusiastic ovation from the studio audience with
an appropriately wary crack: "Let's see how you all feel in 30 years." Looking a
bit formal in dark jacket, white shirt and dressy tie, the new host was
obviously on edge. The billing was hardly reassuring. What was known as "The
Tonight Show Starring Johnny Carson" is now "The Tonight Show With Jay Leno."
Message: Don't feel too comfortable.

Changes have indeed been made. While Edd Hall, the unseen announcer, ticks off
the guest names at the start of the show, the camera seems to move forward
through a series of opening or rising stage curtains. The net effect has an odd
Looney Toons resonance. Then from behind the final curtain steps Mr. Leno,
smiling, nodding, shoulders heaving in a friendly simulation of spontaneous
laughter.

Without further ado, the monologue. Get right to -- what else? -- the Quayle
joke ("Where would I be without my father?" asks Mr. Quayle in his pro-family
mode. "Probably Vietnam," Mr. Leno answers). But like Mr. Carson, Mr. Leno
doesn't neglect other politicians. He had Bill Clinton insisting that "sex is a
deeply personal matter -- between a candidate and his campaign volunteers." Ross
Perot? The less he says, according to Mr. Leno, the more popular he gets -- "a
point that seems to be lost on Dan Quayle."

So far, this is familiar territory. But in a switch of gears, the monologue
ended with a taped comedy sketch called "Feed the Felons." Viewers were told
that for just $271 a day, they could support the prison stays of the "needy
greedy" and get regular reports on appeals, parole reviews and release dates.
Among the more deserving recipients would be Leona, Jim, Charlie and Little
Manuel. Mr. Leno evidently wants to make his humor more pointed. He might also
try making the hand less heavy.

Decidedly on the plus side for Mr. Leno is the recruitment of Branford Marsalis
as musical director overseeing a house band culled from his own group of jazz
musicians. Obviously rattled by some of the pre-opening publicity given to Mr.
Marsalis, Mr. Carson went out of his way in the final shows to heap praise on
Doc Severinsen and the band.

As for changes in the sets, always tricky for an entrenched format, some are
promising. The Marsalis band performs in a space that seems considerably less
cramped than the familiar pen, although the backdrop of lighted arches suggests
the lobby of a hotel that could be called El Convento. Worst new touch is the
giant seascape photo directly behind Mr. Leno's desk. What is this, a travel
agency? All that's missing is a "Your Vacation Is Our Business" sign.

Billy Crystal, Mr. Leno's first guest, moved quickly to loosen up the show.
Greeted by Mr. Leno, he began shouting for Auntie Em upon realizing that Ed
McMahon was no longer there to welcome him. Then, taking off on last week's
Bette Midler stint with Mr. Carson, Mr. Crystal pulled out a sheet of special
lyrics written to the tune of "You Made Me Love You" ("You made me first guest,
I didn't want to do it, I didn't want to do it").

Good stuff, cleverly putting the Carson farewell in perspective while giving Mr.
Leno an opportunity to be more gracious than his predecessor, who had failed to
even mention him. But a nervous Mr. Leno fumbled the occasion. He pushed Mr.
Crystal along to a not-so-funny anecdote about Redd Foxx, and then moved briskly
on to other guests, as if an all-star lineup were panting in the wings.

Shanice, a pop singer, wound up performing two numbers. Robert Krulwich, an
economics correspondent and the host of the short-lived monthly magazine "Edge"
on public television, was introduced next. Armed with unwieldy props, Mr.
Krulwich attempted a presumably lighthearted lecture on how corporate CEO's are
being paid too much. The "guy who works at Heinz," he explained, made $75
million last year, or $31,029.24 an hour. As the studio audience, not to mention
Mr. Crystal, obviously began tuning out, Mr. Krulwich almost pleaded that
"you've got to understand what's going on here."

Perhaps, once again, Mr. Leno was signaling his willingness to tackle weighty
matters, to offer something more substantial than celebrity chit-chat. It's
possible, but a lot more work is required on context and transitions. Monday's
awkward juxtaposition was unfair to Mr. Crystal, Mr. Krulwich and the loyal but
no doubt puzzled viewers.

The Tonight Show With Jay Leno
Jay Leno, host and head writer; writers: Jimmy Brogan, Brad Dickson, Wayne
Kline, Jon Macks, Joe Medeiros, Ron Richards, John Romeo, Peter Sears, Marvin
Sibermintz and Buddy Winston; producers, Debbie Vickers and Bill Royce;
executive producer, Helen Gorman Kushnick. Big Dog Productions in association
with NBC Productions. Weeknights at 11:35 P.M. on NBC.

WITH: Jay Leno, host; Branford Marsalis, musical director; Ed Hall, announcer.

LOAD-DATE: May 27, 1992

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo: Jay Leno, right, has stepped into a role conceived in 1954: the
host of NBC's "Tonight Show." His first guest Monday night, Billy Crystal,
offered his own special lyrics to "You Made Me Love You." (Associated Press)

TYPE: Review

                   Copyright 1992 The New York Times Company


                              153 of 281 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                  May 28, 1992, Thursday, Late Edition - Final

THE 1992 CAMPAIGN: Political Memo;
How Perot Tries to Edit the Press (and the Past?) on Prisoner-of-War Issue

BYLINE: By PATRICK E. TYLER,  Special to The New York Times

SECTION: Section A; Page 20; Column 1; National Desk

LENGTH: 1638 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, May 27


"This is Ross Perot calling," the candidate-to-be announced on the telephone
recently. "Now I'm not asking for a retraction or anything like that, I just
want to get the facts straight."

He was addressing an allegation by former Reagan Administration officials,
reported in The New York Times, that he went to Vietnam in early 1987 and
disclosed without authorization the Administration's negotiating strategy on how
to resolve the cases of Americans missing in action in Southeast Asia.

Mr. Perot adamantly denies this, and his style of driving home his point in
dealings with the news media reflects the same zeal, the same political
salesmanship that Mr. Perot is projecting in his national campaign.

In this instance, Mr. Perot's ostensible withdrawal from public view in mid-May
to develop policy positions did not deter him from monitoring his press
clippings and leading a mini-campaign to amend the record.

He insisted that the former White House chief of staff Howard H. Baker Jr. or
his principal aide, James Cannon, could back him up. "You call Howard Baker or
Jim Cannon and they'll tell you," Mr. Perot said. "I briefed the North
Vietnamese at the request of President Reagan, through Howard Baker." Moreover,
Mr. Perot insisted, "I was not going to go to Hanoi unless they wanted me to."

Not What He Remembers

Mr. Baker, now in private legal practice, is reluctant to be drawn into a public
dispute with Mr. Perot and would not comment directly. But Mr. Cannon, a
longtime friend and admirer of Mr. Perot, said that he and Mr. Baker have
searched their memories. While they recall meetings with Mr. Perot before he
went to Hanoi, neither can recall the substance of the discussions and neither
can recall authorizing Mr. Perot to disclose details of the Administration's
strategy to the Vietnamese.

"I just don't remember that it happened that way," Mr. Cannon said.

Another highly-placed official who was dealing with Mr. Perot at the time, said,
"Perot has been peddling that story for a considerable time." But this official,
too, said he distinctly remembers that the Texan was not authorized to disclose
White House plans in Hanoi.

Finally, the public record shows that the White House issued a statement on
April 24, 1987, saying, "The Government was not aware that Mr. Perot had gone to
Vietnam until after he had returned and provided the White House with a
debriefing."

Credibility as an Industry

This does not matter, Mr. Perot said, adding that he has a letter that proves he
is telling the truth. Mr. Perot has not yet produced the letter.

Weighing the credibility of the man who is expected to challenge President Bush
and the probable Democratic nominee, Gov. Bill Clinton, in a three-way race is
becoming a big industry in Washington.

In a city where nuance, spin, imagery and propaganda are the stuff that shape
the daily complexion of a campaign, Mr. Perot at times charts a more absolutist
course -- I'm right and they're wrong, no matter what -- when it comes to the
history of events that are at the core of his persona as the
outsider-who-knows-how-to-get-things-done candidate.

And an encounter with Mr. Perot over history can produce a whirl of fax machine
responses, calls from his publicist, his secretary and, when least expected, the
praireland twang of Mr. Perot, which comes down the line like the screech of
train brakes.

Even over the fax machine, Mr. Perot employs the diction of a well-timed body
slam when answering queries. "Yes, this did occur," "I never made such an offer"
and "I have no idea what you are talking about" are typical Perot responses.

Taking Up the Cause

No history is more central to Mr. Perot's public image than his involvement in
efforts to find and free American servicemen. In the mid-1980's, when some
advocacy groups and members of Congress forcefully raised the prospect that
Americans might still be held captive in Southeast Asia, Mr. Perot took up their
cause in Washington.

In a series of dramatic statements and appearances, Mr. Perot told the news
media in late 1986 that if President Ronald Reagan and the Congress wanted him
to do it, he would take the Government back from the bureaucrats and get "all
the way to the bottom" of whether American prisoners of war had been left
behind.

The episode is part of the longest-running public service project Mr. Perot
undertook before his expected run for the White House. That many former
Government officials and full-time P.O.W/M.I.A. advocates say they became
disenchanted with Mr. Perot's contentious and superficial approach to the issue
is a sensitive subject for the Texas billionaire.

Perhaps for this reason, Mr. Perot gets testy over whose recollection of events
from this period is accurate and how these recollections might reflect on what
kind of leader he would be in the White House.

An Offer of Steak

In the same telephone call, Mr. Perot moved on to the allegation that he had
advocated a strategy of buying back prisoners of war from the Vietnamese.

"I'll buy you the biggest steak in Texas if you can find one shred of evidence
that that's true," he said with his trademark bluster. The idea of trading
dollars for prisoners ran counter to Reagan Administration efforts to convince
the Vietnamese that they should settle the prisoner issue on humanitarian terms
without trying to trade the remains of American soldiers, or missing Americans,
for financial reward.

In support of this allegation, some Democrats and Republicans point to the
record of the Oct. 15, 1986, hearing of the House Foregn Affairs Subcommittee on
Asian and Pacific Affairs, when Mr. Perot advocated establishing a Presidential
commission, which he was willing to head, that would use subpoena power and
access to intelligence agencies to search for Americans left behind.

In the midst of the hearing, Mr. Perot engaged in the following exchange with
the subcommittee chairman, Representative Stephen J. Solarz, Democrat of
Brooklyn:

MR. SOLARZ: The Vietnamese have said that they don't have anybody. It is very
difficult to negotiate something if your negotiating partner says he doesn't
have the capacity to accomplish whatever it is you are asking for.

MR. PEROT: You are from New York, right? The best traders in the world come from
New York City. I have a horse. You want to buy it, you say, "Ross, do you want
to sell your horse or not?" That is where we start.

Mr. Perot said that the hearing record stands for itself. "I said what I said,"
but he said it was "absolutely untrue" that he advocated offering millions of
dollars for prisoners.

Not so, says another Reagan Administration official who was dealing with Mr.
Perot in the mid-1980's. Sometime before Mr. Perot's appearance before the
subcommittee, a senior member of the National Security Council staff, Richard
Childress, said he received a call from Mr. Perot. Mr. Childress said he was
shocked to hear Mr. Perot holding forth on how he would find missing Americans.

Money for Captives?

Mr. Childress recalled that Mr. Perot said he would go to Hanoi and offer
millions of dollars per American and, if necessary, keep doubling the offer
until he got a deal. Mr. Childress explained that while incentives for the
Vietnamese were important to any negotiating strategy, the offer of cash for
prisoners was not a proper incentive and would likely be counterproductive.

Mr. Childress, the N.S.C.'s director of Asian affairs, recalled being distressed
by the encounter because he feared Mr. Perot might act unilaterally. He recalled
writing a note to his superiors describing Mr. Perot's strategy as boiling down
to "simple bribery."

As for Mr. Childress's assertions, Mr. Perot said: "That is goofy, goofy, goofy.
If you can find one shred of evidence that that is true, I will apologize to
them and to you."

Questions about what Mr. Perot did or did not do, said or did not say about
prisoners seem to crop up everywhere. Recently, C-Span had sent its cameras to
Vietnam for a special program. The C-Span host, Brian Lamb, said the news crew
interviewed a Vietnamese official who had had contact with Mr. Perot.

"Unprovoked, he brings your name up," Mr. Lamb said, addressing Mr. Perot during
a broadcast. "He says that you came once, and since then an aide of yours has
come 13 times, and that you made promises to the Vietnamese for money and
schools and education and medicine and all that stuff, but nothing's ever been
delivered," Mr. Lamb recounted the Vietnamese official's assertion.

"Did you ever offer--?" Mr. Lamb was saying.

"Not any, no, no," Mr. Perot broke in.

Denial Central to Style

In most such disputes, the flat denial has become Mr. Perot's habitual style.
For example, there is the running argument between Mr. Perot and a former White
House aide, Terry Mattke.

Mr. Mattke, then a lieutenant colonel in the Marine Corps, recounted how he
spent a month running down information Mr. Perot offered to support a theory
that a conspiracy existed in the Pentagon and Central Intelligence Agency to
thwart the search for missing Americans.

When these efforts indicated that there was no conspiracy, the White House aide
recalled that Mr. Perot "stood up and walked down the hall arguing with me and
trying to intimidate me by saying, 'You're obviously not doing your job if you
can't get better information than this.' " Then, "He poked me in the chest and
said, 'Realize this, colonel: You and I have nothing in common on this issue
anymore.' "

Later, Mr. Mattke said it was perhaps "more a tap than a poke, but I vividly
remember it and could even take you to the stairwell where it happened."

As for Mr. Perot, there was no such shading in his answer. "I have never poked
anyone in the chest in my life," he asserted, categorically.

NAME: Ross Perot

LOAD-DATE: May 28, 1992

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photos: Gloria Borland, left, a coordinator at Ross Perot's Washington
campaign office answered questions for a passer-by who stopped in yesterday for
details on the candidate's stance on various issues. While Mr. Perot was always
very active in issues concerning Americans missing in action in Southeast Asia,
he has denied that, in 1987, he disclosed the Administration's strategy on the
topic. (Paul Hosefros/The New York Times)

TYPE: Biography

                   Copyright 1992 The New York Times Company


                              154 of 281 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                  May 28, 1992, Thursday, Late Edition - Final

NEWS SUMMARY

SECTION: Section A; Page 2; Column 5; Metropolitan Desk

LENGTH: 1121 words



International     A3-14

EMBARGO, WITH MORE THREATENED

European Community governments imposed a partial trade embargo on Serbia and
Montenegro and called on the United Nations Security Council to ban oil sales in
the hope of forcing an end to Serbian intervention in Bosnia and Herzegovina.
A1

MORTAR WAR IN A MARKETPLACE

In the worst attack on civilians since fighting began in Sarajevo two months
ago, at least 16 shoppers were killed and dozens were wounded when mortar shells
struck a crowded market, not far from where the assassination in 1914 of
Archduke Franz Ferdinand of Austria-Hungary ignited World War I.  A8

O & Y SEEKS BRITISH PROTECTION

Olympia & York, in a sign that its desperate efforts are fading to keep a global
real estate empire intact, has decided to seek British court protection from
creditors for Canary Wharf in London, the largest office-development project in
Europe.  A1

PALESTINIAN KILLS RABBI IN GAZA

A Palestinian stabbed to death the rabbi of a settlement in the occupied Gaza
Strip, adding to rage that has engulfed Israel since an Arab killed a
15-year-old girl Sunday. Jewish settlers retaliated, beating Palestinians,
overturning cars and and burning greenhouses and fields.  A10

U.N. REFUGEE CHIEF ASSAILS U.S.

The U.N. High Commissioner for Refugees assailed the Bush Administration for
returning Haitian refugees without giving them the chance to appeal for
protection. U.N. officials expressed belief that the U.S. is violating
international accords.  A3

HAITIAN CAPITAL'S WORST WEEK

The week has been the most violent in Port-au-Prince since the civilian
Government of Haiti was overthrown. Nighttime shootings involving soldiers and
groups of marauders have become commonplace -- from the neighborhoods of the
poor to rich areas on the hillsides.  A3

RUSSIA'S NEW JOBLESS

Unemployment, the most dreaded of capitalism's consequences, is the shoe that
has yet to drop in Russia. Although joblessness is still negligible, this is
little consolation for the casualties of the free market -- those who now make a
lonely search for work in a land where unemployment offices are ill prepared and
head-hunters unknown.  A10

Yeltsin stumps Siberia, and says he won't run in 1996.  A8

Finland struggles to overcome post-Soviet economic disorder.  A11

A SOLDIER'S LOYALTY IS REWARDED

In November 1986, Gen. Fidel V. Ramos had to decide whether to side with old
comrades in the Philippine military or remain loyal to President Aquino's
Government. He instructed his commanders to "disregard any orders from the
Ministry of National Defense," or its plotters. That was the first of seven coup
attempts he foiled. Now, former General Ramos, West Point 1950, seems all but
certain to be the next President.  A14

Curitiba Journal: An example of planning for the third world.  A4
Vatican seeks a voice in Earth Summit's resolutions on population.  A6
As Deng ages, Chinese ask if his children are using him.  A7
Killing of a 12-year-old sets off clashes in an Iranian city.  A13

National     A16-21, B8-10

SWEEPING ENERGY BILL GAINS

The most ambitious energy legislation in more than a decade easily passed in the
House. The bill is similar to legislation already cleared by the Senate, and the
President is expected to sign whatever version emerges from Congress.  A1

LIMITS ON TEEN-AGE ABORTION

Laws that require unmarried women under the age of 18 to obtain their parents'
consent, or at least notify them, before having an abortion are gaining
increasing favor with state legislators.  A1

Laws restricting abortion were voided in California and Ohio.  B8

CLUE TO LOU GEHRIG'S DISEASE

For the first time, researchers have found a chemical defect in patients
suffering from amyotrophic lateral sclerosis.  B10

HOW PEROT MAKES HIS POINT

Washington is a city where nuance and imagery shape the daily complexion of a
political campaign. But Ross Perot frequently steers a a more absolutist course.
That is being underscored again in the dispute over whether, on a trip to
Vietnam in 1987, he made an unauthorized disclosure of Washington's negotiating
strategy on American M.I.A.'s.  A20

While attacking insiders, Perot woos some of them.  A20

News analysis: Clinton is besieged by Perot and the polls.  A21

On the Trail: More writers of overdrawn checks were defeated.  A20

A SENIOR LAWMAKER WON'T RUN

Representative Dante B. Fascell, the Florida Democrat who heads the House
Foreign Affairs Committee, decided not to seek election to a 20th term. He joins
more than 60 of his House colleagues who have chosen not to run in November.
A16

BLACK SUPREMACIST CONVICTED

A Federal jury in Florida found Yahweh ben Yahweh and six of his followers
guilty of conspiracy to commit murder. The jurors deadlocked on racketeering
charges.  A16

UNITED WAY RECORDS SUBPOENAED

The Justice Department has subpoenaed extensive records from the United Way of
America to determine whether any law was violated by transactions of William
Aramony, its former president.  A16

GAIN IN WHEAT RESEARCH

Researchers said they had genetically altered wheat for the first time, an
achievement that could help lead to improved yields.  B8

A Congressional agency proposed three alternatives to S.D.I.  A17

Metropolitan     Digest, B1

WARMUS IS CONVICTED

Carolyn Warmus, portrayed by prosecutors as obsessed with a married man, was
convicted today of killing her lover's wife.  A1

NEW JERSEY HOSPITAL PLAN BANNED

A Federal judge ruled today that New Jersey cannot enforce its system of paying
the hospital bills of the poor by increasing the bills of workers covered by
self-supporting union health plans.  A1

MURDEROUS MANAGEMENT

A New York-based crime organization often used murder as a managerial technique,
its former boss testified yesterday.  A1

Business     Digest, D1

The Home Section  C1-12
Design Notebook C1
AIDS and Parents.  C1

Arts/Entertainment C14-24

Sports   B11-17
Baseball: Reds edge Mets, 1-0.  B11
Basketball: Bulls take 3-2 edge over Cavaliers.  B11
Tennis: Connors out in 5 sets.  B11

Obituaries   D21-22
Elizabeth David, a British cookbook writer.  D22

Editorials/Op-Ed  A22-23
Editorials A22
"Hello, 911? This is Bosnia."
The House ducks on energy.
Paying for a chance at life.
Topics: Mr. Klestil's demons.

LettersA22
William Safire: Perot's plea of "hardship." A23
Anthony Lewis: The pillage President.  A23
Judy Ching-Chia Wong: Victims of both races.  A23
Mikhail S. Gorbachev: America, da.  A23

LOAD-DATE: May 28, 1992

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo: Counseling teen-agers on abortion and parental consent. (Sarah
Putnam for The New York Times) A1

TYPE: Summary

                   Copyright 1992 The New York Times Company


                              155 of 281 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                  May 28, 1992, Thursday, Late Edition - Final

INSIDE

SECTION: Section A; Page 1; Column 1; Metropolitan Desk

LENGTH: 116 words



How Perot Makes His Point

Ross Perot's admonition to "get the facts straight" about his 1987 trip to
Vietnam underscores his uncompromising approach to political salesmanship.
Political Memo, page A20.

Clue to Lou Gehrig's Disease

For the first time, medical researchers have found a chemical defect in patients
suffering from amyotrophic lateral sclerosis. Page B10.

Dinkins to Veto Carriage Bill

Mayor Dinkins promised to veto a bill allowing horse-drawn carriages in much of
mid-Manhattan. Page B3.

Channel Tunnel in Trouble

Plagued by conflict and delays, the $14.7 billion English Channel tunnel has
degenerated from a grand symbol to a financial morass. Page D1.

LOAD-DATE: May 28, 1992

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Summary

                   Copyright 1992 The New York Times Company


                              156 of 281 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                  May 28, 1992, Thursday, Late Edition - Final

Home Video

BYLINE: By Peter M. Nichols

SECTION: Section C; Page 22; Column 1; Cultural Desk; Word and Image Page

LENGTH: 1104 words


This week in video stores big new titles like "Father of the Bride" and "My
Girl" are stocked by the hundreds of thousands of copies. As always, though,
some new releases have had to work for every piece of shelf space they could
get.

A case in point is "Poison," a movie that tells three tales, about patricide by
a 7-year-old, a loathsome disease and lust in a prison that results in a
homosexual rape. The film, by Todd Haynes, which was released today by Fox
Lorber, provides an example of how careful promotion can help a small niche
title on videocassette.

Last year "Poison" won the Grand Jury Prize at the Sundance Film Festival in
Utah but received mixed reviews when it opened in theaters, where it earned
about $850,000 at the box office. There was also controversy over a $25,000
grant awarded the film by the National Endowment for the Arts.

That bit of notoriety, plus a more recent stir over the rating assigned the
movie by the Motion Picture Association of America, didn't hurt its chances with
retailers.

"Interest increased when we explained the controversy and press coverage around
the film," said Susan Margolin, a Fox Lorber vice president.

"Poison," which has graphic sex scenes but none of them totally explicit, was
unrated in theaters. On cassette the film comes in three versions: NC-17 (No one
under 17 admitted), R (Under 17 requires accompanying parent or adult guardian)
and unrated. Many video stores will not carry a film without a rating, so early
this year Fox Lorber submitted "Poison" to the association, which gave it an
NC-17, equivalent to its old X rating. Some stores, including Blockbuster, the
country's largest chain, will not carry NC-17 movies.

"Fox Lorber thought it was important to get an R," Mr. Haynes said. "I decided,
Let's play ball and see what happens."

Two short scenes flagged by the raters, one with frontal nudity, were cut. But
after further consideration Mr. Haynes declined to shorten the prison rape scene
as requested. On resubmission the R was not granted.

Mr. Haynes still refused to alter the scene. "We submitted it a third time and
said the director doesn't want to make any more cuts," Ms. Margolin said.

After further deliberation, the R was granted. Ms. Margolin wouldn't say how
many copies of "Poison" Fox Lorber has distributed but said the reception was
good in urban areas. Blockbuster carries the R-rated version in some of its
stores.

New Video Releases



Father of the Bride
1991. Touchstone. $94.95. 1 hour 45 minutes. Closed-captioned. PG.

Vincente Minnelli's original film had Spencer Tracy as the solid patriarch in
old-line suburbia, but that was in 1950. In Charles Shyer's remake, set in 90's
southern California, Steve Martin falls into a swimming pool, throws a fit in a
grocery store and carries on in ways more attuned to his style and talent. Annie
Banks (Kimberly Williams) is getting married, and her dad (Mr. Martin), mother
(Diane Keaton), little brother (Kieran Culkin) and bridegroom (George Newbern)
are at their posts as they were in the first film, only now they shoot hoops in
the driveway. Still, memorable moments are preserved, refurbished with new jokes
and attitudes, in a remake that represents "recycling at its best" (Janet
Maslin).

My Girl
1991. Columbia Tri-Star. $94.95. 1:42. CC. PG.

Howard Zieff's film takes Hollywood's hottest child star and not only puts him
in a secondary role but also kills off his character in the process. As Thomas
J. Sennett, Macaulay Culkin hangs around as a sort of a playmate-in-waiting to
Vada Sultenfuss (Anna Chlumsky), a charming child constantly in danger of having
her scenes stolen by Thomas J. whenever he is allowed into them, until various
subplots lead up to the boy's demise by bee sting. Vada's father (Dan Aykroyd)
may be a mortician, but the fatality is too much even in a story with a
"manipulative and clumsy morbid streak" (Maslin).

For the Boys
1991. Fox. $94.98. Laser disk, $49.95. 2:25. CC. R.

Bette Midler is Dixie Leonard, a U.S.O. entertainer, and as a producer of the
movie, Ms. Midler made sure that if nothing else, the role made full use of her
onstage charisma. Mark Rydell's film begins at the outset of World War II and
follows Dixie as she performs for the troops for the next 50 years. After the
show, though, Dixie shrinks into a scrappy character always at odds with her
partner, Eddie Sparks (James Caan). The lack of an intimate relationship between
the two leaves a vacuum, but "Dixie works better in big, sometimes shamelessly
sentimental tableaux than she does in intimate settings anyhow" (Maslin).

The Indian Runner
1991. MGM/UA. $94.99. LD, $39.98. 2:07. CC. R.

Sean Penn's film, inspired by Bruce Springsteen's song "Highway Patrolman," is
about a police officer (David Morse) with family problems. "I got a brother
named Frankie and Frankie ain't no good," goes the Springsteen lament, which
fits the situation faced by the resolute lawman and the moody, volatile Frankie
(Viggo Mortensen), a Vietnam veteran who could erupt anytime. Although as a
director Mr. Penn isn't immune from self-indulgence, he stays close to the
emotional bone, steeping his film in "fundamental honesty and real substance"
(Maslin).

A 30-Year Bond Treasury

James Bond -- of the movies, that is -- is 30 years old, and this week MGM/UA
reissued some of the films based on the novels of Ian Fleming. Here are some of
them, all with Sean Connery as Agent 007. Each is $19.98 and closed-captioned.


DR. NO. In the series opener, Bond is dispatched to Jamaica, where the good
doctor (Joseph Wiseman) is scheming to deflect missiles flying out of Cape
Canaveral and Honey (Ursula Andress) sets the standard for a long line of Bond
women. 1962. Laser disk, $34.98. 1 hour 51 minutes. PG.

FROM RUSSIA WITH LOVE. Back in the days when there were Soviet plots, Bond rides
the Orient Express to Istanbul and learns that shoes (Lotte Lenya's) can have
stiletto tips. 1963. LD, $34.98. 1:58. No rating.

GOLDFINGER. The man with the golden touch (Gert Frobe) tries to empty Fort Knox.
Watch out for Goldfinger's pilot, Pussy Galore (Honor Blackman), and the
all-purpose servant Oddjob (Harold Sakata), who can slice stone with his bowler
hat. 1964. LD, $34.98. 1:52. PG.

DIAMONDS ARE FOREVER. There's a new Blofeld (Charles Gray) in Mr. Connery's
next-to-last Bond (before "Never Say Never Again" in 1983), this time running a
diamond-smuggling operation, with Jill St. John and Natalie Wood's little
sister, Lana. 1971. LD, $39.98. 1:59. PG.

LOAD-DATE: May 28, 1992

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photos: Larry Maxwell and Susan Norman in Todd Haynes's film "Poison."
Because of rating troubles, the film is in three versions on cassette.
(Zeitgeist Films); Bette Midler in "For the Boys." (20th Century Fox)

                   Copyright 1992 The New York Times Company


                              157 of 281 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                  May 28, 1992, Thursday, Late Edition - Final

Essay;
Perot's Plea of 'Hardship'

BYLINE: By WILLIAM SAFIRE

SECTION: Section A; Page 23; Column 1; Editorial Desk

LENGTH: 723 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON


Ross Perot, who presents himself as a patriot and defender of servicemen missing
in action, turns out to be a man who used his father's political influence to
try to get out of fulfilling his commitment to the U.S. Navy.

Mr. Perot has changed his story twice about his reason for seeking a "hardship"
discharge in 1955. That straining to reshape his past makes his use of political
pull to get out of his service obligation into a character issue today.

Here are the facts, as revealed by The Associated Press and Sam Attlesey of The
Dallas Morning News:

In 1949, a time of peace, Henry Ross Perot was admitted to the U.S. Naval
Academy in Annapolis (presumably through appointment by Representative Wright
Patman arranged by his father, a cotton broker). He received the best higher
education the U.S. taxpayer has to offer.

In return for four years of full tuition, room and board, he pledged to serve as
a naval officer for whatever period the Navy deemed convenient. At the time of
his graduation as an ensign in 1953, that hitch was four years. (Perot claims
now the period changed from two to four years during his Annapolis stay; the
inescapable fact is that his contractual obligation was to serve after
graduation as long as the Navy required.)

But he was unhappy in the Navy. In 1955, Lieutenant (j.g.) Perot prevailed upon
his father to appeal to Texas Senators Price Daniel and Lyndon Johnson and
Representative Patman for help in getting a hardship discharge.

These were young Perot's reasons then, in a letter his father forwarded to his
sources of political pull: "I have found the Navy to be a fairly Godless
organization. . . . I do not enjoy . . . being subjected to drunken tales of
moral emptiness, passing out penicillin pills and seeing promiscuity on the part
of married men."

Profanity upset him: "I find it unsatisfying to live, work and be directed in an
atmosphere where taking God's name in vain is a part of the every day
vocabulary."

This borderline conscientious objection after four years of Annapolis did not
elicit the desired hardship discharge from the Navy, but L.B.J.'s staff
persuaded the Chief of Naval Personnel, J. L. Holloway, to transfer Lieutenant
Perot from rigorous duty aboard the destroyer Sigourney to a presumably more
godly atmosphere aboard the aircraft carrier Leyte.

Sixteen years later, as a gung-ho supporter of the Vietnam War around the Nixon
White House, Perot did not reveal his attempts to slip out of his commitment,
but had to find a different reason for not staying in the Navy.

"In the Navy," he told The New York Times Magazine in 1971, "the promotion
system and the seniority system and the waiting-in-line concept were just sort
of incompatible with my desire to be measured and judged by what I could
produce." No moral disgust or profanity shock anymore; that would play as
unmanly. The new Perot line: He preferred the merit system in business.

When he became a media campaigner for President, he needed an even more
honorable reason for using the political guns of Texas to try to weasel out of
half his tour of duty.

Perot's latest excuse, told to Newsweek: The captain of the Sigourney corruptly
wanted him to use the crew's recreation fund to decorate the captain's cabin,
and Lieutenant Perot bravely refused. Only because he protected the enlisted
men's money was he transferred. (Retired Sigourney captains B. A. Lienhard and
Gerald J. Scott, where are you?)

The facts already on the record belie that belated claim. Every veteran can
sense the truth: The Korean War was over, Ross Perot was bored in the Navy, and
he wanted to get out and make money. He used powerful family connections to try
to renege on his commitment to serve in payment for his education.

To explain that tawdry attempt away, he first cooked up a moralizing pitch, then
a management critique, and now a pretense of fiscal heroism.

We know what Perot thought of the U.S. Navy. What the Navy thought of him is
detailed in 10 fitness reports in his file, which he should be asked at every
appearance to make public. The names of his shipmates are in deck logs at the
Naval Historical Center in Suitland, Md.

Neither Dan Quayle nor Bill Clinton has been spared close scrutiny for service
decisions. Ross Perot, prettying up his past, deserves equal treatment.

LOAD-DATE: May 28, 1992

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Op-Ed

                   Copyright 1992 The New York Times Company


                              158 of 281 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                   May 29, 1992, Friday, Late Edition - Final

THE 1992 CAMPAIGN: Undeclared Candidate;
Perot in Wide-Ranging TV Interview

BYLINE: By STEVEN A. HOLMES,  Special to The New York Times

SECTION: Section A; Page 19; Column 1; National Desk

LENGTH: 913 words

DATELINE: DALLAS, May 28


In a television interview, Ross Perot, the likely Presidential candidate, said
that he opposed raising taxes to trim the Federal budget deficit, that it would
not be "realistic" for homosexuals to be in the armed forces and that he would
not appoint homosexuals to top Cabinet-level jobs.

"No, I don't want anybody there that will be a point of controversy with the
American people," the Dallas billionaire said during a segment of the ABC-News
program, "20/20," which is scheduled to be broadcast Friday night. "It will
distract from the work to be done. See, as far as I'm concerned, what people do
in their private lives is their business."

During much of the interview, conducted by Barbara Walters, Mr. Perot repeated
homilies familiar to those who have seen him on programs like the Larry King and
Phil Donohue shows. In recent weeks, as the drive to place Mr. Perot's name on
the ballot has gathered momentum and public opinion polls have shown him leading
or in a dead-heat with President Bush and Gov. Bill Clinton of Arkansas, the
likely Democratic nominee, Mr. Perot has been under increased pressure to make
his opinions known on critical issues.

A transcript of the interview, which was taped on Monday, was provided by the
show.

Straightforward Answers

Although he rarely gave detailed explanations of his views, Mr. Perot provided
several straightforward answers to questions without the rancor he often has
displayed when pressed on a particular subject.

For example, when he was asked if there should be parental approval for an
abortion, he replied: "We're saying a 15-year-old girl? Sure. I think her
parents should have a vote in that."

In commenting on last year's Senate Judiciary Committee hearings into
allegations that Clarence Thomas had sexually harassed Anita Hill, a law school
professor, when the two of them worked at the Department of Education and the
Equal Employment Opportunity Commission, Mr. Perot castigated both the Senate
and the nominee.

"I thought it was reprehensible, the way the Senators treated Dr. Hill," he
said. "They were willing to destroy her for partisan reasons. And I thought it
was a sad day for our country and really damaged the credibility of the Senate
with the American people."

Ms. Walters asked Mr. Perot if he were a member of the Senate, would he have
voted to confirm Justice Thomas.

"I would vote for a Supreme Court Justice without regard to color," Mr. Perot
said of Justice Thomas, who is black. "I'd vote, vote solely based on ability. I
have serious questions about his ability."

Would he have voted against him?

"Well, it, I'd say in, in that case, I would have urged the President to come
forward with a more capable person," Mr. Perot said.

Asked about his ideas for reducing the Federal deficit, Mr. Perot said he
favored a Congressional act to limit Federal spending and promised he would soon
deliver proposals to cut waste in the Federal budget.

'Getting Rid of Waste'

"The second thing you've got to do is then just turn the world upside down
aggressively, getting rid of the waste," he said after declaring support for
legislation to limit spending. "And there is a lot of waste. And in a few weeks
I will be able to go down my detailed list of where the waste is so that we can
get in very, very specifics."

Mr. Perot added that he wanted to "replace our current tax system with a new tax
system," which he said he would develop in consultation with leading members of
Congress.

When asked about increasing taxes, however, Mr. Perot said, "I'm absolutely
against raising taxes."

In foreign affairs, Mr. Perot repeated his assertion that he would provide
financial aid to the former Soviet republics to help them become economically
viable. "I think the most cost-effective thing we can do is to help Russia get
through the transition successfully," he said.

Mr. Perot, who has had contentious dealings with the State Department when he
tried to deliver mail, food and medicine to American prisoners in North Vietnam
in 1969 and 1970 and when two of his employees were jailed in the Iranian
Revolution in 1979, said he would restructure the department.

State Department Shakeup

"Well, first off, the embassies are relics of days of sailing ships," he said.
"At one time, when you had no world communications, your ambassador spoke for
you in that country. But now, with instantaneous communication around the world,
the ambassador is primarily in a social role."

Seated by Mr. Perot's side during the interview was his wife, Margot, who is
rarely seen at public events and has granted few interviews. She told Ms.
Walters that as First Lady, she saw herself having a "supporting role."

"I -- really -- I say that because my first priority is the family, and creating
a happy home life for Ross," she said.

Mrs. Perot described herself as an "independent" woman who "reads" and has her
own opinions. But she said she does not provide any counsel for her husband. "He
doesn't need my advice," she said.

Mrs. Perot said the biggest misconception about her husband was that he is
"thin-skinned," and, without naming them, she criticized reporters for
projecting that image.

"I think they're trying to, to build a persona that I wouldn't recognize at
all," she said. "I think he's very warm."

Then she added: "Well, he may be impatient with some of the questions that they
ask him. But I find that that's not the man he is, certainly not at home."

NAME: Ross Perot

LOAD-DATE: May 29, 1992

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Biography

                   Copyright 1992 The New York Times Company


                              159 of 281 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                   May 29, 1992, Friday, Late Edition - Final

LESBIAN COLONEL REMOVED BY GUARD

BYLINE: AP

SECTION: Section A; Page 16; Column 6; National Desk

LENGTH: 378 words

DATELINE: SEATTLE, May 28


A Vietnam veteran who rose through the officer ranks to become chief of nursing
for Washington State's Army National Guard was discharged from the military
today because she is a lesbian.

The 50-year-old officer, Col. Margarethe Cammermeyer, whom Guard officials say
they would keep on if they could, is one of the highest-ranking members of the
armed forces ever removed from the service because of the Pentagon's
longstanding policy against homosexuality.

Colonel Cammermeyer, who was married for 16 years before divorcing and who has
four sons, first disclosed that she was a lesbian three years ago, during an
interview for a security clearance that might have allowed her to take courses
at the National War College in Washington, D.C.

"I don't think it was until that top-security clearance investigation that I
could say and believe, 'This is who I am,' " she said today from American
Medical Lake Veterans Hospital in Tacoma, where she has a civilian job as a
clinical nurse specializing in neurosciences.

As a result of Colonel Cammermeyer's disclosure, a military board convened last
July at Camp Murray, near Tacoma, and recommended that she be honorably
discharged. The commander of the Washington State Guard, Maj. Gen. Greg Barlow,
adopted that recommendation today despite personal anguish that he said it was
causing him.

The action against Colonel Cammermeyer was first reported by The Morning News
Tribune of Tacoma, which quoted General Barlow today as praising her work but
saying that he must carry out Defense Department policy. "Does that make it easy
for me to look the woman in the eye and announce that?" the general told the
newspaper. "No, it doesn't."

The discharge of Colonel Cammermeyer, who has served in the military for 26
years, is to take effect on June 11. She said that at this point nothing less
than intervention by President Bush or Defense Secretary Dick Cheney could save
her National Guard career.

Such intervention does not appear likely. Asked about it today, a Defense
Department spokesman, Lieut. Col. Doug Hart, reiterated the Pentagon's position
that not only homosexual acts but even homosexual inclinations were incompatible
with discipline and morale among uniformed members of the armed forces.


LOAD-DATE: May 29, 1992

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1992 The New York Times Company


                              160 of 281 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                   May 29, 1992, Friday, Late Edition - Final

At the Bar;
Gone are the tie-dyed shirts and marijuana as a Woodstock-era guitarist covets
judicial robes.

BYLINE: By David Margolick

SECTION: Section B; Page 16; Column 1; National Desk; Law Page

LENGTH: 768 words


For voters on either end of the demographic bell curve, the musical slogan on
Barry Melton's letterhead and campaign placards does not make much sense. But
for people between, say, 35 and 50, it conjures up a host of images, among them
the Vietnam War, Max Yasgur's farm and songs with lyrics like "be the first one
on your block to have your boy come home in a box."

Mr. Melton is a 45-year-old lawyer who is locked in a tight race for a seat on
San Francisco's Municipal Court. It is his second career. From 1965 to 1970 he
was lead guitarist for Country Joe and the Fish, the folk-rock group that
produced what became the closest thing to the national anthem of the antiwar
movement.

Sixties aficionados know the song as "The I-Feel-Like-I'm-Fixin'-to-Die Rag."
But most everyone else, including anyone who attended Woodstock the music
festival or Woodstock the film or who owned Woodstock the record album knows
these lyrics:

1-2-3, what're we fighting for?

Don't ask me, I don't give a damn.

Next stop is Vietnam

And it's 5-6-7, open up the pearly gates!

Ain't no time to wonder why

Whoopee! We're all bound to die.

It was "Country Joe" McDonald, the Francis Scott Key of the Vietnam era, who
dominated the movie, at one point leading 500,000 fans in an obscene variant of
a familiar high-school cheer.

Mr. Melton, 22 at the time, makes only a cameo appearance in the film, shorter
than more memorable moments with the Port-o-San man and various crotchety
farmers of Sullivan County. Grinning mischievously, wearing shoulder-length
curly hair, rose-colored glasses and a tie-dyed shirt of many colors, the
would-be judge prances in front of the camera brandishing a hand-rolled
cigarette.

"Mar-i-juana!!!" the band chants. Mr. Melton then places the butt in his mouth
and begins strumming.

Some of the babies born at Woodstock may well be in law school now. In your
neighborhood video store, Woodstock the movie can be found alongside "Night of
the Living Dead" and "Reefer Madness" under "cult classics." And Mr. Melton, now
the father of two, has shorn -- or shed -- his golden locks, grown a gut, traded
in his tie-dyes for a suit and left his crash pad for a very, very, very fine
house with a very, very, very fine mortgage. True, he once extolled, used and
even inhaled drugs, but no more, he maintains.

"Hey, I've got a 15-year-old," he said.

Occasionally, faint echoes of Woodstock can be heard amid the politicking. A
recent Melton fund-raiser featured remnants from Jefferson Airplane, the
Grateful Dead and the Steve Miller Band. But just as Mr. Melton seems anxious to
soft-peddle his psychedelic past, his opponent, Judge Donna Little, appears
afraid to dredge it up. In liberal San Francisco, she reasons, such charges
could backfire. Indeed, just about the only thing the campaign and Woodstock
have in common is mud.

At 39, Judge Little technically belongs to the Woodstock generation. But Mr.
Melton theorizes -- and Judge Little acknowledges -- that she spent those years
listening more to Herb Alpert and the Tijuana Brass than Big Brother and the
Holding Company. Indeed, Judge Little, a New Jersey native and registered
Republican, passed up going to Woodstock, never sat through the film, did not
buy the album, has not rented the video and does not remember any lyrics to "The
I-Feel-Like-I'm-Fixing-to-Die Rag" beyond "1,2,3."

Mr. Melton began studying the guitar at 5 on Avenue Z and Ocean Parkway in
Brooklyn, where he lived next to Woody Guthrie. He moved to San Francisco in
1965, where he passed up college for Haight-Ashbury. Country Joe and the Fish
eventually swam their separate ways. Mr. Melton enrolled in what he has called
"the Holiday Inn School of Law," cramming in correspondence courses in contracts
and torts between concert gigs.

In his campaign literature he likens himself to such other legal autodidacts as
Clarence Darrow, John Marshall and Abraham Lincoln. In fact, his practice is
considerably more routine than that, consisting of criminal and entertainment
law with a healthy helping of pro bono work.

Over all, he regards his past with a mixture of satisfaction and sheepishness,
defiance and defensiveness.

"My generation has a lot to be proud of, but we did some stupid stuff," he said.
"But I wasn't doing anything different than all the other 20-year-olds at
Woodstock, and there were 500,000 of them. And I dare say that in that crowd
there were all kinds of people who've gone on to lead adult lives: doctors and
lawyers, Congressmen and Congresswomen, district attorneys and public defenders
and judges."

NAME: Barry Melton

LOAD-DATE: May 29, 1992

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Drawing

TYPE: Biography

                   Copyright 1992 The New York Times Company


                              161 of 281 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                   May 29, 1992, Friday, Late Edition - Final

Foreign Affairs;
The Ultimate Pro

BYLINE: By LESLIE H. GELB

SECTION: Section A; Page 29; Column 1; Editorial Desk

LENGTH: 709 words


After a conference where he lectured on foreign policy as the art of right and
wrong and practicality, and after dining at three-star restaurants, Philip Habib
died in France this week at the age of 72 of perhaps his tenth heart attack. I
worked with him in government and harassed him as a reporter. He was the most
outstanding Foreign Service officer of his generation, and he relished his
reputation as the worst Washington source for journalists.

A roly-poly Lebanese Christian from Brooklyn, he rose, improbably, to the
highest ranks of the most unwelcoming WASP institution in the United States --
the State Department -- without ever learning to act like a WASP.

He became the white knight of the Foreign Service at a time when Presidents and
various Secretaries of State were casting the diplomatic corps aside in favor of
political appointees. He nurtured a generation of proteges.

Loud and irrepressible, Phil Habib also became the only man to be confidant to
four wildly different Secretaries of State -- Dean Rusk, Henry Kissinger, Cyrus
Vance and George Shultz. And he was the only Foreign Service officer to gain the
personal confidence of every President from Lyndon Johnson to Ronald Reagan.

They all loved him and listened while he shouted at them because he had
qualities that always seem to be in short supply. He was a quintessential
professional who would make his case very hard, carry out unpleasant and
unwanted decisions and then keep his mouth closed. And he was a truth-teller,
someone who had the truth in him and could not help but blurt it out.

These qualities were put to the test when he was in his 40's and on his way up
-- at one of the most dramatic and crucial moments in American history.

It was March 1968, shortly after the North Vietnamese had shocked the U.S. with
the strength of their Tet military offensive. U.S. military leaders requested
206,000 troops on top of the 550,000 already committed to the war. Lyndon
Johnson, reeling and confused, called in a group of private Wise Men for advice.

Phil Habib, recently returned from the No. 3 job in the U.S. Embassy in Saigon
and still layers down in the State Department bureaucracy, gave one of the key
briefings to the Wise Men.

After he sketched a balanced but bleak picture of the situation, Defense
Secretary Clark Clifford asked him if he thought a U.S. military victory was
possible. In the face of Dean Rusk and William Bundy, his two superiors who
would not like his answer, he responded: "Not under present circumstances." Mr.
Clifford pressed on. "What would you do if the decision were yours?" Mr. Habib
shot back: "Stop the bombing [of North Vietnam] and negotiate."

Phil Habib, known as a supporter of the war, had put his career on the line and
the Wise Men knew it. They could not and did not disregard his assessment. With
their backing, Clark Clifford persuaded President Johnson to level off U.S.
military involvement, stop the bombing and negotiate with Hanoi. The Maronite
Christian from the poor streets of Brooklyn had pulled the plug on the war.

Almost 20 years later, Mr. Habib did it again. President Reagan recalled him
from retirement to see if President Ferdinand Marcos of the Philippines, an old
ally, could be salvaged. The veteran diplomat delivered the bad news to all
those who did not want to hear it, and Marcos was soon gone.

Mr. Reagan also asked him to be his Central American negotiator. But the White
House was interested only in arms to fight the Communists. Mr. Habib told them
they needed both arms and negotiations. They would not listen. He left. Without
a word to the press.

"If government is to work, it's indispensable to have gutsy people like Phil who
will fight for what they believe on the inside," explained Peter Tarnoff, a
Habib protege and now president of the Council on Foreign Relations. "Most
bureaucrats just keep quiet on the inside, go along and then leak their
disagreements to the press. Phil never went public, never destroyed his
credibility with his superiors and never betrayed his loyalty to the
institutions of government."

He believed in an older American dream and epitomized it -- as the outsider who
was the ultimate insider, the consummate professional.

LOAD-DATE: May 29, 1992

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Op-Ed

                   Copyright 1992 The New York Times Company


                              162 of 281 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                  May 30, 1992, Saturday, Late Edition - Final

THE 1992 CAMPAIGN: Political Memo;
Some Feverish Speculation In an Unconventional Year

BYLINE: By R. W. APPLE Jr.,  Special to The New York Times

SECTION: Section 1; Page 1; Column 3; National Desk

LENGTH: 1544 words

DATELINE: SAN FRANCISCO, May 29


By its very existence, Ross Perot's unannounced independent Presidential
campaign promises the unconventional.

Mr. Perot is a businessman, not a politician. Even in a day of wealthy
candidates, he is richer than anyone else in sight. He has devised a kind of
self-nominating process, rooted in appearances on television talk shows. And he
has taken the lead in national opinion polls, something no other Presidential
hopeful outside the two-party system has ever managed.

Earlier in the contest, even before Mr. Perot's sudden appearance on the
political stage, a sitting President was embarrassed by a speechwriter turned
pundit, and a shy, little-known former Senator made a credible run at the
Democratic nomination.

Not a very good year so far for conventional wisdom, and only the uncharted
territory of a three-cornered campaign lies ahead, involving a peevish
electorate, two weakened major-party standard-bearers and the dependably
volatile Mr. Perot. Not since 1912, when Theodore Roosevelt ran on the
Progressive "Bull Moose" ticket, have the possibilities been so rich.

After a month of Perot-mania, some political people are awed, some are fearful,
some are angry and some are skeptical. All are paying attention, and nearly all
are speculating feverishly about what may happen next.

Come, let us speculate.

Begin with the when-will-he-step-in-a-hole proposition. Republican and
Democratic professionals alike keep wondering how long Mr. Perot can keep going.
Will there come a moment, they keep asking, when he will say something that
scuttles his chances as quickly as a comment about "brainwashing" in Vietnam
scuttled those of another businessman, George Romney, in 1968?

Some think he will make a misstep, and it will finish him. Some think he will
make a misstep, and it will change nothing. Some think he will avoid the
potholes. A few think he has already tripped, with his remark in an interview
with Barbara Walters Thursday night about excluding homosexuals from some high
governmental posts; they see him sliding away from the generalities that marked
his early campaign, down the slippery slope to specificity.

What about the third-force Vice-Presidential nomination? Like most putative
Presidential nominees, Mr. Perot needs to find someone who helps him with at
least one segment of the electorate without hurting him with others. He might
choose a senator, for example, to calm those who question his ability to
navigate Washington's treacherous waters, but that could cost him his cherished
image as an outsider.

He also faces the problem of persuading the person whom he chooses to accept.
Few Republicans or Democrats turn down an appeal from their party's nominee,
even in an era of diminished party loyalty. Running with Mr. Perot would be a
bit of a leap in the dark.

"A general would do fine," said a Republican senator who was glad to play the
game as long as he was not identified. "Americans like generals -- George
Washington, Ulysses Grant, Ike. But the list isn't long this time."

For political purposes, it has two names on it: Gen. Colin L. Powell, the
Chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff, and Gen. H. Norman Schwarzkopf, the
retired commander in the Persian Gulf war. Neither has shown much interest in a
Perot candidacy, and General Powell is otherwise occupied just now.

"You need someone who knows his way around Washington, not a run-of-the-mill
politician, a blunt talker like Perot, someone voters consider competent," said
Willie Brown, the Speaker of the California Assembly.

That description might fit Senator Warren B. Rudman of New Hampshire, a kind of
outsider's insider who is quitting Congress because of frustration with
legislative gridlock, or another retiree, Lee Iacocca of Chrysler, or Jeane J.
Kirkpatrick, the former Representative to the United Nations, or even former
Senator Paul E. Tsongas of Massachusetts.

But Mr. Brown's choice was C. Everett Koop, the former Surgeon General who has
campaigned against smoking and for AIDS research.

Mr. Perot has more pressing matters on his mind, such as putting together his
campaign staff. Until a few days ago, the assumption had been that he would
choose newcomers to Presidential politics, but that is apparently all wrong.
Feelers have been put out to the likes of Hamilton Jordan, chief of staff in the
Carter White House, and Edward J. Rollins, onetime political guru to Ronald
Reagan. Why would they want to talk to someone who pictures the politics of the
last two decades as a disaster?

'The Ultimate Perot Surprise'

"This tells you how bad the regular campaigns are," said James Cannon, who has
been around Republican Presidential efforts since Nelson Rockefeller's in the
1960's. "Bush hasn't given anyone a lot of reasons to re-elect him, and the
Democrats are so screwed up that none of their good candidates even gets into
this nominating sheep-dip, so what's to keep talented people from jumping ship?"

A White House operative, despairing about President Bush's troubles in getting
his campaign rolling, said nervously that "the ultimate Perot surprise" would be
to hire Roger Ailes, the political advertising strategist who helped to put both
Mr. Reagan and Mr. Bush in the White House.

Of course, Mr. Ailes would never consider any such thing, said another Bush
aide, but then he fell to pondering unhappily how much money Mr. Perot might be
prepared to pay Mr. Ailes or another television specialist.

Perhaps the next big surprise will not come from Mr. Perot at all. Perhaps, as
Representative Jim Leach of Iowa, a lonely Republican heretic, has been
suggesting for months, Mr. Bush will decide he is in such bad trouble that he
must dump Vice President Dan Quayle despite all his promises never, ever, to do
so.

"I hear around town occasionally that George Bush is going to pull out himself,
like Lyndon Johnson in 1968," said Lloyd Cutler, a lawyer in Washington who is
active in Democratic politics and who has been talking to Mr. Perot a lot.
Having run that up the flagpole, he hauled it back down. "I don't believe it,"
he said. "It's not in Bush's character to do something like that."

Unpersuasive First Lady?

Some high-ranking Republicans are convinced, although they admit they lack hard
evidence, that Barbara Bush tried to talk her husband out of running some time
ago on medical or other grounds, but found it impossible.

Perhaps, as one or two Democratic long-shot players have suggested in the last
few weeks, the party convention will decide that Gov. Bill Clinton of Arkansas
is just too badly damaged to be nominated for President, however many delegates
he may have accumulated, and find a way to award the prize to someone else.

About 15 percent of the votes at the convention will be cast by super-delegates,
who are party leaders and elected officials. Super-delegates were invented to
balance the role of primary voters in selecting Presidential nominees, and it
was thought that in an emergency they might act the way the inhabitants of
smoke-filled rooms once did, deciding at the eleventh hour what was "best for
the party," as the old phrase had it.

Nelson Polsby, a professor of political science at the University of California
at Berkeley, describes that as the most improbable of ideas.

"There is no leadership and no will there," Mr. Polsby said. "They will be
completely overridden by the pledged delegates. Instead of a coalition-building
process, where candidates go around the country forming alliances and gathering
promises of support on the first ballot or the fourth or fifth, we now have a
shoot-out, where the goal is to win primaries no matter what the cost and the
technique is to do dirty to your rivals."

Eddie Mahe, a veteran Republican campaign consultant, argues that it still might
happen. If Mr. Clinton is running third in the polls when the delegates assemble
in New York City in July, he said, and "especially if he's down in the low 20's,
a lot of them are going to have queasy stomachs."

But a move to bump Mr. Clinton would require the commitment of one or more
senior figures, like Senator George J. Mitchell of Maine, the majority leader,
to have the remotest chance of succeeding, and no one has made any moves yet.

New Ways to Communicate

Once the campaign proper begins, all kinds of new communications techniques may
pop up. Already this year, radio and television talk shows have become the media
of choice, as opposed to the set speeches or television news programs of the
past. Mr. Perot promises to use electronic "town meetings," televised ecounters
by satellite where voters will be able to ask him questions directly, in the
campaign and, if he wins, in the White House.

Gerald Rafshoon, who was Jimmy Carter's media expert, thinks the fall may bring
a decline in what he calls "gimmicky, produced spots" like those that have
proved successful in the last three Presidential elections.

"That's especially true of Perot," Mr. Rafshoon said. "Their campaign is him and
the contrast he provides to everything else, his style of keep going forward, no
matter what the obstacles. So you show him as he is, not prettied up, in a very
straightforward style of television, almost documentary in its approach."

LOAD-DATE: May 30, 1992

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo: Ross Perot spoke to cheering supporters in Idaho at a noon
telecast from Orlando, Fla., yesterday after they had marched from the state
Capitol and presented petitions to have him put on the ballot. Page 8. (Glenn
Oakley for The New York Times)

                   Copyright 1992 The New York Times Company


                              163 of 281 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                  May 30, 1992, Saturday, Late Edition - Final

THE 1992 CAMPAIGN: Candidate's Wife;
Back to College for an Image Makeover

BYLINE: By NEIL A. LEWIS,  Special to The New York Times

SECTION: Section 1; Page 9; Column 1; National Desk

LENGTH: 872 words

DATELINE: WELLESLEY, Mass., May 29


Hillary R. Clinton, the wife of Gov. Bill Clinton, criticized the Bush
Administration's family policies here today. And she used the occasion of the
commencement speech at Wellesley College to try to reshape her public image,
which has worried managers of her husband's Presidential campaign.

In her address to the 619 women graduates, Mrs. Clinton, herself a Wellesley
alumna, made a point of praising women who decide to stay at home and raise
families as well as those who choose careers.

"You may choose to be a corporate executive or a rocket scientist; you may
choose to run for public office, or you may choose to stay at home and raise
your children," she said. "You can now make any or all of these choices for the
work of your life."

Emphasis on Children

Mrs. Clinton has been in the middle of a debate about the role of women. Along
with some of Mr. Clinton's campaign advisers, she has expressed dismay and
bafflement with the negative reaction she has provoked among many voters. A
lawyer in Little Rock, Mrs. Clinton, 44 years old, has been active in many
national organizations, particularly some devoted to children's issues.

A senior campaign adviser said he hoped the Wellesley speech would help recast
Mrs. Clinton's image, which he said for some people was that of a hard-edged
careerist. Surveys have shown that many people even mistakenly believed that the
Clintons were childless, so Mrs. Clinton has recently made a point of talking
about their 12-year-old daughter, Chelsea. She did so again today, saying,
"Chelsea has been the joy of our life."

She also told the graduates that women should not have to tolerate lectures
about family values from the Bush Administration, a reference to comments by
Vice President Dan Quayle and other White House figures in recent days.

In discussing the riots in Los Angeles, Mr. Quayle lamented an erosion of family
values and criticized the television character Murphy Brown as contributing to
that when she decided to have a child out of wedlock.

Making Cookies, Making Policy

"Women who pack lunches for their kids or take the early bus to work, or stay
out late at the P.T.A. or spend every spare minute trying to take care of aging
parents don't need lectures from Washington about values," Mrs. Clinton said.
"We don't need to hear about an idealized world that never was as righteous or
carefree as some would like to think."

She also made a lighthearted reference to a remark she once made that seemed to
symbolize for many why she was regarded as a political liability. When
confronted earlier this year with conflict-of-interest questions about her work
as a lawyer in Arkansas, where her husband is Governor, she said she could have
avoided such problems "if I had stayed home, baked cookies and had teas."

She said today that she had made her life's work helping children and told the
graduates that if they chose to do so as well, there were many ways to do it.
"You can do it by making policy or by making cookies," she said to applause.

Two years ago, Barbara Bush, the wife of the President, similarly found herself
at the center of a debate about women's roles when she was asked to give the
commencement address at Wellesley. About a fourth of the graduating class
strongly objected to the invitation to Mrs. Bush. They said that as someone who
had dropped out of college to marry and had never had a career of her own, she
was a poor choice and was only invited because of her husband.

Some students had offered a milder objection to the choice of Mrs. Clinton,
contending that her speech could have an inappropriate political cast. But the
reaction of Ramona Jablon of West Hartford, Conn., was typical of many
graduates. She said the speech was political, "but tolerably so."

There was no argument that Mrs. Clinton was an appropriate choice to address the
Wellesley graduates. She had done so once before, in 1969, when she was selected
as the first member of a graduating class to speak at the commencement
ceremonies, starting a tradition that continues today.

In 1969, then known as Hillary Rodham, Mrs. Clinton was praised for
spontaneously challenging the commencement speaker, Senator Edward W. Brooke, a
Massachusetts Republican, who had urged support for the Vietnam War in his
address.

Mrs. Clinton said today that when the graduates had entered college the greatest
threat to society was that the Cold War might escalate into nuclear warfare.

"Today, our greatest threat comes not from some external evil empire, but from
our own internal indifferent empire that tolerates splintered families,
unparented children, embattled schools and pervasive poverty, racism and
violence," she said.

Governor Clinton, speaking to a rally of women's supporters in Sacramento today,
echoed some of his wife's sentiments and said that President Bush was hostile to
women's health care-concerns.

Mr. Clinton criticized Mr. Bush for lobbying against and threatening to veto a
bill passed by the House that would allow research to be conducted on human
fetal tissue obtained from abortions. "George Bush, he cares more about his
political health than the health of America's women and children," Mr. Clinton
said.

LOAD-DATE: May 30, 1992

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo: Returning to her alma mater as commencement speaker yesterday,
Hillary R. Clinton was surrounded by graduates in the procession at Wellesley
College. Mrs. Clinton spoke of the importance of women's careers both in and out
of the home, as part of an attempt to recast her public image. (Associated
Press)

                   Copyright 1992 The New York Times Company


                              164 of 281 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                   May 31, 1992, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

Drinks

BYLINE: By R.W. Apple Jr.;  R.W. Apple Jr. is the chief Washington correspondent
of The New York Times.

SECTION: Section 6; Part 2; Page 27; Column 1; Entertaining Magazine

LENGTH: 754 words


WHEN I WAS YOUNG, I THOUGHT YOU could enjoy the same drinks in hot weather as in
cool. That delusion ended one scorching day in the 1960's in the Dominican
Republic, where I was covering some uprising or other. I had a couple of dry
martinis at lunch, stepped blithely into the blast-furnace heat and almost fell
on my face. Since then I have been a great one for what are variously called
long drinks or summer coolers. Here are favorites that have eased the angst of
revolution, war, famine and especially campaign speeches over the last three
decades.

UNITED STATES: The arrival of warm weather more or less coincides with the
running of the Kentucky Derby at Churchill Downs in Louisville, where the mint
julep is the libation of choice. Made of crushed mint leaves, ice, a teaspoon of
sugar and enough bourbon whisky to fill a tall glass about a third of the way --
enough, in other words, to stun a medium-size mule -- it soothes the spirit and
cools the brow. At the innumerable wingdings in and around Louisville during
Derby week, they serve juleps in silver cups. But no matter what you drink them
from, they don't do much for the brain. I have never picked a Derby winner after
downing a julep, but then I haven't picked many before drinking one, either.

FRANCE: Pernod is a clear yellow-green liquid that turns cloudy when ice and
water are added, as they almost always are -- about twice as much water as
Pernod, for my taste. Pernod as we know it was developed as a substitute for
absinthe, whose main flavoring agent it shares: star anise. Absinthe was
outlawed in France, the United States and other countries because wormwood, a
key ingredient, was supposed to drive people crazy, promote crime and lower the
birthrate. In fact, wormwood wasn't the problem; what wrought havoc was the
strength of the brew, usually marketed at 65 percent alcohol, as opposed to 40
for Pernod. Pernod and other anise-flavored drinks are favorites of the Foreign
Legion, and they were the mid-day cooler of choice at the cafes in Saigon during
the Vietnam War. In Greece, a similar drink, also taken with as much water as
you like, is called ouzo; in Turkey, ask for raki; in Spain, it's ojen.

BRITAIN: It seems preposterous that a country with so little warm weather would
have a warm-weather specialty, but Britain does: my all-time favorite cooler, a
bottled gin concoction known as Pimm's No. 1 Cup. To about three ounces of
Pimm's, add ice, eight to ten ounces of club soda or dry ginger ale, a strip of
cucumber, a slice of orange and a sprig of an herb called borage -- or mint, if
your garden lacks a borage patch. A bartender at Pimm's restaurant in London's
financial district invented this, the original gin sling, more than a century
ago. Pimm's is a favorite at Ascot, Wimbledon and Henley and at garden parties
where it's 50 degrees.

ITALY: Bitter drinks are Italy's answer to the heat. Campari is the best known,
with Carpano Punt e Mes another favorite. I like Campari in a cocktail called
the Negroni, which is composed of equal parts of Campari, sweet vermouth and
gin, to which I like to add ice cubes and soda water. But as a cooler and
aperitivo in one, nothing quite matches a drink perfected by Victor Hazan, the
wine expert, which he calls Victor's Poison. He and his wife, Marcella, the
foremost writer in English on Italian food, serve it to guests on the shady
terrace of their Venice apartment. Here is how he makes it: Mix one part well
chilled Campari, one-half part Russian vodka that's been kept in the freezer and
one-half part chilled sweet wine, such as an Italian moscato or a late-harvest
California riesling. Add a sprig of mint, cover and refrigerate for 30 minutes.
Then add one part freshly squeezed orange juice. Discard the mint. Put a slice
of lemon in each glass and pour in the elixir.

Finally, what list would be complete without that tropical favorite enjoyed from
Singapore to Zanzibar, the king of rum drinks, the planter's punch? I make it
with an ounce of lime juice, a teaspoon of sugar, a dash of Angostura bitters,
two ounces of dark Jamaican rum and ice. For decoration, a piece of fresh
pineapple suits me; I've never known quite what to do with the maraschino cherry
or (pace Trader Vic) the miniature paper parasol. The acid tang of the lime
makes a perfect foil for the smoothness of the rum, and even if you're a mad dog
or an Englishman and can't stay out of the noonday sun, planter's punch won't
make your knees buckle the way dry martinis do.

LOAD-DATE: May 31, 1992

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Drawing

                   Copyright 1992 The New York Times Company


                              165 of 281 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                   May 31, 1992, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

Books for Vacation Reading

SECTION: Section 7; Page 19; Column 1; Book Review Desk

LENGTH: 9881 words



Biography, Autobiography, Memoir

THE ABANDONED BAOBAB: The Autobiography of a Senegalese Woman. By Ken Bugul.
(Lawrence Hill, cloth, $18.95; paper, $9.95.) This pseudonymous personal history
takes a brave, ambitious young woman from her village in Senegal to Brussels,
where she barely rescues herself from a course of self-destruction.

AFTER GREAT PAIN: A New Life Emerges. By Diane Cole. (Summit, $20.) An
autobiographical account of the courageous -- and finally triumphant --
reconstruction of one woman's life after an almost unimaginable run of grief and
misfortune.

AN AMERICAN ENGINEER IN STALIN'S RUSSIA: The Memoirs of Zara Witkin, 1932-1934.
Edited by Michael Gelb. (University of California, $29.95.) This fascinating
memoir relates the struggles of an American socialist and civil engineer, in
love with a Russian movie actress, in a country where nothing worked.

THE CHAIRMAN. John J. McCloy: The Making of the American Establishment. By Kai
Bird. (Simon & Schuster, $30.) A life of the friend and adviser to nine
Presidents, perhaps the most powerful American who was never really famous.

CHURCHILL: A Life. By Martin Gilbert (Holt, $35.) Rather than attemping a
historian's judgment, the author stitches together bits of a million documents
and lets Churchill be his own interpreter.

DEAR DEPARTED. By Marguerite Yourcenar. (Farrar, Straus & Giroux, $25.) First
published in French in 1974, 13 years before the author's death, this
investigation of Yourcenar's mother's family captures a superb sense of
bourgeois life in the comfy Belgian aristocracy.

DE GAULLE: The Ruler 1945-1970. By Jean Lacouture. (Norton, $29.95.) This final
volume in Mr. Lacouture's monument to the colossus particularly features de
Gaulle's foreign policy (alliance but independence) and his theatrical methods
of getting his way.

DRIVEN PATRIOT: The Life and Times of James Forrestal. By Townsend Hoopes and
Douglas Brinkley. (Knopf, $30.) This book unravels many mysteries about the Wall
Street whiz who became our first Secretary of Defense and who killed himself in
1949.

EDGAR A. POE: Mournful and Never-Ending Remembrance. By Kenneth Silverman.
(HarperCollins, $27.50.) Mr. Silverman sifts the evidence to yield an
authoritative life of the unhappy hack who produced a handful of poems and
stories the world cannot forget.

ELEANOR ROOSEVELT: Volume One, 1884-1933. By Blanche Wiesen Cook. (Viking,
$27.50.) A feminist biography that regards its subject not only as a mostly
19th-century woman who invented her own life with very little help, but also as
a self-created political figure of considerable significance.

ELIZABETH I. By Anne Somerset. (Knopf, $30.) A comprehensive, reliable,
readable, relentlessly detailed biography of the often vain and sometimes
bad-tempered Good Queen Bess.

ELTON JOHN. By Philip Norman. (Harmony, $22.50.) An eloquent, analytical and
well-researched examination of the spectacle who is rock's most devoted scholar
and most brilliant emulator.

HITLER AND STALIN: Parallel Lives. By Alan Bullock. (Knopf, $35.) Borrowing a
trick from Plutarch, Lord Bullock sets forth the two dictators' lives and
careers chronologically, showing who did what first and to whom; often enough,
it was the Fuhrer who learned tricks from his neighbor to the East.

INTELLECTUAL MEMOIRS: New York 1935-1938. By Mary McCarthy. (Harcourt Brace
Jovanovich, $15.95.) In this last volume of her memoirs, written just before she
died in 1989, McCarthy looks back at her bohemian life in New York, shows the
slipperiness of retrospect and hands out more clefs to her romans.

"I'VE SEEN THE BEST OF IT." By Joseph W. Alsop with Adam Platt. (Norton,
$29.95.) The lively autobiography of a born patrician who made himself an
outstanding reporter, columnist and Washington insider; completed after his
death in 1989.

JEFFERSON DAVIS: THE Man and His Hour. By William C. Davis. (HarperCollins,
$35.) Mr. Davis (no relation) has written the best and fullest biography so far
of a man who, despite his faults, was probably the best available leader for the
doomed Confederacy.

KEEPER OF THE MOON. By Tim McLaurin. (Norton, $19.95.) A disturbing and poignant
memoir of growing up in the rural South in the 1960's, by a man who seems to
have forgotten nothing of his hardscrabble life.

THE LAST YANKEE: The Turbulent Life of Billy Martin. By David Falkner. (Simon &
Schuster, $22.) From a childhood in a brawling family to the management of a
team in decline, this is a memorable and absorbing account of the lurid and
monotonous life of a useful Yankee.

MALCOLM: The Life of a Man Who Changed Black America. By Bruce Perry. (Station
Hill, $24.95.) Mr. Perry places the man beside the myth -- including his
autobiography -- to portray a figure who is still a compelling presence in black
political life.

THE MAN TO SEE. Edward Bennett Williams: Ultimate Insider; Legendary Trial
Lawyer. By Evan Thomas. (Simon & Schuster, $27.50.) Though an authorized
biography, this life of the justly celebrated lawyer spares none of Williams's
faults.

PATRICK WHITE: A Life. By David Marr. (Knopf, $30.) A beautifully constructed
account, integrating letters, interviews and narrative, of the difficult and
often nasty novelist who in 1973 became the only Australian to win the Nobel
Prize in Literature.

SALEM IS MY DWELLING PLACE: A Life of Nathaniel Hawthorne. By Edwin Haviland
Miller. (University of Iowa, $35.) Mr. Miller doesn't look for what isn't to be
found in Hawthorne's secretive life, and renders well the lively flavor of his
times.

SMALL CRAFT ADVISORY: A Book About the Building of a Boat. By Louis D. Rubin Jr.
(Atlantic Monthly, $21.95.) A distinguished scholar's fine and atypical
memoir-cum-boat book, combining a 55-year passion for sailing with wise insights
into the relation of work to play.

TROLLOPE: A Biography. By N. John Hall. (Clarendon/Oxford University, $30.) With
tact, wit and what looks like an absolute knowledge of Trollope and his works,
Mr. Hall gives us the novelist who made both life and art into marvelous comic
ironies.

UNQUIET DAYS: At Home in Poland. By Thomas Swick. (Ticknor & Fields, $19.95.)
This engaged, intriguing memoir of an American living in Poland during the
Solidarity revolution and the declaration of martial law is also a literary
appreciation of the Polish people.

WOODROW WILSON. By August Heckscher (Scribners, $35.) and WOODROW WILSON: A Life
for World Peace. By Jan Willem Schulte Nordholt (University of California,
$34.95.) Two lives that differ in approach; Mr. Heckscher's primary interest is
the man himself and his intimate relationships, while Mr. Schulte Nordholt
explores Wilson's flaws of intellect and temperament.

THE WORLD IS MY HOME: A Memoir. By James A. Michener. (Random House, $25.) This
haphazardly narrated book by the prolific writer of solid historical fiction
shows the many facets of his unusual mind.

THE WORLDS OF CHRISTOPHER COLUMBUS. By William D. Phillips Jr. and Carla Rahn
Phillips. (Cambridge University, $27.95.) A conscientious, compendious biography
that sticks to the primary sources and concludes that social ambition was
Columbus's main motive.

Children's Books

I SAW ESAU: The Schoolchild's Pocket Book. Edited by Iona Opie and Peter Opie.
Illustrated by Maurice Sendak. (Candlewick Press, $19.95.) (Ages 5 and up) These
exuberant British children's rhymes, collected firsthand by two famous British
folklorists, have been illustrated with wonderful drawings that provide answers
to the riddles and make jokes.

TALKING LIKE THE RAIN: A First Book of Poems. Selected by X. J. Kennedy and
Dorothy M. Kennedy. Illustrated by Jane Dyer. (Little, Brown, $17.95.) (Ages 3
and up) The mix of mood, tone, humor and rumination in this collection is
broadly representative, and the illustrations are so jovial, skilled and
consonant with the mood of the poetical selection they make the combination a
joy.

ONE DAY, TWO DRAGONS. By Lynne Bertrand. Illustrated by Janet Street. (Clarkson
Potter, $14.) (Ages 4 to 7) This story of a visit by two charming young dragons
to their pediatrician sets out the numbers 1 to 20 in the text and illustrations
with wit and style.

Crime

THE BLACK ECHO. By Michael Connelly. (Little, Brown, $19.95.) A Los Angeles
detective named Hieronymus Bosch is plagued by memories of his war days when he
investigates the death of a heroin addict who turns out to be a marine from his
own unit in Vietnam.

THE HANGMAN'S BEAUTIFUL DAUGHTER. By Sharyn McCrumb. (Scribners, $19.) A dark,
elegiac Appalachian mystery, in which some characters are haunted by loneliness,
and one is haunted by visions.

"I" IS FOR INNOCENT. By Sue Grafton. (Holt, $18.95.) In the "I" volume of Ms.
Grafton's alphabet mysteries, Kinsey Millhone hits her stride again as she takes
on the sobering and sordid case of a high-living architect and his murdered
wife.

PLAY DEAD. By Peter Dickinson. (Mysterious Press/Warner, $17.95.) The adroit and
suspenseful tale of a 50-year-old woman named Poppy Tasker and her circle of
park-going nannies, who become suspects in the murder of an unwelcome man on the
playground.

A STAINED WHITE RADIANCE. By James Lee Burke. (Hyperion, $19.95.) A Cajun police
detective given to reverie sees his beloved bayou country transformed into a
menacing and corrupt landscape.

STRANGE LOYALTIES. By William McIlvanney. (Morrow, $20.) A ruminative,
demon-driven detective of the Glasgow police department turns his searching mind
to the death of his younger brother.

Current Affairs and Social Commentary

THE "ABORTION PILL": RU-486, a Woman's Choice. By Etienne-Emile Baulieu with
Mort Rosenblum. (Simon & Schuster, $22.) The discoverer of the antihormone
RU-486 lucidly explains the discovery and its workings, his views on social
responsibility and the political barriers, here and elsewhere, the drug has run
into.

AFTER APARTHEID: The Future of South Africa. By Sebastian Mallaby. (Times Books/
Random House, $22.) A British journalist who has covered Africa extensively
believes the hardest parts will be achieving democracy and raising living
standards.

AMERICA: WHAT WENT WRONG? By Donald L. Barlett and James B. Steele. (Andrews &
McMeel, paper, $6.95.) This expanded newspaper series by two Pulitzer Prize
winners finds that the economy has been altered to favor the already favored.

A COMPLICATED WAR: The Harrowing of Mozambique. By William Finnegan. (University
of California, $25.) A brilliant, sometimes devastating eyewitness report of the
civil war, sponsored by South Africa, that has killed a million Mozambicans.

THE CONSEQUENCES OF THE PEACE: The New Internationalism and American Foreign
Policy. By James Chace. (20th Century Fund/Oxford University, $22.95.) Tailoring
his book for the post-cold-war world, Mr. Chace elegantly restates Walter
Lippmann's idea that America's diplomatic ambitions must be balanced by economic
realities.

CRAPSHOOT: Rolling the Dice on the Vice Presidency. By Jules Witcover. (Crown,
$25.) After racing through the careers of every Vice President from John Adams
to Dan Quayle, the author sets out to persuade us that we should take our choice
for the second spot more seriously.

DEBATING P.C.: The Controversy Over Political Correctness on College Campuses.
Edited by Paul Berman. (Laurel/Dell; paper, $8.) A well-chosen selection of
interviews, articles and lectures on multiculturalism by some of its best-known
supporters and detractors.

THE DISUNITING OF AMERICA. By Arthur M. Schlesinger Jr. (Norton, $14.95.) A sane
and temperate discussion of how ethnic historians are creating intellectual
ghettos, fragmenting society and undermining the ideal of political unity.

FREEDOM FROM FEAR: And Other Writings. By Aung San Suu Kyi. (Viking, cloth, $25;
Penguin, paper, $12.) This collection of work by the 1991 Nobel Peace Prize
winner offers her insights into Burmese political history and philosophy;
liberal democratic movements, she believes, have been suppressed but not
extinguished by the Japanese occupation and by the Burmese military.

A FULL SERVICE BANK: How BCCI Stole Billions Around the World. By James Ring
Adams and Douglas Frantz. (Pocket Books, $22.) A penetrating treatment of the
underlying forces in the Bank of Commerce and Credit International scandal and
of the detective work by several nations that ran the thieves to earth.

HEAD TO HEAD: The Coming Economic Battle Among Japan, Europe, and America. By
Lester Thurow. (Morrow, $25.) A professor and cogent analyst of economics argues
that other societies, operating by other rules, are likely to leave the United
States behind; his probable winner is Europe.

THE IDEA OF THE UNIVERSITY: A Reexamination. By Jaroslav Pelikan. (Yale, $30.)
Without sounding pious, Mr. Pelikan, a professor at the Yale Divinity School,
gracefully defends the idea of the liberal university, including "the embalming
of dead genius," the imperative to publish or perish and the university's duty
toward the community at large.

I'M DYSFUNCTIONAL, YOU'RE DYSFUNCTIONAL: The Recovery Movement and Other
Self-Help Fashions. By Wendy Kaminer. (Addison-Wesley, $18.95.) The author, a
lawyer and journalist, offers a witty, occasionally harsh account of people who
call their troubles diseases and blame other people for them.

KILLING THE WIZARDS: Wars of Power and Freedom From Zaire to South Africa. By
Alan Cowell. (Simon & Schuster, $23.) The Rome bureau chief of the New York
Times reflects on his days as a correspondent in Africa and ponders the hidden
reasons why all the Western journalists who cover it emerge with identical
views.

LIFE ITSELF: Abortion in the American Mind. By Roger Rosenblatt. (Random House,
$20.) Arguing that most people are in their hearts somewhat ambivalent about
abortion, Mr. Rosenblatt offers a solution: permit abortion but discourage it,
and let all parties learn to live with less than they really want.

THE MAKING OF MIDDLEBROW CULTURE. By Joan Shelley Rubin. (University of North
Carolina, cloth, $34.95; paper, $14.95.) An intelligent study of several
20th-century American efforts to sell culture to the plebs, which did much for
some of the plebs.

THE MISMEASURE OF WOMAN. By Carol Tavris. (Simon & Schuster, $23.) A social
psychologist examines the scientific study of fundamental differences between
men and women; she finds much of it just plain wrong, even when its agenda is
feminist.

MOLEHUNT: The Secret Search for Traitors That Shattered the CIA. By David Wise.
(Random House, $22.) In his seventh nonfiction book on intelligence, Mr. Wise
tells how the agency was crippled in the 1960's by a paranoid hunt for a Soviet
penetrator.

OCTOBER SURPRISE: America's Hostages in Iran and the Election of Ronald Reagan.
By Gary Sick. (Times Books/ Random House, $23.) Mr. Sick lays out his case,
which is circumstantial and not conclusive, that the 1980 Reagan campaign made a
deal with Iran not to release the hostages during Jimmy Carter's term.

ONLY MAN IS VILE: The Tragedy of Sri Lanka. By William McGowan. (Farrar, Straus
& Giroux, $25.) How the people of a terrestrial paradise (still remembered as
Ceylon) turned it, with the assistance of India, into a hell on earth in barely
a decade.

THE OVERWORKED AMERICAN: The Unexpected Decline of Leisure. By Juliet B. Schor.
(Basic Books, $21.) Since about 1970 the American workweek has been increasing,
according to Ms. Schor, who perceives a "structural crisis of time" in our
lives.

RACE: How Blacks and Whites Think and Feel About the American Obsession. By
Studs Terkel. (New Press, $24.95.) Conversations with people, mostly from the
Chicago area, a number of whom seem still to have convictions that encourage us
to hope.

REBUILDING RUSSIA: Reflections and Tentative Proposals. By Aleksandr
Solzhenitsyn. (Farrar, Straus & Giroux, $14.95.) This sometimes breathless essay
suggests introducing democracy at the village level, with no secret ballot and
no encysted minorities.

REINVENTING GOVERNMENT: How the Entrepreneurial Spirit Is Transforming the
Public Sector. By David Osborne and Ted Gaebler. (Addison-Wesley, $22.95.) A
vision and a road map for the sort of government that the authors think will
decentralize authority, promote competition and limit bureaucracy.

RETHINKING SOCIAL POLICY: Race, Poverty, and the Underclass. By Christopher
Jencks. (Harvard University, $27.95.) Mr. Jencks, a down-to-earth liberal
sociologist, zeroes in on what we know and what we don't about some so far
insoluble problems.

SEIZE THE MOMENT: America's Challenge in a One-Superpower World. By Richard
Nixon. (Simon & Schuster, $25.) A forceful argument for a classical,
geopolitical American internationalism.

THE SEVEN FAT YEARS: And How to Do It Again. By Robert L. Bartley. (Free Press,
$22.95.) Partly a memoir of the supply-side revolution of the 1980's and partly
a learned polemic against people who refuse to applaud the achievements of that
revolution, by the editor of The Wall Street Journal.

TELLER'S WAR: The Top-Secret Story Behind the Star Wars Deception. By William J.
Broad. (Simon & Schuster, $25.) This accessible but heavily documented account
of the Strategic Defense Initiative, by a reporter for The Times, argues that
Mr. Teller sold President Ronald Reagan an unworkable turkey.

TWO NATIONS: Black and White, Separate, Hostile, Unequal. By Andrew Hacker.
(Scribners, $24.95.) The thesis of this challenging book by a distinguished
political scientist is that unto this day black people have not received a fair
shake as American citizens -- and that most white Americans don't believe this.

WAKE UP LITTLE SUSIE: Single Pregnancy and Race Before Roe v. Wade. By Rickie
Solinger. (Routledge, $25.) A scholar's grim analysis of the treatment -- and
the difference in treatment -- accorded women and girls who became
extramaritally pregnant.

WHO WILL TELL THE PEOPLE: The Betrayal of American Democracy. By William
Greider. (Simon & Schuster, $25.) Mr. Greider, a former assistant managing
editor at The Washington Post, presents a comprehensive guide to the American
political system, which, he argues, is now a "grand bazaar" of moneyed interest
groups and a grand attempt to obscure this fact.

Essays, Criticism, Letters

AFTER HENRY. By Joan Didion. (Simon & Schuster, $22.) Reporting from coast to
coast, Ms. Didion, who dedicates this collection of essays to the memory of her
editor, Henry Robbins, shows that sensibility is still her strength and cool
irony still her style. Above all, she knows how to analyze the stories people
make up to make sense of public events.

BEGINNING WITH MY STREETS: Essays and Recollections. By Czeslaw Milosz. (Farrar,
Straus & Giroux, $30.) The 1980 Nobel laureate discusses a variety of themes:
time and ephemerality, nationalism and religion, the cardinal sins, his literary
friends.

A DAY AT THE BEACH: Recollections. By Geoffrey Wolff. (Knopf, $22.) Nine
personal essays, or autobiographical reflections, by a skilled writer who has
learned certain lessons in human frailty.

INTOXICATED BY MY ILLNESS: And Other Writings on Life and Death. By Anatole
Broyard. (Clarkson Potter, $18.) Urbane, lyrical, witty and gracious essays by a
former editor of The New York Times Book Review, written mostly in his last 14
months.

JOURNEYS IN DREAM AND IMAGINATION. By Artur Lundkvist. (Four Walls Eight
Windows, $17.95.) An amazing, lyrical out-of-body travel book by a Swedish poet
and essayist who returned from a two-month coma with a remarkable store of
imagery.

KEEPING A RENDEZVOUS. By John Berger. (Pantheon, $21.) These reflections on art
and philosophy demonstrate the astounding range of a British-born essayist,
novelist and playwright.

KURT WOLFF: A Portrait in Essays and Letters. Edited by Michael Ermarth.
(University of Chicago, $24.95.) The invaluable correspondence, intoxicating
recollections and, best of all, engaging voice of perhaps this century's most
discriminating publisher, whose authors and artists included Franz Kafka, Marc
Chagall, Lou Andreas-Salome and Boris Pasternak.

THE LETTERS OF EVELYN WAUGH AND DIANA COOPER. Edited by Artemis Cooper. (Ticknor
& Fields, $27.50.) A wonderfully engaging exchange of observations and
entertainments over more than 30 years between the novelist and the almost
unimaginably golden aristocrat Lady Diana Cooper.

LETTERS OF GUSTAVE COURBET. Edited by Petra ten-Doesschate Chu. (University of
Chicago, $55.) Intense stuff by the great painter, who was a raving democrat
when looking above him in society, a solid bourgeois when looking down.

MIGRATIONS TO SOLITUDE. By Sue Halpern. (Pantheon, $20.) A provocative book of
essays, chiefly about privacy and independence and their rarity in our part of
the 20th century.

OH CANADA! OH QUEBEC! Requiem for a Divided Country. By Mordecai Richler.
(Knopf, $23.) An unsystematic, powerful jeremiad against a law requiring that
all public activities in Quebec be conducted exclusively in French -- a piece of
legislation that Mr. Richler sees as an exercise in cultural small-mindedness,
xenophobia and even anti-Semitism.

PLAYING IN THE DARK: Whiteness and the Literary Imagination. By Toni Morrison.
(Harvard University, $14.95.) With her critic's hat on, Ms. Morrison argues for
the sort of literary scholarship (called "American Africanism") that will bring
the black experience to all Americans and break us of the polite habit of
ignoring race.

POETS, POETICS, AND POLITICS: America's Literary Community Viewed From the
Letters of Rolfe Humphries, 1910-1969. Edited by Richard Gillman and Michael
Paul Novak. (University Press of Kansas, $35.) The view of a smart, honest poet
who knew everybody and did not go in for malice.

SISTER'S CHOICE: Tradition and Change in American Women's Writing. By Elaine
Showalter. (Clarendon/Oxford University, $21.95.) Ms. Showalter's latest book of
literary criticism takes its title from a quilting pattern that becomes an
organizing metaphor for some of the distinctions she makes between women's
writing and men's.

STILL LIFE WITH A BRIDLE: Essays and Apocryphas. By Zbigniew Herbert. (Ecco,
$19.95.) Restless essays and sublime short fictions celebrating and revivifying
the Dutch 17th century, by one of Poland's most distinguished writers.

A WOMAN, A MAN, AND TWO KINGDOMS: The Story of Madame d'Epinay and the Abbe
Galiani. By Francis Steegmuller. (Knopf, $23.) A colorful, lively, teasing,
often moving account of an 18th-century friendship (much of it by
correspondence) between a female philosophe and a Neapolitan intellectual,
diplomat and spy.




Fiction

AN ACT OF TERROR. By Andre Brink. (Summit, $25.) A compulsively readable, tautly
handled novel whose hero, a 13th-generation Afrikaner, becomes an antiapartheid
terrorist.

ALL THE PRETTY HORSES. By Cormac McCarthy. (Knopf, $21.) Overwhelmingly
seductive, dark and difficult, this novel about a 16-year old with a talent for
breaking horses who leaves Texas to work on a vast ranch in Mexico is the first
volume of a planned trilogy and the most accessible of Mr. McCarthy's six
novels.

ALMANAC OF THE DEAD. By Leslie Marmon Silko. (Simon & Schuster, $25.) With a
cast of some 70 obsessed, vengeful characters, this wild, mordant novel grapples
with the cruelty of a nation founded on the deracination of American Indian
culture.

AT WEDDINGS AND WAKES. By Alice McDermott. (Farrar, Straus & Giroux, $19.) This
lovely novel, the author's third in a decade, perceives events in a large but
dwindling Brooklyn Irish family as the memories they later become.

BILLIE DYER AND OTHER STORIES. By William Maxwell. (Knopf, $18.) Tales partly
true yet wholly imagined, located in the childhood of the distinguished writer
and editor, now in his 80's.

BLACK WATER. By Joyce Carol Oates. (William Abrahams/Dutton, $17.) A 26-year-old
woman drowns when a senator's car goes off a bridge; but the point of view in
this powerfully imagined novel belongs to the victim, whom we are made to know
and whose tragedy we are made to comprehend.

BLOOD. By Janice Galloway. (Random House, $19.) A Scottish writer's striking
first collection of short stories, marked by a sense of menace, pain and
emotional rawness.

BLUE CALHOUN. By Reynolds Price. (Atheneum, $23.) The narrator of Mr. Price's
ambitious ninth novel is a loquacious 65-year-old salesman in Raleigh, N.C., who
relates his life story to his granddaughter in order to win her mercy.

BLUE GLASS. by Sandra Tyler. (Harcourt Brace Jovanovich, $19.95.) An unusual
first novel that follows the arc of an adolescent girl's changing relationship
with her mother without identifying either participant as victim or perpetrator.

THE BRIDE PRICE. By Grete Weil. (Godine, $20.95.) Mrs. Weil's beautiful novel,
her first to be published in English, interleaves a narrative of King David and
his infidelities with her own life as a German Jew who returned to Bavaria in
1947.

THE BUSINESS OF FANCYDANCING: Stories and Poems. By Sherman Alexie. (Hanging
Loose Press, cloth, $18; paper, $10.) A collection (the author's first) that
deals comically and poignantly with basketball, convenience stores, cars and
other artifacts of everyday life; set mostly in the Pacific Northwest.

CAETANA'S SWEET SONG. By Nelida Pinon. (Knopf, $24.) This wonderfully original,
down-and-dirty, slow-motion picaresque, set in a rural Brazilian backwater, is
the second of this Brazilian writer's eight novels to appear in English.

CAMBRIDGE. By Caryl Phillips. (Knopf, $19.) Mr. Phillips's splendid and tragic
novel tells two stories that ought to be one -- that of a thoughtful
Englishwoman in the 19th-century West Indies and that of Cambridge, a proud and
powerful slave.

A CASE OF CURIOSITIES. By Allen Kurzweil. (Harcourt Brace Jovanovich, $19.95.)
Mr. Kurzweil's first novel sets a 20th-century narrator in quest of an
18th-century mechanical genius; the result is a witty, curious and studied
account of a mentally lively age.

CAT SCRATCH FEVER: Fictions. By Robert Kelly. (McPherson & Company, cloth, $20;
paper, $10.) Some 30 stories that rummage brilliantly in post-apocalyptic
fantasy or shroud preoccupations with sheltered boyhoods, mythology, sex and
demonology.

COWBOYS ARE MY WEAKNESS. By Pam Houston. (Norton, $19.95.) Short stories, mostly
first-person, told with verve and perfect pitch by women entangled with wild men
in a cruel world.

CRYSTAL RIVER: Three Novellas. By Charlie Smith. (Linden/Simon & Schuster, $20.)
Extraordinary tales that explore the weaknesses and needs that drive people
together and apart.

THE DISTANT LANDS. By Julian Green. (Marion Boyars, $24.95.) Quietly shelved in
the 1930's, when "Gone With the Wind" came out, this languorous 900-page novel
of the antebellum South, written by a lifelong Parisian, re-creates the feeling
of eternal childhood afternoons filled with adults' talk.

DUCK AND COVER. By Brenda Peterson. (HarperCollins, $20.) Narrated by nine
different characters, this wicked black comedy centers on the reunion of an
eccentric family that is strangely tuned into the vibrations of the nuclear age.

THE END OF THE NOVEL. By Michael Kruger. (Braziller, $17.50.) The
writer-narrator of this very funny novella by a German poet, publisher and
editor decides to have his hero commit suicide, and to remove from the book all
episodes that might provide a motive. An elegant entertainment results.

THE FACADE: M.N.O.P.Q. By Libuse Monikova. (Knopf, $23.) In a novel about the
restoration of a castle in Bohemia, a Czechoslovak writer creates a house of
mirrors to reflect the political distortions of reality in her native land.

FALSE GODS. By Louis Auchincloss. (Houghton Mifflin, $21.) The author's 34th
work of fiction, a collection of six chilly, stylized tales, explores, once
again, the dangers of being male, idealistic and WASP.

THE FIELD DAY ANTHOLOGY OF IRISH WRITING. Edited by Seamus Deane. (Field Day
Publications/Norton, $150.) With 4,044 pages in three volumes, this whopping,
generous collection takes the Hibernophile reader right up to 1991.

FIELDS OF GLORY. By Jean Rouaud. (Arcade/Little, Brown, $18.95.) This
accomplished first novel, which has sold more than half a million copies in
France, deals with the wounds wrought by World War I on a French provincial
family.

FOOLSCAP. By Michael Malone. (Little, Brown, $19.95.) The author of "Handling
Sin" captures in another novel the sort of absurdity we are apt to think goes on
all the time -- but unlike us, he has the sharp eye and sensibility to capture
it in motion.

THE FORGOTTEN. By Elie Wiesel. (Summit, $21.) Mr. Wiesel, whose art is so
intensely a witness to the Holocaust, confronts in this novel the horror that
befalls a psychotherapist and survivor of the Nazis who is developing
Alzheimer's disease.

FORTUNATE LIVES. By Robb Forman Dew. (Morrow, $20.) This quiet -- virtually
silent -- novel depends on the characters and the musings of a family during the
summer before their son departs.

THE GATE OF ANGELS. By Penelope Fitzgerald. (Nan A. Talese/Doubleday, $19.) A
slim, concentrated novel about randomness in physics and luck in human affairs,
exemplified in the collision of a physics student's bicycle with a young woman
in 1912.

GOOD GOSSIP. By Jacqueline Carey. (Random House, $19.) A witty, appealing
collection of short stories featuring a continuing cast of men and women trying
to end their extended adolescence.

HIGH COTTON. By Darryl Pinckney. (Farrar, Straus & Giroux, $21.) A rich, dense
first novel whose wordy, alienated narrator, a black fourth-generation college
graduate, is obsessed with racial scenarios but will not conform to any of them.

I AM ZOE HANDKE. By Eric Larsen. (Algonquin Books of Chapel Hill, $16.95.) In
highly mannered but precisely controlled prose, this novel pursues a daughter's
struggle with the most destructive and terrifying of childhood emotions:
abandonment and loss.

JAZZ. By Toni Morrison. (Knopf, $21.) In this novel, Ms. Morrison conjures up
with absolute authority the Harlem of the 1920's, its scenes and its
inhabitants, especially Joe and Violet, a couple who learn again and again that
life does not keep its promises.

THE KIND OF LIGHT THAT SHINES ON TEXAS. By Reginald McKnight. (Little, Brown,
$18.95.) Stories that exploit their author's uncannily sharp ear, bleak vision
and incendiary humor.

LIFE FORCE. By Fay Weldon. (Viking, $21.) The author, a generous satirist and
feminist student of modern mores, delivers a sex comedy that is also a parable
about the act of creativity itself.

THE LITTLE BROTHERS OF ST. MORTIMER. By John Fergus Ryan. (Delta, paper, $10.) A
bunch of rogues drive across Arkansas in this picaresque novel full of
disorderly sex and black humor.

THE LIVING. By Annie Dillard. (HarperCollins, $22.50.) Ms. Dillard's novel, in a
genuine epic mode, concerns what befell nearly everyone in the 19th-century
Washington Territory.

LIVING AFTER MIDNIGHT. By Lee K. Abbott. (Putnam, $21.95.) In this collection of
five short stories and a novella, Mr. Abbott's prose exhibits high intensity,
tight focus and a concentration on the depths and dimensions of more or less
ordinary people.

THE LOST FATHER. By Mona Simpson. (Knopf, $22.) A lyrical, astute novel that
eloquently renders the tumultuous emotional state of a woman totally consumed
with looking for her father.

LOVE JUNKIE. By Robert Plunket. (HarperCollins, $20.) A comedy of manners,
dancing on its toes, about a heroically innocent housewife from Bronxville who
falls in love with a gay porno star.

THE LOVE QUEEN OF THE AMAZON. By Cecile Pineda. (Little, Brown, $19.95.) A droll
novel about sex and stuffy society on the upper Amazon, full of well-handled
incongruities and characters who insist on making theatrical fools of themselves
and others.

A MAN'S PLACE. By Annie Ernaux. (Four Walls Eight Windows, $15.95.) An
autobiographical novel that confronts the author's painful growth into
incomprehension as she becomes a French intellectual while her father remains a
hardworking shopkeeper.

MEN WHO WOULD BE GOOD: A Novella and Six Stories. By Gordon Weaver.
(Triquarterly Books; cloth, $18.95, paper, $9.95.) Full of gritty details of
mills, bars and shopping malls, these sad, unnerving tales all concern men
driven by existential problems.

MR. MANI. By A. B. Yehoshua. (Doubleday, $22.50.) A kaleidoscopic novel of
Jewish history that slips back from 1982 to the 18th century through generations
of one family, its exiles and returns.

ON MOZART: A Paean for Wolfgang. By Anthony Burgess. (Ticknor & Fields, $19.95.)
Mr. Burgess, himself a skilled composer when not novelizing, sets his homage in
heaven, where the dear departed utter truths about music that are not easily
available on earth.

OUTERBRIDGE REACH. By Robert Stone. (Ticknor & Fields, $21.95.) A shapely and
powerful novel with a seafaring adventure in it, built around a triangle of
husband, wife and her film-maker lover, suggesting that post-Vietnam
disillusionment and skepticism may not after all be the whole end of life.

PARADISE NEWS. By David Lodge. (Viking, $21.) In Mr. Lodge's witty, entertaining
ninth novel, a herd of English people descend on Hawaii for a two-week holiday,
while a family death and a few other ugly things try to develop in their midst.

POSTCARDS. By E. Annie Proulx. (Scribners, $22.95.) This lovely novel of the
1940's-80's era turns on a murderer's exile and the decline of the family and
landscape he left behind in Vermont.

PRIMITIVE PEOPLE. By Francine Prose. (Farrar, Straus & Giroux, $20.) Everyone is
pretending, disguising, dressing up in a novel so funny it hardly matters that
it's about a society in decay.

REGENERATION. By Pat Barker. (William Abrahams/Dutton, $20.) Ms. Barker takes
brilliantly to semihistorical fiction with a polemic-free tale of war, manhood
and madness, about the rebellion, the psychiatric treatment and the return to
the front of the poet Siegfried Sassoon in World War I.

RISING SUN. By Michael Crichton. (Knopf, $22.) A shocking and ominous murder
mystery that taps into the fear that the Japanese have declared a full-scale
economic war on the United States and are winning it because we refuse to fight.

SAN CAMILO, 1936: The Eve, Feast, and Octave of St. Camillus of the Year 1936 in
Madrid. By Camilo Jose Cela. (Duke University, cloth, $45.95; paper, $14.95.) A
Spanish Civil War novel with a difference: the apolitical vision of its Nobel
Prize-winning author is a ringing rejection of fanaticism in any form.

SCAR LOVER. By Harry Crews. (Poseidon, $19.) Mr. Crews's 12th novel, set among
country folk in Florida, concerns a man running from a wound in his heart that
will not heal.

THE SHRINE AT ALTAMIRA. By John L'Heureux. (Viking, $19.) A stark, cleanly told
novel of guilt and redemption following a hideous act of child abuse; the climax
is unspeakably terrible.

STARDUST, 7-ELEVEN, ROUTE 57, A&W, AND SO FORTH: Stories. By Patricia Lear.
(Knopf, $19.) A nifty debut collection by yet another language-stoked
Southerner, mixing syncopated syntax, down-home insight and far-out yet
believable characters.

THE TANGO PLAYER. By Christoph Hein. (Farrar, Straus & Giroux, $20.) A professor
jailed for a trifle in East Germany is the focus of a fictional inquiry into the
nature of freedom.

THE TAX INSPECTOR. By Peter Carey. (Knopf, $21.) This disturbing Australian
novel chronicles life in the Catchprice family, a clutch of loonies who enlarge
our sympathies and our understanding as we see more of them and the world around
them.

TIME AND TIDE. By Edna O'Brien. (Farrar, Straus & Giroux, $21.) Subtly conjuring
up the combined misfortunes of Emma Bovary, Anna Karenina and Hedda Gabler, Ms.
O'Brien displays, once again, her imagination for disaster in this melancholy
novel about an Irishwoman living in London who is victimized by ordinary life,
children, parents and especially men.

THE TRAINING GROUND. By Siegfried Lenz. (Holt, $24.95.) An East Prussian
family's wartime escape to the West and to prosperity becomes a symbol of the
development of postwar Germany in this open-ended tale by a Hamburg novelist.

TURTLE MOON. By Alice Hoffman. (Putnam, $21.95.) Ms. Hoffman's lovely novel
insists that there is magic in our lives; its chief characters, two damaged
adults and a troubled child, not only believe in happy endings, they are willing
to work for them.

UNDER THE 82ND AIRBORNE. By Deborah Eisenberg. (Farrar, Straus & Giroux, $20.)
Dark, complex, thematically opulent short stories conveying an atmosphere of
beleaguered disorientation.

UNDERWORLD. By Peter Conrad. (Poseidon, $21.) Mr. Conrad's first novel -- dense,
hermetic, allusive and striking -- takes place in a futuristic metropolis
divided by a valley of criminals and deftly walks the line between parable and
naturalistic narrative.

VERY OLD BONES. By William Kennedy. (Viking, $22.) The sixth novel in the
author's Albany cycle is a sort of excavation into the past of his own career as
a writer, where the undoing of gloom and the reconciliation of family members
are central themes.

VIOLENCE. By Richard Bausch. (Seymour Lawrence/ Houghton Mifflin, $19.95.) A
masterly novel that explores public and private forms of violence with
persistence and sensitivity.

VOX. By Nicholson Baker. (Random House, $15.) This imagined erotic telephone
call between two characters on an adult party line is breathtaking, funny and
perversely tender.

THE WAR OF DON EMMANUEL'S NETHER PARTS. By Louis de Bernieres. (Morrow, $25.) It
looks like Latin American magical realism, but it's a romance by a Briton; when
the war (a mistake, mostly) is over, everybody moves to an arcadian mountain
valley.

WHO WAS DAVID WEISER? By Pawel Huelle. (Helen and Kurt Wolff/Harcourt Brace
Jovanovich, $17.95.) Mr. Huelle's beautifully written first novel is an elegy
for the ancient port city of Gdansk in Poland and for a group of 12-year-old
boys.

WISE CHILDREN. By Angela Carter. (Farrar, Straus & Giroux, $21.) Carter's 11th
and last work of fiction is a mock memoir that is narrated by an endlessly
imaginative post-modernist old woman.

THE WRECKING YARD: Stories. By Pinckney Benedict. (Nan A. Talese/Doubleday,
$19.) Stories, often violent, steeped in the physical world, ultimately moved by
the mess man has made of it.

History

ALIEN INK: The FBI's War on Freedom of Expression. By Natalie Robins. (Morrow,
$27.50.) This admirable history of the F.B.I.'s dossier collection on
intellectuals shows that the bureau's agents weren't really up to the task set
for them by their crazed boss.

BENEVOLENCE AND BETRAYAL: Five Italian Jewish Families Under Fascism. By
Alexander Stille. (Summit, $25.) Mr. Stille's meticulous research and
comprehensive understanding yield a fresh perception of the victims, casualties,
heroes and villains, Jews and gentiles alike, who arose in that terrible time.

THE BLACK MAN'S BURDEN: Africa and the Curse of the Nation-State. By Basil
Davidson. (Times Books/Random House, $24.) A British journalist who lost his
heart to Africa during World War II faces the tragic truth: though Europe robbed
Africa of its history, its culture and its nations, many of its countries are
worse off now as independent nations than they were as colonies.

THE BURIED MIRROR: Reflections on Spain and the New World. By Carlos Fuentes.
(Houghton Mifflin, $35.) Looking for continuity in the cultural history of Spain
and Spanish America, from the caves of Altamira to the streets of East L.A., Mr.
Fuentes has written an anachronistic history but a sweeping and forceful
narrative.

BYZANTIUM: The Apogee. By John Julius Norwich. (Knopf, $30.) The second of a
projected three volumes, this readable and provocative history takes the Eastern
Roman Empire from Charlemagne's coronation, in 800, to the late 11th century.

THE CIVIL WAR IN THE AMERICAN WEST. By Alvin M. Josephy Jr. (Knopf, $27.50.) A
learned and powerful narrative that reveals how intimately joined the war and
the Western expansion were.

THE END OF HISTORY AND THE LAST MAN. By Francis Fukuyama. (Free Press, $24.95.)
A quixotic, tightly argued work of political philosophy whose rallying cry is
"Back to Hegel" and whose central argument is that liberal democracy is the
natural and inviting end of history.

THE GOLDEN AGE OF AMERICAN GARDENS: Proud Owners, Private Estates, 1890-1940. By
Mac Griswold and Eleanor Weller. (Abrams/Garden Club of America, $75.)
Meticulous documentation by horticultural historians of over 500 great gardens
created when wealth was bold and showy.

MYSTIC CHORDS OF MEMORY: The Transformation of Tradition in American Culture. By
Michael Kammen. (Knopf, $40.) Mr. Kammen, a brilliant cultural historian,
explores the creation of a usable American past (Margaret Mitchell's Southland,
for instance) in the teeth (or behind the back) of the facts.

NATURAL ALLIES: Women's Associations in American History. By Anne Firor Scott
(University of Illinois, $32.50.) This clearheaded but impassioned survey shows
that women's volunteer societies, far from being frivolous, were the force
behind countless civic projects, from the building of schools to the
establishment of welfare agencies.

THE NEW EMPERORS: China in the Era of Mao and Deng. By Harrison E. Salisbury.
(Little, Brown, $24.95.) A fascinating and detailed picture of the personal
relationships and private lives of China's rulers for 40 years; by a veteran of
The New York Times.

ORDINARY MEN: Reserve Police Battalion 101 and the Final Solution in Poland. By
Christopher R. Browning. (Aaron Asher/HarperCollins, $22.) A historian's
penetrating account of some men -- most of them not even Nazis -- who killed
about 83,000 Jews.

OVER THE EARTH I COME: The Great Sioux Uprising of 1862. By Duane Schultz.
(Thomas Dunne/St. Martin's, $21.95.) A taut, capable narrative of the abominable
doings by both sides that set the tone for America's post-Civil War expansion.

OWEN LATTIMORE AND THE "LOSS" OF CHINA. By Robert P. Newman. (University of
California, $30.) This landmark work on American politics at the end of World
War II tells us how an obscure scholar came to be seen as the Red Menace itself.

THE RADICALISM OF THE AMERICAN REVOLUTION. By Gordon S. Wood. (Knopf, $27.50.)
Mr. Wood argues with learning and grace that if social change is the measure of
radicalism, our revolution was as radical as anybody's.

ROWAN'S PROGRESS. By James McConkey. (Pantheon, $22.) Well-written and sensible,
this 100-year history shows how a doctor and a hospital helped ease Appalachia's
Rowan Country into the modern world.

THE SCRAMBLE FOR AFRICA: 1876-1912. By Thomas Pakenham. (Random House, $32.)
Exercising both detachment and judgment, Mr. Pakenham relates the endless
movements of the Europeans (and their African enemies) across the huge continent
they snatched from its inhabitants and divided among themselves.

SOLDIERS OF THE SUN: The Rise and Fall of the Imperial Japanese Army. By Meirion
Harries and Susie Harries. (Random House, $30.) A history of the
state-within-the-state that was the Japanese Army before 1945, an organization
addicted to aggression and to exceeding the instructions of its Government.

UNTO THE SONS. By Gay Talese. (Knopf, $25.) Mr. Talese has brought his enormous
reportorial industry to bear on his own family, especially on his Italian-born
father's side, and has meticulously reconstructed a personal history and a way
of life now distant.

Poetry

AN ATLAS OF THE DIFFICULT WORLD: Poems 1988-1991. By Adrienne Rich. (Norton,
cloth, $17.95; paper, $7.95.) In passionate, flowing cadences, our most visible
poetic proponent of feminism finds ways to balance the conflicting demands of
poetry and ideology.

THE LOVE POEMS OF MAY SWENSON. By May Swenson. (Houghton Mifflin, paper, $9.95.)
A rare, authentic poet of celebration, this American original who died at 76 in
1989 wrote high-spirited, unruly, risky poems that reveal a writer filled with
sexual ebullience and emotional candor.

PROVINCES. By Czeslaw Milosz. (Ecco, $19.95.) In new poems of penetrating
honesty, this famous immigrant from Poland, who won the Nobel Prize in
Literature in 1980, presents a lucid, deceptively straightforward, unforgettable
portrait of the artist as an old man.

QUILTING: Poems 1987-1990. By Lucille Clifton. (BOA Editions, cloth, $18; paper,
$9.) This urban African-American poet's work is personal, visionary,
celebratory, passionate, mercurial, angry, prophetic, vulnerable, funny -- and
always surprising.

SELECTED POEMS. By Derek Mahon. (Viking, $20.) Ironic, self-questioning and
skeptical, this outstanding Northern Irish poet writes, with self-lacerating wit
and existential grief, cosmopolitan verse about modern displacement, about
necessary departures and guilty homecomings.

WHAT WORK IS. By Philip Levine. (Knopf, $19.) America's pre-eminent poet of
working life makes severe poetry out of the wounds inflicted on people and the
earth by industry, and pays magnificent tribute to the humanity of ordinary
workers.

Popular Culture and the Arts

THE AGE OF MISSING INFORMATION. By Bill McKibben. (Random House, $20.) Two
dramatic, intertwined reports -- one an account of the world as reflected in a
24-hour period in the Adirondacks, the other an account of the world as
broadcast on 103 television channels in a single day.

ARCHITECTURE: The Natural and the Manmade. By Vincent Scully. (St. Martin's,
$40.) In what is nothing less than an interpretation of the whole history of
Western architecture, Yale's revered teacher of architecture for some 40 years
explores the relationship of buildings to landscape.

FOR A COWBOY HAS TO SING. By Jim Bob Tinsley. (University of Central Florida,
$39.95.) A collection of 60 cowboy songs from the golden age -- 1905-57 -- with
brisk, witty, informative introductions to the songs and their composers in
Brooklyn, Cleveland, Dublin, Hollywood and other homes on the range.

FRANK CAPRA: The Catastrophe of Success. By Joseph McBride. (Simon & Schuster,
$27.50.) A comprehensive biography of the wizard director of "common-man"
movies, which were actually informed (as the author shows) by Capra's right-wing
politics.

GEORGE CUKOR: A DOUBLE LIFE. A Biography of the Gentleman Director. By Patrick
McGilligan. (St. Martin's, $24.95.) A full-bodied account of the brilliant film
maker's works, the man himself and his elegantly gay life in a Hollywood that
pretended to celebrate all the middle-class decencies.

HIRSCHFELD: Art and Recollections From Eight Decades. By Al Hirschfeld.
(Scribners, $50.) An abundant retrospective of the work of this great visual
chronicler of the theater.

THE LAST DANDY, RALPH BARTON: American Artist, 1891-1931. By Bruce Kellner.
(University of Missouri, $34.95.) A sympathetic, informative and just biography
of the compulsively workaholic magazine illustrator and restless man about town.

LITTLE LEAGUE CONFIDENTIAL: One Coach's Completely Unauthorized Tale of
Survival. By Bill Geist. (Macmillan, $17.) A good-humored romp through the
terror and delight of Little League players and their ambitious parents.

LOUIS I. KAHN: In the Realm of Architecture. By David B. Brownlee and David G.
De Long, with essays by others. (Museum of Contemporary Art/ Rizzoli, cloth,
$60; paper, $40.) The first comprehensive account of the career of the man who
was probably America's most important post-World War II architect; gloriously
illustrated.

THE MAESTRO MYTH: Great Conductors in Pursuit of Power. By Norman Lebrecht.
(Birch Lane/Carol Publishing, $22.50.) This juicy, garish and tendentious book
of more than 50 thumbnail biographies explores the conductor's place in the
byzantine world of music and in society.

NO MINOR CHORDS: My Days in Hollywood. By Andre Previn. (Doubleday, $22.50.) An
amiable, intelligent memoir of Mr. Previn's early life as a movie music maker,
with anecdotes of many first-rate colleagues, producers, directors and stars.

PRODIGAL SON: Dancing for Balanchine in a World of Pain and Magic. By Edward
Villella with Larry Kaplan. (Simon & Schuster, $23.) How a guy from Queens
became a great American dancer, and how a great choreographer created through
him a new way of dancing. It wasn't all fun.

TO THE END OF TIME: The Seduction and Conquest of a Media Empire. By Richard M.
Clurman. (Simon & Schuster, $23.) The smooth, brisk story of how Time Inc., the
straitlaced journalistic company, was courted by and married to Warner
Communications, the racy movie venture, to form the biggest American media
conglomerate ever; written by a former chief of correspondents for Time
magazine.

UNSILENT REVOLUTION: Television News and American Public Life, 1948-1991. By
Robert J. Donovan and Ray Scherer. (Woodrow Wilson International Center for
Scholars/Cambridge University, cloth, $49.95; paper, $17.95.) A history of the
broadcast images that have largely molded our minds over the last 40 years.

VESTED INTERESTS: Cross-Dressing & Cultural Anxiety. By Marjorie Garber.
(Routledge, $35.) This erudite and exhilarating book explores how culture
creates transvestites and transvestites create culture.

VIEW: Parade of the Avant-Garde. An Anthology of View Magazine (1940-1947).
Edited by Charles Henri Ford. Compiled by Catrina Neiman and Paul Nathan.
(Thunder's Mouth, $35.) Breton, Duchamp, Stevens, Camus, Magritte, O'Keeffe and
a host of other woozy and astute writers and artists appear in this vivid
anthology of the short-lived magazine that celebrated New York's international
status.

THE WALLS AROUND US: The Thinking Person's Guide to How a House Works. By David
Owen. (Villard, $21.) Solid research, experience and personal enthusiasm inform
this guide to the reasons for keeping the outdoors out and the methods of doing
it.

Religion and Mythology

THE FEMININE FACE OF GOD: The Unfolding of the Sacred in Women. By Sherry Ruth
Anderson and Patricia Hopkins. (Bantam, $20.) Sensitive portraits of the
spiritual lives of more than 100 women, as seen through the eyes of two
feminists.

FUNDAMENTALISMS OBSERVED. Edited by Martin E. Marty and R. Scott Appleby.
(University of Chicago, $40.) The first of five volumes in an encyclopedic study
of fundamentalist movements in just about all the religions and regions of the
earth.

A MARGINAL JEW: Rethinking the Historical Jesus. Volume One: The Roots of the
Problem and the Person. By John P. Meier. (Anchor Bible Reference
Library/Doubleday, $25.) This gently skeptical but old-fashioned study of
Jesus's birth, development and cultural background is the first part of a
planned two-volume work on the historical Jesus.

SANTIAGO: Saint of Two Worlds. By Joan Myers, Marc Simmons and Donna Pierce.
(University of New Mexico, cloth, $45; paper, $25.) Words and pictures (by Ms.
Myers) exploring the legend of St. James in Spain and America.

THE WORLD OF BIBLICAL LITERATURE. By Robert Alter. (Basic Books, $23.) These
addictive essays analyzing the Hebrew Bible as a literary work try to break down
the wall between modern readers and ancient texts.


Science and Medicine

THE ASPIRIN WARS: Money, Medicine, and 100 Years of Rampant Competition. By
Charles C. Mann and Mark L. Plummer. (Knopf, $25.) A fascinating and thoroughly
researched history of a most remarkable little pill.

BRIGHT AIR, BRILLIANT FIRE: On the Matter of the Mind. By Gerald M. Edelman.
(Basic Books, $25.) In a brave attempt to elucidate his own theory of neural
Darwinism, a neuroscientist argues that the brain is not like a computer but
rather like the immune system, molding itself to the contours of the outside
world.

EARTH IN THE BALANCE: Ecology and the Human Spirit. By Al Gore. (Houghton
Mifflin, $22.95.) The junior Senator from Tennessee assesses the decay of the
planet and proposes an environmental Marshall Plan in this perspicacious,
heartening book.

EXTINCTION: Bad Genes or Bad Luck? By David M. Raup. (Norton, $19.95.) In a
breezy tone, a biologist and statistical analyst says that mass extinctions,
triggered by meteorites, are likely to happen every 26 million years and we
should now be looking to ward off the next one.

MAPPING THE NEXT MILLENNIUM: The Discovery of New Geographies. By Stephen S.
Hall. (Random House, $30.) Mr. Hall's fascinating thesis is that the vast gobs
of data generated by modern scientific research yield the clearest and most
useful results when rendered in graphic form -- that is, as maps.

THE MIND OF GOD: The Scientific Basis for a Rational World. By Paul Davies.
(Simon & Schuster, $22.) In this personable and crisp metaphysical quest, a
physicist asks whether scientific inquiry can lead us to ultimate answers about
creation

THE MIND'S SKY: Human Intelligence in a Cosmic Context. By Timothy Ferris.
(Bantam, $22.50.) An audacious, chatty book that explores the connection between
the universe of the mind and the universe of the stars.

THE MINER'S CANARY: Unraveling the Mysteries of Extinction. By Niles Eldredge.
(Prentice Hall, $20.) One of the world's leading evolutionary theorists argues
that the biggest threat to our species is posed not by meteorites but by
ourselves.

NIELS BOHR'S TIMES: In Physics, Philosophy and Polity. By Abraham Pais.
(Clarendon/ Oxford University, $35.) What did the 1922 Nobel laureate in physics
actually do to be so much admired? This first major biography of Bohr
illuminates his contributions.

PRISONER'S DILEMMA. By William Poundstone. (Doubleday, $22.50.) An open and
multifaceted work that explores how the premier paradox about choice and
conflict was formulated by the mathematicians Emile Borel and John von Neumann,
and how it came to be connected with nuclear strategy.

THE THIRD CHIMPANZEE: The Evolution and Future of the Human Animal. By Jared
Diamond. (HarperCollins, $25.) With great wit, a physiologist ponders what it is
that makes chimps and humans, who share 98 percent of their DNA, so different.

UNCERTAINTY: The Life and Science of Werner Heisenberg. By David C. Cassidy. (W.
H. Freeman, $29.95.) A fascinating, well-documented biography of the man who, in
his scientific life, concluded that quantum mechanics had destroyed the
determinism of classical mechanics and who, in his personal life, seemed to
sympathize with the Nazis.

Science Fiction

KING OF THE DEAD. By R. A. MacAvoy. (Morrow, $19.)This worthy sequel to "The
Lens of the World" continues the adventures of Nazhuret, a reluctant hero whose
deadly weapons are swordplay and wordplay.

AND THE ANGELS SING. By Kate Wilhelm. (St. Martin's, $19.95.) Positioned on the
border between fantasy and mainstream fiction, these 12 stories provide pleasure
and provoke thought by undermining the reader's expectations at every turn.

CHINA MOUNTAIN ZHANG. By Maureen F. McHugh (Tom Doherty/Tor, $19.95.) A
beautifully realized first novel that portrays the 22d century as dominated by a
nominally socialist China.

A FIRE UPON THE DEEP. By Vernor Vinge (Tom Doherty/Tor, $21.95.) Thoughtful
space opera at its best, this book delivers everything it promises in terms of
galactic scope, audacious concepts and believable characters both human and
nonhuman.

MURASAKI. Edited by Robert Silverberg. (Bantam Spectra, $20.) For this exemplary
"shared-world" anthology, six Nebula Award-winning authors have created deftly
interlinked stories set in a bizarre planetary system invented by two of the
contributors, Poul Anderson and Frederik Pohl.

Spies & Thrillers

ANGLE OF ATTACK. By Robin A. White. (Crown, $20.) This fine novel about flying
starts just before the beginning of the Persian Gulf war, with American naval
forces off the coast of Libya and with Israel targeted for destruction.

FROST THE FIDDLER. By Janice Weber. (St. Martin's, $19.95.) Ms. Weber is an
American concert pianist who writes as well as she plays; her heroine, a sort of
female James Bond, is a violinist who doubles as a spy for a secret United
States agency.

THE KING'S PRIVATEER. By Dewey Lambdin. (Donald I. Fine, $21.95.) Like Mr.
Lambdin's other sea stories, set 200 years ago, his newest one, with its cast of
intriguing characters, stands up very well even against those of the master, C.
S. Forester.

A LANDING ON THE SUN. By Michael Frayn. (Viking, $21.) A philosophical fable, a
satire on bureaucracies and finally a spy thriller that employs to fine effect
many of Mr. Frayn's numberless talents.

LET US PREY. By Bill Branon. (Black Seal Press, paper, $12.95.) In this raunchy,
cynical book about the inherent rottenness of big government, one man decides to
do something about the inequities of the Internal Revenue Service.

MOSCOW MAGICIAN. By John Moody. (Thomas Dunne/St. Martin's, $17.95.) Mr. Moody,
a correspondent for Time magazine, has written an absorbing novel about a
small-time operator in Moscow during the 1980's who finds himself on the K.G.B.
blacklist.

Travel, Nature, Adventure

BANDIT: Dossier of a Dangerous Dog. By Vicki Hearne. (Aaron Asher/HarperCollins,
$22.) Not just a baroque story about a dog who bit his master but an eccentric
lesson in justice, linguistics, racism and teleology.

BARCELONA. By Robert Hughes. (Knopf, $27.50.) An elegant, often witty, survey of
the history and culture of a great city that fate has made relatively
unfamiliar, by an art critic for Time magazine.

IMAGINED PLACES: Journeys Into Literary America. By Michael Pearson. (University
Press of Mississippi, $24.95.) In this unusual and sometimes dispiriting mix of
travel and autobiography, the author gathers up his best-loved books and tries
to find the worlds they evoked -- Ernest Hemingway's Key West, Mark Twain's
Missouri, Flannery O'Connor's South.

LAND OF THE EAGLE: A Natural History of North America. By Robert McCracken Peck.
(Summit, $30.) The companion volume for a BBC television series portrays the
continent as it appeared to the first European explorers.

THE LOST UPLAND. By W. S. Merwin. (Knopf, $22.) In this agile,
semiautobiographical short-story trilogy, an esteemed American poet portrays the
sleepy Dordogne region of France as only an impassioned outsider can.

MEN AND WHALES. By Richard Ellis. (Knopf, $40.) An impressive, lavishly
illustrated history of one of our most significant and complex relationships
with nature, from Neolithic whale hunts to the world ban on commercial whaling.

THE MOON BY WHALE LIGHT: And Other Adventures Among Bats, Penguins,
Crocodilians, and Whales. By Diane Ackerman. (Random House, $20.) These four
natural history pieces by an unsqueamish, hands-on reporter contain many gems of
description and an incredible amount of sensory detail.

NATIVE STRANGER: A Black American's Journey Into the Heart of Africa. By Eddy L.
Harris. (Simon & Schuster, $22.) A black American writer who has a gift for
opening himself up to strangers travels to Africa to see how African he really
is.

WHITEOUT: Lost in Aspen. By Ted Conover. (Random House, $20.) Mr. Conover spent
two years roaming the streets and slopes of Aspen, Colo., the trendiest place on
earth; he had a wonderful time, almost lost his soul, escaped and wrote a
fascinating book.

THE WORLD AND THE BO TREE. By Helen Bevington. (Duke University, cloth, $39.95;
paper, $15.95.) A poet and tireless tourist with a taste for comfortable hotels
records her travels and quotes voluminously from her reading.

LOAD-DATE: May 31, 1992

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Review

                   Copyright 1992 The New York Times Company


                              166 of 281 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                   May 31, 1992, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

Travel

BYLINE: By Francine Prose;  Francine Prose's most recent book is the novel
"Primitive People."

SECTION: Section 7; Page 11; Column 1; Book Review Desk

LENGTH: 2036 words


EVERYONE who has ever traveled has at some time discovered that a change of
scene can work like a change in an eyeglass prescription. Our plane lands, and
the bright new world we enter is so much more detailed and crisply defined than
the myopic blur we still dimly recall as home. As the scales of familiarity drop
from our eyes, we look on life as it really is -- or at least as it first
appears. For the paradox of travel is that while we feel that we're seeing more,
we secretly worry that we're understanding less. How can we hope to penetrate
the facade of a foreign culture? And how much truth do we want to see if it
threatens our holiday?

Observant travel (and travel writing) requires so much effort that one can
hardly blame those writers whose books are essentially extended boasts (or
complaints) about the courage shown and the hardships faced, crossing
Baluchistan on a skateboard. Nor can one fault the author who travels as an
excuse to sneak off and admire, as if in private, his or her own descriptive
gifts and rapturous sensibility.  Happily, no such chest-thumping or
mirror-gazing mars the books that follow, books that can transport us far away
as we laze through a country weekend or ride the subway to work.

What's most engaging about THE HEART OF THE SKY: Travels Among the Maya (maps,
384 pp., HarperCollins, $25; available next month) is in part its subject -- the
Maya of Mexico, Guatemala, Honduras and Belize -- and in part the almost fanatic
intensity of its author's will to see things whole. Impulsively giving his
raincoat to an Indian who admires it, learning about the subtleties of race
relations from an expatriate Maya rock musician revisiting his father's village,
spelunking in a dark cave where Maya priests practiced ritual sacrifice, Peter
Canby makes an immensely appealing traveling companion. A former New Yorker
staffer who is now a freelance writer, he draws on a wide knowledge of Maya
mythology and customs without ever descending into the numbing drone of the tour
guide on the bus.

As he travels from remote villages to houses whose owners drive BMWs, from
modern cities to deserted ruins, as he witnesses pre-Christian rites, a trendy
Guatemalan gallery opening and the efforts of evangelicals to win Indian
converts, Mr. Canby uses the Maya's tragic past and their literary and religious
heritage as both key and counterpoint to the realities he observes. We are the
lucky beneficiaries of the thoroughness that impels him to learn to decipher
ancient hieroglyphics and of the courage that enables him to tour the most
violent hamlets of the Guatemalan highlands, where thousands of Maya have been
displaced or killed by the army. Never satisfied with quick glances or easy
answers, Mr. Canby keeps looking around him, as well as backward in time, until
he makes us feel that we have just begun to comprehend a rich, profoundly
different and endangered culture.

Sightseeing in desperate or volatile countries presents a particular challenge,
but Norman Lewis's latest book, A GODDESS IN THE STONES: Travels in India (322
pp., John Macrea/Holt, $22.95), succeeds with its straightforward, measured,
humble tone -- and its wonderful prose. Here the British writer contemplates the
splendor of the Indian subcontinent without losing sight of the human cost of
all that complicated beauty. Without preaching or sentimentalizing, he focuses
on the workings of caste and class, on the speed with which India is changing
and on its striking contrasts: the "stick-thin" bicycle-rickshaw drivers
pedaling past billboards advertising Japanese electronics.

Mr. Lewis's journey begins in rarely visited Bihar, India's poorest state, and
takes him to areas whose governments discourage tourism, "sensitive" regions
with restive tribal populations. By the time he meets the Bondas, with "their
capacity for sudden and deadly wrath," and the Koyas, who pressure their women
to marry younger men (because, as they rationalize it, they'll need younger
husbands as providers in their old age), and hears about the Murias, who
officially discourage sexual fidelity (since intense attachments are held to
threaten the communal spirit), Mr. Lewis seems a bit weary. Even so, we're
grateful to him for going where we will probably never go and reporting on a
world that may soon cease to exist.

The surface that the novelist and essayist Stephen Harrigan breaks is that of
the water, and even readers who never enjoyed watching Jacques Cousteau (as much
as they thought they should have) may find themselves drawn to WATER AND LIGHT:
A Diver's Journey to a Coral Reef (277 pp., Houghton Mifflin, $19.95). Moving,
intelligent and, in the best sense, literary, Mr. Harrigan's account of the
months he spent diving in the Caribbean, off Grand Turk Island, begins with a
haunting evocation of the "brutal, unappeasable longing" he felt as a boy when
his mother read to him from Charles Kingsley's novel "The Water Babies."

PACKING scuba gear, aquatic field guides and the poems of Wallace Stevens, Mr.
Harrigan sets out to satisfy his childhood desire to become an undersea
creature, to "slip, unobstructed, from one dimension to another." "Water and
Light" is packed with precisely the kind of information that we want to see
salvaged from the deep: intriguing facts about coral colonies, about the
personality quirks and sex lives of assorted mollusks and fish. Like Peter Canby
and Norman Lewis, Stephen Harrigan is anchored in reality; he knows that the
environment he's describing is in serious jeopardy. At the same time, he has
made this book sparkle with his remarkable ability to discuss the metaphysical
and spiritual aspects of underwater exploration without ever sounding saccharine
or murky.

Though he's no less determined to penetrate the surface, Richard Goodman is more
firmly rooted in terra firma. His experience of travel sticks close to the
ground -- specifically, the hard-packed but fertile clay of Provence. FRENCH
DIRT: The Story of a Garden in the South of France (203 pp., Algonquin, $16.95)
takes us more or less chronologically through the year that Mr. Goodman and his
Dutch girlfriend spent in an idyllic rental house in a tiny village with no
cafe, not much public life and few opportunities for two strangers to meet its
211 inhabitants.

Resolved to join in the life of the community, Mr. Goodman (a freelance writer
who has also apprenticed as a French chef) offers to work in a vineyard in
exchange for firewood. Soon after, he borrows a plot of land on which to grow a
garden, a project that becomes for him both mission and obsession, and that his
neighbors view first with curiosity, then with sympathy and a deepening sense of
involvement. The vital questions of when to water and plant give Mr. Goodman and
the villagers something to talk about, and there's a genuine sweetness about the
way that cucumbers and tomatoes bridge the divide of nationality; only a few
miserable skeptics may find themselves feeling that Mr. Goodman's interest in
being accepted by his fellow gardeners somewhat exceeds his curiosity about who,
exactly, they are.

Ford Madox Ford's classic 1935 travel book, PROVENCE: From Minstrels to the
Machine (illustrated, 372 pp., Ecco Press, paper, $12.95), offers a markedly
different prescription for the traveler wishing to be embraced by the people of
southern France. For Ford, the secret of Provencal conviviality is not about
tilling and weeding, but rather about soliciting detailed menu advice: "The
first thing you should do when you get to Provence is to achieve some intimacy
with a waiter and then to ask him endless questions, for the more advice you ask
of him the more he will respect you. Then, in an astonishingly short space of
time, you will become un homme connu in that town."

This "book of travel and moralising" -- whose quirky, grand and digressive style
is described by its author as mimicking the "larger form of the Opera" -- never
pretends for a moment to be an objective, coolheaded view, but is instead a
passionate and endearingly blustering hymn to a region that Ford calls one of
"only two earthly paradises. The one is in Provence. . . . The other is the
Reading Room of the British Museum." We read "Provence" more for Ford's tastes
and opinions (on subjects ranging from garlic to bullfighting, from haircuts to
grapefruit to religion) than for helpful travel tips, yet we finish the book
amazed by how much we've painlessly learned about Provence's long history and
great literary tradition.

Near the start of O CANADA: Travels in an Unknown Country (173 pp.,
HarperCollins, $20) Jan Morris suggests a reassuringly manageable method of
penetrating that country's "enormous unwieldy" exterior. "I realized the binding
element could lie not in the general but in the particular . . . in the examples
of individual places, each investigated as a separate entity." So "O Canada"
moves from east to west, hopping from city to city, from "windy, fishy" St.
John's, Newfoundland, to Vancouver, British Columbia, "whose appearance is
always seemly, whose temper is famously kind, and whose stance between the
mountains and the sea is a model of municipal etiquette."

As one expects from Jan Morris, the book is extremely lively, punctuated with
quasi hyperboles that strike us as undeniable, with "improbable" facts ("Ottawa
mints the coins of Papua New Guinea. . . . An eminent prime minister of this
capital maintained spiritualist contact with his departed terrier, Pat") and
with the telling details that Ms. Morris promises in her foreword. Yet the way
that each chapter highlights the "separate entity" of another city (most of
these essays appeared as articles in the Toronto magazine Saturday Night)
somehow undermines the possibility of real connection and depth; by the end, we
feel that our plane has set down at one too many airports, leaving us a bit
confused about where we've been and what we may have missed.

A number of newly reprinted vintage travel books offer glimpses of whole
journeys embarked on and concluded in this vaguely benighted condition. These
essays, journals and narratives from the golden age of imperialist travel are
intermittently fascinating, maddening and chilling.

By far the most empathetic is INDIAN EMBERS (397 pp., Trackless Sands Press /
Independent Publishers Group, cloth, $22.95; paper, $13.95), a memoir of the raj
from 1914 to 1919, first published in 1949 by Lady Lawrence, a novelist and the
wife of a former British officer in the Indian Civil Service. Though blithely
accepting of the basic tenets of colonial rule, Rosamond Napier Lawrence was
nonetheless capable of seeing the human face of its subjects. WOMEN'S VOICES ON
AFRICA: A Century of Travel Writings (illustrated, 280 pp., Markus Wiener /
Talman, cloth, $29.95; paper, $14.95), edited by Patricia W. Romero, covers a
long historical span, from the missionary Anna Hinderer's dispatches from
Nigeria in the 1850's to the reports of another missionary, Jocelyn Murray, from
Kenya during the Mau Mau rebellion a century later. Unlike their male
counterparts, these writers noticed -- and had interesting things to say about
-- African women. More often, they were (understandably) fixated on discomfort,
homesickness, disease and death, as well as their great, if unacknowledged,
subject: cross-cultural misunderstanding.

This is also the unacknowledged subtext of Gontran de Poncins's account of a
Chinese community in mid-1950's Vietnam, FROM A CHINESE CITY (illustrated, 256
pp., Trackless Sands / Independent Publishers Group, cloth, $19.95; paper,
$11.95). One cringes at the aristocratic Frenchman's (or his translator's) use
of the term "boyess" for the female servants in the Chinese-Vietnamese "pleasure
city" of Cholon, and we find ourselves paging nervously past de Poncins's own
pen-and-ink caricatures of Asians with which the original publisher illustrated
the text when it first appeared in 1957. Such books are less about the countries
they describe than about the way foreign cultures were once perceived by
outsiders. They move us to consider how far one can go and still see no more
(and in some cases less) than one saw at home.

LOAD-DATE: May 31, 1992

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo: Rosamond Napier Lawrence, center right, in India during World
War I. (Courtesy of Owen Lawrence)(pg. 33)

Drawing (pg. 11)

TYPE: Review

                   Copyright 1992 The New York Times Company


                              167 of 281 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

              May 31, 1992, Sunday, Late Edition - Final<Correctio
                                   Appended>

TELEVISION;
TV Shouts 'Baby' (and Barely Whispers 'Abortion')

BYLINE: By JAN HOFFMAN

SECTION: Section 2; Page 1; Column 2; Arts & Leisure Desk

LENGTH: 2436 words


Scottsdale, Ariz., in the early Summer of 1962: children shout and race
bicycles, Dad washes the car, Mom cooks supper and the cul-de-sac hums
contentedly. It is the prime of Miss Sherri Finkbine, the popular local host of
the "Romper Room" television show.

Then, overnight, Miss Sherri becomes an international scandal.

HBO's new film "A Private Matter" (which stars Sissy Spacek and has its premiere
June 20) tells the true story of Sherri Chessen Finkbine, who took thalidomide
to help her sleep in the first month of pregnancy, only to learn that European
women who had used the drug were giving birth to severely deformed children. She
told a reporter, intending to warn American women, and inadvertently drew a
worldwide firestorm of condemnation, because she also announced she wanted to
terminate the pregnancy.

"You know how it is," her boss hisses as he fires her. "We can't even say the
word pregnant on TV, and you want to have an abortion and go on doing the show?"

It has been 30 years since the Finkbine uproar, and pregnancy now gets said,
shown and widely promoted on television. But the word abortion is scarcely
heard. There have been times, particularly in the mid-80's, when entertainment
programming dealt with the issue, however timidly. But as the national debate
over abortion has heated up in anticipation of the United States Supreme Court
decision on Planned Parenthood v. Casey, it has become increasingly taboo on the
small screen.

For a medium that so freely appropriates its plots from the news, prime time has
worked unusually hard recently to sidestep one of the country's most
headline-grabbing topics. "It has been probably the most troublesome issue that
the industry has ever dealt with," says Kathryn C. Montgomery, author of the
1989 book "Target: Prime Time -- Advocacy Groups and the Struggle Over
Entertainment Television."

The complexity of the questions raised by abortion as well as the volatile
emotions it triggers make it a subject much more difficult for television to
deal with than rape, alcoholism or cancer. "It's easy to do movies on topics
like child abuse," says Alison Cross, who wrote 19 drafts of "Roe v. Wade," the
1989 NBC film that cost the network a reported $1 million in advertising,
"because everyone knows what side they're on."

Scarcely a month after NBC broadcast "Roe v. Wade," the United States Supreme
Court handed down its so-called Webster decision, signaling that the legality of
abortion was in question, and entertainment television has since become all but
silent on abortion. Ms. Cross, who received an Emmy for "Roe v. Wade," says:
"The message is if you do a program about abortion, you will get good reviews.
You will win awards. And you will lose money. This is a bottom-line business,
not a policy-education service." Many producers have concluded it is easier not
to bother.

The subject of abortion makes networks and advertisers so uneasy that on the
rare occasion it has been mentioned on a show, characters twist themselves into
elocutionary contortions rather than actually say the word. Even the
razor-tongued Murphy Brown did not use the word during an episode about whether
to continue her pregnancy.

"She would have used the word many times," said Diane English, the show's
creator, "but I wanted a lot of people to watch, and certain words have become
inflammatory and get in the way of people hearing what we wanted her to say."

"A Private Matter," along with last month's HBO documentary "Abortion: Desperate
Choices," may be the most explicit treatment of the subject ever on television.
But as Bridget Potter, HBO's senior vice president for original programming,
observes: "We're not any braver than the networks. It's just that our economic
basis is different." HBO, a viewer-subscription service, does not have to
assuage sponsors.

The networks, however, are jittery not only about potentially offending viewers
but also about the very real prospect of advertisers dropping out. In 1973, when
CBS reran an episode about the first abortion by a leading television character,
Beatrice Arthur as Maude, not a single national sponsor bought ad time, and 39
affiliates refused to broadcast the segment.

The "Maude" episode galvanized advocates on both sides of the abortion issue who
believed that popular entertainment could make a powerful, persuasive vehicle
for their positions. Anti-abortion leaders argued before the Federal
Communications Commission that its Fairness Doctrine should cover entertainment
programming as well as editorials and public affairs: Maude had the abortion on
CBS, so they should have the right to reply on CBS.

They lost the case, but the networks took heed. The Fairness Doctrine itself was
struck down in 1987; but after the "Maude" furor, the networks strove for
balance, however strained, as a way of handling volatile subjects on
entertainment shows. Many network executives and producers alike say that, as a
result, the dramatic tension of some stories has been weakened.

The Left Jabs, The Right Counters

When the networks do prepare abortion-related shows, broadcasters have two
apparently contradictory goals: they hope ratings will jump because of the
controversial subject matter, but they also hope to preempt controversy by
representing all points of view in the script. By those measures, the networks
have not been particularly successful. The ratings for "Roe v. Wade," like those
of a much-publicized "Cagney and Lacey" episode in 1985 about the bombing of an
abortion clinic, were unremarkable. And advocates on both sides generally remain
displeased by the programs, even when they have been consulted on the scripts.

Because Hollywood tends to be fairly liberal, representatives from
abortion-rights groups like the National Organization for Women and Planned
Parenthood have been consulted formally and informally; on occasion, advance
screenings have been arranged for them as well as for groups like the National
Right to Life Committee. Abortion-rights groups may appear to have greater
impact than anti-abortion ones because of their influence during the early
stages of production. But conservative groups like the Rev. Donald Wildmon's
American Family Association organize boycotts of a sponsor's products when a
show concerns abortion, thus sometimes determining whether a network will agree
to broadcast a show at all. The Freedom of Expression Network, an alliance of
Hollywood-based groups, sprang up to counter right-wing boycotts with their own
letter-writing campaigns.

"Whenever a show deals with abortion, you hear a roar from the anti-choice
community," says Loretta Ucelli, director of communications for the National
Abortion Rights Action League. "With episodes on clinic bombings, they don't
feel as much a need to enter the fray, because they want to distance themselves
from the violence and terrorism. But the more personal the choice for a
character, the louder they object."

Anti-abortion groups, however, believe that reports of their power are greatly
exaggerated. "People in Hollywood will tell you their shows are balanced,"
comments L. Brent Bozell 3d, chairman of the Media Reseach Center, a
conservative watchdog organization. "But you'll never see a program where
there's a serious discussion of abortion, and at the end the star decides to
keep the baby because of her right-to-life position."

S. Robert Lichter, author of "Watching America: What Television Tells Us About
Our Lives," notes that Hollywood has a long tradition of liberal-to-leftist
politics. "Hollywood is so overwhelmingly pro-choice that they're willing to
accept some loss of revenue to tilt a show in the direction of their beliefs.
There may be more socialist C.E.O.'s on Wall Street than there are pro-life
producers in Hollywood."

Ad Battles And Talk-Show Treatment

Both anti-abortion and pro-choice groups face a struggle when trying to place
commercials that deal with abortion. A smattering of ads from both sides have
received air time. But the sensitivity of individual stations, which make the
decision whether to broadcast an ad, and the requirements of the F.C.C. for
extensive documentation and disclaimers, have largely squelched issue-related
advertising.

The exceptions are ads for candidates for Federal office. Under F.C.C.
regulations, television stations must broadcast political ads. Thus Michael E.
Bailey, an anti-abortion candidate who recently won the Republican nomination in
Indiana's Ninth Congressional District, broadcast commercials that featured
photographs of dead, late-term fetuses.
 Besides news and documentaries, the only programs to address abortion with
regularity are the talk shows, beginning with the taped abortion shown on
"Donahue" in 1975. Those shows have been able to seize upon many permutations of
the issue and revel in the raucous debate they engender.

The Plots Thicken, And So Do Waistlines

When a character does have an abortion on a prime-time show, the reasons must be
so compelling and numerous that viewers could hardly quarrel with her decision.
On an episode of "China Beach," the character played by Ricki Lake got pregnant
after a tender one-night encounter with a soldier who had a girlfriend at home.
Her decision to have the abortion, which included the almost obligatory penalty
of a near-fatal botch, was prompted largely by the knowledge that if she kept
the child, she would have to return to the United States, thus abandoning her
cherished tour of duty in Vietnam.

Increasingly now, when a character becomes pregnant, she avows her right to
choose even as she chooses to keep the baby, as was the case with Susannah,
played by Patricia Kalember, on "Thirtysomething," and Murphy Brown. Diane
English concedes that once Murphy Brown got pregnant, she really had to have the
baby. "If I went to CBS and said, 'I'd like Murphy to have an abortion,' it
would have been a long, hard struggle, and I can't say whether they'd stand
behind me."

In another plot twist, a character will have the baby but recite a tear-stained
memory about having had an abortion years ago, as Lacey did on the abortion
episode of "Cagney and Lacey." Perhaps the most circuitous plot was on a 1990
episode of "Roseanne": the star thought she was pregnant, restated her belief in
choice but decided to have the baby, only to learn that the pregnancy was a
false alarm.

Nowhere on prime time does pregnancy-related soul-searching receive the Gothic
treatment that it does on daytime soap operas. "Writers will fall all over
themselves to avoid an abortion," says Meredith Berlin, editor at large of Soap
Opera Digest. "Miscarriage is a convenient out. So is falling down stairs or off
a horse. Or a hysterical pregnancy."

Abortions are in short supply on the soaps, but the first one predates Maude's
by almost a decade. In 1964 Pat Matthews, a character on "Another World," had
what was referred to as an "illegal operation," a back-alley abortion that left
her unable to bear children.  The archvillainess Erica Kane on "All My Children"
also had an infamous abortion, in 1973. Agnes Nixon, the show's head writer,
says that that was the last time she presented the subject: "We do issues about
which the public needs to be informed, and the public already knows plenty about
abortion. We don't do something just to be controversial."

In the mid-80's a "Young and the Restless" good girl, Ashley Abbott, had what
may have been the last abortion on a soap opera. What happened next, says Ms.
Berlin, was emblematic of the genre's anxiety about the subject. "She had a
total breakdown and went to an insane asylum. That was her punishment."

Topical Dramas In More Tolerant Times

In the mid-80's, a handful of programs broadcast at least one episode on
abortion. "Hill Street Blues" and "Spenser: For Hire" tackled the subject. The
creators of "St. Elsewhere" made a point of having at least one abortion-related
show during each of its six seasons. "We weren't trying to sell the American
public a line of thought, but we wanted to raise the question from different
angles without being preachy or political," says Tom Fontana, the show's head
writer. "We always had the woman go through with the abortion, because her not
having it seemed such an easy out. Of course in those years, we thought Roe v.
Wade was safe."

But most of today's television series remain quiet. Linda Bloodworth-Thomason,
the creator of the CBS sitcom "Designing Women," says she has not done an
abortion episode because she didn't think she could "illuminate the issue in a
more meaningful way than the press already had."

"Abortion is coming to such a head that we may have to do it," she says. "But
it's tough when you're doing a comedy and people see that favorite character
week after week and remember what happened to her."

Rosalyn Weinman, NBC's vice president of broadcast standards and practices, says
that network caution about introducing topics like abortion on sitcoms is more
than warranted.

"The paradox is that the issues that are the most complicated and compelling are
also the ones that can offend," says Ms. Weinman. "The real terror is taking a
serious issue and trivializing it."



MURPHY'S CHOICES

If it were up to Vice President Dan Quayle, the distinctly unmarried Murphy
Brown would never have had sex in the first place -- much less a baby. (In Mr.
Quayle's vision of prime time, only people who are married -- to each other --
and animals on PBS should have sex.)

But by the time the Vice President tuned into "Murphy Brown," it was too late
for the CBS series' creator, Diane English, to erase the infamous episode in
which Murphy (Candice Bergen, in photograph) and her ex-husband indulged in a
wild moment of passion (on her desk, no less). And although Murphy declares
herself pro-choice in the episode in which she learns she is pregnant, abortion
on a network prime-time sitcom was never really an option.

Oh, for the days of "Father Knows Best" and "Leave It to Beaver," when
television was all apple pie and children whose families didn't measure up cried
bitterly into their pillows and wished for parents like Ward and June.

Since those days are gone, here are some of the life style choices Mr. Quayle
might have wanted Murphy to make:

* Discover the pregnancy was hysterical.

* Remarry her ex and bicker miserably ever after.

* Give the baby to her married co-worker Corky Sherwood-Forrest to raise, and
take on the role of doting spinster aunt.

* Leave the baby on the Quayles' doorstep for Marilyn to bring up as a proper
Republican.

* Marry Jerry Brown and take the family to Calcutta to work for Mother Teresa.

* Start the Hester Prynne Home for Unwed Mothers, providing shelter for the
likes of Molly Dodd and Carla the barmaid on "Cheers."

* Make all of this season's episodes turn out to be a dream. -- Jan Benzel

LOAD-DATE: May 31, 1992

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photos: Aidan Quinn and Sissy Spacek in "A Private Matter," a new HBO
film about a "Romper Room" host who was ostracized when she had an abortion.
(Randy Tepper/HBO); A 1973 episode of the CBS series "Maude" sparked
anti-abortion protests. (Jerry Engel); Candice Bergen (CBS)(pg. 27)

Drawings (pg. 1,27)

CORRECTION-DATE: May 31, 1992, Sunday

CORRECTION:

Because of an editing error, an article on page 1 of the Arts and Leisure
section today about televi sion's portrayal of abortion misstates the source of
decisions on broadcast ing a special-interest group's com mercial on an issue.
Individual televi sion stations and networks set their requirements for
documentation and disclaimers and judge whether to ac cept the ads; the Federal
Communi cations Commission does not.

                   Copyright 1992 The New York Times Company


                              168 of 281 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                   May 31, 1992, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

Hidden Hollywood

BYLINE: By ALESSANDRA STANLEY

SECTION: Section 9; Page 1; Column 5; Styles of The Times

LENGTH: 2182 words

DATELINE: LOS ANGELES


The young Hollywood agent was at his regular table at Joss, a fashionable
Chinese restaurant here, looking tanned and casually elegant in an Italian silk
tie and a boxy suit from Barney's New York. There was little to distinguish him
from half a dozen other young Hollywood agents and writers picking at $13 plates
of prawns, sipping sparkling water and talking deals. Except one thing.

Deep in his heart, he said, he cheered when the convicted murderer Robert Alton
Harris was executed in San Quentin last month. During the Senate hearings on the
nomination of Clarence Thomas to the Supreme Court, he felt certain that Anita
Hill was lying. He even thought Dan Quayle might have had a point about Murphy
Brown.

He is a closet conservative, who agreed to discuss his political views only on
the condition that his identity be withheld. In Hollywood he is not alone.
There are many other people in the entertainment industry who say they do not
feel free to express their views. They describe themselves as Hollywood's only
persecuted minority, victims of what one writer called "reverse McCarthyism."

"It is not socially acceptable to be conservative," said Lionel Chetwynd, one of
few film makers in Hollywood willing to speak openly. Mr. Chetwynd said he had
been a virtual pariah ever since his patriotic film about Vietnam POW's, "Hanoi
Hilton," was dismissed as right-wing propaganda by Hollywood's intelligentsia.
(The film was not a commercial success.) In a business where judgments about
talent and ability are often subjective, Mr. Chetwynd argued that "being liked
and well thought of can be the difference between making a living and bone-
chilling obscurity."

For every outspoken conservative movie star -- Arnold Schwarzenegger, Tom
Selleck, Charlton Heston -- there are any number of actors, writers and
producers who say they dare not deviate from the liberal consensus that
symbiotically binds studio executives and celebrity advocates, party-givers and
deal makers. Contrary to an assertion made in Robert Altman's new movie, "The
Player," not all Hollywood deals are made at Alcoholics Anonymous meetings. Some
are still conducted at Democratic fund-raisers and Oxfam benefits.

Los Angeles and neighboring Orange County may be home to some of the most
conservative communities in the country, but Hollywood has always been a liberal
enclave. There, charity begins at the studio, and benefits for the homeless or
against apartheid are often viewed as places where agents and writers can
buttonhole executives and actors who do not return their phone calls.

"I did go to a concert for the Christic Institute," the Hollywood agent said
weakly, referring to a recent star-studded benefit for the liberal
public-interest law firm. To conservatives, the institute, like Jane Fonda and
Federal excise taxes, is a bete noire. He added sheepishly, "But I made my wife
pay for the tickets."

Michael Medved, a film critic for PBS and a conservative, calls such people
"Marrano conservatives," likening them to Spanish Jews who tried to pass as
Catholics during the Inquisition.

There are celebrities whose political views are gossiped about almost as much as
movie star romances. They include Mel Gibson, Dennis Hopper, Kevin Costner,
Steven Spielberg, David Lynch and even Denzel Washington, the actor who plays
Malcolm X in Spike Lee's latest film.

Rumors about Mr. Washington's views being conservative apparently began
circulating after he told an interviewer he did not wish to do nude scenes, his
publicist said.

Mr. Costner baffles Hollywood because he supported George Bush in the 1988
Presidential campaign, has played golf with the President and has been a guest
at the White House. On the other hand, he made "Dances With Wolves," a paean to
Native Americans, and investigated a right-wing conspiracy in Oliver Stone's
film "J.F.K." Mr. Costner declined to be interviewed. Stephen Rivers, his agent,
said, "Kevin is not doing anything political, and he does not talk about
politics."

In Hollywood, when people say they do not discuss politics, it is often seen as
a tip-off that they secretly support right-to-work laws or once sent a check to
Jonas Savimbi, the Angolan guerrilla leader. Trendy liberals like Rob Lowe, Ron
Silver or Morgan Fairchild, after all, never tire of airing their views.

Some conservatives complain that they are viewed with the same alarm and
mistrust as leftists were in the 1940's and 1950's. And a few echo the
furtiveness -- and paranoia -- of old-time Hollywood reds in the days of the
blacklist. When asked to name other conservatives, one television producer took
on the indignant tones of Lillian Hellman testifying before the House Committee
on Un-American Activities. "It is wrong to 'out' people," she said, urgently.
"It would only fuel the fire, particularly after the riots." Reluctantly, and
only on the condition of anonymity, she admitted that though she was not now --
nor had she ever been -- a member of the Republican Party, she had been to a few
meetings.

Of course, these conservatives are not facing the risk of jail sentences for
refusing to tell on their friends, and many in Hollywood are skeptical about the
talk of discrimination and thwarted careers, suggesting that some might be using
their politics as an excuse for failure.

"That is ridiculous," said Pat Kingsley, a publicity agent, when asked if she
knew of writers or actors who had not gotten work because of their views. Ms.
Kingsley, whose well-known clients include Candice Bergen and Sally Field, said:
"Studios just want actors who can bring money into the box office. They could
care less about politics."

Many conservative celebrities declined to be interviewed. Charlton Heston was in
the Middle East, filming another Bible epic.

Tom Selleck said, "I don't feel persecuted; I feel frustrated." The actor
complained that even though he took fairly moderate stands on most issues, in
Hollywood he was thought of as a political Neanderthal. "If you fit outside the
narrow parameters of political correctness, they question your compassion," he
added. "That's why a lot of people don't speak up."

Morgan Paull, a former character actor, said he became a talent agent because he
stopped getting parts after he joined Mr. Heston in opposing political activism
by the Screen Actors Guild under Ed Asner's leadership in the early 80's.

Mr. Chetwynd put it this way: "If you want to stand with the Sun King at
Versailles, then you have to think like Versailles."

One writer who demanded that he not be identified said that the atmosphere in
Hollywood was less like McCarthyism than like "anti-Semitism in the 40's."

"When they need you they'll use you, but behind your back you will be disdained
or trivialized," he said.

There could not have been a more poignant illustration of conservatives' lament
that they are "socially unacceptable" than a recent debate on the power of the
Los Angeles Police Department. The debate was sponsored by the American Forum, a
conservative group in Hollywood that was founded by David Horowitz, a writer.
Despite the timeliness of the topic, fewer than 150 people gathered in a
ballroom of the Bel Age Hotel below Sunset Boulevard. Most of them were older,
suburban and distinctly lacking in Hollywood mystique.

"We're second-thoughters," said Lowell Cheyette, an aspiring songwriter, meaning
that he and his wife, Roxane, were 1960's radicals who later repented. Under his
tan, he looked gloomy. "The left is in our face all the time," he continued.
"It's like a fraternity; if you're not part of it, you don't exist." He added
that he would have had a more promising career if conservative artists and
executives had been willing to be mentors to other conservatives. "They're
afraid to speak up or stand out," he said.

The most recognizable face at the event was a character actress who refuses to
be identified as a supporter on American Forum's mailings lest her association
with the group affect her family's real-estate business.

This weekend, the Show Coalition, a nonprofit liberal organization that
mobilizes celebrities on behalf of social causes, planned to hold a daylong
conference at the Sony Studios on racism and domestic issues. More than 300
people were expected to turn up, including several studio heads, top agents,
Gov. Bill Clinton, Kevin Costner, Patrick Swayze, Alfre Woodward and Jimmy
Smits.

"I think it is a little tough for conservatives," said Patricia Duff Medavoy,
who founded the coalition and whose husband, Mike Medavoy, is chairman of
Tristar Pictures. "Its not that their views will not get them work or a certain
part," she said. "But they may not feel they are in like-minded company. They
can be tarred with the brush of not being compassionate."

Ms. Medavoy, one of Hollywood's more prominent and glamorous people active in
politics, suggested that Hollywood can at times lack compassion for people
suspected of not being compassionate. "Even I sort of feel it," she said. "If
views are not in line with what is considered liberal, there is a small sense of
being disloyal."

She gave as an example the "clash" between protecting freedom of expression and
her concern about excessive violence in movies. "You can't deal with those
issues from the right; you get rejected at the outset," she said. "If you are
inside the circle, people are more willing to listen."

If you are successful all the time, "you can be a member of the S.S. and nobody
will care," said John Milius, a writer and director whose screenplays
("Apocalypse Now," "Dirty Harry" and "Magnum Force") have proved more popular
than some of his recent directorial efforts ("Flight of the Intruder").

He said he had been effectively "blacklisted" as a director. His box-office
flops were not forgiven, he claimed, while those of directors whose films had
leftist messages were.

"It weighs 10 times heavier against me," he said. "If you don't share the
politically correct vision, then you are an outlaw, you are hunted, there is a
price on your head, and if they catch you, they will hang you." (This could
explain why Mr. Milius spends his free time practicing his aim at a gun club
outside Los Angeles with Clint Eastwood and Steven Spielberg.)

Mr. Milius said he felt slightly avenged during the recent Los Angeles riots,
when liberal colleagues ("people who hadn't spoken to me in five years") began
calling and asking him to lend them a gun. "I said, 'Sorry, they're all being
used,' " he recalled with relish.

There are also those who thrive on martyrdom. Robert Carnegie is the director of
Playhouse West, a small acting school in the San Fernando Valley. He says that
Hollywood has branded him as a "fascist" for his troupe's most recent play,
"Welcome Home Soldier," a three-hour drama illustrating the callous way soldiers
returning from Vietnam were treated by hippie leftists. The play has a huge
following among veterans but has not caught on as well with the public at large.

Mr. Carnegie said he structured his play on Clifford Odets's "Waiting for
Lefty," and insists that its pro-military message is as controversial in today's
Hollywood as Odets's pro-labor drama once was. "Its the same mentality that gave
birth to the blacklist," Mr. Carnegie said of his critics. Yet reviews of the
play have mostly been favorable, and in Hollywood Mr. Carnegie mainly seems to
have been overlooked. Nevertheless, he appears determined to do Hollywood
battle. His next theatrical production is entitled, "Cop Is Not a Dirty Word."

Conservatives, like high school pariahs, tend to gather in small groups and
obsessively study signs of politically correct behavior at the studios. Several
are still fuming over the fact that in 1990, writers at Lorimar Studios demanded
that the Robert Taylor building be renamed because the actor had cooperated with
the House committee in 1947.

A common lament of conservatives in Hollywood is that it is impossible to make a
serious movie with a conservative bent (Rambo and Steven Seagal movies don't
count). "You could not get a movie made today about a white kid who charges
reverse discrimation to get into law school," said Bob Gale, a screenwriter who
wrote "Back to the Future." "But look at all the movies that get made with
liberal themes," he added, citing three recent flops about the rain forest and
two about apartheid.

Mr. Chetwynd likes to illustrate the Hollywood mindset he deplores by acting out
a meeting he had with a young network executive on making a television movie
about Canadian soldiers who undertook a suicidal raid on the French city of
Dieppe during World War II.

After Mr. Chetwynd outlined the plot, she responded: "I get it! It's about
bloodthirsty generals who send the men to their death." Mr. Chetwynd said he
replied, "Actually, the soldiers wanted to go, and their officers grieved."

Mr. Chetwynd said the executive looked puzzled. "So, who is the enemy?" she
asked.  When he replied, "Well, Hitler," she shrugged impatiently. "No, no!" she
said, "I mean the real enemy!"

LOAD-DATE: May 31, 1992

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photos: Who is the conservative at any Hollywood gathering? Many in the
movie industry say it is necessary to camouflage their political views. (Michael
Jacobs)(pg. 1); Kevin Costner; Steven Speilberg; Mel Gibson; Shannen Doherty.
(pg. 9)

                   Copyright 1992 The New York Times Company


                              169 of 281 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                   May 31, 1992, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

WWII IS REPLAYED IN HILLS OF BOSNIA

BYLINE: By JOHN F. BURNS,  Special to The New York Times

SECTION: Section 1; Page 8; Column 1; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 754 words

DATELINE: PALE, Bosnia and Herzegovina, May 30


The old man stiffened as the vehicles approached the fresh-cut pine trunk
serving as a roadblock, his bolt-action rifle at the ready. His uniform was a
musty relic of the Chetniks of World War II, guerrillas who took to the
mountains to fight the Nazis, and his golden-beret badge was a double-headed
eagle, emblem of a medieval Serbian dynasty.

"Attention! Attention!" he said, pointing down the winding mountain road leading
toward Sarajevo, the capital of Bosnia and Herzegovina.

For several days this week, Serbian military commanders in the Romanija region
of eastern Bosnia have been on alert for Muslim Slav guerrillas who roam the
Alpine terrain, hijacking Serbian supply trucks, ambushing Serbian militiamen,
and avenging in any way they can the disaster that has befallen their people.
Until recently, the Muslims were dominant in eastern Bosnia.

Outnumbered and outgunned by the Serbs, with tens of thousands of them driven
from their homes, the Muslims nonetheless pose a continuing threat near the
border with the Serbian republic. This makes a challenge of any trip from
Belgrade to the political and military headquarters that the Serbs have
established here at Pale, 10 miles from Sarajevo.

Partisans and Chetniks

What travelers experience is an eerie replay of World War II, when the Nazi
invasion drove the resistance into the Bosnian mountains. Two guerrilla groups
-- the Communist Partisans and the royalist Chetniks, backed by American and
British arms drops -- fought to free Yugoslavia from Hitler.

Now, many of the surviving old fighters, joined by sons and grandsons, are at
war again. This time they are on the Serbian side, defending the towns once
occupied by the Germans and their collaborators against a new generation of
"mountain men" -- the Muslims.

The war is waged with mortars and artillery shells, which boomed tonight across
the 6,000-foot mountains that separate Sarajevo from Pale. But outside Sarajevo
it is a guerrilla struggle, with many of the Serbs clad in uniforms pulled from
attic trunks and armed with old Mauser pistols and Lee-Enfield rifles of wartime
vintage.

At the formerly Muslim town of of Visegrad, a bridge across the Drina River is
defended by Serbian teachers, waiters and mechanics manning a 1939 Sherman tank,
a relic of American armament supplied to Yugoslavia after Tito broke with Stalin
in 1948.

It was in towns along the way like Rogatica, 60 miles east of Sarajevo, that
Serbs set about on what their extremists call "ethnic purification."

The busy timber and textile town had a population of 21,000 until the fighting
started in April, more than 60 percent Muslim. Less than 1,500 remain, almost
all Serbs. The killing in the region has frightened Serbs, too. Their departure
has left a string of ghost towns.

The Serbian Government maintains that it has been a bystander in the Bosnian
fighting, sympathetic to ethnic Serbs who feared Muslim domination in an
independent Bosnia and Herzegovina, but not provoking them.

But much along the way in eastern Bosnia suggests that the ethnic Serbian troops
aim for unification with Belgrade. The word "Srbija," meaning Serbia, is
scrawled on the canvas covers of supply trucks, and road signs in towns with the
word "Bosnia" in their names have "Serbia" painted in.

At Pale, the Serbs' sense of isolation has been heightened by the threat of
United Nations economic sanctions.

Even as the Security Council was preparing the sanctions it imposed on Serbia
today, ethnic Serbs continued efforts to drive Muslims from a wide area of
eastern Bosnia. Travelers who reached Pale on Friday from Vlasenica, a village
not far from the river boundary between Serbia and Bosnia, reported seeing
Muslim houses set afire, apparently by Serbian militias.

The travelers, who included Western reporters, said they had seen a group of 20
Muslim women and children walking west in the mountains outside Vlasenica, with
personal possessions on their backs. They also reported seeing farm animals in
pastures that seemed seriously underfed, apparently because their Muslim owners
had fled.

For some of those leading the Serbian cause, the mood is apocalyptic. Todor
Dutina, a professor who heads the new Serbian News Agency, said:

"The United States must choose -- accept that Bosnia must be divided into three
states, Serb, Muslim and Croat, or face a war like you saw in Vietnam. If we
have to, we will take to the mountains, and we will stay there 50 years, but we
will never give up."

LOAD-DATE: May 31, 1992

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo: Flowers were placed at the site in downtown Sarajevo, the
capital of Bosnia and Herzegovina, where 18 people were killed and 150 wounded
in a mortar attack on Wednesday as the victims waited to buy bread. (Associated
Press)

Map of Bosnia and Herzegovina, indicating Pale.

                   Copyright 1992 The New York Times Company


                              170 of 281 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                   May 31, 1992, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

THE 1992 CAMPAIGN: Undeclared Candidate;
Perot Carries His Message To Arkansas

BYLINE: By MICHAEL KELLY,  Special to The New York Times

SECTION: Section 1; Page 20; Column 1; National Desk

LENGTH: 827 words

DATELINE: LITTLE ROCK, Ark., May 30


Ross Perot, settling into the swing of his anti-politician campaign, delivered a
speech here today that hit political hot buttons with the dexterity of a court
stenographer, concluding with a startlingly harsh attack on President Bush.

Mr. Perot, who has repeatedly decried the tendency of Mr. Bush and other
Presidential campaigners to indulge in personal attacks, suggested that the
President went to war in the Persian Gulf in part because he wanted to prove his
masculinity.

Mr. Perot questioned whether there was popular support in this country for a
military response to Iraq's invasion of Kuwait, saying that as President he
"would not send people onto the battlefield unless the nation is committed," and
he added, "I don't have to prove my manhood by sending anyone to war."

No Motorcades

The remark echoed a theme that ran through Mr. Perot's 35-minute talk to a group
of 3,000 supporters here in the home base of the likely Democratic Presidential
nominee, Gov. Bill Clinton. While mentioning neither Mr. Bush nor Mr. Clinton by
name, Mr. Perot repeatedly suggested a comparison between himself and the
President in terms of courage and toughness.

He cast himself as man of conspicuous bravery for daring to come to Little Rock
and walk among his supporters without the protection of bodyguards. "I came here
totally by myself," he said. "I walked down that aisle by myself. Everybody
said, 'My God, Ross, you don't understand the risk.' I looked at them and
laughed. Would you want a general afraid to go in the battlefield?"

By contrast, he said, Mr. Bush's "regal Presidency" only moved among the people
in a "motorcade two blocks long."

Several times, Mr. Perot spoke of "sissies" in Washington, telling his audience
that the kind of hard changes the nation demanded needed tough people. "There's
not going to be much of a place for sissies as we get from where we are to where
we're going," he said. And again: "We don't need any sissies around."

Bush Is the Target

Mr. Perot's speech, delivered in a convention center by the Arkansas River here,
focused far more on Mr. Bush than on Mr. Clinton, suggesting that the Texas
billionaire sees the President as his main opponent.

It suggested as well that Mr. Perot could prove be a formidable enemy for both
the Republican and the Democratic nominees, easily able to deliver the kind of
speech that taps the great dissatisfaction voters appear to have with the
traditional two-party choice this year.

The crowd Mr. Perot appeals to is an angry crowd. To these people, Mr. Clinton
and Mr. Bush are symbols of what is wrong with America and it was hard to find
anyone in the hall who would offer a good word for the man who has been
President of the country for four years or for the man who has been Governor of
this state for 12.

"Ross Perot is the only one we can trust," said Wayne Pigeon, a data systems
processor from Little Rock. "We know about George Bush already, and Bill Clinton
is no different from anyone else in Washington."

Washington 'Gangsters'

"Bill Clinton? No way, Jose," said Alice Lovey, a retiree from Fayetteville. "It
used to be Chicago was full of gangsters. Now, all the gangsters are in
Washington."

Mr. Pigeon, Ms. Lovey and the others gathered here participated in a brief
convention today to elect Mr. Perot as an independent candidate for President,
required by Arkansas law to put him on the November ballot. They heard John
Thompson, a 43-year-old Vietnam veteran, who has never involved himself in a
campaign before, introduce Mr. Perot in heroic terms, as a one-man answer to the
nation's ills.

"If anyone in American can put this country back on course, the gentleman I am
about to introduce can," he said. "Through this grass-roots campaign, we are
going to take our country back."

To these people, to this sentiment, Mr. Perot delivered a speech that any
politician would have been proud to call his own, and he won them utterly,
lifting them time and again to hollering, hooting applause.

'Crazy Aunt'

With the kind of concrete language, , homespun ancecdotes and simple humor that
made Ronald Reagan effective, Mr. Perot touched, one by one, the issues that
stir the public's outrage: high taxes, low employment, crime and, above all, the
sense that America is in decline, somehow not what it used to be.

He likened the Federal budget deficit to "the crazy aunt tucked away in the room
upstairs nobody talks about." He drove home the idea that the condition of the
nation was not an accident, but was the result of Washington insiders'
indifference.

"If you are satisfied with the way things are, don't vote for me," he said. "If
you can go to bed and sleep soundly at night happy with the state of America's
cities, then don't vote for me. If you can live with the fact that the words
'Made in America' are no longer the world standard for excellence, you don't
want me up there, so don't vote for me."

LOAD-DATE: May 31, 1992

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo: Supporters of Ross Perot at a gathering yesterday in Little
Rock, Ark., to put him on the November ballot in his expected campaign against
Gov. Bill Clinton of Arkansas and President Bush. (David Gottschalk for The New
York Times)

                   Copyright 1992 The New York Times Company


                              171 of 281 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                   May 31, 1992, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

As Marxism Fails, Ho Chi Minh City Becomes More Like a Saigon Redux

BYLINE: By HENRY KAMM,  Special to The New York Times

SECTION: Section 1; Page 10; Column 1; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 1185 words

DATELINE: HO CHI MINH CITY, Vietnam, May 25


A big red sign on a bustling central square exhorts citizens to work to make the
former Saigon worthy of the name it was given when the Communists conquered it
in 1975. Underneath, as if in mockery of Ho Chi Minh, the founder of Vietnamese
Communism, an even bigger sign plugs a Japanese brand of cameras.

All around the square, and throughout the center of this city of 4.5 million
people, signs trumpet the names of consumer products of the non-Communist East
and West.

In Vietnam's attempt to extract itself from the economic lurch in which the
Soviet Union's collapse left it, Ho Chi Minh City represents the contradictions
of a nation led by dogmatic Communists trying to have their cake and eat it. The
leaders want to maintain absolute power through constant repetition of slogans
few believe in, yet reap the benefits inherent in the economic energies of its
people and the opening of this potentially rich country to development through
free enterprise.

What would Ho Chi Minh say if he could see Vietnam's surrender to capitalism
since the decline of the Soviet Union deprived it of its main source of aid?

Ho, the Realist

"Ho Chi Minh was a very realistic personality," Maj. Gen. Tran Cong Man, an old
revolutionary and former editor of the armed forces daily, said when asked this
question in an interview in Hanoi. "He was never ideologically intransigent."

No place illustrates better than this city the pragmatism, at least in
economics, that this response conveyed. Deprived of its customary vibrancy for
years, Ho Chi Minh City now looks, at least on the surface, as Saigon did.
Officials acknowledge this with joyless smiles but without contradiction.

"We used to be called the 'Pearl of the Orient,' " said Nguyen Xuan Oanh,
managing director of the organization that guides foreign investors. "We have
lost the luster and are now trying to regain it, to catch up with the rest of
the world."

At least part of the population is indeed catching up. The products that are
advertised -- television sets, videos, stereos, watches, motorcycles, Western
beer and cigarettes -- are plentiful in shops. The central market is rich in
gold jewelry and textiles. Officials profess to be puzzled over where the money
comes from, because wages are pitifully low.

Wages Between $10 and $20

Laborers earn between $10 and $20 a month if they work steadily, but many work
only when they find a day's job and eke out less. What officials cannot admit,
for the sake of appearance, is that a "gray" economy, totally out of official
circuits, is the engine that drives Ho Chi Minh City.

Three main sources of capital are the fuel: gold hidden since 1975, largely in
Cholon, Ho Chi Minh City's bustling Chinatown; overseas Chinese from Hong Kong
and Southeast Asia who invest through family connections, and overseas
Vietnamese, refugees since 1975, who send substantial remittances to their
families.

Moreover, much of the foreign investment so far -- optimistically estimated by
the Chamber of Commerce in Hanoi at $1.5 billion -- has flowed to this city if
it has not gone into the petroleum industry. It finances light manufacturing and
an expanding tourist industry. Taiwan and Hong Kong are its main sources.

The city's partly restored glitter makes for a glaring contrast between poverty
and conspicuous consumption.  Many Vietnamese see the spreading gulf between the
newly rich and the permanently poor as a harsh judgment of the ruling Communist
Party and its oratory.

Faith in the Dollar

Few, however, dare to say so in public. Dr. Duong Quynh Hoa, former Health
Minister in the Communist Government of South Vietnam until reunification of the
country in 1976, is an exception.

"People have no confidence in the Government, only in the dollar," Dr. Hoa said
in an interview in her office at the formerly French Grall Hospital. "Our young
people believe in nothing. All they want is to get rich.

"Two societies exist today. There is a large agricultural society, which is
slowly overcoming much hardship. And then, look at this city. You see the
consumer society in all its splendor. And Hanoi has taken over the bad from the
South -- not the knowledge of the world, not its management experience, only its
consumption habits."

Skepticism and disbelief were themes that recurred in many conversations, not
only with the young. "Seventeen years of emptiness," a man in his 50's said.

Dress Code is Dropped

An American visiting after an absence of many years sees and hears much that
sometimes creates an illusion of having left only yesterday. Most of the earlier
strictures ordering the population to act and dress like the more austere North
Vietnamese have been abandoned. In fact, Hanoi today has copied more from the
Saigon it defeated than Ho Chi Minh City has from the victorious Hanoi.

Cafes and shops of all descriptions take up the street levels of most buildings
in Ho Chi Minh City and the sidewalks in front. Hawkers thread their way among
them, the music of pirated tapes blaring from cassettes. Taxis are rare, but
more pedicabs than ever compete for fares.

Traffic is even more chaotic than before, although the military vehicles are
gone. Motorcycles and bicycles make streets perilous by breaking the guarantees
of safety provided by one-way streets and traffic circles.

A boisterous Sunday evening courting ritual has resumed after an interruption of
many years: swarms of young couples on motorcycles roar down Unification Street,
formerly Freedom Street, from the Roman Catholic Cathedral to the Saigon River,
and remount another street to repeat the circuit.

'Hey, Joe!' Is Back

Young women have gladly put away the white or blue shirts worn outside dark
trousers that were once their recommended uniform, and display again the sense
of fashion for which Saigon was known. The silken ao dai, the tight, high-necked
national costume, has been officially restored to favor.

Gone also is the automatic identification of Westerners by street people as
"lien xo," or Soviet. "Hey, Joe!" which greeted American soldiers, is back in
style, and the surest way of getting rid of a persistent beggar or hawker is to
reply "lien xo," understood as a pauper's oath.

The victims of a nation too long at war, too long impoverished, have not
vanished, however. Maimed beggars, prostitutes and thieving children besiege
visitors.

"Openness multiplies social problems," said Nguyen Son, a spokesman for the
city. He said the problem had been solved, but now the new influx of rich
foreigners into a city with 300,000 unemployed, especially among the young, had
caused a relapse.

Dr. Hoa, a 62-year-old pediatrician from an upper-class Saigon family, worked
for the pro-Communist forces since her youth and joined the Vietcong in the
jungle during the 1968 Tet offensive. She was named Health Minister in 1969 but
quit the party in 1976 because it "kept me from speaking my mind."

"I have always been a revolutionary," she said. "I fought for 30 years, and now
Saigon looks as if the old regime were back."

LOAD-DATE: May 31, 1992

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo: In Ho Chi Minh City, Vietnam, signs trumpet the names of
consumer products from the East and West. (Henry Kamm/The New York Times)

Map of Vietnam, indicating Ho Chi Minh City.

                   Copyright 1992 The New York Times Company


                              172 of 281 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                   May 31, 1992, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

Reports Say Perot Offered Island in U.S. Drug Fight

BYLINE: AP

SECTION: Section 1; Page 21; Column 1; National Desk

LENGTH: 466 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, May 30


Ross Perot offered to buy a Caribbean island to help the Government catch drug
smugglers, two newspapers reported today.

The Philadelphia Inquirer and The Washington Post, quoting a former Customs
Service official and a 1981 Customs Service memorandum, said Mr. Perot proposed
establishing a network of profit-making businesses, one of which, an aircraft
refueling station, would be operated by Perot-financed commandos who would be
informers for the Customs Service.

Frank E. Chadwick, a former special agent in charge of the service's Houston
office, said he had discussed the plan with Mr. Perot.

Tracking Smugglers

After luring drug pilots to the island, Mr. Chadwick said, Mr. Perot's informers
were to secretly plant electronic tracking devices on their aircraft, photograph
the planes and supply the Customs Service with information about their movement.

Mr. Perot, a Texas billionaire who is an undeclared candidate for President,
would have kept the revenue from the sale of fuel or other provisions to the
drug smugglers, Mr. Chadwick said.

In a memo dated March 11, 1981, Mr. Chadwick said the agency "truly cannot
afford to ignore or reject" Mr. Perot's offer. But senior Customs Service
officials vetoed the plan.

The Inquirer reported that Mr. Perot abandoned the proposal after failing to get
quick Government approval.

A spokesman for Mr. Perot, James Squires, said that Mr. Perot had "no personal
recollection of the details" of the Customs Service project.

Offers of Help

"Over the years, he has offered his help to the United States Government in
combating drug trafficking," Mr. Squires told the Post when asked about the
proposal.

In 1978, Mr. Perot arranged the rescue of two of his Electronic Data Systems
employees who were being held in Iran.

He has also financed private attempts to locate and rescue any military
personnel missing in action in Vietnam and, at the request of Oliver L. North,
the former National Security Council aide, agreed to provide ransom money to
free American hostages in Lebanon.

The Inquirer reported that Mr. Perot made the proposal when he headed an
antidrug campaign in Texas.

Search for an Island

The newspaper quoted Mr. Chadwick as saying that Mr. Perot approached him and
asked how he could help the Federal antidrug efforts. Mr. Chadwick said he had
replied that halting the offshore drug flow would help most.

The report said that Mr. Perot hired Richard Meadows, a retired Army colonel,
and that Mr. Meadows scouted the Caribbean looking for a suitable island.

Mr. Meadows recruited six former United States military counter-terrorist
commandos, Mr. Chadwick told the Inquirer. Mr. Chadwick said he became
frightened when a member of the team suggested blowing up freighters carrying
drugs.

LOAD-DATE: May 31, 1992

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1992 The New York Times Company


                              173 of 281 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                   May 31, 1992, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

Dismissed From Army as Lesbian, Colonel Will Fight Homosexual Ban

BYLINE: By TIMOTHY EGAN,  Special to The New York Times

SECTION: Section 1; Page 18; Column 4; National Desk

LENGTH: 1288 words

DATELINE: TACOMA, Wash., May 30


Having served 14 months in a war zone in Vietnam, given birth to four sons and
worked daily with some of the most fragile American war veterans, Col.
Margarethe Cammermeyer has seen her share of pain and torment.

But there was a moment Thursday afternoon, at the Washington National Guard
headquarters just south of here, that broke her heart. After nearly 27 years in
the military, Colonel Cammermeyer, the chief nurse of this state's guard, was
discharged because she is a lesbian.

She wept, as did the man who was forced to dismiss her, Maj. Gen. Gregory P.
Barlow, the commander of the Washington National Guard.

But this is not the end of Colonel Cammermeyer's involvement with the Federal
Government. She said she would challenge her dismissal in Federal court, and her
lawyers have expressed the hope that her case may ultimately overturn the
49-year ban on homosexuals in the military.

Reiterating Policy

The Army refused on Friday to comment on Colonel Cammermeyer's case beyond
reiterating its policy that regards homosexuality as "incompatible with military
service." Defense Secretary Dick Cheney has said he has no plans to change the
policy, though he has dismissed one reason cited against homosexuals, that they
pose a security risk, "as something of an old chestnut."

In the last 10 years, more than 13,000 people have been discharged from all
branches of the military because they are homosexuals. But few have had better
credentials that the 50-year-old Colonel Cammermeyer, who is one of the
highest-ranking members of the military ever to be removed for her sexual
orientation.

When she was a child, her family fled the Nazis after they invaded her native
Norway in World War II. After coming to America, she joined the Army in the
early 1960's, was awarded a Bronze Star for her tour in Vietnam and in 1985 was
chosen from among 34,000 candidates nationwide as the Veterans Administration's
Nurse of the Year. While rising to the rank of chief nurse in the Washington
Army National Guard, she got her doctorate in nursing at the University of
Washington.

Her record was without blemishes, guard officials say. What derailed her career
goal of becoming the nation's chief military nurse was a security clearance
question that she was asked three years ago. After she applied for admission to
a war college, Colonel Cammermeyer went through an extensive background check.
Asked by a Pentagon official during a personal interview if she was a homosexual
-- something she said she had never been quite sure of for the last 10 years --
Colonel Cammermeyer answered yes, without hesitation.

Representing Normality

"I knew then that my career was over," she said Friday, as she strolled on the
wooded grounds of the Veterans Administration hospital here, where she works
with disabled former soldiers.

"What I hope to represent is a part of the normality of being homosexual, of not
being in leather or shaving my hair, but rather showing how much we are all
alike," she said. "If people can see the sameness of me to you, then perhaps
they won't have the walls that makes it so they have to hate us without a
cause."

The issue was fanned again on Friday when Ross Perot, the undeclared independent
candidate for President, told Barbara Walters in an interview on the ABC News
program "20/20" that he would not allow homosexuals to serve in certain Cabinet
posts.

"It will distract from the work to be done," Mr. Perot said. He also indicated
that he would not seek to overturn the ban on homosexuals in the military.

After Colonel Cammermeyer heard Mr. Perot's comments, she said, "I was
frightened by them, really frightened."

'Based on Ignorance'

Officially, the military lists seven reasons for keeping homosexuals out of the
service. These have to do with problems of morale, recruitment, discipline and
privacy, among other factors.

"I'm not a threat," Colonel Cammermeyer said. "This is a regulation that is
truly based on ignorance more than prejudice, but the two go hand in hand."

While Colonel Cammermeyer may not have the support of Mr. Cheney, her immediate
commander in chief, Gov. Booth Gardner of Washington, has fully backed her.

"The Army and the United States of America are senselessly losing an outstanding
individual who is eminently qualified to continue serving in the Washington
National Guard," said Mr. Gardner, a Democrat.

Colonel Cammermeyer has until June 11 to leave the Guard. Her discharge was
honorable, meaning she can receive her pension in 10 years, when she is 60, and
she will stay in her civilian job as head nurse at the veterans hospital.

Support From Many

She also appeared to be getting considerable support from people calling in to
radio talk shows and to her office on Friday.

The reaction here would tend to support Gallup polls over the last decade. They
have shown a steady increase in support for homosexuals in the military to a
point where a majority of people now favor overturning the ban.

At the same time, several cases that are working through the courts could
ultimately set up a challenge to the ban before the Supreme Court. In two West
Coast cases, the United States Court of Appeals for the Ninth Circuit in San
Francisco has ruled against the military.

Lawyers for Colonel Cammermeyer say her case could be the next significant
challenge to the policy.

Fascination With Military

"You couldn't have a better client," said Amy Stephson, a lawyer with the
Northwest Women's Law Clinic, which plans to file a suit in Seattle on Colonel
Cammermeyer's behalf. "She is such an asset to the service. People tend to
demonize the other side, but when you see that the other side is a gray-haired
soldier, it changes things."

Colonel Cammermeyer said she had been fascinated by the military since she was a
child. In part, she said, she joined the service because she wanted to give
something back to America for helping to defeat the Nazis. But her eyes light up
when she talks about the military's traditions.

"I love the wonder of the pomp and ceremony, and the system itself, the
discipline and morale," she said. "I really do love the military. My problem is
not with the military; it never has been. It is with the regulation that makes
me into a stereotype."

She joined the Army as student nurse in 1961. Shortly after that, she met her
husband, a career military man. When he was sent to Vietnam, she volunteered for
duty in the war as well. His orders were canceled, hers were not, and she spent
14 months in Vietnam during the worst fighting of the war, the Tet offensive in
1968. Her job was to supervise a hospital for wounded and dying soldiers.

After returning home, she became pregnant. Since the service would not allow
pregnant women to stay on, she was discharged. She had four children, all boys,
and was married for 16 years. Her divorce, she said, was bitter and painful.

Transfer to National Guard

She joined the Army Reserve in the 1970's, later transferring to the National
Guard here.

Colonel Cammermeyer said she did not realize she was a lesbian until relatively
late in her life, as part of what she called "a process of self-exploration,
understanding how it is you become a full person."

"I was an old lady by the time I figured it out, with grown kids," she said.

Two of her boys, age 15 and 17, still live with her, and one has expressed an
interest in joining the military. When he asked recently for his mother's
advice, she gave an indirect answer.

"I have a very difficult time advocating going into an organization that
discriminates," she said. "On the other hand, I firmly believe there will be a
time when this regulation will be changed."

NAME: Margarethe Cammermeyer

LOAD-DATE: May 31, 1992

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo: Col. Margarethe Cammermeyer, chief nurse of the Washington
National Guard, was discharged because she is a lesbian. (Rich Frishman for The
New York Times)

TYPE: Biography

                   Copyright 1992 The New York Times Company


                              174 of 281 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                   June 1, 1992, Monday, Late Edition - Final

METRO DIGEST

SECTION: Section B; Page 1; Column 1; Metropolitan Desk

LENGTH: 681 words



NEW YORK CITY

THE HOMELESS ON A HOUSING-GO-ROUND

Every month 150 homeless families leave temporary shelters to settle into homes
that the city calls permanent. But also every month, about 75 families, because
of personal problems or problems with city-owned apartments, move out of
subsidized housing and back onto the streets, which is to say back into the
city's bureaucratic shelter system. As a result, the city has to settle a number
of homeless families twice, which some critics see as a staggering waste of
money and time, if not a fundamental indictment of the homeless program. A1.

BANKING AGAINST URBAN CRISIS

Community Capital Bank in Brooklyn is one of three banks in the nation chartered
specifically to invest in reviving depressed neighborhoods. Since it began 18
months ago, it has nearly tripled its assets, to $18 million, granted $3 million
in loans or letters of credit and committed another $1.5 million to more than
two dozen borrowers who might have been rejected by other banks. Metro Matters.
B2.

A MAYOR ABROAD

Mayor David N. Dinkins began his weeklong mission to drum up business for New
York in Europe with a gift-buying stroll through Petticoat Lane Market in
London. With a deal on New York City's budget securely in his pocket, the Mayor
could embark on his journey emotionally upbeat and politically robust, and his
optimism seemed to rub off on the dozen or so of New York's business elite who
accompanied him. B3.

WHAT THE BUDGET BUYS

The $29.5 billion spending plan on which Mayor David N. Dinkins and City Council
leaders agreed on Saturday bears a close resemblance to the budget proposed by
the Mayor a month ago. There are no new taxes, compared with the current city
budget, some service cuts, including fewer jail beds, but also some modest
expansions in services. B3.

LABOR'S SLICE OF THE PIE

Despite Saturday's budget agreement, City Hall still faces a final fiscal
hurdle: reaching an agreement with the municipal labor unions on raises. City
officials and labor leaders will sit down this week for a new round of contract
negotiations, with unions sure to demand a share of the city's budget surplus
for their members, who are working without contracts and have not had raises for
more than a year. The Mayor, however, has said that the city is still in fiscal
straits and that the $515 million budget surplus will be used to allow the city
to avoid some borrowing. B3.

SPARKS OF BIAS IN A MIXED NEIGHBORHOOD

As Gilberto and Gladys Faria prepared to move from the home they owned in the
Throgs Neck section of the Bronx, neighbors warned them not to sell to blacks.
Early Saturday morning, someone apparently set off a small explosion in front of
the house to emphasize the point. B3.

OLD SOLDIERS AND THEIR WAR

About 50 members of Vietnam Veterans Against the War gathered in lower Manhattan
yesterday to celebrate the 25th anniversary of the group that first tapped the
anarchic energy of the war's bitter veterans and to discuss how to apply that
energy now. B2.

REGION

ANTI-KLAN TACTIC RAISES CONCERN

The Jewish Defense Organization, a small Jewish militant group, is waging a war
against the Klu Klux Klan with the help of a modern-day convenience -- the
answering machine. Angry Klan members, who say their right to privacy is being
violated, are crying foul and plan to mount a counterattack with a recorded
message of their own. B5.

BACKING THE SENATOR'S RUN

New York State's Republican Party nominated Senator Alfonse M. D'Amato for a
third term at its convention, even as a former state chairman spoke out against
Mr. D'Amato's anti-abortion stance, calling it dangerously out of step with New
York voters. B5.

NEW DISPUTE WITH DRIVERS

More than a quarter of the newspaper delivery drivers who returned to work on
Friday after a job dispute involving a distributor and The New York Times
received letters Saturday warning that they would be dismissed if their job
performance did not improve. B5.

Chronicle    B2

Traffic Map    B6

LOAD-DATE: June 1, 1992

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Summary

                   Copyright 1992 The New York Times Company


                              175 of 281 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                   June 1, 1992, Monday, Late Edition - Final

LOWER MANHATTAN JOURNAL;
One Day, the Best Hot Dogs in Hanoi

BYLINE: By JAMES BENNET

SECTION: Section B; Page 2; Column 3; Metropolitan Desk

LENGTH: 647 words


WHEN a group of young soldiers raised a makeshift banner 25 years ago at an
antiwar demonstration in New York City -- "Vietnam Veterans Against the War," it
read -- they tapped the anarchic energy of other bitter veterans, energy they
channeled for the first time into a coherent national lobbying and protest
movement.

Yesterday, 17 years after that war ended, about 50 members of the group, which
is still active, gathered in the pews of St. Paul's Chapel in lower Manhattan to
mark their anniversary by trading ideas on where to apply that energy now. Their
discussion gave a glimpse into the maturation of both the antiwar movement and
the balding or ponytailed and generally paunchy vets themselves.

As some talked about returning to Vietnam to build clinics and others about
battling military recruiters for the hearts and minds of high-school students,
speaker after speaker upended the stereotype of troops shattered by a war they
would forever hopelessly fight.

"I went to Vietnam to become a professional soldier," said Jan Barry, one of the
marchers 25 years ago, "and Vietnam turned me into a poet."

Not that the scars weren't visible. Several veterans, who came from as far as
San Francisco, sobbed as they recalled their experiences, and at these times the
brainstorming session easily segued into a support meeting.

Mark Kiselicka, a burly former marine with a graying ponytail, broke down as he
tried to explain how, as he put it, the protest group had saved his life. "Thank
you for showing me I'm not nuts," he said a bit gruffly, before pressing one
meaty hand over his eyes.

"You're O.K., Mark," called out another vet as the rest clapped.

For the most part, the veterans swapped stories about their current wars, about
how they had transferred the political activism they had learned through Vietnam
Veterans Against the War, whose spokesmen have included Ron Kovic and Senator
John F. Kerry, to other fields.

For many, the enemy is now cutbacks in Veterans Administration money to deal
with Post Traumatic Stress Disorder (P.T.S.D., whose clumsy initials flowed
easily off the veterans' tongues) and other maladies inflicted by the war.

Several spoke of helping their old enemy in Vietnam. Ed Murphy described his
plan to return with his family to help protect the environment there, while
Gordon Smith talked about the four medical clinics he has helped set up, and Joe
Bangert, with a broad grin, revealed his dream of building "Joe's Bar and Grill"
in Hanoi, where he urged his peers to retire. "We're going to have the best hot
dog and the best hamburger in town," he promised.

Some in the group criticized the veterans' approach to dealing publicly with
their experience, saying that they had mythologized the Vietnam War and so
helped cut themselves off from Americans who did not serve.

"We tend to romanticize ourselves, to build ourselves up bigger than life," said
the folk singer Country Joe McDonald, a longtime supporter of the Vietnam
Veterans Against the War who served in the Navy but not in Vietnam. "We turn off
people, because we talk about blood and guts a lot."

But several veterans argued that their service in Vietnam did set them apart,
and as a result could be a powerful tool to help others, provided they could
confront it themselves.

"I went to Vietnam half-crazy, and in Vietnam I began to go sane," said Mike
Bukovchik. Now, he said, he works to prevent violence among young people in New
York City.

Mr. Bukovchik softly recited a poem about his child's lifting a toy rifle and
shooting him between the eyes, which concluded, "Tonight I'll tuck him in, kiss
him good night, wish sweet dreams, and then go downstairs and visit with my
secret dead."

His eyes filling with tears and his voice breaking as he looked around at his
fellow veterans, he added: "We have to stop keeping these secrets."


LOAD-DATE: June 1, 1992

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Map of the southern tip of Manhattan.

                   Copyright 1992 The New York Times Company


                              176 of 281 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                  June 2, 1992, Tuesday, Late Edition - Final

U.S. Has a Starring Role At Rio Summit as Villain

BYLINE: By JAMES BROOKE,  Special to The New York Times

SECTION: Section A; Page 10; Column 1; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 698 words

DATELINE: RIO DE JANEIRO, June 1


The Earth Summit officially opens here on Wednesday, but already "villain,"
"party pooper" and "Uncle Grubby" are being used to describe the Bush
Administration, reviving anti-American sentiment rarely seen in international
forums since the Vietnam War.

"The mood in Brazil is that the United States will be the biggest villain of the
conference," Fabio Feldman, a Social Democratic congressman in Brazil, said
today. "U.S. intransigence is recreating the polarized atmosphere of the 1960's:
all civil society and the press against the U.S."

Traditionally centrist Brazilian magazines and newspapers are taking an
increasingly harsh tone, accusing the Bush Administration of draining content
from what Brazilians proudly predict to be the largest gathering of heads of
state in history.

Calling President Bush "Uncle Grubby" and "Mr. Smoke," Veja, a Brazilian
newsweekly, told its million readers on Sunday, "Bush comes to Rio as Earth
Summit enemy."

In contrast, Japan was hailed as the world's "first environmental superpower."

Bush Won't Sign Treaty

The hostility boiled over on Saturday with the news that Mr. Bush would not sign
a bio-diversity treaty when he comes here June 11 to 13. Mr. Bush only agreed to
appear briefly after timetables and targets were withdrawn from the text of a
second treaty to be signed here, on climate change.

"Our feeling is that the world is doing what it should to organize these vast
areas, and that the U.S. is not prepared to join, that the U.S. is isolated,"
said Marco Azamabuja, Brazil's chief negotiator. "What's the point of a major
treaty if the U.S. is not on board?"

American efforts to turn the tide in public opinion have been fruitless.

On Thursday, William Reilly, Administrator of the Environmental Protection
Agency, gave a long interview by satellite to journalists in Latin America and
Europe.

Jornal do Brasil, an influential daily here, printed the interview with an
explanation that Mr. Reilly "will have one of the less desirable jobs of the
Earth Summit, that of party-pooper."

Reflecting the anti-American mood here, Carlos Minc, a left-wing Rio state
deputy, posed on Friday with his new "lie-o-meter." The device, featuring a
caricature of Pinocchio, was designed to reflect mendacity levels emanating from
televised speeches from the official conference hall. For demonstration
purposes, Mr. Minc placed a "U.S.A." plaque on the device and pulled Pinocchio's
nose off the chart.

Today, the news that Mr. Bush had offered $150 million in new forest protection
aid mollified few environmentalists in a nation that has the largest expanse of
tropical forest in the world.

"We feel that the United States is trying to pay to clean their name before the
conference," said Joao Paulo Capobianco, executive director, of Brazil's largest
environmental group, SOS Mata Atlantica.

Mr. Bush's proposal includes doubling international aid to protect world forests
to $2.7 billion in 1992.

The isolation of the United States seemed to take on a physical dimension today
as reporters explored the new exhibition and office hall of the Riocentro
conference center. In this miniature world's fair, the United States has rented
the smallest office space of the eight industrialized nations.

                             --------------------


A Plea for Progress

PARIS, June 1 (Special to The New York Times) -- Scientists, writers and other
figures from 29 nations today warned Government leaders gathering at the Earth
Summit in Rio not to forsake scientific and industrial progress in the name of
the environment.

The statement, signed by 264 scientists including 53 Nobel Prize winners,
appears to be a defense against what scientists describe as the "anti-science
movement."

"Some scientists wanted to stress their ideas amid the growth of
environmentalism," said Emanuel Beaurepaire who distributed the text. "They feel
scientists do not get enough of a voice and they are afraid governments will
take decisions under pressure."

The group includes biologists, physicists, chemists, economists, writers and
politicians. Among the writers are Umberto Eco of Italy and Eugene Ionesco of
France.

LOAD-DATE: June 2, 1992

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1992 The New York Times Company


                              177 of 281 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                  June 2, 1992, Tuesday, Late Edition - Final

The High Cost of Military Prejudice

SECTION: Section A; Page 20; Column 1; Editorial Desk

LENGTH: 316 words


What an incredible waste of talent! The Army has just dismissed Col. Margarethe
Cammermeyer, one of the finest nurses and health officers in the military, as
chief nurse of the Washington State National Guard.

Never mind that she served 14 months in a war zone in Vietnam during some of the
bitterest fighting there, won a Bronze Star and was named the Veterans
Administration Nurse of the Year in 1985. All that paled next to what the
military considers her overriding sin.

Colonel Cammermeyer acknowledged during a background interview for admission to
the National War College that she is a lesbian.

Her honesty did her in, not anything visible in her life style. She is a capable
woman who was married for 16 years, raised four boys, and only later in life
realized she was a lesbian. She deeply loved the Army, including its pomp and
discipline.

And she was loved back. When forced by Army regulations to dismiss her, Maj.
Gen. Gregory P. Barlow, commander of the Washington National Guard, wept openly.
Who wouldn't shed tears over the idiocy and waste of such a policy?

Colonel Cammermeyer is just the latest casualty of a Defense Department
directive that bans homosexuals from military service while allowing them to
serve in civilian jobs. The policy has destroyed thousands of careers and lives
-- all for no good reason.

The military itself has abandoned the claim that homosexuals are susceptible to
blackmail. Its chief remaining rationales -- that they undermine morale and the
command structure -- are ludicrous when measured against the contributions of a
Colonel Cammermeyer.

That's why it was particularly disturbing to hear a Presidential candidate, Ross
Perot, endorse the benighted military ban and also say he would not allow
homosexuals in key cabinet posts.

The nation simply can't afford to keep throwing away such talent through
mindless prejudice.

LOAD-DATE: June 2, 1992

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Editorial

                   Copyright 1992 The New York Times Company


                              178 of 281 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 June 3, 1992, Wednesday, Late Edition - Final

Food Notes

BYLINE: By Florence Fabricant

SECTION: Section C; Page 7; Column 1; Living Desk

LENGTH: 854 words



Postwar Salami

At its best, Hungarian salami is tender, mild and sweet. The meat is pearled
with tiny beads of fat and is rosy in the center and deep burgundy around the
edges, becoming darker with age. The salami, which is made only in winter and
aged for 90 days, has a slightly wrinkled, chalky casing. The finest Hungarian
salami has a distinctive red, white and green band and a clover-leaf label,
which are attached at the Pick Factory in Szeged.

This salami is now being imported by Paprikas Weiss, a 100-year-old company that
had imported it before World War II. It is sold at the company's store, at 1572
Second Avenue near East 82d Street, for $5.99 a pound.

Although some Pick salami has been sold in New York for the last few years, it
does not carry the traditional label. The new Pick salami coming into this
country has a more tender, satiny texture and is of more consistent quality.

Time for Herring, Again<HJE>

 The annual herring festival has begun at the Oyster Bar and Restaurant in Grand
Central Terminal. Fresh, lightly salted matjes herring flown in from the
Netherlands, where the herring season has just begun, will be available to eat
in or to take out until around the middle of June. Herring fillets are sold two
per order for $3.95.

Show-and-Eat Chocolate

Tomorrow at 11 A.M. and Friday at 2 P.M., visitors to the seventh floor of
Bergdorf Goodman will have a chance to learn about chocolate from a master.
Robert Linxe, the owner of La Maison du Chocolat in Paris and New York, will
give an hourlong show-and-tell presentation about chocolate. He will prepare
simple ganache in several flavors and offer tastes of his handiwork. The
demonstration is free.

Lunch Box for the 90's

The classic, utilitarian, black metal factory worker's lunch box with a rounded
top has been cleverly fashioned in cardboard for use as a picnic box by Marche
Madison, at 931 Madison Avenue near East 74th Street. For $12, the box comes
filled with any of the well-crafted sandwiches on the shop's varied menu, plus a
soft drink or bottled water, a cookie or brownie and a piece of fruit. Two
winners on the sandwich list are grilled eggplant, spinach, mushrooms and
provolone on country loaf and roast beef with horseradish coleslaw on rye.

Dutch Treats for a Benefit

The Hudson River Museum, at 511 Warburton Avenue, Yonkers, N.Y., will hold a
black-tie benefit on Saturday at 7 P.M. celebrating the heritage of the Hudson
Valley. The dinner will be catered by the Hudson River Club of Manhattan, with
several dishes reflecting the Dutch traditions of the region. There also will be
dancing and a silent auction that will include some Hudson River School
paintings. Tickets cost $200 and can be reserved by calling (914) 359-4220.

Hot Jazz, and All That Food

A food and music festival will be held Saturday from 11 A.M. to 6 P.M. at the
Northampton, Mass., airport to benefit the Northampton Center for the Arts. In
previous years the festival was in Amherst, Mass.

The theme will be hot food and hot jazz, and among the planned events are a
chili cook-off and a chili-pepper-eating contest. There also will be hot air
balloons on display.

Admission to the festival is $5 for adults, $1 for children under 12 and people
65 and older. Money also will be raised through a percentage of the food sales.
The festival will take place rain or shine.

What's Cooking in Asia?

An eight-part television series by the cookbook writer and actress Madhur
Jaffrey about the cuisines of Asia will begin June 14 at 5 P.M. on WNET, Channel
13.

The first segment of this series of half-hour presentations explores the cooking
of Thailand, with a colorful tour of regions where ingredients originate. It is
part travelogue, part culinary history.

Ms. Jaffrey's succinct narration is as packed with information as the food is
with flavor, but it never intrudes upon or overwhelms the arresting visual
appeal of the program. Several simple recipes are also demonstrated.

The cuisines of Korea, Vietnam, Malaysia, the Philippines, Japan, Indonesia and
Hong Kong will follow.

The series began running on Monday at 1 P.M. on WLIW, Channel 21 on Long Island.
It also will be shown starting June 11 at 1 P.M. on WNHT, Channel 17 in
Schenectady, N.Y.; July 4 at noon on WCNY, Channel 24 in Syracuse, and June 13
at 4:30 P.M. on WHYY, Channel 12 in Philadelphia.


SUMMER AT THE MARKET

SUMMER schedules for New York City's Greenmarkets are now available. Shoppers
can pick one up at a Greenmarket or get one free by calling the main office,
(212) 477-3220.

There are 17 markets in Manhattan, the Bronx and Brooklyn, eight of them
operating year-round, the rest seasonally until late November. This week the
Union Square Greenmarket added Monday to its schedule. It is also open
Wednesdays, Fridays and Saturdays.

Shoppers will find lettuce, herbs, radishes, scallions, baked goods, cheese,
fish and bedding plants. Within the week, locally grown strawberries will
appear. Apples are out of storage and not as crisp as they will be in the fall.

LOAD-DATE: June 3, 1992

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Drawings

                   Copyright 1992 The New York Times Company


                              179 of 281 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 June 3, 1992, Wednesday, Late Edition - Final

Public & Private;
Waiting for Perot

BYLINE: By ANNA QUINDLEN

SECTION: Section A; Page 21; Column 5; Editorial Desk

LENGTH: 720 words


When the boys go to the barbershop, their mother takes notes. Above the
persistent hum of clippers, one of the old-timers tells the buzz-cut crowd that
Ross Perot has been his choice since the second time he saw him on "Larry King
Live," Larry King being to this wild-card candidacy what Walter Winchell was to
aspiring film stars.

"There's none of this, that and the other thing that you get from the other
guys," the old-timer says, which is as illuminating as anything I've heard about
Mr. Perot's appeal.

I'd been waiting and wondering when Ross Perot's candidacy would falter. I
figured that if we all waited, he'd fade.

It worked with Jerry Brown.

But Mr. Perot and what he tells us about ourselves -- as opposed to the little
he tells us about himself -- is not going anywhere, at least for a while. His
name has become synonymous with "Throw the bums out," a slogan that has become
the voters' mantra lo these last 12 months.

Democracy is the most exhausting system in the world. Isn't it understandable
that occasionally America just wants to be led? It's not that we know we're
yearning for a despot. Instead people say they want a guy who will make things
work. A businessman. Leaving aside the question of whether the decision-making
skills of business are transferable to the consensus-building arena of national
politics, the refrain makes me nervous: second cousin to making the trains run
on time.

Mr. Perot says his goal is the opposite, to open the process up via a campaign
built on volunteers, a system of electronic town meetings and a President who
eschews ceremonials. The Vox Poppa. He says folks are concerned about his
principles, not his positions. This reminds me of the old saw about the tree
falling in the forest: if principles exist apart from issues, can you really
hear them?

Fact is that on many current issues I'm in agreement with Mr. Perot. Opposed the
gulf war, favors legal abortion. Thinks Anita Hill was treated shabbily, hawks
early childhood education. Too much lobbying, too little listening. Wrestle that
deficit to the ground. Hear, hear!

So why so wary? Well, there's the spoiler factor, the possibility that a
three-way race ends up being decided by Congress. Mr. Perot, who insists he is
going to return government to the people, may instead trigger a process so
foreign that it will feel like living in a constitutional monarchy.

And there are the hard-guy stories.  Questions about reports he once proposed
cordoning off poor neighborhoods to search for drugs and guns are met by
cheap-shot innuendo leveled at the offending columnist. The publisher of a Texas
newspaper says that when he ran stories critical of Mr. Perot's son, the
billionaire called to report that a newspaper employee was carrying on with a
city official, adding that he had the pictures to prove it.

Mr. Perot denies this, just as he denies that he wanted to buy back prisoners of
the Vietnam War, a cash-for-hostages deal. "I'll buy you the biggest steak in
Texas if you can find one shred of evidence that that's true," says Mr. Perot,
who has seized from Bill Clinton the advantage of colloquialism.

He does denial beautifully: "Not true." End of discussion. He even denies that
he made his billions being a typical top-down, what-I-say-goes executive. He
insists his management style is based on consensus. If true, he does not belong
in the White House, but in the Smithsonian.

He says he doesn't need the press, that when we knock him he gets a whole new
gang of volunteers. He's reaping what we sowed, skating over questions about his
Navy discharge and a dumb comment about keeping gay people out of his cabinet
simply because the nation is fed up with such revelations after watching the
Clinton campaign suffer. His outsider imitation, Croesus by way of Andy of
Mayberry, seems marred not a whit by the fact that he has known every President
since L.B.J.

There has never been a better time for a candidate like him. Start to talk about
his lack of qualifications, and the short shadows cast by his opponents make the
words die on your lips. He is a tabula rasa for a nation that feels no one else
has given it so much as a pen. That makes him an instructive, maybe useful part
of this process. I just can't see how it makes him a good President.


LOAD-DATE: June 3, 1992

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Op-Ed

                   Copyright 1992 The New York Times Company


                              180 of 281 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                  June 4, 1992, Thursday, Late Edition - Final

NEWS SUMMARY

SECTION: Section A; Page 2; Column 5; Metropolitan Desk

LENGTH: 1042 words



International     A3-15

EUROPE TRIES TO REGROUP

A day after Danish voters rejected a treaty on European union, members of the
European Community vowed to forge ahead with plans for political and monetary
integration. But it was not clear how such integration might be achieved.  A1

News Analysis: European unity is exposed as a fragile notion.  A14

OPENING DAY IN RIO

Appealing to nations to redirect military spending toward environmental
protection, Secretary General Boutros-Ghali of the United Nations opened the
Earth Summit.  A10

The man from Canada who helped bring the world to Rio.  A10

TIME TO ACT, OUSTED HAITIAN SAYS

The exiled President of Haiti asked the United States and other countries in the
hemisphere to start taking direct action to restore democracy in Haiti. He
suggested intercepting oil tankers, and said a naval blockade might be
necessary.  A10

CHINA REMEMBERS TIANANMEN

The police arrested several Chinese as they tried to mark the third anniversary
of the attack on pro-democracy demonstrators. Foreign journalists covering the
event were roughed up and detained.  A5

NEW QUESTIONS ON 'STAR WARS'

Pentagon analysts have concluded that even a rudimentary defense against nuclear
attack would violate the Antiballistic Missile treaty. The effort's director
said his agency had not adopted that view.  A7

AID TO NICARAGUA HALTED

United States aid to Nicaragua has been put on hold at the request of members of
Congress who believe the Sandinistas retain too much influence.  A9

SERBS TELL OF KILLINGS

Armed Muslim Slavs and Croats swept through at least six villages last week,
executing Serbian men, Serbs said.  A3

TOO MUCH DEMOCRACY?

More than 80 parties are on the ballot, voters are exhausted and bewildered, and
Czechoslovakia is assured of parliamentary gridlock on the eve of elections.  A6


NEW LIGHT ON OLD HUMANS

Anatomically modern human beings, believed by many scientists to have first
evolved in Africa, may have independently evolved in China and other parts of
the world, a research team has concluded.  A8

Ibrahimpur Journal: Building freedom from bonded labor.  A4
Citing trade with Iraq, the U.S. suspends exercises with Jordan.  A14
In the new Vietnam, health care becomes a casualty.  A12
Nigeria takes a census, and the skeptic count is high.  A13
An American who defected in 1962 is found in a Russian hospital.  A11

National     A16-21, B10-11

PEROT HIRES A RARE KIND OF DUO

Ross Perot appointed an odd couple to run his Presidential campaign: Hamilton
Jordan, the main strategist behind Jimmy Carter's victory in 1976, and Edward J.
Rollins, Ronald Reagan's campaign manager in 1984.  A1

Of Perot, taxes, homosexuals and hot water.  A18

Now thinkable and ponderable: a legitimate three-way race.  A19

News analysis: The California voting and the cutting edge.  A20

Women in the News: Barbara Boxer and Dianne Feinstein.  A20

PEROT AND THE VIETNAMESE

Discussions about investment opportunities in Vietnam appear to have overlapped
with Ross Perot's efforts to determine whether any American prisoners of war
remained alive in Southeast Asia.  A1

VICTORY FOR PUBLIC TELEVISION

The Senate overwhelmingly approved the spending of $1.1 billion over three years
for the Corporation for Public Broadcasting. The vote, which followed similar
action by the House, was a defeat for public television's conservative critics.
A1

GRIM FORECAST ON AIDS

An American-led research group said that international efforts to stop the
spread of AIDS had stalled and that the virus that causes the disease threatened
to infect as many as 110 million people around the world by the year 2000.  A1

NEW TENSIONS IN LOS ANGELES

In a case similar in many ways to the one that touched off rioting a month ago,
a Los Angeles County judge dismissed charges against a police officer who killed
two Samoan brothers.  A16

BIG TEST FOR WHITTLE

A California judge is expected to rule today on a lawsuit that seeks to keep
Channel One, the news program with commercials aimed at youths, out of the
state's public schools.  A16

NEW FORESTRY POLICY

The Forest Service said it planned to reduce the amount of timberland harvested
by clear-cutting. But conservationists said that the alternative timber-cutting
practices to be employed by the agency were just as destructive and that the new
policy would therefore make little difference.  B10

THREAT OF PHONE STRIKE GROWS

Negotiations between A.T.&T. and unions representing 125,000 workers remained
mired in disagreement over wages and job security.  B10

The fate of seven frozen human embryos is in doubt again.  A16
Presbyterians chose a sanctuary-movement figure as chief.  A21
A mystery arose on the racial disparity in infant mortality.  B11

Metropolitan     Digest, B1

CONSENSUS ON DISTRICTING

Legislative leaders agreed yesterday on a plan for redrawing New York's
Congressional map, overcoming months of discord as they came face to face with
the threat that an alternative plan would be imposed by a Federal court.  A1

MEDICAL COURSES IN COMPASSION

At Mount Sinai and at least two other New York hospitals, medical students are
taking part in a $1 million program to teach today's doctors about dealing with
patients.  A1

Business     Digest, D1

The Home Section  C1-11
Recapturing an uptown elegance.  C1
Siblings are a plus.  C1

Arts/Entertainment C12-20
City Opera postpones a production.  C13
It's official: Broadway had a record season.  C13

Sports   B14-19
Baseball: Howe cited desire to get cocaine.  B15
Decision on Steinbrenner near.  B15

Obituaries   B11-12
William Gaines, publisher of Mad magazine.  B11
Robert Morley, actor.B12

Editorials/Op-Ed  A22-23
Editorials A22
No EZ answers for cities.
A woman's place: the Senate.
Jersey saves its incumbents.
Topics: Judging Chief Gates.

Letters A22
William Safire: Rabin redux.  A23
Anthony Lewis: Dollars and cynicism.  A23
Gary Milhollin: North Korea's bomb.  A23
Kevin Phillips: The G.O.P. crackup.  A23

LOAD-DATE: June 4, 1992

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo: The police kept a tight lid on Tiananmen Square. (Associated
Press) A5

TYPE: Summary

                   Copyright 1992 The New York Times Company


                              181 of 281 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                  June 4, 1992, Thursday, Late Edition - Final

Health Care New Casualty of a New Vietnam

BYLINE: By HENRY KAMM,  Special to The New York Times

SECTION: Section A; Page 12; Column 1; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 675 words

DATELINE: HO CHI MINH CITY, Vietnam


Health care has become a casualty in Vietnam's conversion from a centralized
Communist economy to a free-market system, the Health Ministry has reported in a
study circulating among medical officials.

In a radical departure from basic Communist policy, the Government has begun to
charge fees for medical services and education, leaving people to wonder what is
left of the country's declared Communism, except the one-party system.

"The shifting from a subsidized to a socialist market economy has more negative
than positive influences on health in Vietnam," the study, signed by Health
Minister Pham Song, stated.

"The increasing cost of medical care and drugs makes them less affordable to the
users. The differentiation between the rich and the poor is becoming more
accentuated, increasing levels of poverty and exacerbating ill health and
quality of services. Disregarding the needs of the poor, private physicians and
private pharmacies compete only for the services to the rich."

Another study, prepared by the National Institute of Nutrition for the
International Nutritional Conference to be held in Rome in December, has found
that the average daily nutritional intake in this nation of 66 million was 16
percent short of the recommended minimum of 2,300 calories prescribed by the
World Health Organization and the Food and Agriculture Organization.

It reported that 8.5 percent of households had an intake of less than 1,500
calories a person each day. This puts them in the category of suffering from
chronic starvation. Another 14 percent were reported to receive below 1,800
calories, internationally qualified as inadequate.

Dr. Tu Giay, director of the Nutrition Institute, said in an interview in Hanoi
that 51.5 percent of children under 5 were undernourished. Before World War II,
Dr. Giay said, the average Vietnamese was taller than a Japanese, but Vietnamese
height has remained about 5 feet 6 inches, while a typical Japanese is now 10
inches taller.

In an unusually direct public criticism of the Government, the institute's
report said, "Despite dietary intake inadequacies, the state has exported
locally needed food and foodstuffs such as rice, peanuts, eggs, shrimp, fish and
vegetables in order to earn hard currencies to pay debts and purchase essential
raw materials for production, including agriculture."

Even more outspoken was the former Health Minister of Communist South Vietnam,
Dr. Duong Quynh Hoa, who now runs the Center of Pediatrics, Development and
Health in this city. "I have said publicly that a country like this exporting
food is exporting the health of its people," she said in an interview.

The former Minister said such children showed deficiencies in power of memory
and concentration but not in intelligence.

"There is a great need to improve the health network," said Dr. Mario Gonzalez,
representing the World Health Organization. "The staff is there, but the
equipment is obsolete, the hospitals in shambles, and there is no budget." In
1990, according to the Health Ministry, health expenditure per capital was about
50 cents a year.

One of Dr. Gonzalez's Vietnamese aides said that rural hospitals were raising
funds for their needs by raising pigs, growing fruit and vegetables, running
soup shops and even selling cigarettes and growing tobacco. He said in rural
health centers, equipment usually did not include more than a microscope, a
stethoscope and a scale.

The usual ambulance is a hammock and two bicycles, the Vietnamese doctor said.
He said the monthly base salary of a beginning physician was a little more than
$3, rising slowly to the average pay of $6. Service bonuses are usually added,
but few Government doctors earn more than $8 to $12.

In much of the countryside, even this pay is usually a month or two behind
schedule, the doctor said. No wonder then, many said, that Vietnamese physicians
are eager to practice privately, charging about 50 cents for a consultation or
10 cents for giving an injection or acupuncture treatment.

LOAD-DATE: June 4, 1992

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1992 The New York Times Company


                              182 of 281 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                  June 4, 1992, Thursday, Late Edition - Final

THE 1992 CAMPAIGN
Woman in the News: Barbara Boxer;
2 Senate Nominees Who Have Paid Political Dues

BYLINE: By JANE GROSS,  Special to The New York Times

SECTION: Section A; Page 20; Column 3; National Desk

LENGTH: 694 words

DATELINE: LOS ANGELES, June 3


As newlyweds in 1962, Barbara and Stewart Boxer chose a Brooklyn apartment that
seemed the perfect place to start their marriage, but for the musty carpet in
the lobby, which the landlord promised would be replaced any day.

Months passed with no action.

So Ms. Boxer, fresh out of Brooklyn College with an economics degree and a
go-get-'em attitude, organized the tenants of 770 Ocean Parkway, began planning
all manner of protest, got the landlord's attention and quickly won a new rug.

Mr. Boxer, a lawyer specializing in worker's compensation cases, told the
emblematic story of his wife's first political victory last night as a victory
celebration swirled around him at a Holywood recording studio. Ms. Boxer, a
five-term Democratic member of Congress, was on the stage promising her
supporters that she was ready to shake up the Senate and go head to head with
the entrenched, male political establishment, if she beats Bruce Herschensohn, a
conservative Republican television commentator, in the fall.

Step by Step Into Politics

Her husband looked up at her, a tiny woman who needs a riser to see over most
lecterns, and smiled a shy, proud smile. There was nothing she was saying, Mr.
Boxer said, that he had not known for 30 years.

During those three decades, Ms. Boxer, born Nov. 11, 1940, in Brooklyn as
Barbara Levy, moved step by step into politics, following the community-oriented
track common to women entering public life.

After moving west to the wild beauty of Marin County, following a sister who had
already settled there, Ms. Boxer worked part time as a stockbroker while raising
two children.

Aroused by the Vietnam War, and casting about for a worthy local project while
her husband pursued his legal career, Ms. Boxer invited some neighborhood women
to her backyard in Greenbrae. "Are you feeling what I'm feeling," she remembers
asking them. The group organized a program to counsel high school dropouts,
which was so successful it was taken over by the county school system.

Soon, Ms. Boxer was dabbling in journalism, at the weekly newspaper Pacific Sun,
and from 1974-76 she was a district aide to Representative John Burton, a
Democrat. From 1976 to 1982, she served on the county Board of Supervisors and
then won election to the House of Representatives.

Ms. Boxer's daughter, Nicole, now 25, remembers her childhood home as command
central for a group of animated, busy women who were constantly hatching plans.

"I was always sneaking downstairs in my pajamas," Nicole Boxer said, "because it
was too exciting to go to bed."

Attack on Pentagon

Once Ms. Boxer reached Congress, where she started her career with a highly
publicized attack on Pentagon coffee pots that cost $7,622, she did lots of
"telephone parenting," her children said.

Unlike some politicians, Ms. Boxer rarely trots her family out in public.  Using
them as campaign surrogates does not work, Mr. Boxer said, "because the certain
magic Barbara has with people doesn't transfer to the rest of us."

Ms. Boxer made the most of her personality in a primary race that began months
before the candidacies of women were galvanized nationwide by the spectacle last
fall of the all-male Senate Judiciary Committee hearing charges of sexual
harrassment against a Supreme Court nominee. Back then, and through the final
days of the race when she made a 27-hour, 7-city campaign tour, Ms. Boxer built
her campaign around cozy gatherings of like-minded women, much like the ones
years ago.

In her base of Northern California and in the unfamilar southern precincts where
California elections are won and lost, Ms. Boxer attended backyard barbeques,
lox and bagel brunches, reunions of former Brooklynites, gripe sessions at
senior centers.

Her supporters and strategists argued on Tuesday night that the person-to-person
style was a perfect complement to a female candidacy, touching the same nerve in
voters searching for leaders who understand their daily lives.

"She touched people and she talked to them," said Gloria Molina, the first woman
and the first Hispanic politician elected to the Los Angeles County Board of
Supervisors.

NAME: Barbara Boxer

LOAD-DATE: June 4, 1992

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Biography

                   Copyright 1992 The New York Times Company


                              183 of 281 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                  June 4, 1992, Thursday, Late Edition - Final
                              Correction Appended

THE 1992 CAMPAIGN: Candidate's Record;
PEROT AND HANOI DISCUSSED BUSINESS

BYLINE: By PATRICK E. TYLER,  Special to The New York Times

SECTION: Section A; Page 1; Column 5; National Desk

LENGTH: 1594 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, June 3


After going to Hanoi in 1987 to try to free Americans who might have remained in
captivity after the Vietnam war, Ross Perot and an associate discussed private
business opportunities with top Vietnamese officials, according to a Vietnamese
official and Mr. Perot.

In a June 1990 letter the Vietnamese Foreign Ministry designated Mr. Perot and
his company as a business agent of the Government of Vietnam to help procure
American investment after diplomatic and trade relations were normalized, Mr.
Perot said today. Those criteria have yet to be met.

But Mr. Perot and the Vietnamese official agree about little else in accounts
they provided this week about the business discussions that appear to have
overlapped with Mr. Perot's efforts to determine if any American prisoners of
war remained in Southeast Asia, and if they did to free them.

None of Mr. Perot's contacts with Hanoi after his 1987 trip were disclosed to
United States Government officials who were engaged in delicate negotiations
with Vietnam. Nothing about the business discussions was illegal, but several
American officials dealing with prisoner-of-war and missing-in-action issues
expressed surprise at the discussions, and some criticized them.

Mr. Perot said that he had never had any intention to invest in Vietnam or
Southeast Asia and that his 1987 trip to Hanoi and the eight subsequent trips by
his associate, Harry McKillip, to meet with Vietnamese officials had been
related to P.O.W. or M.I.A. issues or been purely social in nature.

He said he engaged in several "philosophical" discussions about business
opportunities with Vietnamese officials, but he dismissed the talks as the
initiative of the Vietnamese, including the country's Vice Premier, who also
served as Foreign Minister.

Mr. McKillip, responding to questions on a speaker phone in Mr. Perot's Dallas
office, said he had not engaged in commercial negotiations with Vietnamese
officials. He said he merely supplied the Vice Premier, Nguyen Co Thach, with
books on management, investment and finance to help Mr. Thach develop a code of
foreign investment.

Mr. Perot said he never acted on the June 1990 letter from Mr. Thach when Mr.
McKillip returned with it from Hanoi and never replied to the Vietnamese, though
Mr. McKillip continued his contacts with Hanoi, including a social call on Mr.
Thach at his retirement last August.

In a lengthy response today in several interviews, Mr. Perot read the letter
over the telephone, but declined to make public a copy of it. He said he feared
that would harm current discussions between Vietnam and the United States.

A senior official of the Vietnamese Foreign Ministry, Le Van Bang, said in a
telephone interview from Hanoi that his Government had been discussing
commercial ventures with Mr. Perot's representative since some time after Mr.
Perot's 1987 visit, a visit that Mr. Bang said was mostly devoted to discussions
about P.O.W.'s and M.I.A.'s.

In an interview with C-Span last month, Mr. Bang said Mr. Perot and Mr. McKillip
promised money, medicines, medical equipment and other humanitarian aid in
discussions that eventually included much larger commercial assistance.

Mr. Perot categorically rejected Mr. Bang's assertion that his company actively
pursued a commercial relationship with Vietnam. "When the dust settles, no
matter how you write it, you have my word, my oath on it: none of this is true,"
he said. "It did not occur."

Mr. Perot raised the possibility that Vietnam's ruling politburo had determined
it could curry favor with the Bush Administration and speed normalization of
trade and diplomatic ties with the United States by sabotaging his putative
Presidential campaign.

Contents of the Letter

Mr. Bang, who has responded to questions about Mr. Perot from several reporters
in recent weeks, characterized in positive terms what he said were Mr. Perot's
efforts to help Vietnam's commercial reconstruction. Mr. Bang has also
complained to a reporter that Mr. Perot has not acted on promises to help Hanoi
with development assistance.

"Mr. Perot asked if he could help Vietnam in some of the economic areas," Mr.
Bang said in the telephone interview. "And therefore we have given him a letter
of intent to help him so he can inform American companies to concentrate on the
areas where he has expertise, like electronics, oil and gas, metallurgy, food,
agriculture, transportation and real estate."

Mr. Perot acknowledged today that Mr. McKillip's trips to Hanoi were not
disclosed to American officials who were pursuing a complex diplomatic strategy
to persuade Hanoi to end the stalemate over resolving all cases of P.O.W.'s and
M.I.A.'s. The question of American investment was an integral part of that
diplomatic strategy.

The June 1990 letter, which was issued by Mr. Thach, referred to a possible
timetable for American-Vietnamese normalization as early as September 1990.

According to Mr. Perot's reading today, which he said was somewhat abbreviated,
the letter begins: "In anticipation of normalization of relations between the
United States and the Socialist Republic of Vietnam, this letter is to formally
invite Ross Perot and/or his designated companies to assist Vietnam in its
economic recovery and redevelopment effort. Vietnam will appoint Ross Perot and
his company as agent of the Socialist Republic of Vietnam in the procurement of
capital investment" and other services from American companies.

Anger About Contacts

Mr. Perot said the letter stated that "compensation" would be "mutually agreed
and based on effort and investment." He said it made clear that any transactions
would have to comply with the laws of both countries and abide by any conditions
of any normalization agreement between Washington and Hanoi.

Reacting to the disclosure of the letter, Ann Mills Griffiths, the director of
the League of Families of American P.O.W.'s and M.I.A.'s, said "I am shocked and
had no idea, and I can just imagine what the Vietnamese must have been thinking
of official efforts" to negotiate with Hanoi "if this was going on during this
period."

Gen. John W. Vessey Jr., retired, a former chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff
and for the last five years the Presidential emissary for P.O.W. and M.I.A.
negotiations with Vietnam, said in a telephone interview from Minnesota that Mr.
Perot never disclosed the letter or discussions surrounding it.

The general said he was not aware that after Mr. Perot's visit to Hanoi in 1987
the Texas businessman continued a dialogue there through Mr. McKillip. "I have
not heard that from the Vietnamese, from Mr. Perot or from anybody else," he
said.

Several American officials suggested that Mr. Perot's private dealings with
Hanoi could reinforce hardline views in the Vietnamese politburo, where there is
strong sentiment to delay cooperation on the repatriation of P.O.W. remains and
other outstanding war-related issues as a way to exert leverage on Washington to
speed normal relations and the end of a trade embargo.

"The more negotiators there are, the more danger there is the other party will
start playing one off against the other," General Vessey said, adding that he
was not criticizing Mr. Perot's dealings until he fully understood them.

'Not to Ever Go Back'

There is nothing illegal about American companies discussing prospective
business dealings with Vietnam's Government after the normalization of
relations, and Mr. Perot said he felt no obligation to respond to Mr. Thach's
letter or to disclose it.

"I told Harry just not to ever go back again," Mr. Perot said. "I didn't want to
dignify it with a response."

Asked why he thought Vietnam issued the letter, Mr. McKillip said, "Mr. Thach
had great admiration for Ross Perot and always believed someday Ross Perot would
help him.

"Mr. Thach was getting the extra assignment of writing an investment code as
they started to think about business enterprise," he added, "and he had great
confidence that Mr. Perot would help him or help Vietnam because they were
getting a lot of offers and deals from all over the world.

"It was an invitation and a hope on his behalf that Mr. Perot would come in and
help him.".

When Mr. McKillip arrived from Hanoi with the letter, Mr. Perot said that his
first reaction was, "What the hell is this?"

"That was the sixth of seven trips," Mr. Perot said, "and at that point I shut
it down."

But Mr. Perot said contacts with Vietnamese officials continued the next year.
Mr. Bang said there were 13 trips in all.

In an initial set of responses faxed to The New York Times today, Mr. Perot had
seemed to deny any contact after Vietnam issued the letter.

"We never responded," his initial statement said. "In fact, nobody representing
me ever returned to Vietnam after that meeting" when the letter was handed to
Mr. McKillip.

In April 1991, a year after the letter, Mr. Bang came to Washington as a fellow
of The United States-Vietnam Trade Council, which represents American companies
wishing to do business in Vietnam after a normalization of relations.

Virginia Foote, the director of the council, said Mr. McKillip called her
several times trying to secure permission to fly Mr. Bang to Dallas for meetings
at Perot headquarters.

"I found McKillip aggressive," Ms. Foote said. "He was mysterious about it."

She said it was agreed that Mr. McKillip could meet with Mr. Bang in Washington.
Mr. Perot said he did not know about this meeting but Mr. McKillip said it was
innocuous and "social" in nature.

LOAD-DATE: June 4, 1992

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

CORRECTION-DATE: June 8, 1992, Monday

CORRECTION:

An article on Thursday about business discussions that Ross Perot was reported
to have conducted with Vietnamese officials in 1987 rendered the name of a
business associate incorrectly. He is Harry McKillop.


                   Copyright 1992 The New York Times Company


                              184 of 281 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                   June 5, 1992, Friday, Late Edition - Final

THE 1992 CAMPAIGN: White House;
PRESIDENT AVOIDS DISCUSSING PEROT AT NEWS SESSION

BYLINE: By ANDREW ROSENTHAL,  Special to The New York Times

SECTION: Section A; Page 1; Column 3; National Desk

LENGTH: 1647 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, June 4


Using a prime-time news conference a la Ronald Reagan to evoke an image of
Presidential statesmanship, President Bush refused tonight to be drawn into
direct criticism of Ross Perot.

But the effort, which underscored the alarm that Mr. Perot's unexpected showing
in recent polls has caused among Mr. Bush's political advisers, was marred by
the refusal of three of the four major television networks to carry the event
live. Mr. Bush, who has held only one other prime time news conference in his
tenure, was left beseeching the television reporters who were there to give him
some attention.

The President took a few indirect swipes at Mr. Perot over his opposition to the
Persian Gulf war and other issues. Mr. Bush suggested that Mr. Perot's appeal as
a problem-solving outsider might not withstand close questioning from the press.
But he refused to discuss in any detail Mr. Perot's standing in the polls, his
fitness for office, or even whether he would debate the Texas billionaire after
the summer's nominating conventions.

'A Funny Time Here'

Instead, Mr. Bush tried to focus public attention away from his staggering
campaign and toward his own programs and leadership. Complaining about what he
called "a funny time here, time warp" in the campaign, Mr. Bush said he was in a
"nonpolitical mode," dealing with substantive issues and eager to solve the
economic problems that threaten his re-election. He sought to keep attention on
his support for a constitutional amendment aimed at balancing the Federal budget
and on his anti-crime, education and economic legislative proposals. [Excerpts
from the President's news conference appear on page A16.]

"I will be ready to join the fray after the conventions," Mr. Bush said. "But as
you know, I have not challenged either Perot or Clinton, Mr. Perot or Governor
Clinton. I have no intention of changing that before the conventions. I am
trying to get things done that will help this country."

Perot Aide Is Delighted

He also suggested that he was untroubled by the rapid plunge in popularity that
he took last year and his inability so far to recover from record-low public
approval ratings. But the President's decision to break with his pattern of
holding news conferences in the informal briefing room and move to the ornate
East Room in prime time was a clear sign of concern about what Mr. Bush conceded
was his lingering inability to persuade voters that he deserves re-election.

Mr. Perot's top campaign official, his longtime adviser Tom Luce, reacted with
open pleasure at the sight of Mr. Bush spending a news conference fielding
questions about an opponent who has not even declared his candidacy. Speaking on
Cable News Network immediately after the news conference, Mr. Luce said this
showed Mr. Perot "is really going to drive the agenda for the whole country."

The event clearly was intended to give Mr. Bush a political boost by projecting
him to the country from the White House, surrounded by the trappings of power,
and it was drawn directly from Mr. Reagan's playbook. White House aides even
left open the double doors of the East Room, behind Mr. Bush's lectern, as they
had done for Mr. Reagan, to provide a television picture of the President
striding in from the long hall behind him.

Marlin Fitzwater, the President's spokesman, tried to play down the significance
of the refusal by ABC, CBS and NBC to broadcast the event in its entirety.

But White House aides were clearly perturbed that only CNN carried it live,
sandwiching it between the "Crossfire" program, whose co-host is Mr. Bush's
deposed chief of staff, John H. Sununu, and an appearance by Governor Clinton of
Arkansas, the probable Democratic nominee, on "Larry King Live." Mr. Bush
competed for viewers with repeats of the popular "Cosby Show" on NBC, the
Western program "Young Riders" on ABC, "Top Cops" on CBS and "The Simpsons" on
Fox Broadcasting.

'I Need Your Assistance'

It is extremely rare for the broadcast giants to refuse a President prime-time
coverage when it is requested, and their decision to do so may in the end only
have underscored the difficulty Mr. Bush is having in seizing control of the
campaign.

Mr. Bush seemed clearly agitated about the problem as he faced reporters
tonight. At one point, addressing the NBC correspondent, Jim Miklaszewski, he
said, "I need your assistance, Jim, in getting the message out loud and clear
tonight on what the President said about the balanced-budget amendment. And if
you can bring an editorial or two on there saying this is a good idea, it would
help enormously."

At one point, a reporter asked Mr. Bush why any candidate would submit to
grueling primaries, when he could, like Mr. Perot, simply announce his intention
to run. "That's what Barbara was asking me a few minutes ago," he said,
referring to his wife.

Pressed for an answer, Mr. Bush said, "Say, hey, I want to continue this job to
help this country." He added, "To get out of the arena, to suggest that you're
going to run because it's not particularly pleasant, that's not the way I
operate."

Serene or Drowsy?

Mr. Bush seemed to be trying to assume a confident serenity that sometimes took
on a drowsy quality when projected through the television screen. He became
animated only when talking about his leadership in the Persian Gulf war, which
he sees as his greatest accomplishment and has been trying without much success
to introduce into the campaign.

Although Mr. Bush wanted to talk about the balanced-budget amendment and other
issues, which he discussed in a prepared opening statement that included no
major policy announcements, the subject of Mr. Perot came up repeatedly.

Other members of the Bush camp have not hesitated to attack Mr. Perot directly.
Marilyn Quayle, the Vice President's wife, has accused Mr. Perot of trying to
buy the White House. Mr. Fitzwater said today: "This is a man who has no history
of sitting down with anybody. His entire history is to stomp into the group,
demand to do his things his way, and if he doesn't get it, he picks up the
football and goes home."

But Mr. Bush at first declined to say anything about Mr. Perot. Asked if he
thought it was proper for Mr. Perot, who is said to be prepared to spend $100
million to $300 million of his own money on the campaign, to do that, Mr. Bush
said, "I'd love to answer that question."

But he said he would not, "because I've vowed to keep my sights set on these
legislative goals and on leading this country, and if I get into characterizing
one opponent or another, I diminish my effectiveness in doing that."

Landing Indirect Jabs

Toward the end of the news conference, Mr. Bush did get in some indirect jabs.
"I can understand that appeal: 'I'm from the outside, I'll solve all the
problems,' " he said.

He added: "And then some day you guys are going to start: How are you going to
do it? How are you going to get this through the Congress? What do you believe?
Do you think the President is right on a balanced-budget amendment? Are you with
him or against him? Do you think he's right to tighten down on crime
legislation? How do you feel on the narcotic problem? How do you feel on world
peace? Were you with him when he had to make a very tough call on sending back
aggression, a move that was saluted all over the entire world and put this
country together like it's never been together in the past since World War II?"

Mr. Bush also said: "I have a difference with him clearly as far as the Persian
Gulf War goes. I believe the American people supported our actions in that war."

When asked about Mr. Perot's role in negotiations concerning American prisoners
of war or those missing in action in the Vietnam War, Mr. Bush said he would
"elaborate on that later on." He said Mr. Perot's negotiating role had been
"quite helpful," but said that he "simply cannot comment on" reported private
dealings between Mr. Perot and the Vietnamese government.

Imagines Meeting Perot

Asked what he would say to Mr. Perot if they met on the street, Mr. Bush said he
would ask him to drop his drive for the Presidency and support him. "I'd say:
'Ross, I think I've been a good President. I believe a man of your capability
and talents ought to support me.' " He added, ruefully, "Not that I'd be hopeful
by a long shot of persuading him."

When Mr. Bush asserted that his own problem was simply that voters had not heard
his pitch, a reporter suggested that perhaps they had and were simply rejecting
it.

Mr. Bush responded: "I don't think so because you ask in these deadly polls that
you read all the time, you know, about -- relating to issues -- and it's vague
out there. We've got a good program and tonight, maybe, this is a more effective
way to say we want a balanced-budget amendment." Senator Robert C. Byrd of West
Virginia, chairman of the Senate Appropriations Committee, on Tuesday predicted
defeat for the amendment.

Mr. Bush added, "Most people would concede that my problems stem from this
sluggish, anemic economy." But now, he said, "The economy is improving," so he
should get credit for it.

Mr. Bush said he accepted a share of the blame for the economy, but added that
Congress is also accountable. While he acknowledged that public opinion polls
still reflect a gloomy outlook, he said there were clear signs of recovery,
including employment statistics.

Mr. Bush said the time for pointing fingers is over, and that he and Congress
should work together to solve the nation's problems.

He also acknowledged that the challenge from his fellow Republican, Patrick J.
Buchanan, "was not particularly helpful" for his re-election prospects.

But he said that because of Mr. Buchanan's conservative challenge, "maybe I'm a
little stronger" and a "better candidate for the fall."

"I've no hard feelings," Mr. Bush said.

LOAD-DATE: June 5, 1992

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo: President Bush taking questions from reporters last night at his
news conference. At rear was Marlin Fitzwater, White House Press Secretary.
(Paul Hosefros/The New York Times) (pg. A17)

                   Copyright 1992 The New York Times Company


                              185 of 281 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                   June 5, 1992, Friday, Late Edition - Final

THE 1992 CAMPAIGN: Candidate's Record;
Perot to Testify in Senate on Americans Missing in Southeast Asia

BYLINE: By PATRICK E. TYLER,  Special to The New York Times

SECTION: Section A; Page 18; Column 1; National Desk

LENGTH: 635 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, June 4


The Senate committee on American servicemen missing in Southeast Asia today
called Ross Perot to appear at a hearing on June 30 to answer questions about
all aspects of his efforts to find and free Americans he believes have been held
since the Vietnam War.

Some senators are said to be pressing for Mr. Perot to explain his discussion of
business opportunities with Hanoi. This includes the decision by Vietnam's
Foreign Ministry in June 1990 to designate Mr. Perot and his company as business
agents for Vietnam after diplomatic relations were normalized. That has not
happened.

Other members of the panel, officially the Select Committee on POW/MIA Affairs,
are said to be interested in investigating allegations that Mr. Perot's trip to
Hanoi in March 1987 did not have prior approval of the White House. They also
want to know if, on the trip, Mr. Perot improperly disclosed the Reagan
Administration's strategy for dealing with Hanoi on issues involving any
prisoners of war and servicemen missing in action.

A committee statement today said that Mr. Perot would appear with "former and
present Administration officials" to discuss his trips to Southeast Asia, his
assignment from the Reagan Administration and the report he provided the White
House after a 1987 visit to Hanoi. It also said Mr. Perot would discuss his
"continuing involvement on behalf of P.O.W.-M.I.A.'s."

Perot Sees Politics

Mr. Perot has publicly defended all of his actions on behalf of servicemen
missing in Southeast Asia, and has ascribed partisan political motives to his
accusers, generally present and former Administration officials dealing with the
issue.

Senate aides familiar with the negotiations between Mr. Perot and the committee
said that the terms of Mr. Perot's appearance were a contentious issue over
several months.

"Perot feels he's being called to be embarrassed," said one Congressional aide.
Another aide said that the committee chairman, Senator John Kerry, Democrat of
Massachusetts, and the vice chairman, Senator Robert C. Smith, Republican of New
Hampshire, had insisted that Mr. Perot testify. But the aide said they were
eager to avoid any appearance that they were coercing Mr. Perot or threatening
him with the committee's subpoena power.

Perot campaign aides are skeptical of the committee's intentions and fear that
Mr. Perot is being "set up" by Democratic and Republican members who want to
grill him on his business discussions in Hanoi, Congressional aides said. The
Perot aides were also said to think that the panel members wanted to link Mr.
Perot with some P.O.W.-M.I.A. advocates who have been described by some
officials as "way out there."

A statement issued by the committee today announced two rounds of hearings on
June 24-25 and June 30-July 1. Aside from Mr. Perot, the announced witnesses
include such former Pentagon officials as William Clements, who was Deputy
Defense Secretary in the Nixon Administration, and Gen. Eugene Tighe, a former
director of the Defense Intelligence Agency who concluded in 1976 that hundreds
of Americans could still be held in Southeast Asia.

Senator Kerry said the hearing would provide "important insights into efforts
America made on behalf of P.O.W.-M.I.A.'s since the Vietnam War ended."

But coming in the midst of a political season in which Mr. Perot's popularity
has been surging in the polls, the hearing is more likely to provide the most
complete examination of Mr. Perot's actions on the Vietnam assignment.

Senator John McCain, Republican of Arizona, who was a prisoner of war in
Vietnam, said of Mr. Perot, "I have heard he is very convinced that there are
still numbers of Americans being held against their will in Southeast Asia, and
I am very interested in knowing what leads him to hold that view."

LOAD-DATE: June 5, 1992

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1992 The New York Times Company


                              186 of 281 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                   June 7, 1992, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

Defiantly Incorrect

BYLINE: By Timothy Egan;  Timothy Egan is the Seattle bureau chief of The New
York Times.

SECTION: Section 6; Page 21; Column 1; Magazine Desk

LENGTH: 3822 words


The parade of personality disorders, all the men who hate women and the women
who love them, marches on in the talk shows of America. Each day brings new
revelations, darker and more embarassing than the previous ones, the kind of
details that were once confined to an analyst's couch but now fuel the
self-confession racket practiced by Oprah, Geraldo, Donahue and a half-dozen
others. John Callahan sits in his small basement apartment in Portland, Ore.,
his television tuned to the so-called reality shows, and he is inspired.

He draws a small, streetside restaurant, the door shut, no one inside. And in
the window, he puts a sign: "The Anorexic Cafe, Now Closed 24 Hours a Day."

Another day, another image comes to mind. Callahan sketches a blind man and his
Seeing Eye dog, walking on an airport tarmac toward a plane, escorted by a
flight attendant. "We've arranged a window seat for your dog so you can enjoy
the view," the stewardess says to the blind man.

Callahan imagines a twist on a classic story, and draws four small islands, each
with a person sitting on it, frowning. He labels the cartoon "The Dysfunctional
Family Robinson."

Finally, he turns on the medium itself. A condemned man sits tied to an electric
chair, awaiting the end. Next to him, behind a desk, is a talk-show host. "So,"
the host asks, "where do you go from here?"

Anorexia, blindness, dysfunctional families and the death penalty -- in a good
week, all of those topics can find their way into the cartoons of John Callahan.
Reality, as presented in the tell-all talk shows, provides a steady flow of
ideas. He drew a cartoon in March, showing Geraldo Rivera on his knees saying
his bedtime prayers. "Thank you, God, for all the tragedy, wretchedness and
perversion in the world," Geraldo says.

But for his ongoing source of inspiration, Callahan does not need television;
for that, he has himself. Abandoned at birth by his mother, he was educated by
Roman Catholic nuns of the old-style school of guilt and harsh discipline,
became an alcoholic by the age of 12 and then was paralyzed in an auto accident
shortly after his 21st birthday. On any given day, Callahan may call on his
family isolation, his religion, his alcoholism or the view from his wheelchair
to bring life to a blank sheet of paper.

At age 41, he finds himself at the center of a debate raging in editorial
offices across the country over how far to push the edge of humor in the
venerable American craft of cartooning. His 1989 autobiography, "Don't Worry, He
Won't Get Far on Foot," published by William Morrow, was a critical and
commercial hit, introducing a voice that had rarely been heard among the volumes
of stories about people overcoming physical disasters. It was inspirational, the
critics said, but not in the traditional sense of such works. When the actor
William Hurt purchased the rights to make a movie about Callahan's life, based
on the book, the cartoonist had one reservation. "Just don't call it 'Children
of a Lesser Quad,' " he said.

Two books of cartoons, "Do Not Disturb Any Further" and "Digesting the Child
Within," and weekly syndication in more than 40 newspapers have helped to
establish Callahan among the new breed of quirky sketch-and-gag artists like
Gary Larson, creator of the phenomenally popular "Far Side," and Berke Breathed,
who won a Pulitzer Prize in 1987 for "Bloom County," a strip he has since
discontinued in favor of a new cartoon. "Doonsbury" may trouble editors for its
political satire, but Callahan is often accused of doing something that many
readers consider more sinister: making fun of invalids and animals.

CALLAHAN HAS YET TO achieve the sort of mass-market fame of his friend Larson,
who lives in Seattle, or that of another cartoonist and former Portland
resident, Matt Groening, the creator of "The Simpsons" on Fox television and
"Life in Hell," a syndicated strip.

In all likelihood, his drawings will never end up on every other coffee cup
because they are so polarizing. He is either brilliant and savagely honest, as
many fans, in and out of wheelchairs, have told him in letters and phone calls.
Or he is sick, making fun of the most vulnerable people in society, as some
organizations that represent the handicapped have told him.

This year is a landmark for the 43 million Americans whom the Government
classifies as physically or mentally impaired. The Americans with Disabilities
Act, which went into effect in January, forbids bias in hiring and requires
businesses and public offices to accomodate the disabled. It has been called the
most sweeping anti-discrimination law since the Civil Rights Act of 1964. For
all the liberating intents of the new law, Callahan would add another dimension,
one that defies legislation: the freedom of the disabled to laugh at themselves.

Not that being crippled, blind or diseased is inherantly funny. Obviously it is
not. But, says Callahan, that does not mean pity should monopolize all feelings
for or about the disabled.

"I'm sick and tired of people who presume to speak for the disabled," says
Callahan, wheeling down the street in Portland, where he is a celebrity. "The
question of what is off-limits should not be defined by some special interest
group. The audience, the readers, should decide."

Just as Lenny Bruce broke the rules of stand-up comedy in the early 1960's,
Callahan sees himself as a rebel force against politically correct views and
people who are trying to narrow the boundaries of appropriate humor. The last
thing he wants is to be called by one of the new euphemisms for people with
disabilities, terms like "vertically challenged" for dwarfs or "otherly abled"
for someone in a wheelchair.

"Call me a gimp, call me a cripple, call me paralyzed for life, but just don't
call me something that I'm not," he says. "I'm not differently abled. I can't
walk. But I also hate it when people say 'wheelchair-bound.' People who can walk
are not car-bound."

Callahan's words, which can seem bitter and harsh at times, are softened by the
way he talks. He drops one-liners, throwaway jokes and self-deprecatory remarks
about himself in between barbs aimed at his critics. On an otherwise gloomy,
recent visit to the doctor, he says, "Why couldn't I have walking pneumonia?"

He has a mop of fading red hair, a ruddy complexion scarred by adolescent acne
and a large body, 6 foot 3, that seems uncomfortably tied into his wheelchair.
He struggles with his weight. A cartoon of his reflects the strain of trying to
exercise. The drawing shows an aerobics class for quadriplegics. The instructor
says, "O.K., let's get those eyeballs moving."

The tools of his artistry are simple, pen and sketch pad, but the mechanics are
not. Unable to move all his fingers, he draws by clutching a pen in his right
hand and then guiding it slowly across the page with his left. He produces 3 to
10 cartoons a week.

A few years ago, just as Callahan's cartoons were starting to catch on
nationally, he found himself in trouble over one particular drawing. It showed a
dark-skinned beggar in the street, wearing a sign that read: "Please help me. I
am blind and black, but not musical."

Letters poured in to some of the papers that carry Callahan, most of which are
on the West Coast. How dare he make fun of blind people, or blacks, or both, the
letter writers insisted. Callahan was a bit taken aback by the critics, some of
whom accused him of racism. In the midst of the controversy, Callahan says a
black man approached him in a restaurant.

"Did you draw that black and blind strip?" the man asked, according to
Callahan's recollection. The cartoonist nodded. Then, he said, the man shook his
hand and thanked him.

A similiar situation arose over a cartoon about a double amputee. The drawing
showed a bartender refusing to pour another drink for a man who had two
prosthetic hooks in place of hands. "Sorry Sam," says the bartender, "you can't
hold your liquor." Callahan says he was at a concert shortly after the panel
appeared, when a man who had lost his hands in Vietnam approached him and
thanked him profusely.

"My only compass for whether I've gone too far is the reaction I get from people
in wheelchairs, or with hooks for hands," says Callahan. "Like me, they are fed
up with people who presume to speak for the disabled. All the pity and
patronizing. That's what is truly detestable."

When pressed by critics, Callahan will rarely defend himself with drawn-out
explanations or appeals to reason. Instead, he falls back on a simple answer:
"It's funny."

Of late, other people have been doing the defending for him. The American Civil
Liberties Union of Oregon last year gave Callahan its Free Expression Award. He
was cited for a "history of facing challenge to artistic and intellectual
freedom." Last fall, he was honored by the Media Access Office in Los Angeles, a
disability center for the entertainment industry.

"From my experience, I would say about 90 percent of the people who find John's
work questionable are able-bodied," says Royce Hamrick, a paraplegic who is
president of the San Diego chapter of the National Spinal Cord Injury
Association. "In the disabled community, we make a lot of jokes that stay within
that community. What John is doing is bringing those out to everyone else."

But for every compliment and accolade, there is a fresh controversy. Last year,
Callahan drew a cartoon called "The Alzheimer Hoedown," which showed confused
couples at a square dance. They were scratching their heads, unable to follow
the instructions to "return to the girl that you just left." In an angry letter
to Callahan, Kathleen Higley, executive director of the St. Louis chapter of the
Alzheimer's Association, said the drawing had deeply upset some of her memebers.

"Four million Americans suffer from this mind-robbing disease," Higley wrote in
the letter. The victims, she said, "should be treated with dignity and
compassion, not ridicule."

A paper in California, the Coast Weekly of Carmel, canceled Callahan after a
storm of protest over one cartoon. It showed a dog, lying on its back, with a
windowpane imbedded inside its chest. A passerby asks, "How much is that window
in the doggie?" The cartoon has proved to be one of Callahan's most popular, and
he has since adapted it into an animated short film.

"A lot of people thought the cartoon was just a bit too distasteful," says
Bradley Zeve, editor and publisher of the Coast Weekly. "Of course, the editors
thought it was hilarious."

Callahan says there is a double standard for humor in this country. Virtually
within hours of the space shuttle accident five years ago, he says, people were
making jokes. But when Callahan takes the same impulse that drives street humor
about popular events and puts it into print, he's vilified.

"There is humor in all parts of life, families suffering from Alzheimer's or
cancer, who have their own private jokes as a way of coping with the pain," he
says. "So why is it crime to share the joke in print?" But applying that same
standard to, say, racial humor, would likely put Callahan on shaky ground with
fans who are otherwise more tolerant. The question with all gallows humor is
whether it dehumanizes its subject or helps to cover pain and break down false
pretense.

Callahan's best weapon with his critics, of course, is his own disability. He
can say things that others may be thinking, and usually get away with it,
precisely because he is quadriplegic. "People always say, 'How can he make fun
of the handicapped?' " Callahan says. "And then an editor will usually write
back and say that I'm in a wheelchair. Their attitude changes immediately."

While Callahan's defenders have used his disability to defuse critics, he says
he does not want special treatment because he is in a wheelchair. His cartoons,
he points out, do not carry a note to readers that the artist is crippled.

"Being in a wheelchair has nothing to do with why he can do the things he does,"
says Sam Gross, a veteran cartoonist whose drawings appear regularly in the New
Yorker, the National Lampoon and other publications. "He is in the vein of sick
humor -- but sick humor that's funny. He's intelligent and witty -- that is why
he gets away with it."

NOTHING IN JOHN Callahan's early life indicated that he would ever end up as
anything but a casualty on a police blotter. Taken to a Roman Catholic orphanage
after his birth in 1951, he was adopted by David Callahan, a Columbia River,
Ore., grain broker, and his wife, Rosemary, who thought they could not have any
children of their own. But less than six months after the adoption, Rosemary
Callahan gave birth to the first of five children. From as early as he can
remember, John, with his red hair and freckles, felt like an outsider.

He grew up in The Dalles, 80 miles east of Portland, which he describes as "a
sleepy wheat port with a small Irish Catholic community surrounded by snakes,
lizards and Mormans." His schooling was from the Sisters of the Holy Names; he
was one of the last generations of American schoolchildren to experience the
strict Catholic education by nuns in full habit. Every Saturday night, he went
to confession, where his sins, real and imagined, were told to a priest. Two
Callahan cartoons recall his somewhat tortured grade-school years. One shows a
boy at a chalkboard under the harsh stare of a bulky nun. As punishment, the boy
is repeating a line: "I am personally responsible for the agony of Christ."
Another pictures a church, with a sign out front: "Beware of Dogma."

At the age of 12, attending his grandmother's wake, Callahan discovered gin.
From then on, he was an active drinker, usually consuming enough alcohol to make
him pass out. "I spent almost my entire senior year in high school in the bag,"
he writes in his autobiography. His drinking was not daring, glamorous or fun.
Instead, it was, as he describes it, a pathetic sort of painkilling ritual. His
face disfigured by acne, feeling shut out at home and useless at school,
Callahan retreated to alcohol. He was drunk even while on the job as an orderly
at a state mental hospsital and, later, at an aluminum plant.

Early on in life, he knew he could draw and took great delight in savaging the
nuns with caricatures. But any ambition of becoming a cartoonist was clouded by
his alcoholism. He was motivated during his younger years by nothing so great as
a desire to get his next drink.

He reached his low point in The Dalles shortly after high school while hanging
out with a young man who sniffed paint constantly to get high. "No matter how
hard I tried, I could not catch up with him," Callahan writes. One day, while
high on paint fumes, Callahan's friend steered his Triumph into a moving trailer
rig; he was decapitated. Callahan left for Southern California shortly
thereafter.

On July 22, 1972, the last day Callahan ever walked, he started his morning in
Buena Park, Calif., with a half-pint of tequila. He had the shakes from a
hangover, but the booze steadied him. He got into his car, drunk at midday, and
went out for another half-pint of liquor. It did not matter that his license had
already been suspended for driving while intoxicated. He was 21 years old and
felt invulnerable. In the afternoon, he drank a six-pack of beer. In the
evening, he went to a party. Callahan left the party to bar-hop with a man he
had met that evening. Sometime in the early morning, traveling nearly 90 miles
an hour, with the drunken friend at the wheel, Callahan's Volkswagen ran into a
utility pole. The car was completed destroyed. Callahan's spine was severed. His
drinking partner, whom he has not seen since the day of the accident, suffered
only minor injuries.

Callahan spent his first weeks after the accident in intensive care at Harbor
General Hospital in Torrance, Calif. To hold his spine straight, he was fitted
with tongs that were inserted into two holes in his skull, and he remained "thus
crucified," as he calls it, for six weeks. It was not until he heard a doctor
say, ". . . 21 years old and paralyzed for life," that he cried. He is a C5-6
quadriplegic, which means that his spinal cord was severed between the fifth and
sixth vertebrae. Everything from his diaphragm down was without sensation or
control. He could move some muscles in his upper body, extend his fingers and,
after extensive therapy, grip a pen. By contrast, a paraplegic has use of the
upper body.

"Yes, quads wish they were paras," Callahan writes, "paras wish they were
able-bodied and the able-bodied wish they were Jane Fonda."

He is quick to point out that his penis works. At rehabiliation in the Ranchos
Los Amigos Hospital in Downey, Calif., Callahan learned about reflexogenic
erections, which would allow him to have sex if areas above his bladder and in
his thigh were massaged. But that was the only bright light in the early days of
rehab. Unable to feed or dress himself, or to control his bladder, he fell into
self-pity and thoughts of suicide. What brought him out of the depression,
slowly, was his own sense of black humor. He escaped in dreams, in which he
walked or played tennis, and in Scotch whisky, which he obtained from a
paraplegic who kept it in his locker.

Judging by the letters Callahan has received since writing his book, his
description of rehabiliation -- the bleakness, the denial, the sense of
abandonment, the bizarre humor and the gradual self-determination -- have helped
people in similiar binds get through the first year of being in a wheelchair.

"Most people in rehab probably aren't ready for John yet, but I loved it," says
Hamrick, an aerospace engineer who suffered a spinal-cord injury three years
ago. "You come out of your depression, your denial, by recognizing that your
disability is not the end of the world. Your disability, in fact, can add to
your personality."

Callahan moved back to Oregon shortly after his six-month rehabilation was up.
He lived on the money from an insurance settlement and continued to drink
heavily, even with a series of attendants whom he'd hired to take care of him.
He started drawing cartoons again, off and on, but never thought of making a
career of it. His single obsession was drink. He says he consumed more than a
fifth of hard liquor a day. On a summer day in 1978, Callahan was getting ready
for his usual routine, trying to open a bottle while his attendant was out on
errands. Using his teeth, he tried for an hour to pry open the bottle. Then it
fell to the floor and rolled away, out of reach. Callahan raged, screaming at
the sky. Then he had an epiphany.

"I knew with utter certainty that my problem was not quadriplegia, it was
alcoholism," Callahan writes. He has been in recovery since then and has become
a fervent believer in the 12-step program fostered by Alcoholics Anonymous. As
with the other major events of this life, therapy for alcohol has provided
fodder for Callahan's cartoons. A recent drawing is labeled "A.A. in L.A." and
shows an agent at the podium of a meeting. He says, "My name is Mort and I
represent Chuck who's an alcoholic."

Though sober, Callahan remained caustic and somewhat cynical toward traditional
views of how he should live the rest of his life. "The idea promoted in re-hab
of the socially well-adjusted, happily married quad made me sick," he says.
Gradually, his anger found its way into his drawings. His role models were Don
Martin, of Mad Magazine, and Sam Gross. Once he even called up Gross, who
advised him to keep sending out his cartoons, even though they were being
rejected by major magazines.

By the mid-80's, magazines like Playboy and Penthouse were running Callahan, as
was The Williamette Week, an alternative weekly in Portland that was also one of
the first papers to run Matt Groening and Lynda Barry. Many of Callahan's
cartoons went right after the liberal readers of the Portland paper. One
drawing, titled "The Politically Appropriate Brain," shows a pie chart inside a
man's head. Guilt makes up 40 percent, whales 10 percent, rain forests 10
percent, apartheid 10 percent and comfortable sandals 30 percent. It is the
favorite cartoon of Bud Clark, Portland's Mayor.

"John is very politically incorrect," says Mark Zusman, editor and co-owner of
The Willamette Week. "But over the years, everybody has gotten used to him. I
remember being taken aback by his answering machine. You'd call and his voice
would say, 'Hi, this is John, I'm really depressed right now so I can't come to
the phone. Please leave a message after the gunshot.' "

Callahan developed a style in which he would take a cliche and turn it on its
head. An early cartoon, for example, showed two cowboys getting ready to draw
their guns. One of the men is without arms. The other says, "Don't be a fool,
Billy."

Deborah Levin, a California talent agent who had helped to lauch both Groening
and Barry into syndication, scouted Callahan while on a Portland visit five
years ago. She was responsible for his national syndication, but only after long
explanations to the editors of different papers. Readers in south Florida, where
Callahan is run in The Miami Herald, recently voted him more popular than Dave
Barry, the Miami humor columnist.

Two of Callahan's longer cartoons, a narrative labeled "The Lighter Side of
Being Paralyzed for Life" and a later one called "How to Relate to Handicapped
People," have been widely reprinted in magazines and circulars used by the
disabled. He wrote in the latter panel that people overcompensate when they meet
someone in a wheelchair, usually acting overfriendly or patronizing or directing
questions to a friend of the handicapped person. Access Living, a United Way
organization in Chicago, has issued a poster of Callahan's satires on attitudes
toward the disabled, and the city government of Milpita, Calif., wants to use
some of his work in presentations.

Callahan's work has recently caught on in gift shops of recovery centers like
the Betty Ford Clinic, according to Levin. She is also working to sell his
cartoons on T-shirts and postcards. When asked if this spurt of marketing could
take away Callahan's edge, Levin says: "It hasn't changed him yet. But he's
maturing."

Even with new income from books and commercial sales, Callahan lives a spartan
life in the Portland studio apartment. His draws from bed, with straps and
cables hanging overhead, a cat nearby and the television usually on. The costs
of a full-time attendant and medical care have drained much of his earnings, he
says.

Despite his dismissive remarks, Callahan, who has had a series of girlfriends
over the last 20 years, would like to get married and have a family. Some day.
But even when speaking in rare solemn tones about his dreams for the future, he
cannot resist a self-cutting line: "I think it would be fun to hear the whir of
little wheels around the house."

NAME: John Callahan

LOAD-DATE: June 7, 1992

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photos: John Callahan. (pg. 20); Callahan can't move all his fingers,
so he draws by clutching a pen in his right hand and guiding it across the page
with his left. He produces 3 to 10 cartoons a week. (pg. 23); Callahan's view
from the wheelchair often gives life to a blank sheet of paper. (pg.
44)(Photographs by Robbie McClaran for The New YorK Times); Photos of some of
John Calahan's Cartoons.

TYPE: Biography

                   Copyright 1992 The New York Times Company


                              187 of 281 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                   June 7, 1992, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

Superpower Blues

BYLINE: By Alan Wolfe;  Alan Wolfe is the dean of the graduate faculty at the
New School for Social Research and editor of "America at Century's End."

SECTION: Section 7; Page 20; Column 3; Book Review Desk

LENGTH: 1020 words



THE DEMOCRACY TRAP
The Perils of the Post-Cold War World.
By Graham E. Fuller.
285 pp. New York:
Dutton. $20.

LIKE Salman Rushdie's character Saleem Sinai, who was born at precisely the
moment that India achieved its independence from Britain, the largest generation
of Americans came into the world simultaneously with the start of the cold war.
The generation that routinely ducked under its desks through air-raid drills,
attended college during the war in Vietnam, married and started families amid
the energy crisis, and prospered (or failed) in the go-go 80's now faces a
serious challenge. Can it cohere without the cold war, which had, for so long,
defined its existence?

Graham E. Fuller -- a former Foreign Service official who now is a senior
political analyst at the RAND Corporation -- believes that Americans will long
for the days of the cold war when they begin to face the problems raised by its
end. And that is the more optimistic account of "The Democracy Trap," for he
also argues that Americans may not be able to face those problems at all.

Mr. Fuller correctly understands that the cold war period was the exception, not
the rule. (So, one could argue, were the postwar economic boom, the expansion to
the suburbs, the Ozzie-and-Harriet nuclear family and the space race.) For all
the angst of the 60's, the baby-boom generation has lived with remarkably little
international conflict, in part because of the stability produced by stalemated
superpowers possessing nuclear arms. The generation that came before knew a
world war and a Great Depression. The generation that comes after, Mr. Fuller
argues, is likely to face a world characterized by intense nationalist conflict,
frequent civil wars, religious frenzy and hatred and, inevitably, greater
violence. The paramount challenge we will face, Mr. Fuller maintains, is
preparing ourselves for the return to a more "normal" world of war and
instability.

The author does not believe we will be able to rise to the challenge. What
stands in our way is what is most precious about us: our democratic system. For
all its virtues, he believes, democracy is a trap. It encourages us to indulge
in the politics of immediate gratification. It enables interest groups to put
their parochial needs before the needs of the whole. It rewards leaders who
emphasize good news, not hard work. It exalts individualism when what we need is
to work together. Mr. Fuller writes: "The United States with its contemporary
designer morality just might have something to gain from looking back to
societies in which moral values are less subject to the tides of social
preference or the interpretations and rationalizations of sociologists."

Walter Lippmann, Reinhold Niebuhr and Hans Morgenthau were only some of the
influential American intellectuals who also perceived contradictions between the
domestic needs of American democracy and the international demands of superpower
status. Americans, it seems, are always in need of thinkers who can cut through
the cycle of can-do optimism and total withdrawal that characterizes American
attitudes toward the rest of the world.

But unlike Lippmann and other realists who were as clearsighted in talking about
the United States as they were in understanding the world, Mr. Fuller -- who
knows much about Islam, Africa and the Soviet Union -- is dyspeptic when he
discusses his own country. It may well be that his many years of service outside
this country have colored his views of what takes place inside. Appalled at
nearly everything he sees, he delivers a jeremiad against everything he does not
like: affirmative action, ethnic consciousness, television, the underclass,
drugs and litigation -- without ever demonstrating the role that any of them
play in our foreign policy.

Whereas most people around the world want to copy the United States, Mr. Fuller
wants this country to copy what he has learned around the world. Intrigued by
Muslim notions of determinism and the frailty of man, he suggests, with some
seriousness, the virtues of an Islamic republic for America. (He believes that
"Arabs are still fair game in American culture for any kind of gross ethnic
caricature, racial slur or outrageous stereotype -- they are the only major
ethnic group left that can be treated prejudiciously with total impunity.")
Surely it is the Orientalist in him who can suggest, in a passage that would
make Walter Lippmann blanch, that "we need to be more conscious of the Yin and
Yang, the concept of complementarity and balance of virtues that seems somehow
alien to our American culture."

"The Democracy Trap" is anything but a tightly argued, well-researched and
historically grounded effort to predict the future by studying the past. It is,
rather, an odd mixture of whatever is on Graham Fuller's mind, some of it
interesting, some trivial. Mr. Fuller is on target when he says that Americans
are ill prepared to deal with such issues as global poverty or the collapse of
empire. We may indeed come to wish for the good old days of the cold war, when
understanding the world was so much easier. We are surely not at the end of
history but rather at the start of a historical era we can barely comprehend.
But we will have to wait for books more rooted in a realistic view of the world
and our place in it before we can understand the paths before us.



CULTURE SHOCKS

Americans generally have little recognition of the extent to which the immigrant
culture and society of America, and its deep-rooted Anglo-Saxon sense of rule of
law, is absolutely unique in the world. We are therefore less intuitively
equipped to understand foreign cultures than almost any other country on earth.
Young Americans are generally shocked the first time they encounter in depth the
attitudes, thinking and culture even of a European society, much less societies
of the third world. The person who grows up in Zaire is better equipped to
understand the political and cultural motivations of an Egyptian, a Brazilian or
an Indian than is an American. -- From "The Democracy Trap."

LOAD-DATE: June 7, 1992

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Review

                   Copyright 1992 The New York Times Company


                              188 of 281 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                   June 7, 1992, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

MAKING A DIFFERENCE;
A Package Deal in Court

BYLINE: By BARNABY J. FEDER

SECTION: Section 3; Page 12; Column 5; Financial Desk

LENGTH: 300 words


When Steven Phillips, a Manhattan attorney with a growing client list of
keyboard operators, journalists and others suffering from typing injuries, began
to wonder how to gain more attention for their problems, he naturally turned to
Federal Judge Jack B. Weinstein in Brooklyn. Over his 25-year career on the
Federal bench, Judge Weinstein has shown a willingness for taking dramatic steps
to join related cases together and keep them moving.

Judge Weinstein's high-profile moves included consolidation of huge numbers of
asbestos complaints and of cases related to diethylstilbestrol, or DES, the
pregnancy drug thought to cause cancer in the daughters of women who took it. He
also oversaw a nationwide settlement of lawsuits against chemical companies by
Vietnam veterans claiming they were injured by exposure to Agent Orange.

Sure enough, the 70-year-old jurist concluded last Tuesday that the rapidly
growing caseload of repetitive stress complaints by the electronic equipment
users should also be consolidated. He said the move would allow more efficient
and consistent rulings on the basic scientific questions about such injuries and
how they arise, and make it easier to alert the public to potential hazards.
Judge Weinstein also pointed out the benefits of pooling knowledge for lawyers.

"Attorneys for all parties and potential parties will be better informed and
able to reach more equitable dispositions of cases more quickly and at less
cost," he said.

A native of Wichita, Kan., Judge Weinstein graduated from Columbia Law School.
He made his mark as a legal scholar, writing books on evidence and civil
practice while teaching at Columbia. He has also taught at Brooklyn Law School
and takes obvious delight in sparring with former students who appear before
him.

LOAD-DATE: June 7, 1992

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo: Judge Jack B. Weinstein (Fred R. Conrad/The New York Times)

                   Copyright 1992 The New York Times Company


                              189 of 281 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                   June 7, 1992, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

A Loud, Angry World on the Dial

BYLINE: By BRUCE WEBER

SECTION: Section 1; Page 31; Column 2; Metropolitan Desk

LENGTH: 2023 words


"Am I right?"

The caller's name was Barbara, and she was venting spleen about many things, but
in particular about Ross Perot, the putative candidate.

"I think the man is a bigot and would be dangerous as President," she said. "Am
I right?"

This was Wednesday, a little before 10 in the morning, well into an ordinarily
cacophonous call-in radio day in New York. The station was WEVD, the host was
Bill Mazer, but to judge from a daylong round-the-clock radio vigil -- O.K., a
couple of catnaps were involved -- it could have been almost anywhere on the
dial, AM or FM, and any time, day or night.

A Shelter for Homeless Thoughts

The issues and subjects may have varied -- among the most frequently broached
were Presidential politics, the Amy Fisher case, the Los Angeles riots, the
left-wing media conspiracy, Bobby Bonilla's earplugs and what's wrong with Jews,
blacks and Italians -- but for all the plaints and opinions launched into the
ionosphere, a whiny "Am I right?" (or its corollary "Am I wrong?") was the pithy
theme.

Think of call-in radio as a precursor to the electronic bulletin board, a place
where anonymously expressed thoughts appear and evanesce; or as a vanity press
for the spoken word, a place where thoughts that have no place else to go can be
made manifest. As a phenomenon it is neither new nor local, of course, but it is
proliferating, and in New York it is probably at its loudest.

"What's amazing is that any ordinary guy can have access to hundreds of
thousands of people," said Eric Bogosian, the performance artist and the author
of the play "Talk Radio," adding that in New York more than elsewhere, "an
audience has developed that is mostly based on rancor."

Vehemence and Vitriol, Paranoia and Pettiness

Listening in for a day is to be pelted with tales and travails, vehemence and
vitriol, paranoia and pettiness, stupidity masquerading as wisdom and, to be
fair, occasionally even vice-versa. People speak amazing sentences. To wit, from
Wednesday:

"I want to start an association, for profit, with a newsletter and everything,
but I just don't know where to start."

"He says, 'C'mon, let's go out and shop for a ring,' and I'm like, 'No way.' "

"Who's to say that we know who they say won the election actually won the
election?"

"My triglycerides are up double, and I can't get them down, nohow."

Both Barbara J. Sabol, the city's Human Resources Commissioner, and Mr. Perot
were explicitly compared to Hitler. A stunning list of politicians, including
President Bush, Gov. Bill Clinton, Mayor David N. Dinkins, the Rev. Al Sharpton
and State Attorney General Robert Abrams were dismissed as racist, incompetent,
vacant or all of the above. Hosts asked several leading questions:

"What are some of the issues we should put before Bill Clinton?"

"If someone cheated on you, could you trust again?"

"Are you crying, loving or leaving tonight?"

It's pretty dizzying, and a few conclusions are inescapable. First, people are
almost intolerably cranky. Second, they effuse opinions. Third, no matter what
their views, they need affirmation.

This was the day, for instance, that a woman identifying herself as Pat Connery,
the mother of Mary Jo Buttafuoco, the Long Island woman whom the police say was
shot by her husband's teen-age lover, the suddenly infamous Amy Fisher, called
John Gambling on WOR. She would lay down her life for her son-in-law Joseph,
Mrs. Connery said, adding that her youngest daughter had said to her: "I hope
someday, Mom, that I could find a guy like Joe."

'I Say Throw the Bum Out'

Radio listeners -- and hosts -- were not sympathetic. Curtis and Lisa Sliwa, the
Guardian Angels leaders who are hosts of a morning drive-time show on WABC,
ridiculed the Buttafuocos as well as Dr. Joyce Brothers, who had told The New
York Post that morning that the marriage deserved another chance.

"Should she take the guy back?" Ms. Sliwa asked her listeners.

"Lisa, I say throw the bum out," said a caller named David.

"Let her go," a caller named Candy added, referring to Miss Fisher, "but hang
him."

Joan Hamburg, whose long-running morning show on WOR attracts mostly women,
posed the question, "What would you do if something like this happened in your
life?" Callers tried to identify with either Mrs. Buttafuoco or Miss Fisher.

A caller named Betty told a story of a friend who, at age 14, was seduced by the
owner of a pet store. As a result, Betty said, "she hasn't had a terribly happy
life."

Shortly afterwards, a man named Brad called to say that he didn't think it was
possible for a marriage to survive an affair, and that his own situation was
proof. He disagreed with a previous caller who had said the spouse always
manages to know when infidelity is in the wind, because he himself was caught
completely by surprise.

"How did you find out?" Ms. Hamburg asked.

"From my father," Brad said.

"From your father?" Ms. Hamburg said, aghast. "How did he find out?"

"From the maid," Brad said.

"Thank you, Brad, for sharing that with us," Ms. Hamburg said.

The Hosts
New Tribal Gods, And So Accessible

It is probably true that most people who listen to radio still do so for
information and entertainment. According to the Arbitron Company, an audience
measurement service, the New York stations with the most listeners are those
that focus on music and news.

Although Arbitron doesn't rank the specific shows, the undisputed king of talk
radio in the New York region is Bob Grant, the conservative icon who occupies
the crucial afternoon drive-time slot on WABC. An average of 130,500 people are
tuned into the show during any 15-minute period between 3 P.M. and 7 P.M.,
putting the show at 5th in the ratings for its time period.

Mr. Grant is one of about 1,000 talk show hosts in the country, and WABC is one
of about 650 stations with an all-talk format, said Michael Harrison, who edits
a trade publication called Talkers and keeps track of the topics discussed over
talk radio. The hottest topic by far, he said, is Mr. Perot's undeclared race
for the White House.

In the New York region, it is possible to sample dozens of call-in shows in a
day. In addition to the many general interest and current events forums, there
are local arenas for black issues, Christian spiritual issues and personal
problems, shows on which to share food recipes or computer hacking secrets, get
real-estate, medical or financial advice and, of course, to argue about sports.
But they share this call-in world as if it were an actual place and they were
its citizens, sort of an ethnic group of their own.

"It's the one medium left where people can interact with each other with a sense
of immediacy," said Imhotep Gary Byrd, who is the host of a talk show on WLIB
from 10 A.M. to 2 P.M, Monday through Thursday. "You get information and you can
react immediately."

Although Mr. Byrd's show, which is broadcast live from the Apollo Theater on
125th Street, has a call-in format, it is almost a neighborhood gathering. The
host sits at a table onstage. People wander in off the street and sit down, read
the newspaper, offer occasional catcalls and now and then speak. And though the
show, and the station's programming in general, is directed primarily at black
listeners, Mr. Byrd sees his audience as part of a larger one.

"In the black community, radio is a tribal drum," he said. "We don't have the
cohesion in our community that we used to have, and for a number of people,
black talk radio is a way to stay in touch with their neighbors." But he added:
"There's a tremendous amount of frustration people feel -- not just black people
-- about not being able to affect change. They want to sound off in a way that
their opinions count. In a certain way, it's better than a vote."

To the listeners, the hosts, of course, are notorious. One illustration occurred
at a New York Rangers playoff game against the Pittsburgh Penguins last month at
Madison Square Garden. Attending the game, Chris (Mad Dog) Russo, the
high-pitched co-host of "Mike and the Mad Dog," the afternoon show on WFAN, the
city's all-sports station, was recognized by some fans. Mr. Russo, who had
criticized a Ranger on the air for slashing and injuring an opposing player, was
the target of an obscene chant and was physically threatened.

'We Haven't Changed Much'

"This guy blocked his way in the aisle," said Bob Gelb, the show's producer, who
accompanied Mr. Russo to the game. "And he said, 'I got 50 bucks for anyone who
would punch this guy in the face.' "

This is a theme -- the supplicant betrayed by an icon -- that Mr. Bogosian
explored in "Talk Radio." In it, the central character, a virulent call-in host
who openly disdains many of his callers is visited by his biggest fan, who turns
out to be a murderous lunatic.

"We haven't changed much in 30,000 years," Mr. Bogosian said. "The average
person uses people in the mass media the way the Greeks and Romans used their
gods. They all want to touch the flame. And the talk-radio guy is so
accessible."

The Callers
Naming Everyone But Themselves

The callers are a minuscule percentage of the listening audience, of course, but
they are the unsilent minority, and some of them are famous in the call-in
community. Frank from Queens, Eli from Westchester: it's like the cool clique in
school.

"They know me all up and down the dial," said John from Staten Island.

"You name it and I have an opinion on it," added John, who said he was 38 years
old and worked as a computer console operator. Like several other regular
callers who were interviewed, he displayed an encyclopedic knowledge of who was
on the air and when, and would not give his last name. He said he called a
number of shows and had been a devotee of call-in radio since the Vietnam War,
provoked by what he said was the left leanings of the media.

"Liberalism is an illness," he said, adding, unsurprisingly, that of all the
talk-show hosts, Mr. Grant, whom he calls once or twice a week, was his
favorite. Mr. Grant says homosexuality is a perversion and refers to Bill
Clinton as "the sleazebag."

Asked why he calls so frequently, John echoed the sentiments of several callers.
"I like to let my pent-up frustrations out," he said, "And I'm looking to find
other people who feel the same way as I do, to validate my feelings."

The Coming of Car Phones

Anyone wishing for validation on the air can find an outlet 24 hours a day, but
there's no fuller menu than in the late afternoon: drive time. Mr. Gelb, the
WFAN producer, said, "Car phones have changed talk radio."

A Wednesday tour of the dial between 5 P.M. and 6 P.M. turned up the following:
On WFAN, callers asked Mr. Francesa (Mike) and Mr. Russo (Mad Dog) to do a
frenetic flip-flop between baseball and basketball.

"I wanna propose a trade. Barkley to Minnesota for Philly's number 3 pick.
Possible?"

"The San Diego Padres: What are the possibilities this year?"

Switch to WMCA, a station devoted to religious programming. On "Table Talk" with
Rich Buehler and his guest, a therapist named Marilyn Murray, a caller named
Joan said she suffered from anorexia, bulimia, alcohol and drug addiction and
sexual obsessions. "I feel like I can't do anything right," she said. "Is it
normal to come through what I feel was a normal childhood with those kinds of
problems?"

Ms. Miller responded: "It's not uncommon."

Free Financial Advice

Switch to WEVD, where the Zock brothers, Paul and Don, were dispensing financial
advice about irrevocable trusts.

To WLIB. Mark Riley led a discussion of what black people should expect from
Presidential candidates. On WABC, a college student named Joe sought -- and
received -- consolation from Mr. Grant for a college curriculum that was "50
percent devoted to sensitivity training and propaganda."

And finally, on WOR, just before the hour ended, Gene Burns, who had been
directing a forum about the Columbus quincentenary, signed off with the
following: "The Gene Burns program is made possible by the First Amendment of
the Constitution."

He, at least, was right.

LOAD-DATE: June 7, 1992

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photos: Bob Grant, the afternoon talk-radio host for WABC-AM, has the
fifth-highest rated show in the New York area between 3 and 7 P.M. Mr. Grant, a
conservative icon, is one of about 1,000 talk-show hosts in the country. (Jim
Estrin/The New York Times) (pg. 31); Broadcasting live from the Apollo Theater
in Harlem, Imhotep Gary Byrd listened to Lady Peachema perform last week on his
show, which is broadcast on WLIB. Mr. Byrd said of his audience: "They want to
sound off in a way that their opinions count. In a certain way, it's better than
a vote." (Jim Estrin/The New York Times); Bill Mazar; Curtis and Lisa Sliwa;
Imhotep Gary Byrd; Mike Francesa (pg. 38)

                   Copyright 1992 The New York Times Company


                              190 of 281 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                   June 7, 1992, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

Mexican Women, Doffing Old Ways, Join Exodus

BYLINE: By TIM GOLDEN,  Special to The New York Times

SECTION: Section 1; Page 1; Column 3; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 1875 words

DATELINE: TIJUANA, Mexico, June 1


When the husband of Esther Alvarez left their home in the northern city of
Hermosillo to look for work in the United States, she took her first job, as a
janitor, and told her two young children to expect their father back soon.

"He was going to go and make some money," Mrs. Alvarez said. "I don't know if he
ever did."

Mrs. Alvarez was sitting by the fetid Tijuana River, awaiting the night. After
it fell, she planned to climb the high metal barrier that separates Mexico from
San Ysidro, Calif., run the gantlet of bandits and Border Patrol agents, and
follow her husband's path. She said that she was not planning to look for him
and that he had probably found another woman a long time ago. Instead, she said,
she was going to make good on his promise for her children.

With hundreds of thousands of other women, Mrs. Alvarez, 35 years old, is part
of a fundamental change in the tide of undocumented Mexican migrants to the
United States.

After decades in which the flow was made up overwhelmingly of men traveling for
seasonal work, the number of Mexican women crossing into the United States has
risen sharply in recent years. Census and immigration data indicate that women
now account for about half of the Mexican immigrants who settle in the United
States.

Partial records of the Mexican adults caught crossing the border illegally show
that the proportion of women among them has nearly doubled, from 8 percent to
about 15 percent, since 1987.

Many of the women have gone to join husbands and other family members who gained
amnesty under the 1986 immigration-reform law. Others have been sent for by
fathers, husbands or boyfriends who, even without residency papers, have become
more settled or financially secure. But sociologists and anthropologists who
have studied the phenomenon say it also reflects a steady evolution in the roles
that women are playing in a society defined for centuries by its rigid
patriarchy.

Over the last two decades especially, Mexican women have grown more independent
of their families. They marry later and have fewer children. Though they have
been working outside their homes in growing numbers since the 1950's, the
economic crisis that began in 1982 has pushed many more into the labor force.

The experience of being left behind by migrant husbands has itself often
transformed the lives of Mexican women. In tradition-bound communities in the
countryside, the sudden responsibility for homes and children has been the
catalyst for a new self-confidence and autonomy, researchers say. Women who
might not previously have made decisions about where to live are now insisting
on joining husbands in the United States or seeking lives of their own there.

"These women are more and more in control of their own lives," said Mercedes
Gonzalez de la Rocha, an anthropologist who studied women leaving an isolated
farming village in the western state of Jalisco.

The Cultures Clash At Mexican Fiestas

For the time being, there are only hints of how Mexican society might be changed
by the exposure of so many more women to a culture in which women's independence
is comparatively matter-of-fact.

In the central state of Puebla, the annual fiestas of towns that have long sent
their men to work in the United States have become parades of suddenly clashing
cultures. Women who have stayed behind dress in the braided hair and embroidered
skirts of their great-grandmothers; those back visiting from "the other side"
wear nylons, punk haircuts and costume jewelry.

In San Francisco or Chicago, Mexican women say the situation is sometimes
reversed: women whose independence in Mexico has led to their trips north find
themselves back to cooking, cleaning and caring for their children in insular
communities that resemble rural Mexico as much as they do the next neighborhood.

Yet from about three dozen Mexican women interviewed in the United States or as
they crossed the border came story after story of experiences not easily
forgotten and of people who it seemed would not be the same.

Guillermina Bautista, now a domestic worker in Los Angeles, told how in one of
many beatings she received from her alcoholic husband in their poor village in
Oaxaca State he broke her nose. She retaliated by scalding him with hot soup.

"My mother almost killed me," the 29-year-old Ms. Bautista recalled. "She said,
'You don't raise your hand to your husband.' And I forgave him. I had to live
with him. He was the father of my children. And what would people say if you did
anything?"

After her husband left her, Ms. Bautista took her two small boys and sneaked
across the border at Tijuana as he had. She said she did not look for him when
she arrived in Los Angeles; he eventually found her through a sister of hers who
lived there. And when Ms. Bautista refused to stay with him, she said, he again
beat her badly.

"I called my sister," Ms. Bautista said. "She said, 'If you want to be done with
this problem, this is what you do.' I called the Santa Monica police, and in the
end they deported him."

Migration Changes The Age-Old Ways

Telling her story at a Roman Catholic Church center in West Los Angeles after a
meeting of the fledgling domestic workers' cooperative that she and other
Mexican and Central American women have joined, Ms. Bautista seemed at once
proud and taken aback by what she had done.

Other members of the cooperative nodded when Juana Campos, a 25-year-old woman
raised in the western Mexican town of Zacapu, said: "Yesterday, in Mexico, you
did everything without thinking about it. Things were the way they always were.
Here, you have to understand things, to try to make them like you want."

Like the men who preceded them, the women who come to the United States are
predominantly poor or working-class natives of a handful of western Mexican
states. Relatively few are middle class or professional, in deliberate pursuit
of freedom from the rules and social pressures that shaped their Mexican lives.

Magdalena Grijalva, 30, was of the minority. A former army nurse from the state
capital of Oaxaca, she said she had gone to Los Angeles "fleeing" her former
husband, an army doctor.

"Once we got married, he wanted me to stop working and dedicate myself to him,"
she said. "I always thought it was important to have a profession."

A survey of 718 women crossing into the United States from Tijuana found that
only 10 percent said they were going to join their families; 67 percent said
they were seeking jobs. "The fact that they are going to work tells you a lot
about what has changed in Mexican society," said Ofelia Woo, a fellow at the
College of the Northern Border, the research institute just south of Tijuana
that conducted the study.

Men's Machismo Stays Strong

In many traditional villages, as the contribution of women to the family economy
has grown, their submissiveness has eroded; the men's machismo, their masculine
pride, generally has not. Orlando Centeno, a machinist from the western state of
Nayarit, summarized the situation while waiting to cross with his wife through a
remote canyon at Tijuana's edge: "The woman in Mexico does what the man says."

Men's migration to the United States has often been understood as an expression
of that balance of powers. Yet social scientists who have studied migrant
communities say the prolonged absences of so many men have in fact turned some
of those villages into a locus of change.

In the western state of Michoacan, the arrival of strawberry-packing plants in
the mid-1960's opened up jobs to young women whose fathers or husbands often
were not around to object, said Gail Mummert, an anthropologist who has studied
women's migration from the state. In northern Michoacan, women have gone into
the hog-raising industry. In other places, they now work as agricultural day
laborers.

"Now, single women working are just generally accepted," Dr. Mummert said of the
village she studied. She added that for the strawberry packers, for the young
women who qualify as "spinsters" by staying unmarried past their early 20's, and
for women whose autonomy has surged in their husbands' absence, the thought of
seeking jobs in Los Angeles or Chicago, if not the obvious step, is far less
radical than it might have been for their mothers or older sisters.

Standing along the Tijuana-San Ysidro barrier late one night, Griselda Nava
Hernandez, 17, described the change in her Michoacan family. Her four sisters
"think differently," she said. "They have husbands."

In San Miguel Acuexcomac, a town near the city of Puebla, the shift appears to
have somewhat less to do with women's independent action. Unlike the earlier
generations of men who traveled alone to Los Angeles, young San Miguel men now
"steal" girlfriends, as the local saying goes, and take them along.

In the past, Mexican men have typically objected to the presence of their wives
or girlfriends in the United States. Part of what has changed, researchers said,
is that as more women have settled in the United States, they have constituted
networks of support for the new immigrants.

Novel as it may be for women to lend each other money for the trip, lobby one
another's husbands for their assent, or find each other jobs, such obstacles
often pale against that of the border itself.

Dr. Rodrigo A. Munoz, a psychiatrist at the University of California, San Diego
School of Medicine, who has treated some 200 immigrant women, said about half
suffered from depression and nearly a fourth from post traumatic stress
disorder. That diagnosis is perhaps most familiar to Americans from veterans of
the Vietnam War.

Dr. Munoz said his patients were usually reacting to having been beaten or raped
by their own smugglers or by bandits, or having been stuffed for hours in the
trunks of cars. "The image I got is of a war zone with many victims," he said,
describing southern San Diego County.

2 Women Are Lured Into Bondage in U.S.

In a Tijuana shelter, Araceli Lopez, 19, told how two Mexican-American women
that she and her mother had met there had lured them to San Diego with a promise
of well-paid jobs as maids. But after having entered the United States on a
nightmarish journey through a sewer pipe, Miss Lopez said, the women virtually
enslaved her and her mother as unpaid servants. "We were very afraid," she said,
"but we could not find anyone to help us."

On a shopping trip, Miss Lopez said, she and her mother bolted from the women
and, mistaking a mall security guard for an immigration agent, tried to have the
man arrest them. Finally, they hitched a ride to the border and walked back
across.

Estela Munoz, 29, who sat on the Tijuana River levee with her friend Esther
Alvarez, said that though she had crossed the border once before, she was no
less terrified the second time. But having been abandoned by her husband and
with four children to feed, she said she saw no alternative.

"I never thought I would be doing something like this," she said. "But I
believed that man."

Mrs. Alvarez looked across the levee at the crowd gathering before the tall,
black metal fence. "I don't know what's there," she said. "But it has to be
something better than here."

LOAD-DATE: June 7, 1992

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photos: A mother and child joined other Mexicans in Tijuana as they
awaited nightfall to slip over the border. (Jim Wilson/The New York Times) (pg.
1); The number of Mexican women crossing into the United States has risen
sharply in recent years. On a levee in Tijuana, a group of Mexicans waited for
nightfall before trying to slip across the border into the U.S. (Jim Wilson/The
New York Times) (pg. 18)

                   Copyright 1992 The New York Times Company


                              191 of 281 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                   June 7, 1992, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

Abroad at Home;
Governing By Television

BYLINE: By ANTHONY LEWIS

SECTION: Section 4; Page 19; Column 1; Editorial Desk

LENGTH: 738 words

DATELINE: BOSTON


Ross Perot is the most interesting thing that has happened to American politics
in years. He is also the scariest.

He has tuned in brilliantly to Americans' frustration with government, their
perception that life in this country is growing worse and politicians do nothing
about it. He has convinced an astonishing number of people that he can fix
things if he is put in charge.

He has not said what he would do about the hard problems, and voters do not seem
to care. But he has indicated how he would govern. That is the scary part.

"The electronic town hall" is Mr. Perot's idea. Every so often he would put on a
television program about an issue: how to deal with the budget deficit, say. His
people, Congressmen and others would argue different views. Then the public
would vote -- by push-button telephone or postcard.

"If we ever put the people back in charge of this country and make sure they
understand the issues," Mr. Perot says, "you'll see the White House and
Congress, like a ballet, pirouetting around the stage getting it done in
unison."

Direct democracy. But who will "make sure" the people understand the issues? The
opportunities for manipulation are overwhelming.

Few of the issues that confront governments are so simple that they can be
decided by pushing a telephone button or checking a postcard. In fact, that kind
of direct democracy is usually a device to transfer real power to a maximum
leader.

Mussolini made himself Il Duce by saying he would end political stalemate and
make the trains run on time. At his behest crowds chanted "Duce! Duce! Duce!"
and the Italian Parliament was reduced to a rubber stamp.

Demagogues of all kinds have used popular referendums to overwhelm parliamentary
opposition. Fidel Castro tried his opponents before chanting crowds in a
football stadium. The image of politicians pirouetting at the people's command
is not a happy one, given the history of this century.

Doubts about Mr. Perot's proposed method of governing are strengthened when one
looks carefully at the man who would be in charge. Ross Perot has a record of
ruthless determination to get his way when he thinks he is right, which is
always.

Here is a small example, the more frightening because it is so small. John
Wheeler, who was chairman of the fund that built the Vietnam War Memorial in
Washington, told the story last week in The Los Angeles Times.

Ross Perot was against Maya Lin's winning design for the memorial, the low black
wall with the names of America's dead inscribed in the order of their death. He
told Mr. Wheeler that unless the design was changed as he wanted, "I'll wipe you
out."

Mr. Perot hired Roy Cohn, the New York lawyer, to stop the memorial from being
built as designed. Mr. Cohn demanded the memorial fund's records, charging that
it had misused money. An audit showed nothing wrong. Finally, after delay caused
by Mr. Perot's obstruction, the memorial was built.

Frank Borman, the former astronaut, was once hired by Mr. Perot to try out the
electronic town meeting idea. But he told Michael Kelly of The New York Times
that he had come to think it was a bad idea, one with "enormous potential for
manipulating the emotions of people" and intimidating Congress.

"You realize as you get older that a lot of issues are very profound and
difficult to understand," Mr. Borman said. "I don't think you can govern 250
million people with a TV set."

The founders of the United States, the men who wrote the Constitution, chose not
direct democracy but a representative republic. And they created a system with
many checks and balances, knowing that it would not be as efficient as a tyranny
but preferring liberty to efficiency.

The checks and balances have become frustrating in our day, with Congress and
the Presidency politically divided. But safety is still better than efficiency.
Robert Michel, the Republican Leader of the House, made the case when he warned
last month against "the glib reply, the demagogue's gift for
oversimplification." He said of Ross Perot:

"He isn't the first, not going to be the last, to say that democracy isn't
working and that if you trust me with power I'll solve your problems. That
message, sometimes sinister, sometimes just downright silly, has been heard all
over the world at various times in this century. That siren call has enchanted
good, decent people who are frustrated and disillusioned . . ."

LOAD-DATE: June 7, 1992

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Op-Ed

                   Copyright 1992 The New York Times Company


                              192 of 281 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                   June 7, 1992, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

Hanoi Jails Lawyer for Links With American

BYLINE: By BARBARA CROSSETTE,  Special to The New York Times

SECTION: Section 1; Page 19; Column 1; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 670 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, June 6


At a time when the United States is moving steadily but slowly toward lifting an
embargo and establishing diplomatic relations with Vietnam, Hanoi has chosen to
send a strong if perplexing message to its people against fraternizing with
Americans.

In mid-May, a southern Vietnamese lawyer who had aided homeless orphans with the
backing of leaders of the American antiwar movement was sent to prison for 12
years for maintaining ties with United States citizens. His crime -- an
"anti-socialist act" -- was trying to go into business with an American who
advocates ending the embargo against the Vietnamese. He was arrested with
another Vietnamese and Michael Morrow, a former American journalist who
uncovered the story of the My Lai massacre.

The case might have gone unnoticed here if the lawyer had not been Doan Thanh
Liem and the charity he assisted and later directed had not been the Shoeshine
Boys project.

The project, begun in 1968 by an American conscientious objector, Richard
Hughes, captured the imagination of Americans who were dismayed by the war. In
Saigon and Danang, Mr. Hughes set up homes for boys, some of them severely
handicapped, who had known nothing but rough life on the streets. After Mr.
Hughes left Vietnam in 1976, the project was ended, and the balance of the money
he had raised was used for another program for homeless children.

The official hounding of Mr. Liem after the fall of Saigon in 1975, culminating
in his arrest in 1990 and his trial last month, has provoked in recent weeks a
volley of letters to Hanoi from leading members of Congress and George S.
McGovern, the former Senator and Presidential candidate who was an outspoken
critic of the war.

A May 18 petition to the Vietnamese Communist Party's Secretary General, Do
Muoi, from dozens of American intellectuals and celebrities reads like a who's
who of the antiwar movement. Among the signers are Ed Asner, Daniel Berrigan,
Noam Chomsky, Jane Fonda, Frances FitzGerald, Tom Hayden, Seymour Hersh, Ron
Kovic, David Rabe, Oliver Stone and Cora Weiss.

"If nothing else, it is severely damaging to Vietnam's efforts to rebuild and
finally join the international family," said the petition to Mr. Muoi. "It is
time, Mr. Secretary, for all of us to realize our dream that the war be truly
ended, that all the wounds be healed, here and in Vietnam, and that suspicion
and misunderstanding become a thing of the past."

The cases of Mr. Liem and Do Ngoc Long, another former manager of the Shoeshine
Boys project who is also under arrest, are painful for Americans who consider
themselves friends of Vietnam, Mr. Hughes said in an interview Sunday from his
home in Manhattan. He is now an actor with the Circle Repertory Company and
other theaters.

Mr. Hughes, branded a Central Intelligence Agency spy by hard-liners in Hanoi
who seem to fear Western influence more than they want economic liberalization,
said that for years Americans who had been in the antiwar movement chose to
ignore repressive actions by Hanoi by saying they had to be understood "in a
political context."

"I've reached a point where I said to Vietnam, this is no longer acceptable,"
said Mr. Hughes, who was forced to leave the country in August 1976, a year
after the fall of Saigon.

"Vietnam was never about Vietnam," he said. "Vietnam was the defining event of a
generation, but it was something to service everyone else except the
Vietnamese."

Mr. Hughes said Vietnamese had told him that some officials are embarrassed by
the treatment of his former aides, Mr. Liem and Mr. Long.

The two men were arrested in April 1990 along with Mr. Morrow, who planned to
set up a consulting company to advise American businesses in Vietnam. Mr. Long,
an economist, and Mr. Liem, the lawyer, had hoped to become partners in the
joint venture.

Mr. Morrow was released after three weeks of detention in Ho Chi Minh City.

A month later, Mr. Muoi was again pleading publicly for help from industrialized
nations in rebuilding Vietnam.

LOAD-DATE: June 7, 1992

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1992 The New York Times Company


                              193 of 281 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                   June 7, 1992, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

The Way It Was at Radcliffe

BYLINE: By ALESSANDRA STANLEY,  Special to The New York Times

SECTION: Section 1; Page 34; Column 1; Metropolitan Desk

LENGTH: 1214 words

DATELINE: CAMBRIDGE, Mass., June 6


The Acting New York State Supreme Court Justice was arguing rather vehemently
with Manhattan's Borough President.

"Are you sure we weren't allowed to wear pants to class?" Acting Justice Leslie
Crocker Snyder of State Supreme Court in Manhattan asked. She said she thought
she could recall riding to Harvard Yard on a bicycle.

But Ruth Wyler Messinger hooted. Summoning reserves of three-decade-old
indignation, the Borough President said: "You biked in a skirt.  We could never
wear pants."

The non-nostalgic discussion of the dress code was one of many intense, and at
times personal and emotional, exchanges at the 30th reunion of the 1962 class of
Radcliffe College in Cambridge, Mass., which ended this morning.

Several of its members are prominent public figures and elected officials in New
York, but the class as a whole has its own collective identity -- and
reputation.

Last of Their Kind

The 300 graduates of the Class of '62 -- which also includes Elizabeth Holtzman,
the New York City Controller and Senate candidate; Frances Fitzgerald, a war
correspondent who won a Pulitzer Prize, and Ann Swift, a State Department
official who was an Iranian hostage in the 1970's -- were the last to receive
Radcliffe diplomas. The classes that followed were awarded degrees from Harvard
University.

They consider that they came of age on "the fault line" between the
convention-bound 1950's and the era of feminism, and many say they are still
haunted by their experience.

If there is a parallel among men, it is not among the Harvard alumni of the same
generation, who, when they meet, tend to charter giddy boat rides up the Charles
River here or schedule lectures by famous professors on the economy and world
affairs. The women's events are closer in spirit to reunions of Vietnam
veterans, where participants mainly seek solace and support.

Linda Greenberg Davidoff, now the executive director of the nonprofit Parks
Council and a longtime political organizer in New York City, said she wrote on
her college application that after college she planned to "give lovely dinner
parties with wonderful conversations." When her classmate Ms. Holtzman confided
during their senior year that she was applying to law school, Ms. Davidoff
recalled thinking, "I didn't know women could be lawyers."

Time Out From Politics

Ms. Holtzman took a detour from her Senate campaign on Friday and flew to
Cambridge, where she was warmly received by her classmates. Not known for warmth
or spontaneity as a candidate, she came close to both in an impromptu speech to
her fellow alumnae.

"She is so relaxed and personal," said a somewhat surprised Elinor Bernstein
Balka, a New Yorker who has attended functions for Ms. Holtzman since she was
the Brooklyn District Attorney.

And Ms. Messinger, who was not close to Ms. Holtzman in college and has remained
neutral in the Holtzman primary race against three other candidates, including
Geraldine A. Ferraro, gave a brief speech on Ms. Holtzman's behalf.

Both Ms. Messinger and Ms. Holtzman, two of the highest-ranking elected
officials in New York, were not politically engaged in college, nor were they
ardent feminists. They were wonks.

"I remember vaguely being aware that Ruth was very competitive in a very upfront
way," said Cecily Morse Orenstein, who was the host at one reunion dinner at her
house in Brookline. "I admired it -- she wasn't afraid of asking people what
they got on their exams."

'Self-Contained'



Ms. Messinger, who planned to be a social worker and got married after her
junior year, was elected to Phi Beta Kappa.

Liz Holtzman, was "very smooth and self-contained." said Barbara Graf Meyer, who
was in the same dorm. "She had herself 'finished' before a lot of us did."

Others described Ms. Holtzman as having been"reserved" and "driven," but Ms.
Holtzman remembered lighter moments, like cruising around Harvard Square in a
Radcliffe friend's 1939 Plymouth roadster equipped with a Bombay taxi horn and a
rumble seat.

Ms. Holtzman said she was oblivious in those days of sexual discrimination.

"It's the way things were," she said. "Nobody protested. We didn't know yet what
was unfair. I felt privileged to be getting a Harvard education."

She remains proud of her one prefeminist act -- persuading the administration to
drop its strict curfew rules.

The Diploma Rebellion

It was during the Class of '62's college days that John F. Kennedy was elected
President, the Berlin Wall went up and Fidel Castro spoke at Harvard. But the
political event the women recalled most clearly was the "Latin diploma riot," a
series of demonstrations held by Harvard and Radcliffe students who opposed the
school's decision to write diplomas in English instead of Latin. The protesters
were so boisterous that the police, armed with tear gas, were summoned.

Both Ms. Messinger and Ms. Holtzman credited their mothers, who worked, with
inspiring them to pursue careers. Ms. Holtzman, unlike Ms. Messinger, never
married.

"I didn't feel any social pressure," She said. "I wanted to find myself first."
In that she was almost alone.

Patricia Sullivan, a director of the Natural Resources Defense Council in
Manhattan, admitted she did feel enormous social pressure in those days. Like
Ms. Holtzman, she is single.

"If anybody had asked me to marry them between April and September of 1962, I
would have said yes," she said. "It appeared to solve so many problems."

Lectures and Discussions

It was those sorts of remiscences that consumed four days also spent at
lectures, conferences and group discussions. On friday morning, Ms. Messinger,
wearing a Clinton button, a red AIDS ribbon, and carrying her clothes on her
back in a biker's garment bag/knapsack, joined other classmates who are parents
of gay and lesbian children in an in-depth discussion that also embraced child
molestation and AIDS.

These lawyers, doctors, college professors and club women, some of whom are
grandmothers, talked about a feminist "insurrection," mixing terms like
empowerment and patriarchy with references to Strindberg and Fra Angelico blue.

Ms. Messinger explained that "self-revelation" had become important to her and
to many classmates and that they mostly felt "safe" discussing such issues only
among themselves.

They have been scrutinized by others.

As the last women to receive Radcliffe degrees, they were the subject of an
amused 1962 New York Times Magazine article by Michael J. Arlen, the New Yorker
writer who was then a freelance writer, a recent Harvard graduate and husband of
a member of that class, Alice Albright. He called them "Radcliffe girls" and
wrote that "Like graduates of other women's colleges," they "don't DO (italics
sic) much of anything beyond marrying and raising children."

Twenty years later, some things have changed. Before the dinner at Ms.
Orenstein's home, husbands weresent off to have dinner at a restaurant so the
women could be alone. Peter S. Scholl, who said he was the second husband of
Thalassa Hencken Scholl, tiptoed onto the balcony after dinner and listened
quietly to the women discussing the environment, the economy and the
presidential campaign.

"I'm a trophy husband," he said. "Pay no attention to me."

LOAD-DATE: June 7, 1992

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photos: Among those attending the 30th reunion of the 1962 class of
Radcliffe College in Cambridge, Mass., were, from left, Linda Greenberg
Davidoff, executive director of the Parks Council, Betty Schafer, Elizabeth
Holtzman, New York City Controller and Senate candidate, and Anne Maskovitz
Davis. (Evan Richman for The New York Times); Elizabeth Holtzman, left, Ruth
Wyler Messinger and Linda Greenberg Davidoff, right, from 1962 yearbook.

                   Copyright 1992 The New York Times Company


                              194 of 281 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                   June 7, 1992, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

Let's Disperse the Family Values Smokescreen;
Hope and Pride

SECTION: Section 4; Page 18; Column 6; Editorial Desk

LENGTH: 246 words


To the Editor:

As one who helped develop poverty programs in Anacostia and other hard-pressed
Washington neighborhoods in the 1960's, I was appalled by Marlin Fitzwater's
unsubstantiated accusations about those helpful programs (front page, May 5). It
is outrageous for the Administration spokesman to assert that these programs led
to the Los Angeles tragedy.

If the Vietnam War had not brought an end to these modestly funded, promising
beginnings, and if the last 12 years had not been almost totally lacking in
responsive social-educational follow-up, the nation's capital, especially
Anacostia, might not be the "war zone" it is today.

Those who participated in the Anacostia model programs were unemployed and
underemployed young men and women, primarily African-Americans, many who were
residents of public housing, eager to improve life in the community for
themselves and their families. Among their roles were to link people in their
neighborhoods to health, education, employment and other services and, where
services did not exist, to become an organized voice for obtaining them. Some
participants went on to professional education.

Characteristic of this effort was a hope and pride in what neighborhood workers
and others were able to accomplish beginning in their own inner city
neighborhoods. It was the antithesis of the pain, anger and destruction that we
have witnessed this spring in Los Angeles.

AIMEE I. HORTON
Chicago, May 17, 1992

LOAD-DATE: June 7, 1992

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Letter

                   Copyright 1992 The New York Times Company


                              195 of 281 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                   June 7, 1992, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

IN SHORT: FICTION

BYLINE: By David Murray

SECTION: Section 7; Page 18; Column 1; Book Review Desk

LENGTH: 239 words



OVER THERE
By Thomas Fleming.
HarperCollins, $20.

In "The Officers' Wives," the novelist and historian Thomas Fleming dissected
the United States Army in the years from Korea to Vietnam. In "Over There," the
focus is narrower: the American role in World War I. His characters are both
real (Gen. John J. Pershing, for example) and imagined. There are even some who
are very thinly disguised -- like the mother-dominated, medal-hunting colonel
who is the son of a famous general. (He is even given the first name Douglas, in
case anyone misses the point.) The central character is Polly Warden, whose
pacifism and feminism are sharpened as an ambulance driver and front-line nurse.
She falls in love, seriatim, with a young French surgeon, whose father tries to
lead her into a defeatist political plot, and Malvern Hill Bliss, a general who
is commanding the Lafayette Division. Mr. Fleming has an understanding of la
guerre luxe as it was fought in Paris and trench warfare as it was fought by the
combat soldiers. Unfortunately, this book's characters are not as well drawn as
the officers' wives and their soldier husbands in the earlier novel. There is
also some downright pretentious writing. In one such passage, an Ivy League
lieutenant jumps into a river to save his sergeant: "Harvard was risking his
life to save the slum mug who had beaten him up in Union Square. It was a
parable of American democracy."

LOAD-DATE: June 7, 1992

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Review

                   Copyright 1992 The New York Times Company


                              196 of 281 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                   June 7, 1992, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

From the Mekong to the Bayous

BYLINE: By George Packer;  George Packer is the author of "The Village of
Waiting," a memoir about Africa, and a novel, "The Half Man."

SECTION: Section 7; Page 24; Column 1; Book Review Desk

LENGTH: 1373 words



A GOOD SCENT FROM A STRANGE MOUNTAIN
By Robert Olen Butler.
249 pp. New York:
Henry Holt & Company. $19.95.

For three decades Vietnamese have played the foils in an American psychodrama.
We venture, we kill, we dream, we regret, we make peace; they smile their
innocent or sinister smiles. One of the Vietnamese characters in Robert Olen
Butler's first collection of short fiction gives a bitter self-portrait through
distorting American eyes: "We were fascinating and long-suffering and unreal or
we were sly and dangerous and unreal."

"A Good Scent From a Strange Mountain" goes a long way toward making the
Vietnamese real, and its method is bold: each of the 15 stories is told in the
first person from the viewpoint of a Vietnamese transplanted from the Mekong
Delta to the Louisiana bayou. The Americans have become foils; it's the
Vietnamese who are now at the center, haunted by the past, ambivalent about
their hosts, suffering sexual torments, seeking a truce in their various wars.

This reversal makes for a less hyperbolic kind of story than most American
fiction and film about the war in Vietnam and its aftermath. In their new home
on the Gulf Coast these Vietnamese are often visited by old ghosts and legends,
but the war itself is on the periphery, a given. Unlike Americans, they don't
pick at the horrors they've survived and there's hardly a word of politics.
Their memories are dominated instead by bittersweet sense experience: in
"Preparation" a woman readying her friend's corpse for burial combs and envies
the beautiful hair she combed and envied when they were girls in Saigon.

VIETNAM, where Mr. Butler served as an Army linguist fluent in the language, is
the setting for two of his six novels -- "The Alleys of Eden" and "On Distant
Ground," which share common characters. They are the work of a writer who is
intoxicated by Vietnam and the Vietnamese, who loves what has alienated so many
other Americans, including novelists: the strange lingual tones, the ambiguity
of relations in an ancient and complex society, the teeming nighttime streets of
Saigon. The heroes of both novels withdraw from the war -- one as a deserter,
the other as a traitor of sorts -- in favor of personal ties, to a South
Vietnamese woman and a Vietcong prisoner. Vietnam is where these Americans
become more compassionate, not more cruel, and the memory of Vietnam keeps them
in the grip of a powerful nostalgic longing for the smell of market food, the
flesh of a lover or the face of a lost child.

In his stories Mr. Butler confers this longing on his Vietnamese characters. And
in doing so he manages to make them completely original, with quirky interests
and odd obsessions, as distinct from one another as from the Americans they
brush against.

In "Fairy Tale" a bar girl, remembering what a delicacy apples were in Saigon,
thinks how, like apples in America, sex has become too abundant for her to savor
it: "You take a bite now and you can make yourself remember that apples are
sweet, but it is like the apple in your mouth is not even there. You eat too
many apples and all you can do is remember them." In "Snow," a spinster with
little hope of ever marrying expresses a different shade of melancholy: "There
are other Vietnamese here in Lake Charles, Louisiana, but we are not a
community. We are all too sad, perhaps, or too tired. But maybe not. Maybe
that's just me saying that. Maybe the others are real Americans already."

Probably not. These Vietnamese -- even the businessman in "Relic" who swears
that "America is the land of opportunity" -- seem to live their real lives in
the past and the supernatural. In the title story, an old man preparing for
death is visited by the ghost of Ho Chi Minh in search of memories. Ho's hands
are covered in the sugar he baked with when the two men worked at a London hotel
in 1917. In spite of the Communist victory, Ho's ghost confesses: "I am not at
peace."

The dying man, whose relatives have brought Vietnamese political murder to New
Orleans, asks Ho, "Are there politics where you are now, my friend?" The
implicit answer is that there are only memories, that it's the burden of the
dead to recover them all, that sugar is as important as war. The dying man
finally understands Ho's restlessness: "He has used confectioners' sugar for his
glaze fondant and he should be using granulated sugar. I was only a washer of
dishes but I did listen carefully when Monsieur Escoffier spoke. I wanted to
understand everything. His kitchen was full of such smells that you knew you had
to understand everything or you would be incomplete forever."

To become complete, these dislocated men and women return in memory and
imagination to Vietnam, where folk tales narrated within the stories often
illuminate their present condition. An expectant mother who lost her first lover
in Vietnam tells her unborn American child a fairy tale: an emperor went to the
moon and found happiness there, but after returning to earth he could never go
back; he could only remember. A South Vietnamese soldier is saved from Vietcong
ambush by a beautiful woman's ghost; later, when he finds the ghost to thank
her, she devours him; and the man telling the story on a Greyhound bus feels
devoured, too, in his uneasy American exile.

The intricacy of these stories, and of most of the collection, lies in their
motifs, not in psychological insight. Mr. Butler uses the narrative surprises
and symbolic imagery of folklore, and as in folklore his meanings can be both
simple and opaque. The longest and most ambitious of the stories, "The American
Couple," comes much closer to the familiar terrain of contemporary fiction. But
to do so it has to give its Vietnamese woman narrator an essentially American
consciousness. In the shifting tensions of two couples spending a day together
at a Mexican resort -- one Vietnamese, one American, of whom the husband is an
obsessive Vietnam vet -- Mr. Butler loses in focus and compression what he gains
in complexity. Nothing in "The American Couple" is quite as vivid as the sugar
on Ho Chi Minh's ghostly hands.

BUT there are risks in the simpler tales. They sometimes tend toward melodrama:
large, obvious emotions are generated by manipulations of plot. And Mr. Butler
can't always resist sentimental endings. Since these weaknesses also show up in
his two war novels, they're more than just functions of taking on so many
convincingly Vietnamese points of view. But in the absence of sophisticated,
familiar, telling ironies, and within the limits of what even this most
sensitive American writer can know about his Vietnamese characters, he's often
left with crude resolutions. At least three stories end happily ever after in at
long last love.

One of the strongest stories, "The Trip Back," shows Mr. Butler's art at its
most moving and problematic. A businessman drives to the Houston airport to pick
up his wife's grandfather, just emigrated from Vietnam. On the way home, the old
man expresses interest in little other than the businessman's car, which has
induced a memory of driving from Saigon to Hanoi years before. "This man beside
me was rushing along the South China Sea," the businessman thinks. "Right now.
He had felt something so strong that he could summon it up and place himself
within it and the moment would not fade." The grandfather has returned so
vividly to the deep past that he has no memory of the granddaughter he's about
to be reunited with. And the businessman begins to dread that when his own time
comes he won't "die well," that his own life will be reduced to "the faint buzz
of the alarm clock beside my bed," that "I may be prepared to betray all that I
think I love the most." He's afraid that he'll end up remembering even less than
the grandfather -- without his homeland, without his wife.

In the end, he overcomes his wife's grief at being forgotten with a simple
gesture, meant to be poignant, that seems inadequate to the profundity of his
crisis. It takes a little away from an almost perfect story. But "A Good Scent
From a Strange Mountain" is remarkable not for its flaws, but for how
beautifully it achieves its daring project of making the Vietnamese real.

LOAD-DATE: June 7, 1992

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Review

                   Copyright 1992 The New York Times Company


                              197 of 281 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                   June 8, 1992, Monday, Late Edition - Final

Corrections

SECTION: Section A; Page 3; Column 1; Metropolitan Desk

LENGTH: 35 words


An article on Thursday about business discussions that Ross Perot was reported
to have conducted with Vietnamese officials in 1987 rendered the name of a
business associate incorrectly. He is Harry McKillop.

LOAD-DATE: June 8, 1992

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Correction

                   Copyright 1992 The New York Times Company


                              198 of 281 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                   June 8, 1992, Monday, Late Edition - Final

Hanoi Journal;
Talking in Vietnam, Few Now Use the Party Line

BYLINE: By HENRY KAMM,  Special to The New York Times

SECTION: Section A; Page 4; Column 3; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 991 words

DATELINE: HANOI, Vietnam


Old-guard Communists still wield power here in what remains a sternly ruled
one-party capital. Red banners proclaiming fidelity to the legacy of the late
President Ho Chi Minh are strung across the streets of this lovely city of
traditional Vietnamese and French colonial architecture.

But after decades of reticence toward foreigners and uniformity of expressed
views, people in Hanoi now speak in many and varied voices.

They engage visitors in open conversation in the streets, eager to practice
their English, which young and old are earnestly studying as the key to a better
future. And, in a practice unthinkable until recently, they invite foreigners
into their small apartments in rundown buildings and disclose views that belie
the image of single-minded heroism and austerity cultivated under Communist rule
in northern Vietnam since 1954.

A scholar in his 60's, who fought against the French in the 1940's and has been
a Communist Party member since then, laughed when asked how people squared
Vietnam's new enthusiasm for capitalism with equally ringing affirmations,
anchored in the Constitution revised this year, of the leading role of the
Communist Party.

A Different Look at War

"It reminds me of my grandfather, a very strict mandarin," he said in the
melodious French of the old Indochina. "When I was a boy, he sent me letters,
very severe letters. 'If you don't obey your father and teachers, I don't
recognize you as my grandson,' he wrote. His strictness shocked me. But later I
learned that he had mistresses in every town.

"This is just like the party speeches," he added. People laugh at them. With my
friends, whenever somebody mentions the differences between what we say and what
we practice, all we can do is burst out laughing. The people in the countryside
feel the same way. They are even more practical than pragmatists. They expect
politicians to make speeches they don't mean."

Bao Ninh is the 40-year-old author of a best-selling novel that for the first
time describes the war between South and North not as a heroic struggle by noble
Communists against American puppets but as bitter savagery between brothers,
with the destructive participation of a foreign superpower.

The novel, "The Sorrow of War," won last year's national prize of the Writers
Association despite criticism of its determinedly nonheroic character. The
writer was spared personal attack largely because in the novel he drew on his
own experience. Drafted at the age of 19 in 1971, he took part in heavy fighting
as a member of a reconnaissance company until the end of the war in 1975.

"There was bitterness," Bao Ninh (that is a pen name for Hoang Phuong) said in
an interview in his crowded apartment in a Soviet-style tenement block. "True,
the Americans were fierce with their bombs and sophisticated weapons. And the
latter part of the war took on the dark color of civil war.

"But today," he continued, "we feel no hatred toward the Americans -- that is
the truth. And when I meet a corporal from the Saigon forces, I feel closer to
him than to a captain from our side."

A View of Postwar Vietnam

Bao Ninh, himself a corporal, spoke of postwar Vietnam.

"We soldiers from the North feel sad today," he said. "We struggled for the
liberation of the whole nation, but we achieved the poverty of the whole nation.
We feel sorry for the southerners who had to become boat people, and for the
nation that has become tattered, and the soldiers from the South that could find
no work. We feel sorry for those who spent years in re-education camps."

Bao Ninh and his father, Hoang Tue, a linguistics scholar, disagreed with the
official view that the North's victory was a triumph of Communism.

"It was a victory of the national spirit," the writer said. "The soldiers'
feeling was that the Saigon army belonged to the Americans. Our aim was not to
smash them to bits but to gain victory for peace. The simple soldier never
thought of Communism. Maybe that was in the minds of the leaders. We wanted to
get the war over with."

Bao Ninh, who served after the fighting ended in a unit that gathered the
remains of fallen North Vietnamese soldiers, spoke sympathetically of the desire
of American families to retrieve the remains of those still missing in Vietnam.
But father and son condemned what they called the political use of the issue in
the United States to delay normalization of relations with Vietnam.

The writer spoke feelingly of the far greater number of Vietnamese families who
do not know if or where their sons or husbands were buried.

"Our Government is so poor," he said. "We would like to demand that Vietnamese
mothers, too, can go to burn incense sticks on their sons' graves. But we know
the Government can't afford it."

In the bookstores of Hanoi, plaster busts of Ho and medallions with profiles of
Marx and Lenin still make up the decor. But while this trinity accounted for
most of the books on sale in the past, now not even the collected speeches of
the father of the Vietnamese revolution are available.

'Scarlett' Is the Rage

Instead, there are pirated translations, between garish covers, of American,
British or French best sellers. "Scarlett" is the rage of Hanoi, but English
language textbooks and computer manuals outsell all other categories.

Even in officially arranged interviews -- in the past no more informative than
editorials in the party press -- candor is now the rule.

Le Dang Doanh, deputy director of an official economics research institute, went
so far as to put Marx's teaching in doubt. "He elaborated an idyllic society,
without motivation," he said. "Too nice to be true. I'm far from declaring Marx
is dead, but I'm absolutely against accepting Marxism as the Holy Bible."

But asked whether he felt free to publish such heretical thoughts, Mr. Doanh
thought briefly. "It would be unpopular to write this," he said with a smile.

LOAD-DATE: June 8, 1992

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo: "Today we feel no hatred toward the Americans -- that is the
truth," said Bao Ninh, whose recent novel describes the Vietnam War not as a
heroic struggle by noble Communists against American puppets but as bitter
savagery between brothers, with the destructive participation of a foreign
superpower. (Hoang Dinh for The New York Times)

                   Copyright 1992 The New York Times Company


                              199 of 281 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                   June 8, 1992, Monday, Late Edition - Final

Nicholas Thorne, 71, Who Assisted Refugees

SECTION: Section B; Page 10; Column 1; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 217 words


Nicholas G. W. Thorne, an American military and diplomatic officer who directed
missions to resettle 50,000 Indochinese refugees and monitor an Egyptian-Israeli
buffer zone, died on May 28 in the Philippines. He was 71 years old and lived in
Manila.

He died of complications of lymphoma, his family said.

Mr. Thorne was born in Lissa, Poland, and moved to the United States when he was
one month old. He worked for the British War Ministry and then enlisted in the
United States Marine Corps, serving from 1942 to 1962. He worked for the State
Department from 1962 to 1980 in posts including Mali, Laos, Vietnam, Thailand
and Ethiopia.

In 1975 he was the coordinator of a Presidential task force charged with placing
Vietnamese and Cambodian refugees who were taken to Camp Pendleton, Calif.,
after the war in Southeast Asia.

In 1976-77 he directed the American mission monitoring a 1,700-square-mile
buffer zone between Egyptian and Israeli forces in Sinai, an effort for which he
received a Presidential commendation.

Surviving are his mother, Vera S. Thorne of Old Lyme, Conn.; his wife of 27
years, the former Fay Stevens; a daughter, Elizabeth M. Ryan of Marshfield,
Mass.; a son, Nicholas C. K. Thorne of Marshfield, Vt.,; and a brother, Samuel
Thorne Jr. of Manchester, Mass.

LOAD-DATE: June 8, 1992

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Obituary (Obit)

                   Copyright 1992 The New York Times Company


                              200 of 281 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                  June 9, 1992, Tuesday, Late Edition - Final

Emily Lodge Clark, 86, Widow of a Politician

SECTION: Section D; Page 28; Column 2; National Desk

LENGTH: 159 words


Emily Sears Lodge Clark, the widow of Henry Cabot Lodge, the Senator and
Republican Vice-Presidential nominee in 1960, died Saturday in her house in
Beverly, Mass. She was 86 years old.

She died of lung cancer, said her son Henry Sears Lodge.

Mrs. Clark was married to Forrester A. Clark, a retired investment banker, in
1987, two years after Mr. Lodge died.

She was born in Beverly, the daughter of Henry F. Sears, a doctor, and grew up
partly in France. Her schooling as a child came largely from tutors.

She met Mr. Lodge at a debutante party in Boston, and they were married in 1926.
She was at his side while Mr. Lodge was a Senator from Massachusetts, United
States Ambassador to the United Nations, Ambassador to South Vietnam and
Ambassador to West Germany.

In addition to her husband, Mr. Clark, she is survived by two sons, George Cabot
Lodge and Henry Sears Lodge, both of Beverly; 10 grandchildren and 14
great-grandchildren.

LOAD-DATE: June 13, 1992

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Obituary (Obit)

                   Copyright 1992 The New York Times Company


                              201 of 281 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 June 10, 1992, Wednesday, Late Edition - Final

Emily Lodge Clark, 86; Was Senator's Widow

SECTION: Section D; Page 20; Column 6; National Desk

LENGTH: 159 words


Emily Sears Lodge Clark, the widow of Henry Cabot Lodge, the Senator and 1960
Republican Vice-Presidential nominee, died on Saturday at her home in Beverly,
Mass. She was 86 years old.

She died of lung cancer, said her son Henry Sears Lodge.

Mrs. Clark married Forrester A. Clark, a retired investment banker, in 1987, two
years after Mr. Lodge died.

She was born in Beverly, the daughter of Henry F. Sears, a doctor, and grew up
partly in France. Her schooling as a child came largely from tutors.

She met Mr. Lodge at a debutante party in Boston, and they were married in 1926.
She was at his side while Mr. Lodge was a Senator from Massachusetts, chief
United States delegate to the United Nations, Ambassador to South Vietnam and
Ambassador to West Germany.

In addition to her husband, Mr. Clark, she is survived by two sons, George Cabot
Lodge and Henry Sears Lodge, both of Beverly; 10 grandchildren, and 14
great-grandchildren.

LOAD-DATE: June 10, 1992

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Obituary (Obit)

                   Copyright 1992 The New York Times Company


                              202 of 281 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 June 10, 1992, Wednesday, Late Edition - Final

Trenton Crime Bill: Puzzling Package Stirs Concern Over Assault Weapons

BYLINE: By WAYNE KING,  Special to The New York Times

SECTION: Section B; Page 6; Column 1; Metropolitan Desk

LENGTH: 976 words

DATELINE: TRENTON, June 9


The New Jersey Legislature is not famous for truth in packaging; what you see in
a bill is not always what you get. But an "anti-crime" measure making its way
through the Legislature may set new standards for obfuscation. It is so
confusing that not even its prime sponsors seem to know what it does.

The bill's sponsors say it would deter crime by imposing new penalties for the
use of firearms in drug-related offenses and for doing things like carrying
firearms too close to school buildings. They say the bill will also ban "assault
weapons."

But in fact the bill repeals a ban on sale and possession of assault weapons
that was imposed by Gov. Jim Florio and the Democrats when they controlled the
Legislature in 1990.

In Other Words, Machine Guns

The bill does so by redefining the term "assault weapon," applying it only to
weapons defined as machine guns under Federal law. Congress decreed in 1986 that
no more machine guns could be manufactured for private sale. Under Federal
regulations, they can be bought only with a $200 Federal tax stamp,
fingerprinting and the permission of a local law enforcement official. In
addition, New Jersey requires a court order. Since permission and court orders
are almost impossible to obtain, the regulations effectively prohibit the
private sale of machine guns. So what the bill now in the Legislature does is
ban something that is already banned.

Defining "assault weapons" to mean only machine guns is the official position of
the National Rifle Association, which gave strong support in the last election
to the new Republican majority in the Legislature. New Jersey Common Cause and
New Jersey Citizens to Stop Gun Violence today released figures compiled from
state election contribution records showing the N.R.A. and its state affiliate,
the Coalition of New Jersey Sportsmen, contributed $364,000 over the last three
years to legislative candidates, $326,000 of it to Republicans.

The new bill does not say clearly that it deals only with machine guns. It says
an assault weapon is one with "a selector switch" to allow it to "fire a single
projectile for each single pull of the trigger or to fire more than once for
each single pull of the trigger, depending on the selected position of the
switch or device." Weapons with such switches are classified as machine guns
under Federal law.

But both the New Jersey bill's sponsors and the Republican Speaker of the
Assembly, Garabed Haytaian, have maintained that the bill "bans both the AK-47
and the Uzi," the only assault weapons most Americans have ever heard of, mainly
because of their association with violent crime.

Ban on AK-47 Would End

Not all AK-47's and Uzis have selector switches, and the ones that do not are
classified as semiautomatic assault weapons under Federal law and are not banned
at that level. The bill under consideration would lift the existing New Jersey
ban on semiautomatic AK-47's, Uzis and some 60 other assault weapons that were
listed in the measure approved in 1990.

Mr. Haytaian, after initially maintaining that the pending law did ban the
assault weapons, finally conceded that it would indeed allow their possession
and sale in New Jersey again.

But after granting that they could be sold, he added, "They are just brand
names; AK-47 and Uzi are just brand names."

AK-47 is not a brand name but the model number of the military-issue gun used in
its automatic version by the Chinese People's Liberation Army. Millions of
AK-47's and imitations have been manufactured to equip the Chinese army and
virtually every Marxist and Maoist insurgency in the world, from the Vietcong
and Pathet Lao in Southeast Asia to the Shining Path guerrillas in Peru.

5 Schoolchildren in 2 Minutes

The gun is cheap, virtually indestructible and very efficient. In Vietnam, it
became something of an embarrassment when thousands of American fighting men
discarded Government-issue M-16's in favor of AK-47's they had plucked up from
the battlefield. The semiautomatic version of the AK-47 became popular with gun
buffs in this country and it gained considerable notoriety for its ability to
kill quickly and efficiently.

One of the 88,000 semiautomatic AK-47's that the Federal Bureau of Alcohol,
Tobacco and Firearms says have been imported into the United States since 1985
was bought by Patrick Edward Purdy, a deranged drifter with a long history of
minor crimes. He stalked into a schoolyard in Stockton, Calif., on Jan. 17,
1989, and opened fire with the weapon. In a barrage that witnesses said took
about two minutes, he unleashed at least 106 rounds, killing five schoolchildren
and wounding 29 others and a teacher before killing himself.

"He was not aiming as much as spraying," said Capt. Dennis Perry of the Stockton
Police Department. Many of those who heard or saw Mr. Purdy in action thought he
was using a machine gun, so rapid was the fire.

Most Oppose Repealing Ban

He was not. He was using the semiautomatic AK-47, which will be made legal in
New Jersey if the new bill passes and the Republicans, who have the votes to do
it, override a certain veto by Governor Florio.

A recent poll of New Jersey residents found 78 percent opposed to overturning
the assault weapons ban, compared to 18 percent favoring repeal, with 4 percent
undecided. In the poll, by Political/Media Rearch Inc., of Washington, 807
registered New Jersey voters were interviewed by telephone between May 23 and
May 25. It has a margin of error of plus or minus 3.5 percentage points.

Former Gov. Thomas H. Kean suggests that his fellow Republicans run a political
risk in repealing the ban. "I talked to a legislator who asked me about the
repeal," he said in an interview, "and I said I don't like it. I don't like
assault weapons, and most of the people of New Jersey don't, either."

LOAD-DATE: June 10, 1992

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: News Analysis

                   Copyright 1992 The New York Times Company


                              203 of 281 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 June 11, 1992, Thursday, Late Edition - Final

ON PRO BASKETBALL;
Nets' Daly Simply Can't Get Enough Of Those Arduous N.B.A. Seasons

BYLINE: By Harvey Araton

SECTION: Section B; Page 14; Column 3; Sports Desk

LENGTH: 834 words


Any day now, the long and winding National Basketball Association season will
officially end, and the two marathon finalists will conclude a nine-month
continuum of wakeup calls, bus rides, plane trips, dozens of hotel check-ins,
three or four weekly shootouts, battles with officials, skirmishes with news
media and tense negotiations with late-night room service minutes after the
kitchen has closed.

What began in the cool breeze of October finishes in the stifling air of June,
and this, according to Chuck Daly, the recently named coach of the New Jersey
Nets, is what it feels like to play 8 exhibitions, 82 regular-season games and
20-plus more in the playoffs:

"The first year with the Pistons that we made it to the finals, 1988, we come
down to the seventh game against the Lakers, and it's June 15th," said Daly.
"You're completely drained, exhausted, and on that morning, I wake up and start
screaming, 'Good morning, Vietnam!'

"See, I know that no matter what happens, this is it, you can't play another
game after the next one, and you're going home."

Of course, despite losing that seventh game on two heart-wrenching, last-second
free throws, Daly soon found himself bored to tears at home and counting the
days until he could get started again.

What can he tell you? "Coaching in the N.B.A. is a suffering business," said
Daly, "and you really have to enjoy it."

Enjoy suffering?

"Right, enjoy suffering."

Daly will be 62 years old on July 20, and he will spend his birthday in Monte
Carlo, preparing the United States Olympic team for Barcelona, Spain,
acknowledging that he would be well advised "seeking asylum" if his collection
of N.B.A. millionaires should fail to win the gold medal.

Anxiety, even insomnia, has accompanied this precedent-setting endeavor, Daly
admitted Tuesday, after stopping off at the Nets' offices in East Rutherford,
N.J. He had one day to house hunt in the area, attempting to establish what he
calls "the triangle," meaning symmetrical driving distance between his home, the
team's practice site and the airport.

Since accepting the Nets' job on May 28, Daly has been juggling Olympic
preparation and such Nets' indoctrination exercises as lunching with Derrick
Coleman. Daly has a speaking engagement later this week and turned down a chance
to do another, as a late replacement for Jim Valvano, who is ill.

What the heck, he has already replaced Valvano, as successor to Bill Fitch, and,
besides, he will by next week be inundated up to Patrick Ewing's ears with
Olympic matters.

When Daly announced in early May that he was stepping down after nine rewarding
years as Pistons coach, he said, "I have no plans."

That did not mean he for a moment considered the Olympic challenge a fitting
conclusion to a 37-year coaching career, or even the prelude to a well-deserved
break.

He is amazingly youthful, dapper and energetic for his age. When a Detroit
columnist, Mitch Albom, wrote recently that Daly's feet are moving even when he
is sitting for an interview, Daly was intrigued by the observation, and, in
relating it Tuesday, was hardly embarrassed by the inability of his feet to work
in conjunction with the rest of his body.

What makes Chuck Daly continue to run? The challenge of building another
champion may have something to do with it. The money, certainly. But probably
neither as much as "The N.B.A. Life" itself, month after month after month of
manufactured highs and lows, of pure, exhilarating escapism into the highly
charged, tension-filled, temptation-laden disco of professional sports.

It is a league whose coaches have never heard of burnout. If Fitch could spend
the rest of his years stalking the sideline and studying film late into the
night, he would. Men like Pat Riley and Doug Moe can't let go, even for cushy
network jobs, or to ensure their health.

So determined was Hubie Brown to coach again that he offered his services to a
team last summer and promised 40 victories or forfeiture of his entire pay. Rick
Pitino once complained of "not enough games and too short a season" in college
and that perceived shortcoming will ultimately return him to the N.B.A.

When Red Holzman rejoined the Knicks in 1978 after being fired the previous
year, he reveled in the chess matches with rival coaches, the ref baiting, the
off-night scotch and steak at his favorite restaurant in the city du jour.

"What would I be doing if I were home?" he said.

It was December 1977 when Daly's good friend, Billy Cunningham, asked him to
leave the University of Pennsylvania and join him as an assistant coach with the
76ers. After years on high school and college benches, it was, Daly believed,
his destiny.

"I remember us losing in the second round of the playoffs, and after it was all
over, sitting in my car and wanting to cry," he said. "It was so long, so
tiring, and I was thinking, 'How can I do this again?' "

Daly did, now 15 years and counting.

"It's a form of addiction," he said. "A way of life."

LOAD-DATE: June 11, 1992

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1992 The New York Times Company


                              204 of 281 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 June 11, 1992, Thursday, Late Edition - Final

Sports of The Times;
Mark Bavaro Asks Browns: Trust Me

BYLINE: By DAVE ANDERSON

SECTION: Section B; Page 11; Column 1; Sports Desk

LENGTH: 746 words


WHEN the Giants won Super Bowl XXV, their tight end, Mark Bavaro, seldom
practiced that season. His knees were too battered. If he practiced too hard and
too often, he knew that his knees would hurt too much for him to play in that
week's game.

"Mark tells me when he can practice," Bill Parcells, then the Giants' coach,
often said that season. "I trust him."

Trust. It's a word not often heard in sports now. Trust some players to tell the
coach when they can practice and you'll never see them again except in the
whirlpool. But during that 1990 season Mark Bavaro may have caught more passes
in the games than he did in the practices.

While missing only one game, he caught 33 passes for 393 yards and 5 touchdowns.
In the Super Bowl playoffs, he caught 13 passes for for 129 yards.

Trust. He rewarded Parcells's trust by helping the Giants earn another Super
Bowl trophy, their second in a span of five seasons.

But now Mark Bavaro is asking the Cleveland Browns to trust him. And if any pro
football player was ever worth that trust, he is.

Bavaro missed all of last season after those battered knees prompted the Giants
to release him as training camp opened. He received only $65,000 in severance
pay, a paltry sum that provoked howls of protest. Eventually those howls
persuaded the Giants to award him $375,000, half his 1991 contract before he was
judged "unable to perform" when his knees flunked the Giants' physical exam.

But now Mark Bavaro thinks he's able to perform again. So do the Browns, whose
coach, Bill Belichick, inspected him during a workout last week.

"Over the last few months," said Bavaro's agent, David Fischoff, "I had calls
from several teams inquiring about Mark, but he feels comfortable with Bill.
They were together when Bill was the Giants' defensive coordinator. Mark needs
an understanding coach."

Bavaro, in other words, needs a coach who will trust him as Parcells did.

Although Bavaro has yet to sign a contact with the Browns, he wouldn't have
worked out for Belichick if he didn't think he was healthy. Or at least healthy
enough, which the Browns' doctors agreed after checking his knees.

Like anybody else around the Giants during Bavaro's six seasons, Belichick
understands what Bavaro can do. And if Bavaro can't do it in training camp,
trust him to acknowledge it and retire.

As a football player, Bavaro is an old 29, but his knees might be rested enough
to approach what he once was.

Among the 1986 Giants, he provided two highlight moments of their highlight
film. One, dragging several 49er defensive backs and linebackers for several
yards before he was finally stopped in a Monday night game in San Francisco.
Two, kneeling in a moment of prayer after catching a 13-yard touchdown pass from
Phil Simms early in the 39-20 rout of the Denver Broncos in the Super Bowl.

Those two plays helped Bavaro develop into a cult figure for Giants' followers:
the epitome of the strong, silent type who spoke to the news media only during
the required inquisitions of Super Bowl week.

"It wasn't premediated," he said four years later of his Super Bowl XXI prayer.
"I was very thankful and grateful at the time. I'm grateful every time I walk
off the field and I'm healthy and I've made it through another series. I kneel
and give thanks to God in every area of my life. It wasn't anything special. It
was very routine, kneeling down in the Super Bowl, because that's what I do in
my life. It wasn't a show. It wasn't an act."

With him, nothing is ever a show or an act. As a rookie out of Notre Dame, he
was quickly nicknamed Rambo for the Vietnam movie starring Sylvester Stallone in
the title role. But he asked his teammates not to call him that.

"Because 'Rambo' exploited the Vietnam veteran," he said before his first Super
Bowl. "I have a lot of respect for the people in my family who were in Vietnam.
My uncle, Donald Bavaro, and my cousin, Bobby Rossi."

Respect. To him, that's as important as trust. During that 1986 season his Giant
teammates respected him not only for his 66 receptions for 1,001 yards and 4
touchdowns, but for playing five games with a fractured jaw that the club had
described as a "chipped tooth" and for playing two games with a cracked big toe
that the club had described as "sprained."

Asked once how he wanted to be remembered, Mark Bavaro replied, "As a good
teammate."

No matter how long he's with the Browns, he'll be remembered that way, too.
Trust him.

NAME: Mark Bavaro

LOAD-DATE: June 11, 1992

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo: Mark Bavaro (Barton Silverman)

TYPE: Biography

                   Copyright 1992 The New York Times Company


                              205 of 281 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                  June 12, 1992, Friday, Late Edition - Final

NEWS SUMMARY

SECTION: Section A; Page 2; Column 5; Metropolitan Desk

LENGTH: 1052 words



International     A3-11

SHAKY START TO BUSH'S TRIP

President Bush's trip to the Earth Summit in Brazil took a harrowing turn in
Panama as gunshots and tear gas were fired nearby, forcing him to make a hasty
exit before he could address a rally.  A1

Resentment against the United States lingers in Panama.  A11

LEADERS ARRIVE AT EARTH SUMMIT

A multibillion-dollar aid package to help save the developing world's
environmental resources was taking shape as heads of state began arriving for
the Earth Summit in Brazil. Officials said Washington's contribution was likely
to be small.  A10

U.S. delegation suffers from internal divisions and low morale.  A10

Powerbrokers from India, Malaysia, Singapore and Germany.  A10

YELTSIN'S BALANCING ACT

President Yeltsin said he would soon lift some major barriers to privatization.
But he declared that he would not permit the West to dictate economic policy to
Russia -- even if this meant delays in Western aid.  A3

U.N. TEAM REACHES SARAJEVO

In a last-ditch effort to head off a major human disaster in the Bosnian
capital, a United Nations negotiating team arrived in Sarajevo to resume efforts
to open the airport to relief shipments.  A6

The United States ponders a humanitarian aid role for its troops.  A6

LIMITED OFFER FROM CHINA

The Beijing Government invited Chinese living abroad to return "to serve the
construction of the motherland." But it hinted that it might bar Chinese
students from returning if they oppose Communism.  A7

4 MORE EXECUTIONS IN IRAN

Four people were executed in the Iranian city of Shiraz for "sabotage" during
riots there in April, the Teheran Government said.  A8

LETDOWN FOR M.I.A. INVESTIGATORS

A Vietnamese film maker was recently brought to the United States because he
said he had information about Americans unaccounted for from the Vietnam War.
Officials say he failed to produce useful material and is now seeking asylum.
A7

GYPSIES UNDER SIEGE IN ROMANIA

Valea Pietrelor Journal: A tiny gypsy community becomes the fifth in Romania to
be driven out by angry, torch-wielding neighbors.  A4

German and British doubts about a treaty on European union.  A9
Lech Walesa denies he collaborated with Communist secret police.  A9
Cuba's leader greets U.S. businessmen with capitalist hints.  A8

National     A12-15, B8-10, D17-18

BUDGET AMENDMENT DEFEATED

The proposed constitutional amendment to require a balanced Federal budget
failed by nine votes to win the two-thirds majority needed in the House.  A1

Man in the News: Charles W. Stenholm. B8

The House roll call.  B8

Text of the amendment.  B8

PEROT ON TAXES

In a two-hour national television appearance, Ross Perot said he would
"absolutely not" raise taxes except in the case of "an incredible emergency,"
and even then only with "clearance" from the people. He said it would
nonetheless be possible to cut the Federal deficit.  A1

Excerpts from Perot's remarks on a range of issues.  A14

Two candidates on "Today," and two very disparate appearances.  A14

Cuomo said Perot could be President but Clinton should be.  A15

Quayle was cheered at the Right to Life convention.  A15

MAJOR GAIN BY ASTRONOMERS

Evidence that planetary systems resembling the young solar system may exist in
nearby parts of the galaxy was reported by four teams of astronomers working
independently.  A1

NASA offered reassurances about Galileo's mission to Jupiter.  D17

INFANT-FORMULA CHARGES

The F.T.C. accused the three leading makers of infant formula of price-fixing in
a Government program for poor women and children.  A1

BILL SOUGHT BY LABOR DIES

The Senate killed a bill that would have prohibited employers from hiring
permanent replacements for striking workers.  A13

A Senate panel backed benefits for the long-term jobless.  A13

HONORARIUMS DROP IN HOUSE

Annual financial disclosure forms show a sharp decline in speaking fees to House
members last year. That drop followed adoption of a rule that prevents them from
keeping the fees.  D18

CASINOS FOR NEW ORLEANS

The Lousiana Senate gave final legislative approval to a bill that would allow
New Orleans to join Nevada and Atlantic City as a gambling mecca.  A12

ADVANCE IN GENE THERAPY

A type of gene therapy unlike any tried before has proved highly successful in
treating brain tumors in laboratory rodents.  D17

GAIN REPORTED IN AIDS RESEARCH

In a development that could greatly assist research on AIDS vaccines, scientists
have discovered an animal that can be infected with the AIDS virus and that then
becomes ill, just as people do.  D17

Law Page   B20
A woman whose marriage made history 25 years ago recalls the past.
A matter of honor. The weapon: the law.

Metropolitan     Digest, B1

STUDENTS' SCORES DROP

After two years of rebounding academic results in the New York City school
system, reading and mathematics scores dropped sharply this spring, many of the
city's superintendents say.  A1

INQUIRY IN SHOOTING

A Newark teen-ager who was critically shot early Tuesday was wounded one minute
before the Police Department formally learned that the car he had been driving
had been stolen, the authorities said.  A1

Business     Digest, D1

Weekend   C1-25
Celebrating Stephen Sondheim.  C3
Japan bestows arts awards.  C3
For Children C12
Theater: "Richard III." C1
Film: "Housesitter."C1
Music: Otis Clay and Ann Peebles performing.  C3
Restaurants C16
Art: Lovis Corinth.  C20
Word and Image: Two British mysteries.  C21

Obituaries   D20
Cathy E. Bennett, an authority on jury selection.
Nicholas Guy Anton; invented a cancer detecting device.

Sports   B12-18
Baseball: Mets' millions for mediocrity.  B13
Baseball owners approve sale of Mariners.  B13
Hockey: Ziegler resigns as N.H.L. president.  B13

Editorials/Op-Ed  A24-25
Editorials A24
The courage to bend in Rio.
Folly defeated, by nine votes.
Topics: What a rose is.

Letters A24
A. M. Rosenthal: Once more unto the breach.  A25
Leslie H. Gelb: "Macedonia" for Greece.  A25
Richard Nixon: Yeltsin needs us. We need Yeltsin.  A25

LOAD-DATE: June 12, 1992

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo: Quayle took his campaign to an anti-abortion group. (Reuters)
A15

TYPE: Summary

                   Copyright 1992 The New York Times Company


                              206 of 281 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                  June 12, 1992, Friday, Late Edition - Final

U.S. DISAPPOINTED BY HANOI DEFECTOR

BYLINE: By BARBARA CROSSETTE,  Special to The New York Times

SECTION: Section A; Page 7; Column 1; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 766 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, June 11


The Defense Department recently brought a Vietnamese Government film maker to
the United States because he said he had new information about Americans still
unaccounted for from the Vietnam War, officials say. But the film maker, Trung
Hieu, failed to produce any useful material, and is now seeking political
asylum.

The case is likely to set off a new round of raised hopes and charges of fraud
by opposing forces on this emotionally charged issue, just before a crucial
round of public hearings is held by the Senate Select Committee on P.O.W.-M.I.A.
Affairs.

The committee, headed by Senator John Kerry, a Massachusetts Democrat and
Vietnam veteran who opposed the war after his return home, had hoped to defuse
the issue in a year of thorough investigations.

Mr. Hieu was first interviewed in Bangkok by Defense Department officials
tracking the 2,266 Americans still officially missing in Indochina. They decided
that Mr. Hieu, a documentary maker for Hanoi during the war and after, might
have had important information worthy of a closer examination in Washington.

Claim of Other Information

"The United States Government and the Department of Defense are always open to
any credible information people may have regarding prisoners of war and those
missing in action," a senior Administration official said. "Based on the claims
that this man made that he had photographs that would be useful to us, we
facilitated his travel to the U.S."

"The information he had did not prove useful," the official said. "He now claims
to have other information, but he seems to be unwilling to provide it."

Mr. Hieu, who is staying at an undisclosed address in the Washington area, would
not be interviewed on Wednesday or today.

David Crosland, former general counsel and acting director of the Immigration
and Naturalization Service who is now in private law practice, has agreed to
represent Mr. Hieu, whose American visa expires on Friday.

The Vietnamese film maker has told at least two Americans that the Defense
Intelligence Agency, the intelligence arm of the Pentagon, had tried
unsuccessfully to recruit him in Bangkok for work in Vietnam, and that American
agents in Bangkok had helped him get a United States visa. Administration
officials would not comment on the recruitment charge.

Mr. Hieu, who is reported to be about 54 years old and a longtime employee of
Hanoi's Ministry of Culture, was interviewed on Monday by staff members of the
Senate committee. He returned to give more testimony today.

Among officials, Congressional aides and private veterans' organizations, the
story of Mr. Hieu and his trip here set off memories of an earlier case in which
a Vietnamese refugee in Hong Kong who had been a mortician was brought to the
United States with his family because he said he had knowledge of a warehouse in
Hanoi where the remains of 400 Americans were stored. His testimony has been the
subject of fierce controversy ever since.

On Tuesday, Mr. Hieu went to the office of Representative John Miller,
Republican of Washington, to ask for asylum, unaware that members of Congress do
not have this power. Staff members advised him to seek legal help.

Vietnamese officials at Hanoi's United Nations Mission in New York say that
while they are aware of Mr. Hieu's work in Vietnam, they had no information on
reports that he was trying to stay in the United States.

Helped by M.I.A. Group

In the last few days, Mr. Hieu has been helped by Ted Sampley, a North Carolina
contractor who heads the Homecoming II Project, which raises money to publicize
the cause of those who believe American prisoners may still be alive in Vietnam.
The project has also offered rewards to Indochinese who can provide information
on Americans they believe remain in custody in Laos, Cambodia or Vietnam.

In an interview on Wednesday, Mr. Sampley said he first met Mr. Hieu on Monday
at the Capitol Hill Quality Inn. He said the Vietnamese, who said he had brought
negatives and videotapes with him from Hanoi, asked only for access to American
relatives of missing servicemen. The Homecoming II Project is planning a
national meeting on July 23 at which many families will be represented.

Beyond that request, Mr. Sampley said, Mr. Hieu asked for "absolutely nothing."
Payment for the use of the material was never mentioned.

The Homecoming II project has hired a lawyer for Mr. Hieu, Mr. Sampley said.

He said Mr. Hieu had told him that he had -- or knew where to find in Hanoi --
pictures of American plane crashes that clearly showed victims or survivors.

LOAD-DATE: June 12, 1992

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1992 The New York Times Company


                              207 of 281 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                  June 12, 1992, Friday, Late Edition - Final

2d Key Republican in House Says He Won't Run Again

BYLINE: By LINDSEY GRUSON,  Special to The New York Times

SECTION: Section B; Page 4; Column 1; Metropolitan Desk

LENGTH: 506 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, June 11


In the second resignation this week by a Republican in New York State's House
delegation, Representative David O'B. Martin of the state's northeastern corner,
who has used his seat on the Armed Services Committee to win Federal projects
for his economically distressed district, announced today that he would not seek
re-election.

The six-term Congressman, a Marine Corps fighter pilot in the Vietnam War and
the only New York Republican on the influential committee, said he decided to
step down now instead of serving another two-year term so that his successor
would have a chance to begin accruing seniority and because of the job's
excessive demands.

"Living a couple of hundred days a year out of a suitcase is not something you
want to do," Mr. Martin said in noting that his 13,500-square-mile district is
larger than nine states. "You have to work with the zeal of a crusader, which I
think I've done. The only promise I made my constituents is to work 60 seconds
every minute, which I think I've done."

He was one of just three Republicans to oppose Defense Secretary Dick Cheney's
plan to cancel the Marine Corps' Osprey aircraft and the Navy's F-14D fighter, a
major program on Long Island, where the plane is built by the Grumman
Corporation.

But perhaps his biggest impact came in 1985 when he overcame the Army's concerns
and pushed the service into basing a new light infantry unit, the 10th Mountain
Division, at Fort Drum. As the ranking minority member on the Military
Installations subcommittee, he obtained $1.3 billion for construction at the
post for some 25,000 soldiers and their families. That made Jeffferson County
the fastest-growing county in the state.

Huge House Turnover

Mr. Martin's decision adds to the upheaval reverberating through the House in
the wake of voter dissatisfaction and the checking scandal. So far, 70
Representatives have announced their retirement or have been defeated in
primaries, insuring the greatest turnover in the House since World War II.

Mr. Martin said it was the large turnover that convinced him to step down now,
even though he was considered certain to win re-election in the district, one of
the most solidly Republican in the state. "If I had served two more years,
whoever succeeded me would have been very junior, entering after the biggest
class in history," he said. And that, he noted, would have doomed his successor
to serving on inconsequential committees.

But in the short run Mr. Martin's decision will undercut New York's influence in
the House. His announcement came two days after Raymond J. McGrath, also a
six-term Republican and a ranking member of the powerful Ways and Means
Committee, said he would not seek re-election. In addition, two influential
Democrats, Matthew F. McHugh and Robert J. Mrazek, have decided to step down.

Mr. Martin said he had not decided what he would do in the future but noted that
he had always wanted to teach and greatly enjoyed a short stint this year as an
instructor at the Naval Academy.


NAME: David O'B. Martin

LOAD-DATE: June 12, 1992

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo: Representative David O'B. Martin, who became the second member
of New York State's House delegation this week to announce a decision not to
seek re-election. (Stan Barouh)

TYPE: Biography

                   Copyright 1992 The New York Times Company


                              208 of 281 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 June 13, 1992, Saturday, Late Edition - Final

Yeltsin Says U.S. Servicemen Were Held by Stalin

BYLINE: By BARBARA CROSSETTE,  Special to The New York Times

SECTION: Section 1; Page 6; Column 1; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 624 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, June 12


President Boris N. Yeltsin of Russia told a Senate committee in a letter today
that the Soviet Union detained and imprisoned American servicemen during World
War II, when the two countries were allies, and afterward, often in violation of
conventions governing prisoners of war. He also said Soviet officials had lied
to the United States about the fate of missing Americans.

Mr. Yeltsin's letter, released in translation by the Senate Select Committee on
P.O.W.-M.I.A. Affairs, acknowledged for the first time that nine American
aircraft had been shot down over the Soviet Union at the height of the cold war
in the 1950's and that there had been survivors.

Describing today's letter as a report on "preliminary results" of an
investigation, the Russian President said that in 1953 eight captured Americans
were known to be confined to Soviet prisons or prison camps and four others were
in special psychiatric clinics. The letter did not rule out that some of these
Americans may still be alive, nor did it address cases of Americans reported
missing after that period.

716 Held in World War II

The letter also said records show, "regrettably," that 716 American servicemen
were interned in the Soviet Union during World War II, most of them members of
bomber crews who had made forced landings.

"The Stalin Government applied a double standard with respect to those people,"
Mr. Yeltsin wrote. "Some were immediately and with honors handed over to the
U.S. side, while others were held in isolation for a year or more."

All of these Americans were apparently freed, as were most of the 23,000 United
States troops who had been picked up in German camps or territory by Soviet
forces.

In a news conference today, Senator John F. Kerry, Democrat of Massachusetts and
chairman of the committee, called these and other revelations "an acknowledgment
of unprecedented proportions."

Senators on Mr. Kerry's committee praised Mr. Yeltsin for his candor and
helpfulness. Senator Kerry and Senator Bob Smith, Republican of New Hampshire
and vice chairman of the committee, also said Russian officials had offered
extensive help in pursuing further investigations of Americans missing in
Vietnam.

Most of the downings of American military aircraft over the Soviet Union in the
1950's have never been made public here, Senator Kerry said, although they were
known to intelligence officials and some members of Congress. The Pentagon
confirmed today that a number of planes had been shot down by the Soviets in the
1950's.

In those years, Moscow frequently accused the United States of violating Soviet
airspace with spy planes. Two such incidents received wide publicity, the
downing of a C-130 over Armenia in 1958 and of the U-2 reconnaissance flight of
Francis Gary Powers in 1960. In the first case, Moscow denied American
assertions that 11 men were missing after 6 bodies were returned. Mr. Powers
survived and was put on trial.

China May Have Held Prisoners

The Yeltsin letter also provided the committee with some preliminary evidence
that Americans taken prisoner during the Korean War were turned over to China.
He said Soviet records showed that 510 Americans had been taken prisoner by the
North Koreans and Chinese.

Fifty-nine of the American prisoners were apparently interrogated by Soviet
officials, Mr. Yeltsin said.

Bush Administration officials, acting on earlier reports that the Chinese may
have held captured Americans during the Korean War, raised the issue in Beijing
on May 8 during a trip to Asia by Arnold L. Kanter, Under Secretary of State for
Political Affairs. Officials say the Chinese told Mr. Kanter that they had
investigated the report and found no new information to support it.

LOAD-DATE: June 13, 1992

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1992 The New York Times Company


                              209 of 281 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                  June 14, 1992, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

The Queen of Hearts

BYLINE: By RON ALEXANDER

SECTION: Section 9; Page 5; Column 1; Styles of The Times

LENGTH: 1585 words


YOU'RE not likely to hear her order her staff to "banish the black, burn the
blue, bury the beige." This, after all, is not Kay Thompson playing fashion
editor in "Funny Face." This is Barbara D. Tober, and the only time she thinks
pink is when she opens a packet of Sweet 'n Low. Her prime color concern is
wedding white, which befits the woman who is editor in chief of Bride's and Your
New Home magazine (until last winter, simply plain old Bride's).

"There is no subject you can name, nothing you can show me, that I can't tell
you where it will fit in the new magazine," Mrs. Tober, her voice full of
conviction and pride, said the other afternoon. Her friendly challenge was made
to a visitor to her roomy corner office on the sixth floor of the Conde Nast
building on Madison Avenue.

Mrs. Tober's graceful, polishless fingers reached across her black lacquered arc
of a desk and swooped down on a small crystal hippopotamus.

"This? O.K., how about an article on falling in love at the zoo? No? O.K., what
about a travel piece on honeymooning in Kenya?"

Her hand floated across her desk, this time settling on a stapler.

"A feature article on making space for an office in your honeymoon home! You
see?" Mrs. Tober said triumphantly.

Romance is where you find it, and Barbara Tober finds it everywhere.

Bride's and Your New Home has an average bimonthly circulation of over 300,000.
Its February-March issue (1,046 pages, about 1 1/4 inches thick and weighing in
at 4.2 pounds) is believed to be the all-time heavyweight champ,
consumer-magazine division. That issue, which sold more than 500,000 copies,
surpassed the magazine's 1990 February-March issue (1,024 pages), which was
entered in the Guinness Book of Records as "the weightiest book ever."

This June, Mrs. Tober said, some 274,000 weddings will take place throughout the
United States. In all likelihood, most of the brides, if not the bridegrooms,
will have dipped into an issue or two of Brides and Your New Home. If
nonromantics find the magazine an exhausting frenzy of fashion, flowers and
facts, with editorial pages and ads frequently indistinguishable from one
another, they probably deserve to remain single forever.

TWENTY-SIX years and one day ago, Mrs. Tober, now 58, became the editor in chief
of Bride's magazine. It began life in 1934 as "So You're Going to Be Married," a
give-away to women whose nuptials were announced in Northeastern social pages.
Its founder was the perfectly named Agnes Foster Wright, who dispensed glum
advice to brides: call your husbands at the office only in extreme emergencies.
The give-away eventually expanded to Bride's, which Conde Nast bought in 1949.
Mrs. Tober, who had been a secretary, copy editor and beauty editor at Vogue and
had attended the Fashion Institute of Technology, became editor in chief of
Bride's in 1966.

"What a time that was!" she recalled. "Twiggy, microminis, Vietnam War protests,
civil-rights demonstrators, Betty Friedan, Timothy Leary, drugs, rockets in
space paving the way for our first moon walk. The country was on fire, and I was
named editor in chief of a magazine perceived to be backwards, limited, dull.
Even in the mid-70's, the perception was that marriage was out of style."

Mrs. Tober put wrist to forehead in a Blanche DuBois gesture. "In 26 years I
have watched the entire nation change its mind about marriage," she said. "And
the wonderful places there are for people to meet. Did you know there are still
jousting matches? What better place for wearing lovely rose-pointed lace? My
husband and I have friends who met on horseback in North Salem. They mounted
their horses, she rode sidesaddle, he rode aside, and off they went into the
sunset. How delicious!"

Her voice became more businesslike. "But from the day I took the job as editor
in chief, it was clear to me that the magazine was not simply about what to
wear. I've always seen it as three magazines in one: the wedding magazine, the
honeymoon magazine, the home magazine."

She is overjoyed to say that, when men propose (in most cases, she said, it is
still the man who asks), they go about it "in the most romantic ways."
(Examples: an engagement ring frozen in an ice cube; "Linda, will you Marry Me?"
on a ballpark scoreboard.)

And when the proposal is accepted?

"This is where we come in. This is when they begin to need us. This is our
challenge." Gently pounding her desk for emphasis: "This is why we're here! We
are offering solutions. We are soothing!"

How great a responsibility does the Barbara Cartland of weddingdom owe her
readers? "When one is getting married, there are so many decisions," she said.
"We have the responsibility to show what the choices are.""

Mrs. Tober removed her red-framed eyeglasses and ran a hand through her handsome
gray hair. "A major, major, major point: We tell our readers how important it is
for couples to talk to each other. He may seem like a wonderful guy, but what's
lurking underneath?"

Mrs. Tober recalled the early days of her courtship with Donald Tober, her third
and current husband, whom she met in 1972 and married exactly one year later. "
'Are you always so even tempered?' I asked him. 'What you see is what you get,'
he said, and I knew he was the man for me. He's filled with energy, and men with
energy have always been attracted to me."

Mr. Tober is the chief executive and chairman of the Sugar Foods Corporation,
the marketers of Sweet 'n Low. A handsomely framed photograph of him is one of
two photos in his wife's office; the other is of Leo, her favorite of four
horses that the Tobers keep on Yellowframe Farm, their retreat in Dutchess
County. When she talked of her husband, she nodded at his picture. "He's got
dozens of pictures of me on his desk."

Her first marriage was to a dentist, quite a few years her senior. Her second
husband, an advertising director, she described as "the same kind of
tempest-tossed man my father was." For marriage No. 1, in a judge's chambers,
she donned a pink silk dress. For the second wedding, in a chapel, she wore an
ivory lace wedding dress with a portrait collar. Both marriages ended in
divorce. She became Mrs. Tober in an apricot-colored suit and, for the party
that followed, a peach chiffon dress with a long, sweeping train. "Oh, golly, it
was pretty."

That wedding cake was decorated with swans. "Swans mate for life," she said.

Her phone rang. It was the radio station CJAD in Montreal. Would Mrs. Tober be
interested in being on a call-in show about wedding trends? Would she?! Would
Uncle Ben like to throw rice? The next call: Can Mrs. Tober do a live segment on
"Good Morning New York" in two weeks on the subject of wedding dresses? It is
the height of the wedding season (mid-May through mid-October), and Barbara
Tober is hot stuff.

Here are some of the questions she is asked on call-in shows (at least two or
three a day during the season): "Can I have a flower dog instead of a flower
girl?" (Yes, if it's part of the family.) "What is the average cost of a wedding
these days?" (Sixteen thousand dollars for 50 guests.) "What are some examples
of wedding nightmares?" (The flower dog eats the wedding cake. The bride's
perfume attracts bees.)

Mrs. Tober was about to look at magazine layouts when a journalist phoned. She
is ever gracious to the press. "Well, yes, silk flowers are forever, but the
floral industry has exploded," she informed the caller. "There's everything from
Victorian tussie-mussies to huge bouquets of roses. Rent a wedding dress? No,
dear, that's really not an overwhelming trend."

An assistant brought in dummies for "Cakes and Toasts," one of the titles in the
Little Books series on weddings and marriage, written by members of the
magazine's staff. Mrs. Tober was enchanted. "Sweet," she exclaimed. "Pretty.
Understated."

"We'd love to cut this," the assistant said, referring to one picture. "The cake
is designed to repeat the bows on a wedding dress, but it just doesn't work."

"O.K. Cut it," Mrs. Tober said. "Eating cakes that duplicate wedding-dress
details. It's a trend! And the title: 'Dressed to Confection.' I love it! Last
night I had the most incredible chocolate souffle. It had caramel in it."

"This photographer doesn't want his picture in the book," the assistant told
her.

"He's very naughty," Mrs. Tober said.

"Wait till you see the Wedgwood cake."

"Divine. We do such wonderful things!"

Mrs. Tober initialed the layouts. "I always sign last," she said. "If I sign
first the others will feel powerless. I want my staff to be strong, resourceful,
independent."

Her editorial staff of 32 has one male, the senior designer, Raymond Choy. "I
believe in the empowerment of women," she said.

The phone rang again. It was her husband, wanting to know their plans for dinner
at the Harvard Club before they were to go to the Broadway musical "Jelly's Last
Jam."

"I'm runnning late, dear," his wife said. "Order for me. Oh, I don't know.
Whatever looks yummy."

Over the weekend, they would go riding, as usual, and make plans for their
B.Y.O.H. (bring-your-own-horse) party this summer.

Why, Mrs. Tober was asked, with all of its problems, frustrations, bills,
disappointments and heartaches, do so many people long for a wedding?

"Because," she said, "it's the biggest high in the world."

And who would she like to have play Barbara Tober in a film of her life?

"Me," she said. "It's been so wonderful, I'd like to do it all over again."

LOAD-DATE: June 14, 1992

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo: Barbara D. Tober (Peter Freed for The New Yoirk Times)

                   Copyright 1992 The New York Times Company


                              210 of 281 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                  June 14, 1992, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

Watergate's Shadow Lies Across the Land

BYLINE: By ADAM CLYMER

SECTION: Section 4; Page 3; Column 1; Week in Review Desk

LENGTH: 1541 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON


THIS week marks the 20th anniversary of the most famous botched burglary in
history, an event that led to furious debate and then provided the last national
occasion of general satisfaction with the government and the system.

But in the 18 years since President Richard M. Nixon resigned after revelations
of the Watergate burglary cover-up and a vast array of political crimes, the
national watchword that "the system worked" has been succeeded largely by a
dissatisfied aftertaste with the consequences of Watergate and the steps taken
in reaction to it.

After the exposures of how slush funds and illegal corporate cash financed the
burglary and other dirty tricks, the country got tougher campaign spending laws.
But while today's election campaigns are less corrupt they are probably nastier,
and no more satisfying or substantive.

Congress, angered at the secrecy surrounding warfare in Cambodia and other Nixon
high-handedness, used the political weakness of Mr. Nixon and his successor,
Gerald Ford, to pass the War Powers Act and limit Presidential power to impound
appropriated funds. But there is little will or purpose behind the exercise of
these tools today, and so the balance of power has shifted less than it seemed
it would.

The press gloried in the success of The Washington Post in probing the Watergate
scandal. It forswore the coziness with officialdom that led so many Washington
journalists, including many on The Post itself, to scoff at the work of Bob
Woodward and Carl Bernstein. Investigative reporting that sears politicians is
highly regarded within the press today, but to outsiders, its handling of
politicians often makes the press almost as disliked as those it covers.

Mr. Nixon's disgrace has only kept his party from the Presidency for a single
term since he took the helicopter from the White House lawn on his way to exile
in San Clemente. But it has left the G.O.P. with no sense of connection to the
progressive elements of his domestic policy, from food stamps to the
Occupational Safety and Health Administration to the Endangered Species Act.

And ultimately, if "the system worked" to force Mr. Nixon out, it did so in ways
that have made his successors' tenure safer. The Supreme Court decision that
ordered him to turn over taped conversations to the special prosecutor's office,
which sent them to Congress, also enshrined executive privilege in the law of
the land. And the so-called "smoking gun" tape of his instruction to have the
C.I.A. tell the F.B.I. to halt its investigation of the burglary served to dry
up his support from Republicans, but it also established a standard of proof for
political crime unmatched since then.

The grumpiness about Watergate's legacy spreads across ideological lines.

Senator John C. Danforth says Watergate's legacy has proved a distraction: "It's
created a sense that the problems of government are that there are bad people,
who are trying to do us in. And if we get rid of the bad people, we've gotten
rid of the problems of government." The Missouri Republican said: "The problem
isn't that there are corrupt people. The problem is that we as a people want
more out of a government than it can give us without doing harm."

But Senator Paul S. Sarbanes, a Maryland Democrat who voted for impeachment in
the House Judiciary Committee 18 years ago, thinks that on the contrary,
Watergate is not sufficiently prominent in the memory of the country, and
especially its Presidents. "I don't think the kind of renewed respect for the
Constitution that one would have expected in the aftermath has sustained itself
over the subsequent two decades," he said; except for Jimmy Carter, "I don't
think you've had a President who wanted to draw a strong lesson out of
Watergate."

The lessons drawn by the press from Watergate concern Bill Kovach, curator of
Harvard's Nieman Foundation. An aggressive reporter for The New York Times here
in 1972, he sees an attitude about government and its lies, beginning in
Southern civil rights reporting, enhanced by Vietnam and then "rooted in
Watergate," that troubles him. The legacy of the Watergate investigative fervor,
he said, was an intense focus on the watchdog role of the press, on the
"journalism of exposure." The press should be readier, he said, "to not just
expose wrongdoing, but expose the characters and the ideas" of politicians,
especially Presidential candidates.

A Cynical Public

John F. Bibby, professor of political science at the University of
Wisconsin-Milwaukee, connected the Kovach and Danforth concerns. Hostile
reporting, he argued, leaves a lasting legacy of "increasing cynicism" in the
public. That cynicism has been measured most consistently in the American
National Election Studies. Its series of questions about trust in government
took a sudden turn for the worse between 1972 and 1974. And with minor blips in
intervening years, attitudes have continued to turn down in just about all
population groups.

But even if Mr. Danforth is right and public opinion now hinders politicians in
their search for solutions, politicians contribute to that problem. If average
people find it easiest to deal with complex problems by personifying them and
seeing only good and evil, well, "We politicians do that to one another with 'so
and so's been bought.' "

Probably the President who suffered most was Mr. Carter. He owed his election to
Watergate, but he was the first to encounter from Congress what Mr. Bibby called
a "greater tendency to challenge the competency of any President, and maybe the
legitimacy." He confronted a Congress whose Democrats seemed anxious to prove
that they had not picked on Mr. Nixon because he was a Republican, and whose
Republicans thought they had, and wanted to get even. Mr. Carter's own contempt
for Congress made things worse, but he ended up being challenged more seriously
than Presidents were used to and his thin legislative record reflected that
antagonism.

Watergate affected the politics of the 70's, and its shadow can still be seen.
The immediate impact was in the 48-seat Democratic gain in the House in 1974.
That huge freshman class had staying power and devoted itself as much to
re-election as to policy. In Professor Bibby's view, the cementing of Democratic
control of the House then and since has contributed heavily to the irritability
today of what may be the permanent Republican minority.

The party was affected more generally, too. Mr. Nixon's biographer, Prof.
Stephen E. Ambrose of the University of New Orleans, says, "The Republican Party
went to the right because of Nixon's disgrace." Mr. Nixon's efforts at
rehabilitation have focused on foreign policy, but his domestic record was a lot
more wide-ranging than his successors'.

"More and more as time goes by," Mr. Ambrose said, "I'm struck by how innovative
he was," citing programs in health care, welfare, student loans, revenue sharing
and the environment. Some were Mr. Nixon's ideas, some were borrowed from
Democrats or the result of compromises with them, but the record is one of
initiatives of a sort hardly imagined in the Reagan and Bush Administrations.
When Mr. Ford lost to Mr. Carter, the connection to the Nixon domestic record
was broken, and the party has felt no need to revive or remember it since.

Healthy Executive Privilege

But all of these considerations are about side effects of Watergate, and not
what Watergate was about -- the only President in history who was an unindicted
co-conspirator. So it is perhaps in the area of political crime that lessons
matter most. Mr. Ambrose observed, "executive privilege is alive and well," and
the doctrine that Presidents have a right to refuse some demands by Congress and
the courts was endorsed in United States v. Nixon, even as it found the doctrine
inapplicable to the details of the particular subpoena of White House tapes.

The lack of an equivalent of the "smoking gun" tape was a major factor in the
unwillingness of Congress to press the Iran-Contra scandal against President
Reagan. The perceived need for such a piece of evidence, argued Mr. Sarbanes,
amounted to setting "a standard of certainty that it's very rare that we're
going to reach."

Even if no one would argue that the reaction to Watergate has prevented serious
problems today, Fred Wertheimer, president of Common Cause, argues that it is
important not to "lose sight of the real constitutional crisis we faced at that
time." Common Cause was in the middle of it, successfully suing for disclosure
of illegal corporate contributions. In the "most serious political scandal and
crisis in this century," he said, the country found that "at that time the
political system worked."

Today he said, the immediate improvement in ethical standards in Washington has
fallen away, and big money has returned to Presidential campaigns. Even worse,
he said "there is far more cynicism" about the potential of the system than
there was in 1972 to 1974. It may be harder to restore confidence today but the
lessons of Watergate still exist in the form of laws and standards. Even if
inadequately enforced, he said, "They remain there as permanent fixtures and
guideposts for what we need to do."

LOAD-DATE: June 14, 1992

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo: Forced to resign, Richard Nixon leaves Washington on Aug. 9,
1974, with a reflexive jaunty gesture. (United Press International)

                   Copyright 1992 The New York Times Company


                              211 of 281 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                  June 14, 1992, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

Wall of Silence Impedes Inquiry Into a Rowdy Navy Convention

BYLINE: By ERIC SCHMITT,  Special to The New York Times

SECTION: Section 1; Page 1; Column 1; National Desk

LENGTH: 1808 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, June 12


On a warm Saturday night last September, Navy Secretary H. Lawrence Garrett 3d
chatted with Navy pilots on a patio outside the Las Vegas Hilton, where military
aviators, flush from their victory in the Persian Gulf, were celebrating at a
three-day convention.

Just inside, hundreds of officers -- lured by the prospect of free drinks, free
food and a chance to share war stories with old buddies -- roamed the
third-floor "hospitality suites" rented by aircraft squadrons. Strippers and
scantily clad bartenders worked the 20 suites, where Navy and Marine Corps
pilots watched pornographic movies. Male streakers dashed about, and in one
suite, officers goaded female guests to drink from a dispenser shaped like a
rhinoceros penis. The alcohol bill per suite was as much as $7,000 during the
three days.

It was the 35th annual convention of the Tailhook Association, a private group
of retired and active-duty naval aviators whose parties were well known as
rowdy. The Navy paid more than $190,000 to fly 1,500 officers on military
aircraft to Las Vegas.

'Drunken, Messy Mass'

By late that evening, so many people had swarmed into the 140-foot-long hallway
connecting the suites that the corridor was, an officer said, "a hot, drunken,
messy mass of humanity, so crowded it would take you 20 minutes to walk from one
end to another."

In that hallway, as Mr. Garrett socialized on the patio just outside, some of
the Navy's most elite young officers were grabbing at female colleagues and
civilian women and shoving them down a gantlet, all the while keeping an eye out
for approaching admirals. Mr. Garrett, who proclaimed his distaste for lewd
behavior with a "zero tolerance" policy issued when he became Navy Secretary,
has said that he spent 30 to 45 minutes on the patio but was unaware there was
anything amiss inside until three weeks later.

Yet the next morning, Navy officials say, one of the Navy Secretary's top aides,
Lieut. Mike (Trusty) Steed, learned of the assault when he had breakfast with
one of the victims, an admiral's aide who was a friend. Lieutenant Steed
declined to comment for this article.

Condoning Lewd Behavior

The activities in that hallway over three nights last September are at the heart
of the military's most notorious sexual harassment scandal, and the sordid
events have come to symbolize the "Top Gun" mentality that not only engages in
such lewdness but even condones it as nothing extraordinary.

How it happened is a question that Navy investigators have had difficulty
sorting out, confronted with a stone wall of silence among a brotherhood of
aviators who said they could not recall what they had seen at the hotel just off
the Strip in Los Vegas.

"A lot of the people there said they didn't see anything they considered wrong,"
Robert J. Powers, director of investigations and counterintelligence for the
Naval Investigative Service, said in an telephone interview this week.

But after more than 1,500 interviews with officers and civilians who attended,
investigators said earlier this month that they had pieced together a rough
account that implicated more than 70 officers either in assaults against at
least 26 women, of whom 14 were officers, or in a subsequent cover-up. The Navy
has not publicly identified the officers.

Mr. Garrett, a former seaplane officer in Vietnam and a lawyer in the Reagan
White House, declined to be interviewed, and Mr. Powers said the Navy Secretary
has never been interviewed in connection with the incident because "there didn't
seem to be any reason to do so."

Mr. Garrett, who has said he is trying to change the culture of the
male-dominated, tradition-bound service, has ordered training sessions for Navy
personnel worldwide about harassment. Still, he has had to fend off accusations
that the seeds of the scandal, whose outlines were first made public several
weeks after the convention, flourished on his watch.

'Acceptable Social Conduct'

The investigators concluded that despite Mr. Garrett's policy of intolerance
declared in 1989, uniformed commanders had tacitly condoned the rowdy behavior
at every Tailhook convention since, and that the gantlet had apparently become a
fixture of the gatherings.

"Apparently, there is a sense in the tactical air community that what happened
on the third floor was acceptable social conduct and that allegations concerning
their conduct had been blown out of proportion," the inspector general said in a
report in April.

On each of the three nights of last September's convention, investigators found,
groups of officers in civilian dress suddenly turned violent, organizing with
military precision into drunken gangs that shoved terrified women down the
gantlet, grabbing at their breasts and buttocks and stripping off their clothes.


Women Ambushed

Unsuspecting women were ambushed when they walked out of the elevator and turned
right down the hallway into an ocean of unrelenting arms.

Among them was a 30-year-old Navy lieutenant, a helicopter pilot who was an
admiral's aide at the time. As she approached a group of officers in the hallway
looking for some dinner companions, one officer shouted, "Admiral's aide!
Admiral's aide," while another "grabbed me by the buttocks with such force that
it lifted me off the ground and ahead a step," she later told naval
investigators.

Others grabbed her, too, and one man put his hands down her bra. "I then turned
my head to the left and sank my teeth into the fleshy part of the man's left
forearm, biting hard," she said.

The lieutenant kicked and punched her assailants but was overpowered. After
being pawed for about 20 feet of the hallway, she managed to escape through an
open door into a hotel room.

Complaints Dropped

The lieutenant, who declined to be interviewed for this article, later filed a
complaint with her boss, Rear Adm. John W. Snyder Jr., then the head of the
Patuxent River Naval Air Test Center in Maryland. According to statements the
admiral's aide made to investigators, Admiral Snyder said of her complaint,
"That's what you get for going to a hotel party with a bunch of drunk aviators."
But he eventually relayed the complaint to his superiors.

Two civilian women from Northern California who were vacationing at the hotel, a
31-year-old computer engineer and a 33-year-old real estate appraiser, said they
were accosted when they went to the third floor as the guest of an officer.

The women reported the assaults to the hotel security and to the Las Vegas
police. But their complaint was dropped for lack of evidence, a police spokesman
said. A lawyer for the women in Las Vegas, James V. Lavelle, said the women were
"groped" when they got off the elevator, and were now considering filing a civil
suit. No lawsuits are known to have been filed in connection with the assaults.

Most women who were accosted told investigators later they did not want to press
charges or could not identify their attackers. Indeed, many women said in Navy
investigative interviews that the gantlet's existence was common knowledge among
officers, and many women warned friends to avoid the third floor.

One female officer told the investigators that she was "grabbed and fondled at
her first symposium" in 1986, "but did not formally complain, because she was
aware it could happen."

Slow Awareness

For the Navy, the awareness of the scandal's scope and magnitude came only
slowly. It was not until late September, three weeks after the convention, that
Mr. Garrett learned from Lieutenant Steed of the first assault complaint by the
admiral's aide. A formal investigation began on Oct. 11.

At the end of October, Mr. Garrett learned of five more incidents from Gregory
Vistica, a reporter with The San Diego Union-Tribune. The incidents were cited
in an Oct. 11 letter reporting on the convention sent to Tailhook Association
members from the group's president, Capt. F. G. Ludwig Jr.

The Navy's inquiries were handled by its inspector general and by the Naval
Investigative Service Command. They ended in April with investigators able to
identify only two suspects because of officers' refusals to talk about the
incidents. The Navy widened its inquiry this month to include officers who it
said refused to cooperate in the original investigations and senior officers in
nearby suites who did not prevent or stop the incidents.

As the investigation progressed, Navy officials came to realize that what they
originally believed was a single assault case had snowballed into at least 26
different incidents. That number is considered low because many of those
attending refused to cooperate with investigators and because women left the
convention without being identified.

'Watershed' Incident

Senior uniformed Navy officers say the Tailhook convention marks a "watershed"
in the way the service deals with sexual harassment.

"I'm sorry that it took an incident of such magnitude to get our attention
completely, but let me tell you Navy leadership is on board," the chief of naval
operations, Adm. Frank B. Kelso 2d, said in an April 29 speech to an advisory
panel on women in the military.

Besides ordering training on harassment, Mr. Garrett has demanded that Navy
commanders at the convention who failed to prevent the abuses be held
accountable. Admiral Snyder, the boss of the aide who complained about her
treatment at the convention, was transferred to a lesser job last December.

More Jobs for Women

Comdr. Rosemary Mariner, a 19-year Navy pilot and the Navy's first female
squadron commander, said in an interview that "a minority of jerks" at Tailhook
have given all naval aviators a bad name.

She said the broader issue is integrating women into all Navy jobs and lifting
combat exclusions on female pilots. Female Navy pilots have flown fighter
aircraft in training, but are barred from combat roles.

"Until you remove all the combat restrictions on women, you're going to continue
to have this problem," Commander Mariner said. "If the institution says you're
not good enough to fight or doesn't want you to, it's natural for people to
think you're inferior."

Friends of the former admiral's aide say the woman has felt tremendous pressure
as a whistle-blower. Worst of all, they say, she feels ignored by her peers.

"I was so disappointed that a group of naval aviators would think I was trash,"
the aide said in her statement to investigators. "There was complete disregard
that I was a naval officer. I never thought that naval officers would act that
way."

Last October, Mr. Garrett severed all ties with the Tailhook organization, which
takes its name from the hook that catches planes landing on aircraft carriers.
This year's convention -- without official Navy support -- is scheduled for
Sept. 18 and 19 in San Diego.

LOAD-DATE: June 14, 1992

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Map: "Scene of the Party," shows layout of party on third floor of Las
Vegas Hilton. (pg.34)

                   Copyright 1992 The New York Times Company


                              212 of 281 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                  June 14, 1992, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

CAMBODIAN GROUPS BEGIN PEACE MOVE

BYLINE: Reuters

SECTION: Section 1; Page 7; Column 1; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 349 words

DATELINE: KAMCHEY MEA, Cambodia, June 13


Fighters from three of Cambodia's four rival factions began reporting to United
Nations sites across the country today despite the refusal of the Khmer Rouge to
follow suit, the head of the United Nations mission here said.

In a new phase of the peace accords reached by the Phnom Penh Government and
three rebel factions in October, the fighters are required to report to United
Nations cantonments in preparation for disarmament and demobilization.

In a move that may jeopardize the peace plan, the powerful Khmer Rouge said this
week that it would not enter the camps because the United Nations could not
guarantee that all Vietnamese troops have left the country.

Vietnam, which drove the Khmer Rouge from power in Phnom Penh after an invasion
in late 1978, says the last of its troops were withdrawn in 1989. Diplomats say
that most Vietnamese soldiers have left the country but that some advisers
remain.

The United Nations Transitional Authority in Cambodia, known as Untac, has
agreed to let soldiers carry their personal weapons because of the Khmer Rouge's
refusal to join in the demobilization process.

Assurances by U.N. Aide

In an address at the Kamchey Mea cantonment site in southeastern Prey Veng
province, the head of the United Nations authority here, Yasushi Akashi, told
1,300 Phnom Penh Government soldiers that they would not suffer because they
were cooperating with phase two of the peace accords.

"I would like to assure all of you that the international community is fully
committed to bringing this peace process to its final successful conclusion," he
said.

Mr. Akashi has described the Khmer Rouge's refusal to report to United Nations
cantonments as a "clear breach of the Paris accords." At the United Nations
headquarters in New York, the Security Council prodded the Khmer Rouge on Friday
to abide by the accords.

In ruling Cambodia from 1975 through 1978, the Communist Khmer Rouge presided
over a brutal restructuring of society. Estimates of the number of people who
died range from hundreds of thousands to more than a million.

LOAD-DATE: June 14, 1992

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1992 The New York Times Company


                              213 of 281 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                  June 14, 1992, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

Topics of The Times;
The Vietnam War, Continued

SECTION: Section 4; Page 18; Column 1; Editorial Desk

LENGTH: 223 words


Just when Washington seems ready to acknowledge that the Vietnam War is over,
Hanoi is cruelly stirring its ghosts.

Last month Doan Thanh Liem was sentenced to 12 years' imprisonment for
anti-Socialist activity. The case against him grew out of his efforts to attract
Western businesses to Vietnam, in conjunction with Michael Morrow, an American
who has long worked for reconciliation with Hanoi.

During the war years, Mr. Liem won renown for his work with homeless children in
Saigon and Da Nang in a project called the Shoeshine Boys. At the time, he
worked closely with Richard Hughes, an American conscientious objector and war
critic.

Hanoi's hard-line Communists have always had trouble making a distinction that
came easily to Mr. Liem -- between the conscientious actions of individual
Americans and Washington's official policies. For example, Hanoi assumed that
Mr. Hughes must have been an intelligence agent because Washington did nothing
to suppress his antiwar work. Mr. Morrow's private efforts to reconcile the two
countries seem likewise to have aroused Hanoi's suspicions.

And now Mr. Liem, a victim of guilt by association, faces cruel punishment. It
has taken Washington a painfully long time to get over its Vietnam defeat. How
much longer will it take Hanoi's hard-liners to get over their victory?

LOAD-DATE: June 14, 1992

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Editorial

                   Copyright 1992 The New York Times Company


                              214 of 281 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                  June 14, 1992, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

Let Some Smoke In

BYLINE: By Tom Wicker;  Tom Wicker is a former political columnist for The New
York Times. His novel "Donovan's Wife" will be published in September.

SECTION: Section 6; Page 34; Column 2; Magazine Desk

LENGTH: 2657 words


Despite his obvious problems of "electability," Gov. Bill Clinton of Arkansas
has moved inexorably into position to win the Democratic Presidential
nomination. Republicans have little choice except to renominate George Bush,
despite his equally obvious vulnerabilities.

These seemingly inevitable major-party candidates may be the main reason why
Ross Perot, until recently an unknown figure in national politics, suddenly
looks like a man of destiny to so many voters.

The stars were not always so nearly fixed in their course. In an earlier,
less-regulated era, the out-of-power Democrats, at least, could have urged a
strong candidate to make a late entry into the nominating campaign. If none
responded, national convention delegates, under prodding from party leaders
alarmed by Clinton's problems and Perot's potential, could have nominated
someone other than the front-runner.

Neither option is more than a theoretical possibility for the Democrats this
year. Even if somebody other than Governor Clinton looked promising, Democratic
Party "reforms" since 1968 have all but guaranteed that his primary victories,
together with the party's system of awarding delegates in proportion to a
candidate's share of primary votes, will insure his nomination on the first
ballot.

Some Democrats -- dourly contemplating the loss of four of five Presidential
elections since the reform era began after 1968 -- have had enough of this
"automated" process, as it has been called by Nelson Polsby, a political
scientist at the University of California at Berkeley. They'd like to return to
a more "deliberative" system.

However, that would mean reneging on a reformed nominating process touted for
two decades as more "open and democratic" than it used to be. Whether or not
such openness is a good thing, or actually has been achieved, few Democrats
would dare advocate anything carrying the scent of the bad old days of party
"bosses" and "smoke-filled rooms."

More and more Democrats, nevertheless, are asking themselves some hard
questions. What, for example, is the virtue of a nominating process that
effectively closes the list of possibilities three or four months before the
convention?  What's "open" or "democratic" about rules that effectively prevent
some in the party from reconsidering what others of its members did in the early
primaries, even when -- as in 1992 -- polls show that so many Democrats are
clearly dissatisfied with the results of those primaries?

Why foreclose California, the most populous state in the union, whose rich haul
of electoral votes may be ripe this year for Democratic plucking, from any
effective role in choosing the party's Presidential nominee? By the time the
California primary rolled around two weeks ago, Clinton had the nomination all
but in the bag.

Where, anyway, is it written in the Constitution or in American political
history or practice that no one need apply for the Presidency unless he or she
has made it through a torturous obstacle course of state primaries -- 37 of them
this year?

Why does everyone have to run the same gantlet to win a party's Presidential
nomination? And if everyone does, won't the field soon be limited (if it isn't
already) to those men or women who most desperately want to be President, who
are willing to pay the high personal price of achieving that goal -- subjecting
themselves and their families, for instance, to the considerable rigors and
indignities of a year or more of primary campaigning in 37states?

Why should such obsessed persons, no matter how bold, be the only ones our
political parties may consider for the highest office in the nation?

ON APRIL 23, 1968, IN the aftershock of the withdrawal of the Democratic
incumbent, Lyndon Johnson, from one of the most turbulent Presidential campaigns
in American history, Eugene McCarthy won the Pennsylvania primary by more than
300,000 votes -- 71.6 percent of the Democratic total. The primary, however, was
a nonbinding "beauty contest," and the state's Democratic leader, Mayor James H.
Tate of Philadelphia, steered most of the delegates to Vice President Hubert H.
Humphrey, who was not even on the ballot.

Political potentates like Tate had been doing that sort of thing routinely
throughout the history of American party politics. But in that year of protests
-- against the war in Vietnam, L.B.J., the draft, the universities, the
establishment, the second-class status of black Americans -- the routine seemed
doubly outrageous. Because of Pennsylvania and other such "atrocities," the
legions of young people who had flocked into the Democratic Party to oppose the
war and support Gene McCarthy -- or, later, Robert Kennedy -- demanded a new
"participatory politics," a greater public voice in a more open process of
choosing Presidential nominees.

Leaders like Mayor Tate and Mayor Richard Daley (the elder) of Chicago
nevertheless controlled the 1968 national convention. Blandly asserting their
dominance-as-usual, they duly nominated Humphrey for President, though he had
entered no primaries at all. Perhaps chastened, however, by Humphrey's loss in
November to Richard M. Nixon, the Democrats finally responded to continuing
calls for "participatory politics." Ultimately, a number of reforms were
developed by a commission led by George McGovern, who in 1972 became the party's
nominee and Nixon's second victim.

After 1968, the McGovern Commission decreed, delegates to the Democratic
National Convention were to include women and members of minority groups in fair
proportion to their presence in a state's population. Presidential candidates
were to be awarded a share of each state's delegates in proportion to the number
of votes the candidate received in that state's primary or state convention.

Most significantly, as was to become apparent, these delegates were to be
selected by the various state parties through "open and democratic" processes
that ultimately would have to gain the approval of the Democratic National
Committee and the national convention's credentials watchdogs. Banned outright
was the selection of convention delegates in a caucus of party officials, or by
primary ballots on which only the names of delegate candidates appeared.

These McGovern rules were designed to tip the balance of power in the nomination
process from party bosses and machines to the voting public. No longer, for
example, could the Georgia party chairman, in consultation with only the
Governor, choose the state's entire delegation (with little regard to race or
sex) and have it in place long before the national convention, awaiting the
highest bid from Presidential candidates who had to come, hats figuratively in
hands, seeking Georgia's delegates.

John F. Kennedy -- like most nominees before him -- had won the Democratic race
in 1960 mostly by gaining the backing of state delegations, sometimes by
personal or political appeal, often by making alliances with state officials and
leaders who controlled or influenced members of their delegations. Kennedy won
only two significant primaries, in Wisconsin and West Virginia -- and the latter
was important primarily for its demonstration to dubious Democrats in nonprimary
states that a Roman Catholic could win in a Protestant electorate.

The McGovern rules caused this "old politics" of Presidential nominating to
disappear after 1968. State party leaders, looking at the new complexities and
uncertainties of choosing delegates under unfamiliar rules, saw only one thing
clearly: the legitimacy of their state's delegates was out of their control. It
would be determined by the national party and convention.

Many such leaders wanted no part of this threatening new process, and the result
was a startling proliferation of candidate primaries. They appeared to be the
most obvious means of "open and democratic" candidate selection, and their
results were almost certain to be approved at the national level.

From 17 Democratic state primaries in 1968 -- many, like Pennsylvania's, not
binding, some, like California's, winner-take-all -- the number grew to 23 in
1972. As years and elections passed, more states joined the primary parade. Now
three-quarters of the states apportion their convention delegates via a public
vote.

Republicans, with less enthusiasm for participatory politics, were forced to go
along in some cases by changing state laws; their primaries increased from 16 to
22 by 1972, and more have been added since. More important, Republican
fund-raising scandals in 1972 -- the year of Creep (Committee for the
Re-Election of the President) and Watergate -- influenced passage of new laws to
regulate election finance. Notably, these changes provided for Federal subsidy
of primary campaigns, nominating conventions and Presidential elections, and for
limitations on amounts that could be spent by candidates who accepted Federal
funds.

Taken together, campaign-financing reform and the new reliance of the parties on
candidate primaries resulted in the "automation" cited by Nelson Polsby. The
automated nominating system has the virtue of giving little-known or
underfinanced candidates -- Jimmy Carter in 1976, Paul Tsongas in 1992 -- an
opening in the relatively low-cost state contests in Iowa and New Hampshire,
which have become so important. Proportional awarding of delegates increases the
clout of minorities in the nominating process, though not necessarily in the
ultimate election.

Some party pros also like the fact that the early primaries can give the party
an early nominee, and thus extra time to make the case against a Republican
opponent. But Michael Dukakis's early triumph did not do the Democrats much good
in 1988; nor, many fear, will Bill Clinton's April clinching this year.

Governor Clinton has raised the most money to be matched by Federal subsidy, put
together the best organization, waged the most effective primary campaigns and
won the most primaries in the most regions. Why, then, do so many Democrats view
his impending nomination with so much trepidation?

Governor Clinton no doubt would be more highly esteemed by more Democrats if
questions about his marital problems and Vietnam draft status had not arisen.
Even if these "character" issues had never been raised, however, an automated
Presidential nomination was likely to prove unsatisfactory to many who must
support a nominee if he or she is to win in November.

That's because participatory primaries are not necessarily the most "open and
democratic" means of choosing delegates or a nominee. The widespread perception
that they are probably results from Americans' theological faith in "free
elections" as a means of political choice.

Voters in early primaries in a few states, however, are not representative of a
national party, much less the national electorate; witness the fate of Michael
Dukakis. Nor do primary voters necessarily reflect even their state party's
overall makeup. A winner may be backed by little more than a highly motivated
faction.

If several competent candidates are entered in a primary, one may come in first
with a relatively small vote -- and still reap the enormous publicity benefits
of winning. Several candidates together may receive far more votes than that
single candidate who comes in first -- but without the support of a majority.
Thus, had only two candidates entered the contest, the putative winner might
well have lost.

As was the case even in the hotly contested New York primary this year, voter
turnout may be abysmally low. Primaries tend, moreover, to yield great
advantages to glamorous or charismatic candidates, to those most adept at
providing sound bites and photo-ops to a voracious press, to organizations with
plenty of money to buy television spots, to candidates who have been publicized
for coming in first in other states and to users of hit-and-run tactics that
damage an opponent without giving him or her sufficient opportunity to respond.

Those who benefit for such reasons, however, may not meet the political
standards of voters in other states, or those who backed the losers, or those
who refused or neglected to vote in a primary. None of this is likely to help
the winner when it really matters, on Election Day in November; and all of it
can diminish the national party acceptability of the winner of a string of early
primaries.

But these deficiencies of primaries will make little difference to a winner's
bonanza of headlines and TV interviews. They will make no difference whatever in
the delegate total he or she will have amassed, in low turnout or high, and no
matter how small the "winning" percentage of a state's primary vote, or how
questionable the tactics that may have been used.

And if the voting public, or some portion of it, chooses among candidates in a
primary, these voters do not really choose delegates. Those who are to fill the
seats at the national convention are chosen, instead, by candidates, as they
fill the numerical quota they won in the primary. Thus, the McGovern rules
actually have shifted the power to select delegates from party officials
(sometimes called "bosses") to candidates.

It's not apparent that the candidates are better qualified to choose than the
party officials, or that they are more public-spirited; and the delegates they
pick are as beholden to those who anointed them as any delegate ever was to Boss
Flynn of the Bronx. Most, in fact, are pledged by state law, at least on the
first ballot. That such delegates might be persuaded to turn to a "dark horse"
or to a late-blooming candidacy is a forlorn hope indeed.

NO REFORMS CAN RELIEVE Bill Clinton of the burden of his 1968 draft problems;
nor can any produce a candidate who would necessarily be more electable in
November. But the problems his impending nomination present to many in his party
might have been circumvented in a more deliberative nominating process -- one
that could be put in place of today's automation by permitting state parties
once again to select delegates by any method they choose.

This proposal evokes anguished cries about a return to the smoke-filled room,
with all-white, all-male delegations again dominating national conventions. For
the Democratic Party, at least, in which women and minorities are firmly
established in the hierarchy, this is implausible; participation once granted is
not easy to curtail. Moreover, not all states that, under the McGovern rules,
have moved to primary selection would abandon that method if permitted.

But enough might to produce a more representative mix of delegates. Many states
would still use the participatory primary, despite its shortcomings; some would
turn to perhaps less "open" but more deliberative processes relying on the
knowledge, experience and preference of elected and state party officials. If
some of the latter did deliberate in smoke-filled rooms, their efforts would be
balanced by the primary states. In turn, the deliberators would balance some of
the less helpful primary results.

Above all, the delegations of an increased number of nonprimary states might
provide a roadblock at the convention against the bandwagon of a candidate who
had piled up victories and delegates in early but unrepresentative primaries.
They could keep a convention open for deliberation, compromise and astute
ticket-making, in place of an automated nominee ratified on the first ballot.

DON'T HOLD YOUR breath, however, for a reform movement that can be portrayed as
retreating from participatory politics, re-creating bosses and machines and
yielding to the old politics. Any political process has its winners and losers,
and the automated nominating process of the post-1968 era is no different. Those
who benefit from it will not easily give it up -- not, perhaps, until the
Democrats lose a few more Presidential elections with nominees chosen in
unrepresentative primaries.

LOAD-DATE: June 14, 1992

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Drawing

                   Copyright 1992 The New York Times Company


                              215 of 281 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                  June 15, 1992, Monday, Late Edition - Final

WATERGATE, THEN AND NOW;
Who Was Who in the Cover-Up and Uncovering of Watergate

BYLINE: By KAREN DE WITT,  Special to The New York Times

SECTION: Section A; Page 14; Column 1; National Desk

LENGTH: 2181 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, June 14


The discovery of an attempted burglary of the office of the Democratic National
Committee on June 17, 1972 -- an incident President Richard M. Nixon referred to
as "that pipsqueak Watergate" -- led to disclosures that unraveled over the next
two years like a ball of twine.

Entangled in that skein were dozens of men implicated in the scandal, many of
whom were top aides to the President. As it steadily unwound, the American
people watched a parade of witnesses expose the details of a political crime
whose proportions were nearly unfathomable: wiretapping, money laundering,
destruction of documents, payment of hush money, character assassination,
disinformation and deception -- all perpetrated by people at the highest levels
of Government. More than 30 people pleaded guilty or were convicted of crimes
like perjury, burglary, wiretapping and obstruction of justice.

"That pipsqueak Watergate" finally ran itself out in the Oval Office. Mr. Nixon,
described by the House Judiciary Committee in its impeachment articles as the
"unindicted co-conspirator" in his Administration's cover-up of the connections
between the Watergate burglary and the White House dirty-tricks department,
resigned on August 9, 1974. "Resignation meant life without purpose as far as I
was concerned," Mr. Nixon said later.

Following are a more than a score of others who were major players in
coordinating the break-in and cover-up, or in unraveling the scheme. Although
some were willing to reminisce about Watergate, others could not be reached for
comment or declined to be interviewed.

Carl Bernstein
Washington Post reporter

With Bob Woodward, Mr. Bernstein was half of the Washington Post reporting team
that uncovered the Watergate scandal and earned a Pulitzer Prize. The scandal
thrust the pair into the limelight, especially after they wrote "All the
President's Men" and "The Final Days" about Watergate. Mr. Bernstein went on to
work for ABC News and Time magazine, and recently wrote a memoir of his parents.
Mr. Bernstein, 48 years old, said that the lesson of Watergate was that "the
system really did work."

Alexander P. Butterfield
Nixon aide

Mr. Butterfield, who disclosed the existence of the "Watergate tapes," the Oval
Office conversations that had been recorded, said he is still angry at Mr.
Nixon for what he considers his refusal to take responsibility for Watergate.
The tapes showed that Mr. Nixon had approved paying hush money to the Watergate
burglars and sought to block the investigation of the break-in. Mr. Butterfield,
now 66 and chief executive of Armistead & Alexander, a management consulting
firm in San Diego, said: "The President was trying to get people to believe that
this was something his aides had gone off and done on their own. That was the
myth he was trying to perpetuate." Although he said he still admired some of the
former President's attributes, he added, "On the issue of morality, I just give
Richard Nixon the lowest possible marks."

Charles W. Colson
Special counsel to Nixon

Mr. Colson, known as a master of dirty political tricks, once said that he would
"walk over my grandmother if necessary" to insure Mr. Nixon's re-election. He
was instrumental in setting up the break-in team, and he disseminated false
information about Daniel Ellsberg, the Pentagon researcher who said he gave the
Pentagon Papers on the Vietnam War to the press in 1971. In 1973, Mr. Colson
pleaded guilty to obstruction of justice and other offenses. He served seven
months in prison and became a born-again Christian. Now 60, he is a lay minister
and chairman of Prison Fellowships Ministries and has written several books.

Archibald Cox
Watergate prosecutor

As the first special Watergate prosecutor, Mr. Cox laid the legal groundwork for
prosecution of the conspirators and for the Supreme Court decision requiring
President Nixon to turn over tapes of converstaions in the Oval Office.
Appointed by Attorney General Elliott L. Richardson, a former student, Mr. Cox
promised to pursue his investigation wherever it led. But five months later, in
what became known as the "Saturday Night Massacre," Mr. Cox was fired, on Mr.
Nixon's orders, by Acting Attorney General Robert Bork after Mr. Richardson
resigned rather than execute the President's order. He was replaced by Leon
Jaworski, a Texas lawyer. Mr. Cox, 80, recently retired after 45 years on the
Harvard Law School faculty.

John Ehrlichman
Nixon adviser

Mr. Ehrlichman supervised the covert actions of the Special Investigations Unit,
known as "the Plumbers," organized to plug leaks to the press. Mr. Ehrlichman
was convicted of conspiracy to obstruct justice and perjury in the Watergate
cover-up and conspiracy in the 1971 raid on the office of Daniel Ellsberg's
psychiatrist. Mr. Ellsberg, a Pentagon researcher, has said he leaked the
Pentagon Papers to the press. Mr. Ehrlichman served 18 months in prison before
his release in 1978, and was suspended from the practice of law. Now 67, he
lives in Atlanta where he works for Law Companies Group, a consulting firm.

L. Patrick Gray 3d
Acting F.B.I. Director

Mr. Gray hampered the investigation of the burglary by destroying documents
under pressure from the White House. During hearings on his nomination to be
F.B.I. director in early 1973, he admitted turning over F.B.I. files on the
Watergate affair to John W. Dean 3d, the White House counsel. President Nixon
withdrew his name from nomination, saying he had done so at Mr. Gray's request.
Mr. Gray, 63, is now a lawyer in New London, Conn.

H. R. Haldeman
White House chief of staff

Mr. Haldeman and John Erhlichman, an adviser to President Nixon, were dubbed
"The Prussians," not only because of their German surnames but also because of
their peremptory manner in protecting Mr. Nixon. A former advertising executive
and Mr. Nixon's closest confidant, Mr. Haldeman served 18 months in jail for
conspiracy to obstruct justice and perjury in the Watergate cover-up. Mr. Nixon
turned down his request for a pardon, and Mr. Haldeman later accused his former
boss of being behind the cover-up "from day one." Mr. Haldeman, 65, now lives in
Santa Barbara, Calif., and is a real-estate developer with interests in
restaurants and hotels.

E. Howard Hunt
Consultant

A former C.I.A. agent and prolific mystery writer, Mr. Hunt worked for Charles
W. Colson, President Nixon's master of political tricks. Mr. Hunt was dismissed
by John Erlichman after taking part in covert political operations like the
coordination of the Watergate break-in and the burglary of the Los Angeles
office of Daniel Ellsberg's psychiatrist in search of incriminating information
about a Nixon "enemy." He served 33 months in prison for burglary, conspiracy
and wiretapping. Mr. Hunt asserted that he had agreed to plead guilty because
Mr. Colson had promised him that the President would grant him clemency. Now 73,
he lives in Miami where he has just completed his 74th book.

Richard G. Kleindienst
United States Attorney General

Mr. Kleindienst resigned as Attorney General in April 1973, citing a conflict of
interest because the scandal had implicated "persons with whom I had close
personal and professional associations." Though not charged in the Watergate
conspiracy, Mr. Kleindienst pleaded guilty to a misdemeanor charge of refusing
to testify fully and accurately before the Senate Watergate committee about the
White House role in a Justice Department suit against the International
Telephone and Telegraph Corporation, a corollary scandal. His $100 fine and
one-month jail sentence were suspended. He practiced law in Washington until
1979, when he moved to Tuscon, Ariz. Mr. Kleindienst, 68, said that he had often
been lumped with those involved in the Watergate affair. Of the scandal, he
said, "The carnival-type atmosphere surrounding Watergate, you just can't
imagine what it was like."

Egil Krogh Jr.
Aide

Mr. Krogh headed the Special Investigations Unit, known as "the Plumbers,"
organized to plug leaks to the press at the time of the break-in of the office
of Daniel Ellsberg's psychiatrist. Mr. Krogh admitted authorizing the break-in
and served four months in prison on a conspiracy conviction.  "At the time, in
1971, I thought that what we were doing was dictated inescapably by the national
security interests," he said. Mr. Krogh said Watergate taught him that "You have
to remain true to your deepest sense of what is right. You have to be willing to
question what you're being asked to do. I wasn't willing to question what I was
doing." He said he sees President Nixon, John Ehrlichman, Donald Segretti and
other players in the Watergate affair perhaps once a year.  Since 1980, Mr.
Krogh, 52, has been a partner with Culp, Dwyer, Guterson & Grader law firm in
Seattle, where he lives.

John J. Sirica
Judge

Judge Sirica of United States District Court in Washington sentenced 12 of the
Watergate defendants to jail and also ordered President Nixon to release his
White House tapes. Recently recovered from pneumonia, Judge Sirica, 88, retired
four years ago and lives in Washington. His son, Jack, a reporter in the
Washington bureau of Newsday, said the judge considered the Watergate trial the
high point of his career.

Frank Wills
Security guard

Mr. Wills discovered the break-in at the Watergate office and called the police,
uncovering a burglary that eventually brought down a president. Unlike some
others, including several of the co-conspirators, Mr. Wills did not profit from
the scandal. A celebrity for an instant, he quickly sank from public view. He
worked sporadically as a security guard and in 1983 he was sentenced to a year
in jail for shoplifting a $12 pair of sneakers. "Watergate hasn't really changed
my life," he said. "I was just doing my job. If anything, the crooks benefited.
They got famous." Since 1990, Mr. Wills, 45, has been living in North Augusta,
S.C., caring for his sick mother.

Bob Woodward
Washington Post reporter

Mr. Woodward, 49, is now managing editor for investigative reporting at the
newspaper. After writing two books about Watergate with Carl Bernstein, he went
on to write several more bestsellers. When asked whether Watergate could happen
again, Mr. Woodward said, "Maybe it has, and we don't know it."

Herbert W. Kalmbach
Nixon lawyer

Mr. Kalmbach was associate finance chairman of the 1968 Nixon for President
campaign and was an unoffical fund-raiser for the Committee for the Re-election
of the President, controlling several secret funds. Mr. Kalmbach served six
months in jail and was fined $10,000 for operating an illegal campaign committee
and for offering an ambassadorship in return for political support. He also
handled a secret $500,000 fund to finance sabotage and espionage operations in
the salary of Donald H. Segretti, a lawyer, whose job it was to discredit the
Democrats. Mr. Kalmbach is now 69 and an investor in Newport Beach, Calif.

Jeb Stuart Magruder
Deputy campaign director

Mr. Magruder, 57, said he would have stayed in government service had it not
been for Watergate. For his part in the cover-up, Mr. Magruder pleaded guilty to
conspiracy to obstruct justice and served seven months in prison. The former
cosmetics company executive is today the senior minister at First Presbyterian
Church in Lexington, Ky. The ministry, he said, is not a direct result of his
experiences after Watergate but offers him the same chance to serve that being
in government did.

John N. Mitchell
Campaign director

Mr. Mitchell, President Nixon's former law partner and a former Attorney General
resigned after his wife, Martha, demanded publicly that he leave politics and
"all those dirty things that go on." The couple separated in 1974, and Mrs.
Mitchell blamed Mr. Nixon. Mr. Mitchell was accused of having knowledge of
numerous dirty tricks in the Watergate cover-up but denied that he had done
anything but withhold some information from investigators, for what he termed
were solid political reasons. He was convicted of conspiracy, obstruction of
justice and perjury and served 19 months in jail. Mr. Mitchell left prison in
1979 and was disbarred. He lived quietly in Washington until his death Nov. 9,
1988 at the age of 75.

The Burglars

JAMES W. McCORD JR., a former C.I.A. employee and chief of security for the
Nixon re-election committee, was the lead burglar inthe Atergate break-in. After
implicating the White House, he was sentenced to four months in jail.

Of the others, BERNARD L. BARKER, 75, was one of three Cuban exiles recruited by
a former C.I.A. agent, E. Howard Hunt. Mr. Barker, who is a retired zoning
inspector in Miami, said: "We did our jobs. Under the circumstances, I have no
regrets about it." Mr. Barker said that he occasionally sees his fellow
burglars, VIRGILIO GONZALEZ, 67, a retired locksmith, and EUGENIO MARTINEZ, 68,
a sales manager at a car dealership. The fifth burglar, FRANK STURGIS, 67, also
lives in Miami.

LOAD-DATE: June 15, 1992

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photos: The Watergate apartments, scene of an attempted burglary of the
office of the Democratic National Committee that mushroomed into a political
crime, whose proportions were nearly unfathomable, perpetrated by people at the
highest levels of Government. (George Tames/The New York Times); Carl Bernstein;
Alexander P. Butterfield; Charles W. Colson; Archibald Cox; John Ehrlichman; L.
Patrick Gray 3d; H.R. Haldeman; E. Howard Hunt; Richard G. Kleindienst; Herbert
W. Kalmbach; Egil Krogh Jr.; Jeb Stuart Magruder; John N. Mitchell; John J.
Sirica; Frank Wills; Bob Woodward.

                   Copyright 1992 The New York Times Company


                              216 of 281 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                  June 15, 1992, Monday, Late Edition - Final

Khmer Rouge Balk at U.N. Peace Plan

BYLINE: By PHILIP SHENON,  Special to The New York Times

SECTION: Section A; Page 3; Column 4; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 650 words

DATELINE: PHNOM PENH, Cambodia, June 14


Diplomats and United Nations officials warned today that the refusal of the
Khmer Rouge to put their soldiers under United Nations supervision will delay --
and could eventually destroy -- the peace process aimed at ending a generation
of bloodshed in Cambodia.

At the same time, diplomats said they suspected that the Khmer Rouge were
bluffing once again in hope of winning new concessions, and that their leaders
would eventually meet the terms of the United Nations-brokered peace treaty they
signed last fall.

"The bluff is on a larger scale this time," said a senior Asian diplomat based
in Phnom Penh. "Eventually, the Khmer Rouge will rejoin the peace process
because it offers them what they want very badly -- legitimacy."

The Khmer Rouge, the Maoist-inspired rebels responsible for the death of more
than a million Cambodians when they controlled the central Government in the
1970's, announced last week that they would not take part in the next phase of
the peace plan.

First Troops Enter U.N. Camp

In the new phase, all four factions in the Cambodian civil war are supposed to
put their soldiers under the supervision of the United Nations in preparation
for their disarmament.

Troops from the other factions -- the Vietnamese-installed Phnom Penh Government
and two non-Communist rebel groups -- began arriving at United Nations camps on
Saturday.

The Khmer Rouge had said they would not adhere to the peace treaty unless, among
other things, they received a guarantee that the Vietnamese Army, which ousted
the Khmer Rouge in 1979, had pulled its troops out of Cambodia.

Yasushi Akashi, the United Nations diplomat overseeing the peacekeeping
operation, has described the Khmer Rouge's refusal to disarm its troops as a
clear violation of the treaty.

Where Is Vietnamese Army?

He has made it equally clear, however, that the United Nations will do what it
can to negotiate with the Khmer Rouge to save the peace plan. But time, he
added, "is very much running out."

The Khmer Rouge have long charged that large numbers of Vietnamese troops remain
in Cambodia in support of the Phnom Penh Government.

Foreign diplomats say that there is no evidence to support the allegation.  The
Hanoi Government says all its troops were withdrawn in 1989.

The Khmer Rouge move appears also to stem from a perception among the leaders
that some United Nations diplomats have begun to side against them in talks
among the four factions.

Friends Have Fled

"The Khmer Rouge leaders seem to feel the United Nations is not treating them as
equals, that their pariah status has not been fully lifted," said an Asian
diplomat.

The Khmer Rouge have been responsible for repeated violations of the cease-fire
and are thought to have ample supplies of weapons to continue a limited fight
against the Phnom Penh Government.

Yet if they chose to resume a full-scale civil war, Khmer Rouge guerrillas would
likely find themselves without the vast military and other logistical support
they had received in the past from China and Thailand.

The Word From Sihanouk

The Khmer Rouge threat to the peace process is taken seriously, although not so
seriously that the mood in Phnom Penh has become particularly gloomy. The city,
in fact, continues to bustle with the frenzied commerce made possible by last
year's peace settlement.

Nor was the threat serious enough to prevent Prince Norodom Sihanouk, the
nation's newly restored head of state and arguably the most important person in
the process, from leaving Friday to visit an ailing aunt in China.

On Friday, the Prince said bluntly, "The fact is that the Khmer Rouge is not
going to let us live in peace."

Yet at a ceremony at Phnom Penh's Ponchentong Airport to see him off to Beijing,
Prince Sihanouk and Khieu Samphan, the nominal leader of the Khmer Rouge, bowed
and touched hands in a sign of respect.

LOAD-DATE: June 15, 1992

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo: Tank commanders waiting for orders from the United Nations after
bringing five Russian-built PT-76 amphibious tanks to temporary quarters
yesterday at a Mekong River naval base northeast of Phnom Penh. (Reuters)

                   Copyright 1992 The New York Times Company


                              217 of 281 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                  June 16, 1992, Tuesday, Late Edition - Final

SUMMIT IN WASHINGTON;
GULAG HELD M.I.A.'S, YELTSIN SUGGESTS

BYLINE: By BARBARA CROSSETTE,  Special to The New York Times

SECTION: Section A; Page 1; Column 5; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 989 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, June 15


President Boris N. Yeltsin of Russia said today that some Americans captured
during the Vietnam War were apparently transferred from Hanoi to labor camps in
the Soviet Union. He added that some of them may still be alive, possibly in
psychiatric hospitals.

Mr. Yeltsin made his statements in an interview with NBC News as he flew from
Moscow to Washington for a summit meeting with President Bush on Tuesday.

If the assertions made by Mr. Yeltsin are true -- he said they were based on a
first impression drawn from the recent release of Soviet archives -- the
information could profoundly change the history of the contentious issue of
American prisoners of war.

The White House said tonight that it could not comment on the substance of Mr.
Yeltsin's statement.

"We have been discussing the P.O.W. issue with the Russians for quite a while,"
Doug Davidson, a White House spokesman, said tonight, "and it will be on the
agenda with President Yeltsin on Tuesday."

Some Administration officials say they believe that earlier statements by Mr.
Yeltsin and his aides on these issues may have been intended to shore up his
position in Russia and to discredit the former Communist Government and
hard-liners who oppose him.

The new information, which Mr. Yeltsin said was still being investigated more
fully, could also pose political problems for President Bush. Ross Perot, who is
seeking the Presidency in this year's election, has been sympathetic to lobby of
families who have kept this issue alive since American troops were withdrawn
from Vietnam in 1973. Mr. Perot has said on numerous occasions that he believes
prisoners could still be alive despite the denials of the Vietnamese and
skepticism expressed by the Pentagon, and he has traveled to Hanoi to discuss
the issue.

Moscow Had Denied Transfers

Last year, President Bush raised the issue with President Mikhail S. Gorbachev
before the Soviet leader stepped down. Moscow repeated its denial that Americans
had been brought to the Soviet Union from Vietnam, as some former American
intelligence analysts and others have charged.

Mr. Davidson said that reports that Vietnam-era servicemen were being held in
the Soviet Union were not new, and that the American Embassy in Moscow had been
pursuing the assertions through diplomatic channels.

Richard L. Armitage, who as a senior Defense Department official negotiated this
issue with the Vietnamese in the mid-1980's, said in an interview tonight that
"if this is true, it is a fantastic breakthrough and a very positive
development."

Mr. Armitage, who now directs American assistance to the former Soviet republics
as the State Department's Deputy Coordinator for the new independent states,
said that to his knowledge the United States had no information like Mr.
Yeltsin's assertion despite recent fact-finding trips to Russia by American
officials trying to close the book on the issue.

Focus on Vietnamese

"If true, this also casts further doubt on the assertions of the Vietnamese that
they didn't transfer prisoners," he said. "It makes on wonder how forthcoming
they are being."

Family members of Americans unaccounted for since the Vietnam war have accused
successive Administrations of covering up information on prisoners who may have
been left behind in Indochina.

"I feel that with Yeltsin's information we family members can challenge the
Department of Defense to declassify all P.O.W.-M.I.A. documents from 1945 and
including the Vietnam war," said Dolores Apodata Alfond, a founder of the
National Alliance of Families for the Return of America's Missing Servicemen, a
group representing relatives of people missing from all wars since World War II.

Ms. Alfond's brother, Maj. Victor J. Apodata, was shot down over Vietnam on June
6, 1967. In 1986, a former National Security Agency broadcast monitor, Jerry
Mooney, told Congressional investigators and family members that Major Apodata
had been traced by radio interception as "Moscow bound" after his capture.

On Friday, Mr. Yeltsin acknowledged for the first time to a Senate committee
that is examining the prisoner issue that the Soviet Union had imprisoned
Americans during World War II, when Washington and Moscow were allies, and had
sent to labor camps and psychiatric wards an unknown number of Americans who
were shot down during the Korean War or who were on aerial reconnaissance
missions during the cold war.

Those comments, included in a letter, were described as "an acknowledgement of
unprecedented proportions" by Senator John F. Kerry, the Massachusetts Democrat
who heads the Senate Select Committee on P.O.W.-M.I.A. Affairs.

In his interview today with the television network today, Mr. Yeltsin was asked:

"For years there have been rumors in the United States that American P.O.W.'s
from the Vietnam War were transferred from Vietnam to the Soviet Union. Do you
know that to be true?"

Mr. Yeltsin, according to NBC, answered:

"Our archives have shown that it is true, some of them were transferred to the
territory of the former U.S.S.R. and were kept in labor camps. We don't have
complete data and can only surmise that some of them may still be alive."

Answering questions from the NBC reporter, Stone Phillips, Mr. Yeltsin said
these cases were under investigation.

Since Friday, when Mr. Yeltsin's unexpected letter was delivered to the Senate
by Col. Gen. Dmitri Volkogonov, who heads the Russian half of a joint commission
set up in May to investigate the issue of prisoners and missing Americans from
World War II to the present, families of missing servicemen have renewed
criticisms of successive administrations for their handling of this matter.

In Washington today, General Volkogonov said that the Russian authorities were
investigating whether an American man reportedly sighted in the Ural Mountains
might be one of hundreds of American citizens missing since World War II.

LOAD-DATE: June 16, 1992

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1992 The New York Times Company


                              218 of 281 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                  June 16, 1992, Tuesday, Late Edition - Final

NEWS SUMMARY

SECTION: Section A; Page 2; Column 5; Metropolitan Desk

LENGTH: 1063 words




International     A3-15

JAPAN PASSES TROOPS BILL

Despite a post-war prohibition on dispatching troops abroad, Japan's Parliament
approved limited military participation in peacekeeping operations after a long
and dramatic debate. Despite the limits, Japan's neighbors are edgy.  A1

JAPAN MEETS CREDIT CARDS

The world's most fervent savers have discovered not just the joys of shopping
with plastic but, in soaring numbers, the burdens of mounting indebtedness.  A1

YELTSIN'S PARTING DECREES

As President Yeltsin left for Washington, he signed several economic decrees on
privatization and stabilizing the ruble. Critics say he's moving too fast toward
capitalism.  A1

GULAG HELD M.I.A.'S, YELTSIN HINTS

Soviet archives indicate that American prisoners were transferred from Vietnam
to Soviet labor camps, President Yeltsin said in a television interview, adding
that it is possible some may have survived.  A1

BACKSTAGE AT THE SUMMIT

The dialogue of Presidents preparing for a summit meeting and the simultaneous,
11th-hour arms negotiations between their staffs have a distinctly different
tone.  A12

News Analysis: Russia needs time for its identity to jell.  A13

THE STREETS OF SARAJEVO

In an answer to hardship, the Sarajevans of Marshal Tito Street turn out with
civilized scorn and meet a passerby called tragedy.  A8

HUSSEIN'S HIDDEN STRENGTH

Sanctions notwithstanding, President Saddam Hussein of Iraq is stronger now than
he was a year ago, according to a classified intelligence report.  A3

HOSTAGES REPORTED RELEASED

The state-run Iranian news agency said that two Germans, the last of the Western
hostages to be held in Lebanon, had been released.  A5

NEW PRESIDENT FOR YUGOSLAVIA

Dobrica Cosic, a Serb, was elected President of what remains of Yugoslavia as
thousands of university students in Belgrade continued to protest Serbian
domination.  A9

ALBANIA AS A BUFFER

Albania's President met with President Bush today and said he feared the
conflict in Yugoslavia might spreading.  A10

BRITAIN CUTS BACK ARMS

Britain will remove tactical nuclear weapons from all Royal Navy surface ships
and attack aircraft as part of a program to dismantle all but "an absolute
minimum" of Britain's nuclear stockpile.  A14

National     A16-23

KIDNAPPING OF SUSPECT UPHELD

The Supreme Court ruled that the United States can kidnap a criminal suspect
from a foreign country to put the suspect on trial, even if the foreign country
objects. A1

Excerpts from the High Court ruling.  A18

UNKIND WORDS FROM A VISITOR

Vice President Quayle returned to New York with words of scorn for Democratic
leaders and subjects as varied as condom distribution in schools, high local
taxes and rent control.  A22

CLINTON'S STUDIO AUDIENCE

With the help of a friendly studio audience, Governor Clinton pursued his new
mission: persuading voters to keep an open mind about his chances of becoming
President.  A23

RENDING A G.O.P. MARRIAGE

Edward J. and Sherrie Rollins were the ultimate Republican power couple until he
defected to the Perot campaign and she left her White House job. Each thinks the
other erred, and Republicans are furious at both. Washington at Work.  A23

The President said he might grace the television talk-shows.  A22

BUSH'S BROTHER IS SUED

A Japanese company with reputed mob connections filed a lawsuit accusing
President Bush's older brother of refusing to honor a $2.5 million guarantee he
had given the company as part of a 1989 stock transaction.  A20

FROM WELFARE ROLLS TO REFORMER

Two decades ago Lynn Woolsey of Petaluma, Calif., was forced to go on welfare.
Within three years, she was off welfare and making swift progress in the
business world, eventually winning election to the city government. Now she is
running for the House, telling voters that she knows just how to contain welfare
costs.  A16

CHICAGO CELEBRATION TURNS UGLY

Chicago's celebration of the Bulls' N.B.A. championship was not entirely joyful.
Before the night was over, 100 people were injured, more than 1,000 people were
arrested, and several arson fires were set.  A16

REPORT ON SEX ABUSE BY PRIESTS

The Roman Catholic Archbishop of Chicago said he would establish an independent
board made up mostly of lay members to investigate accusations of sexual abuse
of children by priests in his archdiocese.  A17

Metropolitan     Digest, B1

GUN BILL BLOCKED

The State Legislature and the New York City Police Department have struck a deal
to kill legislation that would have forced the department to arm all its
officers with semiautomatic weapons, agreeing instead to greatly expand a
current test of the guns.  A1

GRADUATING WITH UNCERTAINITY

The Class of 1992 at Linden, N.J., has plans. There just aren't many June
graduates thinking of spending the summer criss-crossing the country or
backpacking through Europe, finding themselves. They want jobs. A1

Business     Digest, D1

Science Times  C1-11
Latest views of the universe are beautiful and inconclusive.  C1
Bromeliads, the natural terrariums of the rain forest.  C1
Toward exploding some myths about children's suicide.  C1
Whale losses in the polluted St. Lawrence River persist.  C4

Fashion Page   B9

Sports   B10-16
Baseball: Vincent puts off Steinbrenner decision.  B11
Red Sox shut out Yanks.  B11
Mets lose to Expos.  B13
Basketball: Bulls favored for next season.  B11
Football: N.F.L. free agency case to open.  B10
Golf: Simpson a major threat in Open.  B14

Arts/Entertainment C13-18
An unhappy Hollywood ending.  C13
Debating the financial value of Andy Warhol estate.  C13
Two leave endowment posts.  C13
Music: Nightclub opera.  C13

Obituaries   B8
Robert William Haack, former New York Stock Exchange head
Eddie Lopat, Yankees pitcher

Editorials/Op-Ed  A24-25
Editorials A24
Deadly business with Russia.
Adirondacks at risk.
School board meddlers.
Topics: G.O.P., democracy.

Letters A24
Russell Baker: Save that arch for Fu.  A25
A. M. Rosenthal: Congress, Yeltsin and prisoners.  A25
Michael Schudson: The archeology of a crisis.  A25
Larry Gelbart: Perot's ticket to the White House.  A25

LOAD-DATE: June 16, 1992

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo: Bush and Albanian leader discussed Yugoslav war. (Paul
Hosefros/The New York Times) A10

TYPE: Summary

                   Copyright 1992 The New York Times Company


                              219 of 281 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                  June 16, 1992, Tuesday, Late Edition - Final

THE 1992 CAMPAIGN: Political Week;
Missing Endorsements Leave Clinton Fragile

BYLINE: By R. W. APPLE Jr.,  Special to The New York Times

SECTION: Section A; Page 22; Column 1; National Desk

LENGTH: 883 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, June 15


The primaries are over, the convention opens four weeks from today, but three of
the Democrats whom Gov. Bill Clinton of Arkansas defeated on his way to locking
up the party's nomination have still not endorsed him and have not decided
whether they should do so.

In one sense, it matters little that Senator Bob Kerrey of Nebraska, former
Senator Paul E. Tsongas of Massachusetts and former Gov. Edmund G. Brown Jr. of
California have remained silent. Mr. Clinton beat them fair and square in state
after state, he has the delegates to assure himself a first-ballot nomination,
and most of the party's leadership has joined his campaign.

But in another sense, their reluctance is hurtful. Candidates in third place in
the polls need no further reminders of the fragility of their appeal, and
parties as inured to defeat in Presidential campaigns as the Democrats need no
public squabbles during their conventions to mar the message of unity and
determination they want the television networks to carry to the voters.

Nothing as divisive as the questions of civil rights and the war in Vietnam,
which once tore Democratic conventions apart, looms on the horizon this year.
But there are enough different tendencies in the party to cause friction, and to
a considerable extent, they explain the missing endorsements.

Take the case of the middle-class tax cut. For Mr. Clinton, it was a central
element of his early campaign -- a symbol of his determination that the
Democratic Party would appeal to more than minorities and special-interest
groups this year. During the New Hampshire contest and for many weeks
thereafter, Mr. Clinton banged away at the proposal in speeches, television
commercials and debates.

Some of his opponents, notably Mr. Tsongas, disliked the idea and said so.  Mr.
Clinton gradually de-emphasized it as the campaign wore on, but he never
abandoned it. Now, however, his agents have reportedly agreed to drop the idea
from the Democratic platform as a concession to Mr. Tsongas and others.

The agreement, party officials said, was worked out before last week's first
platform-drafting session in Santa Fe, N.M., in telephone conversations
involving Ted Van Dyk, a Washington consultant representing Mr. Tsongas, and
Representative Bill Richardson of New Mexico, the chairman of the drafting
committee, and other backers of Mr. Clinton on the committee.

Clearly, the Clinton forces think bringing Mr. Tsongas into the fold, and
perhaps Mr. Brown and Mr. Kerrey, is worth a fairly sizeable concession.

But it is still not entirely clear whether there will be a floor fight or a
love-in at the convention. Mr. Tsongas is pressing for other changes in the
proposed platform language, on such matters as the capital gains plank and Mr.
Clinton's proposed tax breaks for families with children.

No actual drafting was done in Santa Fe. That work will be done over the next
two weeks, in time for a meeting of the full 186-member platform committee in
Washington on June 27.

Mr. Van Dyk said that "what the committee decides will go a long way toward
determining what we do, on endorsement and on a floor fight." He said that he
and former Governor Brown had met in Santa Fe over the weekend and had discussed
the possibility of a common challenge to the platform on July 14, when the
convention is scheduled to vote on it, if the Clinton majority on the committee
did not compromise.

"We have 600 delegates," Mr. Brown told reporters at the Santa Fe gathering. "I
don't think they are going to New York to be extras in a 'B' political movie.
They want to be participants in a live debate and process."

But there will be no debate on the floor unless there is a minority report, and
there can be none unless at least 20 percent of the members of the platform
committee sign a petition asking for one. Mr. Clinton's backers dominate the
committee, but backers of other candidates or former candidates have been given
places on the panel in proportion to the breakdown of convention delegates.

Neither Mr. Brown, whose positions tend to be more liberal than Mr. Clinton's,
nor Mr. Tsongas, who has some views that are more pro-business than Mr.
Clinton's, can muster 20 percent of the committee on his own. Mr. Brown has 618
delegates, according to the most recent New York Times tally, and Mr. Tsongas
has 547, for a total of 1,165, or 27 percent of the convention.

Theoretically, at least, that means that together they could muster 20 percent
of the committee, issue a minority report and stage a debate.

But with Mr. Clinton running third in the polls, behind both Mr. Bush and Ross
Perot, the presumed independent candidate, there is a powerful motive for unity
and a strong incentive to avoid the kind of public squabbling that has come to
typify the Democrats in recent decades. So it may be that some of the Tsongas
delegates, for example, will conclude that a televised platform fight is not in
their best interest.

Mr. Tsongas himself may back off, for that matter; defeated candidates often
talk tough, extract what concessions they can, then kiss and make up. He is
hardly the party-wrecker type. Mr. Brown may be more inclined to fight on, but
without Mr. Tsongas, he would lack the numbers, and he would have to fight from
outside the hall.

LOAD-DATE: June 16, 1992

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1992 The New York Times Company


                              220 of 281 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 June 17, 1992, Wednesday, Late Edition - Final

SUMMIT IN WASHINGTON: And Now, the Political Plowshares;
Boost for Bush Campaign, but Will It Last?

BYLINE: By R. W. APPLE Jr.,  Special to The New York Times

SECTION: Section A; Page 1; Column 3; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 1006 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, June 16


On the face of it, the sweeping arms agreement announced today by President Bush
and President Boris N. Yeltsin of Russia seems precisely the kind of political
medicine Mr. Bush needs.

It displays Mr. Bush in his preferred role of accomplished international
negotiator and peacemaker, which since the Persian Gulf war has been gradually
eclipsed, in terms of public opinion, by concerns about health care, jobs,
education, the environment and the credibility of politicians. Nuclear
disarmament is obviously an easier sell than sluggish economic growth.

The historical record shows, furthermore, that Presidents who make major strides
toward peace or who confront major world crises get political credit for doing
so. A study last year by the Gallup Organization identified 42 "rally events,"
in which Presidents played such roles, in administrations stretching back to
that of Franklin D. Roosevelt, and found an average jump of 8 percentage points,
lasting an average of 10 weeks, in Presidential approval.

Sometime the increase has been bigger. When the American hostages were seized in
Iran in November 1979, Jimmy Carter's ratings jumped 19 points; when the Vietnam
peace agreements were reached in January 1973, Richard M. Nixon gained 16
points. Mr. Bush's approval figure reached 89 percent, a record, after jumping
18 percent at the onset of the air war in the gulf.

Stressing the Negative

But the Democrats will do all they can to re-emphasize George Bush's weak suit,
domestic affairs. The Speaker of the House, Representative Thomas S. Foley,
Democrat of Washington, said this evening that he doubted the House would
approve further aid for Russia because of political instability there; he did
not say, but other Democrats did, that their political interest clearly lies in
spending money at home, not abroad.

The political fallout of the Yeltsin visit is also complicated by the
possibility that Americans taken prisoner in Vietnam might have been shipped to
Russia and imprisoned, and that some might still be in labor camps.

A whole series of other caveats must be applied to any suggestion that today's
agreement could represent a turning point in what has been a dismal campaign for
the President.

First and most obviously, the election is in November, not June, and other
events at home and abroad will arise to capture the electorate's attention. Only
rarely is a foreign-policy event so riveting that it swings large numbers of
votes months later, as the war for the Falkland Islands in 1982 apparently did
in the British general election of 1983, when Margaret Thatcher won a decisive
victory.

A Short-Term Gain

"The President has had very little good news to talk about for the last three
months," said Peter Hart, a Democratic poll-taker, strategist and analyst, "and
this will certainly help him in the short term by pulling the spotlight back
onto foreign affairs, the one subject voters think he is best qualified to deal
with.

"But this is not like a war in the intensity of its impact, and people are going
to come back to the domestic issues by the fall. It will still be an election
about whether the government works and solves our problems."

In addition, a potential paradox lurks in the agreement to cut the two
countries' nuclear warheads by two-thirds: if it takes effect, the possibility
of nuclear confrontation between the two would be further reduced and, it could
be argued, so would the importance of having an experienced hand on the nuclear
trigger. Ross Perot and Gov. Bill Clinton of Arkansas lack foreign-policy
experience, but would that matter so much to voters when the risk of major
conflagration appears slight?

Mr. Clinton, in particular, might also be able to argue that the further
reductions in weaponry should make available more money for the domestic
programs that he has advocated without always being able to describe precisely
how he would pay for them.

Whether the arms agreement will help the President persuade a hitherto reluctant
Congress to approve his aid package for Russia is also open to question,
especially given the sensitivities on Capitol Hill to the prisoner-of-war issue.
Until Mr. Yeltsin's disclosure that some Americans may still be held in Russian
camps has been investigated, said Senator John McCain, a Republican from
Arizona, there will be no approval for aid to Russia.

Asked about the arms-control agreement, Senator Patrick J. Leahy of Vermont,
chairman of the Subcommittee on Foreign Operations, commented, "I think it
should help. I think the majority in the Senate are predisposed to help. It
would be a shame if because of the prisoner-of-war aspect defeat was snatched
from the jaws of victory."

Foreign-Affairs Appeal



Mr. Bush has been trying to play the foreign-policy card, without conspicuous
success, since he began his re-election campaign in January.

He used television commercials in New Hampshire that extolled his role in the
gulf victory and attacked his Republican rival, Patrick J. Buchanan, as a
reluctant warrior. Only Monday, in an appearance on CNN before the arms-control
agreement was reached, the President all but begged voters to reward him for his
foreign policy.

"I hope they know I stand for world peace," he said. "I hope every mother and
dad out there says, 'Hey, we ought to give this President a little credit for
the fact that our little kids don't worry quite as much about nuclear war.'
Isn't that important? Isn't it important that because of Ronald Reagan and me,
to a large extent -- and a lot of support in Congress -- we've seen a crumbling
of our monolithic opponents, the Communists?"

Voters do credit Mr. Bush with foreign-policy expertise; in the most recent New
York Times/CBS News poll, taken in early May, he had a 47 percent favorable, 42
percent unfavorable rating in that field. But his rating in handling the economy
was so dreadful -- 18 percent favorable, 73 percent unfavorable -- that it
dragged his overall standing into negative ground.

LOAD-DATE: June 17, 1992

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: News Analysis

                   Copyright 1992 The New York Times Company


                              221 of 281 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 June 17, 1992, Wednesday, Late Edition - Final

SUMMIT IN WASHINGTON;
BUSH AND YELTSIN AGREE TO CUT LONG-RANGE ATOMIC WARHEADS; SCRAP KEY LAND-BASED
MISSILES

BYLINE: By MICHAEL WINES,  Special to The New York Times

SECTION: Section A; Page 1; Column 6; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 1748 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, June 16


President Bush and President Boris N. Yeltsin announced an agreement today that
not only sharply reduces their stocks of long-range-missile warheads, but also
eliminates all multiple-warhead missiles based on land, the core of the old
Soviet Union's nuclear arsenal.

The accord was announced by the leaders in the White House Rose Garden just
hours after Mr. Yeltsin began the first state visit to Washington by a Russian
President. It must still be translated into a formal treaty, which United States
officials said could be done within three months, then approved by the United
States Senate and the Russian Parliament.

"With this agreement," Mr. Bush told reporters, "the nuclear nightmare recedes
more and more for ourselves, for our children and for our grandchildren."
[Excerpts from Mr. Bush's and Mr. Yeltsin's remarks, page A10.]

The Target Date is 2003

The accord requires each nation to reduce its nuclear force to between 3,000 and
3,500 warheads in two phases by no later than 2003, and by 2000 if the United
States helps Russia to destroy its arms system.

The two nations together currently control about 22,500 warheads. Under a treaty
that Mr. Bush and the former Soviet leader, Mikhail S. Gorbachev, negotiated in
1991 but which is only now being implemented, the United States arsenal was to
be reduced to 8,500 warheads and Russia's to about 6,900.  [Page A11.]

Mr. Bush and Mr. Yeltsin also agreed to pursue indications in newly examined
Soviet records that some American prisoners from the Vietnam War may have been
transfered to the Soviet Union, and could still be held in Russia. But Mr.
Yeltsin stressed that the prospect was merely "possible," and Mr. Bush said the
United States had no independent proof that Mr. Yeltsin's assessment was valid
or that any Americans were alive. [Page A11.]

Following Up P.O.W. Report

The President said that he would immediately dispatch Malcolm Toon, a former
United States Ambassador to Moscow, to Russia to pursue the reports. Mr. Toon
and an adviser to Mr. Yeltsin, Dmitri Volkogonov, head a joint committee seeking
to locate both Russian and American service personnel missing in conflicts that
involved the two superpowers.

While the planned cuts in nuclear warheads are dramatic, arms-control analysts
said that the mix of weapons remaining under the agreement is equally
significant.

The accord would effectively wipe out the centerpiece of the Russian arsenal,
its land-based missile force, while preserving much of the sea-based force that
United States military strategists consider this nation's great strength.

The United States would cut the number of its submarine-launched missile
warheads to 1,750, from 3,840; while this is a 50 percent reduction, it still
allows the United States a potentially devastating force at sea.

The Russian concessions on land-based missiles, which Mr. Yeltsin said last week
would give the United States an unacceptable advantage, appeared to be driven by
his urgent need to secure economic aid to help prop up the faltering Russian
economy and to cut his own military expenditures.

Mr. Yeltsin called the accord "an unparalleled and probably unexpected thing for
you and the whole world," and indeed, as early as this morning, officials in
Washington said they were not sure when an accord would be reached.

The suddenness of today's announcement triggered speculation that Mr. Bush had
lured Mr. Yeltsin into a nuclear accord with promises of further or quicker
economic aid. "I honestly don't believe that that was any part of his
calculation," a senior official said today of Mr. Bush.

Bush Seeking More Aid

The President has pledged billions in loan guarantees and hundreds of millions
more in humanitarian aid to the former Soviet nations as part of a $24 billion
aid package being prepared by the Western democracies. But Congress has balked
at approving aid in an election year dominated by domestic concerns, and the
President has been forced to lobby increasingly hard merely to persuade
lawmakers to consider his request.

Mr. Bush made another pitch in his welcoming remarks to Mr. Yeltsin this
morning, calling the economic aid "an investment in a new century of peace with
Russia."

"History offers us a rare chance, a chance to achieve what twice before this
century has escaped our grasp," he said. "It is the vision that perished twice
in the battlefields of Europe, the vision that gave us hope through the long
cold war, the dream of a new world of freedom."

United States officials had been hinting for days that the arms talks with the
Russians were going slowly. That raised the question of whether an agreement had
suddenly fallen into place or Administration officials had been deliberately
minimizing their progress.

If progress was played down, it might have been to set the stage for a
public-relations coup at a two-day meeting that had promised to generate less
news and electricity than the meetings between Mr. Gorbachev and Mr. Bush, and
before him President Ronald Reagan.

In trappings and public interest, this Moscow-Washington meeting has not
approached the spectacle of past summits, despite the White House's best
efforts.

At welcoming ceremonies on the South Lawn of the White House this morning, red,
white and blue bunting ran riot, troops massed in uniforms ranging from Navy
whites to revolutionary tricorners and greatcoats and the landscape was bedecked
not just with the flags of the two nations, but those of all 50 states as well.

Not Much Cheering

But unlike Mr. Gorbachev, who was mobbed with traffic-stopping crowds wherever
he went in Washington, Mr. Yeltsin was greeted outside Blair House on his way to
the ceremony by a scattering of about 200 tourists and other onlookers and only
a brief, stifled cheer as his motorcade sped away.

The Russian leader stood stiffly erect and smiling through much of the morning
ceremony, in which he and Mr. Bush exchanged florid praise suited more to
lifelong allies than to erstwhile enemies. But his handshake with Mr. Bush at
the morning's end was strong, and later he predicted, to the surprise of
reporters, that he and Mr. Bush would reach agreement to cut their nuclear
stockpiles.

"When the presidents take charge of something, you can be sure it will be
handled in the most efficient way," he said before entering a working lunch with
Secretary of State James A. Baker 3d. "That means we will reach an agreement."

A Boost for Bush

The arms agreement allowed Mr. Bush to regain the international spotlight and
the political offensive after a discouraging week in which he first was caught
on the edge of a tear-gas attack in Panama, then held up to global criticism in
Brazil for his contrary views at a United Nations environmental summit meeting.

And it permitted Mr. Yeltsin to return home later this week with the burnish of
international leadership and, perhaps, some greater assurance that Mr. Bush
would deliver on his promise to contribute to the international rescue of
Russia's economy.

Mr. Yeltsin described the accord as tangible evidence of the "partnership and
friendship" between Washington and Moscow.

"We know one thing," he said. "We shall not fight against each other."

Asked how the two leaders had achieved an accord that seemed unlikely only hours
before, a United States official replied: "Hard work. Would you believe it? And
a strong sense on both sides that it was a real chance, an historic opportunity,
and that a maximum effort should be made on both sides."

Mr. Yeltsin described the accord as tangible evidence of the "partnership and
friendship" between Washington and Moscow.

"We know one thing," he said. "We shall not fight against each other."

Bush Optimistic on Aid

At briefings for reporters, Administration officials said that Mr. Bush
expressed optimism that assistance for Russia would move quickly through the
Senate, perhaps this week, but that he also told Mr. Yeltsin that election-year
realities made the final prospects for passage less certain.

Mr. Yeltsin was said to have responded that he understood political realities,
and that back home in Moscow, his own were "brutal."

Today, however, all that was swept into the background by an arms agreement that
appeared, at least on paper, to dwarf its ancestors.

The agreement was ironed out in horse-trading this afternoon between President
Bush and President Yeltsin, when the Russian leader finally agreed to destroy
his multiple-warhead missiles by 2003, as Washington had proposed, after
President Bush assured him that the United States will help pay for the
destruction.

The Path to an Accord

The chronology of the negotiations, as outlined today by a senior Administration
official, went something like this:

Last September President Bush proposed deep cuts in nuclear missiles, to 4,700
warheads each, provided that Moscow agreed to give up all of its land-based,
multiple-warhead ballistic missiles. The Kremlin countered with a proposal that
the two sides cut to 2,500 warheads each, and that both nations give up their
land-based and sea-launched multiple-warhead missiles.

When Secretary of State Baker and Foreign Minister Andrei V. Kozyrev met in
Brussels on March 11, Mr. Baker tried to persuade Mr. Kozyrev that given their
new friendship, it was not necessary to maintain parity, with both sides giving
up their multiple-warheaded missiles. The Russians were not persuaded.

When Mr. Baker and Mr. Kozyrev met again in Lisbon in the middle of May, the
Russians for the first time signaled a general willingness to accept
Washington's number of 4,700 warheads and to allow the United States to keep
some submarine-based multiple-warhead missiles; this would be done in two stages
by 2005. But Moscow wanted to retain almost all of its ICBM's until the second
stage.

From then on, talks between Mr. Baker and Mr. Kozyrev focused on how to
implement this understanding. The Americans wanted an earlier target date, and
eventually they compromised on 2003. The Russians wanted lower total warhead
numbers, and the two sides eventually agreed on the range of 3,000 to 3,500.

The last minute wrangling was over how to pay for such rapid destruction of
nuclear weapons, how to count the number of weapons that bombers would be
allowed to carry and how to actually go about taking warheads off missiles --
all of which were resolved in talks last night and this morning.

LOAD-DATE: June 17, 1992

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photos: Boris N. Yeltsin yesterday with President Bush, Barbara Bush
and Mr. Bush's dog, Ranger. (Reuters) (pg. A1); The South Lawn was the scene
yesterday for the official welcoming ceremony for President Boris N. Yeltsin,
who began a two-day state visit. (Paul Hosefros/The New York Times) (pg. A10)

                   Copyright 1992 The New York Times Company


                              222 of 281 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 June 17, 1992, Wednesday, Late Edition - Final

SUMMIT IN WASHINGTON;
U.S. to Press Yeltsin to Reduce Budget Deficit

BYLINE: By STEVEN GREENHOUSE,  Special to The New York Times

SECTION: Section A; Page 13; Column 1; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 501 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, June 16


Administration officials said today that they would press President Boris N.
Yeltsin to bring Russia's budget deficit under control to help enable Moscow to
sign an economic reform agreement with the International Monetary Fund.

If Russia controls its deficit, reins in its money supply and moves to make the
ruble convertible, then the Administration will press the I.M.F. not to delay an
agreement because of concerns about details, the officials added.

"If those three key issues can be resolved, then we're willing to work with
Russia to see that superfluous issues don't get in the way," said a senior
Administration official.

With their battered economy deteriorating day by day, Russian officials are
eager to sign an agreement with the fund as soon as possible because an accord
will unblock most of the $24 billion in aid the Group of Seven industrial
nations promised last April.

During Mr. Yeltsin's visit to Washington, Russian officials have waged a public
campaign to urge more flexibility from the fund, arguing that if the I.M.F. is
too stern it could push Russia's economy to the breaking point.

Fund officials are pushing Russia to reduce its budget deficit to zero, while
Russian officials are talking of a deficit target of around 4 percent of the
gross national product as compared with more than 20 percent last year.

The fund also wants Russia to explain how it will coordinate monetary policy
with other former Soviet republics that plan to continue to use the ruble,
because such coordination is deemed essential for reducing inflation and
stabilizing the currency.

"We couldn't support a program that would be regarded as less than adequate,"
said Michel Camdessus, the I.M.F.'s managing director.

The I.M.F. is also pushing Russia to remove price controls on oil, but Mr.
Yeltsin said this would make it hard for farmers to harvest.

"Russia needs to concentrate on the key elements fundamental to reform," said
Treasury Under Secretary David C. Mulford. "The fund needs to remember what is
politically possible."

In meetings today with President Bush, Mr. Yeltsin explained the sweeping
reforms he announced Monday about privatization, bankruptcy, ownership of land
and foreign exchange.

"They clearly gave us the impression that they're fully committed to continuing
with their reform effort, that they're going to stay the course," said an
Administration official who sat in on the meetings.

Members of Congress said an American aid package for Russia could be further
delayed by Mr. Yeltsin's statement that Russia might be holding some American
prisoners of war who have survived since the Vietnam War.

"If it's determined definitively there are Americans being held as prisoners of
war in Russia, there's no way that the Congress is going to pass aid while
they're being held," said Senator Patrick J. Leahy, Democrat of Vermont.

The House and Senate foreign relations committees have both approved the
package, but no floor vote has been scheduled.

LOAD-DATE: June 17, 1992

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1992 The New York Times Company


                              223 of 281 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 June 17, 1992, Wednesday, Late Edition - Final

SUMMIT IN WASHINGTON;
PRESIDENT PRAISES YELTSIN ON M.I.A.'s

BYLINE: By BARBARA CROSSETTE,  Special to The New York Times

SECTION: Section A; Page 11; Column 1; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 769 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, June 16


President Bush praised Boris N. Yeltsin today for acknowledging, after years of
denials from Moscow, that American prisoners from several wars may have been
taken to the Soviet Union.

Mr. Bush said the Russian President told him for the first time in meetings this
morning that the Russians were investigating new information that servicemen
from the Vietnam War might have been among those prisoners.

On Monday, in an interview with NBC News, Mr. Yeltsin said that "our archives"
showed that some American prisoners from the Vietnam War "were transferred" to
the Soviet Union "and were kept in labor camps." He said some "may still be
alive."

Vietnam's Foreign Ministry denied today that any American prisoners of war had
been sent to the Soviet Union.

Mr. Bush said he had been given no evidence that American prisoners were still
alive in the former Soviet Union. But he said he was persuaded that Mr. Yeltsin
was prepared "to go the last mile" to find any that were.

American to Examine Papers

"For him to go back and dig into these records, without fear or embarrassment,
is of enormous consequence to the people of the United States of America," Mr.
Bush said at a joint meeting with Mr. Yeltsin at the White House. "I salute him
for this."

Mr. Bush said Malcolm Toon, a former Ambassador to the Soviet Union who leads
the United States contingent on a joint commission investigating four decades of
missing Americans, would go to Moscow immediately to work with his Russian
counterpart, Col. Gen. Dmitri A. Volkogonov, in examining recently opened
archives. No new information was made available today.

As the issue of missing servicemen intruded unexpectedly into the
Russian-American summit, Ross Perot, who has long insisted that Americans may
have been left behind in Indochina, suddenly pulled back from a promise to
testify publicly on the issue at a Senate committee hearing on June 30. In doing
so, he came closer than he has in the past to confirming his expected candidacy
for President.

In a letter faxed today to Senator John F. Kerry, the Massachusetts Democrat who
is chairman of the Select Committee on P.O.W.-M.I.A. Affairs, Mr. Perot said,
"The politically charged atmosphere that exists at the present time makes it
impossible for the subject to be treated with the thoroughness and seriousness
it requires."

Mr. Perot said the hearings, coming shortly before national party conventions,
"with a witness who is being placed on the ballot as an independent," would
quickly turn into "a political circus."

Kerry Chides Perot

In a three-page reply, Mr. Kerry chided Mr. Perot for breaking his promise. He
said that Mr. Perot, who traveled to Hanoi in 1987 to discuss the issue, had
information to offer and that "the public is entitled to hear it."

The committee, which has subpoena powers, met today to begin discussions on its
next course of action.

Regarding Mr. Yeltsin, some in Congress and the Administration said they thought
that he might have jumped the gun in some of his statements on American
prisoners. They suggested that he might have wanted to discredit his critics,
including Mikhail S. Gorbachev, at home and please members of Congress.

Some members of Congress doubt that Mr. Yeltsin's statements will help free aid
for Moscow. "We cannot move forward on an aid package to Russia, nor advance
steps to normalization with Vietnam without obtaining a complete report on
President Yeltsin's statement," Senator John McCain, Republican of Arizona, said
today.

There are 2,266 Americans still unaccounted for from Vietnam, Laos and Cambodia,
in many cases because bodies have not been recovered. The Pentagon says there
are more than 8,100 unaccounted for from the Korean War and 78,750 whose fates
have not been confirmed -- though most are assumed to have died -- in World War
II.

Internments in World War

In a letter to the Senate Committee on Friday, Mr. Yeltsin said 716 American
servicemen, mostly bomber crews making forced landings on Soviet territory, had
been interned during World War II. About 23,000 United States troops wound up in
Soviet custody after being freed from German camps; most were sent home in
1945-46.

Mr. Yeltsin also said that 262 pilots shot down over North Korea during the
Korean War had been taken prisoner and that at least 59 of them had been
interrogated by Soviet agents. Other Americans fell into Chinese hands.

He said further that 9 American planes were shot down over Soviet territory in
the 1950's, and that in 1953 at least 12 of the crew members were in Soviet
prisons or hospitals.

LOAD-DATE: June 17, 1992

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1992 The New York Times Company


                              224 of 281 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 June 17, 1992, Wednesday, Late Edition - Final

SUMMIT IN WASHINGTON;
Excerpts From Bush-Yeltsin Conference: Working Toward a Safer World

BYLINE: Reuters

SECTION: Section A; Page 10; Column 1; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 1731 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, June 16


Following are excerpts from statements and a brief news conference by President
Bush and President Boris N. Yeltsin of Russia, who spoke through an interpreter:


BUSH STATEMENT

Mr. President, let me just say that I'm pleased to announce that President
Yeltsin and I have just reached an extraordinary agreement on two areas of vital
importance to our countries and to the world. First, we have agreed on
far-reaching new strategic arms reductions. Building on the agreement reached
with Russia, Ukraine, Kazakhstan and Belarus, our two countries are now agreeing
to even further dramatic strategic arms reductions substantially below the
levels determined by Start.

We have agreed to eliminate the world's most dangerous weapons, heavy ICBM's,
and all other multiple warhead ICBM's, and dramatically reduce our total
strategic nuclear weapons.

Those dramatic reductions will take place in two phases. They will be completed
no later than the year 2003 and may be completed as early as the year 2000, if
the United States can assist Russia in the required destruction of ballistic
missile systems.

With this agreement the nuclear nightmare recedes more and more for ourselves,
for our children and for our grandchildren.

Just a few years ago, the United States was planning a strategic nuclear
stockpile of about 13,000 warheads. Now President Yeltsin and I have agreed that
both sides will go down to 3,000 to 3,500 warheads with each nation determining
its own force structure within that range.


'The New Relationship'

And I'd like to point out that this fundamental agreement which in earlier years
could not have been completed even in a decade has been completed in only five
months. Our ability to reach this agreement so quickly is a tribute to the new
relationship between the United States and Russia and to the personal leadership
of our guest, Boris Yeltsin.

In the near future, the United States and Russia will record our agreement in a
brief treaty document that President Yeltsin and I will sign and submit for
ratification in our country. President Yeltsin and I have also agreed to work
together, along with the allies and other interested states, to develop a
concept for a global protection system against limited ballistic missile attack.

And we will explore a senior group -- or we will establish a senior group to
explore practical steps toward that end, including the sharing of early warning
and cooperation in developing ballistic missile defense capabilities and
technologies.

This group will also explore the development of a legal basis for cooperation,
including new treaties and agreements, and possible changes to existing treaties
and agreements necessary to implement the global protection system.

That group is headed by Dennis Ross for the United States, and will first meet
in Moscow within the next 30 days.

In conclusion, these are remarkable steps for our two countries, a departure
from the tensions and the suspicions of the past, and a tangible important
expression of our new relationship. They also hold major promise for a future
world protected against the danger of limited ballistic missile attack.

YELTSIN STATEMENT

Mr. President, ladies and gentlemen, I'd like to add a few words to what
President Bush has just announced here.

What we have achieved is an unparalleled and probably an unexpected thing for
you, and for the whole world. You are the first to hear about this historic
decision which has been reached today after just five months of negotiations. We
are in fact meeting a sharp dramatic reduction in the total number for the two
sides of the number of the amount of nuclear warheads. . . .

Indeed, we have been able to cut over those five months of negotiations the
total number of nuclear warheads to one-third, while it took 15 years under the
Start treaty to make some reductions.

This is an expression of the fundamental change in the political and economic
relations between the United States of America and Russia.

It is also an expression and a proof of the personal trust and confidence that
has been established between the Presidents of these countries, President Bush
of the United States of America and President of Russia, and these things have
been achieved without deception, without anybody wishing to gain unilateral
advantages.

'Balance of Security'

This is a result of the trust entertained by the President of the democratic
Russia toward America and by the President of the United States toward the new
Russia.

This is the result of a carefully measured balance of security. We were not
going in for numbers, for just one, two, three thousands of pieces. Rather we
have established a record for each country to elect the number, the figure that
it will consider appropriate for its own defense and security.

The total number will go down from 21,000 to 6,000 for two sides. Under the
first phase, the reductions for the two sides will be down to 3,800 to 4,250,
including ICBM's, 1,250, and heavy missiles, 650; SLBM's, 2,250. Under the
second phase we shall go down to, respectively, 3,000 and 3,500, including total
reduction and destruction of heavy missiles. Land-based MIRV's will be reduced
as well. SLBM's will go down to 1,750. Each country will elect the figure that
it will consider appropriate to ensure its defense and security.

Thus we are departing from the ominous parity where each country was exerting
every effort to stay in line, which has led Russia, for instance, having half of
its population living below the poverty line. We cannot afford it, and therefore
we must have minimum security level to deal with any possible eventuality which
might arise anywhere in the world and threaten our security.

But we know one thing: we shall not fight against each other. This is a solemn
undertaking that we are taking today, and it will be reflected as a matter of
partnership and friendship in the charter that we are going to sign.

Our proposal is to cut the process of destruction from the proposed 13 years
down to 9 years. So the things that I have been mentioning before will be
materialized by the year 2000.

                                    .  .  .

I want to add that these figures have been agreed with and ratified by the
secretary for defense, Mr. Cheney, and the Defense Minister, Pavel Grachev, of
the Russian Federation.

QUESTIONS AND ANSWERS

Why Nuclear Warheads?

Q: Would you explain for people who might not understand why friends who trust
each other and who do not plan to attack would still need 7,000 nuclear
warheads?

PRESIDENT BUSH: What I'm saying is, we've moved dramatically down from 13,000.
It's going to be a -- this will be seen as an enormous move forward toward the
relaxation of tension and toward the friendship that we feel for each other. The
elimination of these, the most destabilizing of weapons, is extraordinarily
positive. And the fact that each country at this juncture in history retains
some nuclear weapons speaks for itself.

Who knows what lies out there ahead? But certainly I agree with what President
Yeltsin said, that there is no animosity. The cold war days are over and he came
here in a spirit of forward movement on these arms control agreements and that
speaks for itself.

PRESIDENT YELTSIN: I would like to amplify on that. I would say that in response
to your question that the technical and financial resources that are required in
order to destroy, dismantle and reduce the total number of warheads and missiles
from 21,000 to six or seven thousand is enormous and this is the only thing that
conditions this figure.

The Missing G.I.'s

PRESIDENT BUSH: With your permission, Mr. President, I would like to take the
last question, which relates to the P.O.W.-M.I.A. discussions that we have had.
President Yeltsin and I discussed this morning the issue that is of the highest
priority for our Administration, and I know for every American, the fate of
American P.O.W.'s and M.I.A.'s from World War II, Korea, the cold-war period and
Vietnam.

President Yeltsin informed me for the first time that Russia may have
information about the fate of some of our servicemen from Vietnam. And he said
the Russian Government is pursuing this information vigorously, just as we
speak. And with us today are President Yeltsin's adviser, Dmitri Volkogonov over
here and our able former Ambassador to the U.S.S.R., Ambassador Malcolm Toon. .
. .

President Yeltsin and I have instructed both of these gentlemen to begin
immediately a joint U.S.-Russian pursuit of the latest information; it was given
to me today. I have asked Ambassador Toon to return immediately to Moscow to
work on this issue, and I want to assure all Americans, and particularly those
families of the American P.O.W.'s and M.I.A.'s that we will spare no effort in
working with our Russian colleagues to investigate all information in the Russia
archives concerning our servicemen.

And while we do not have any specific information to make public today, I pledge
to keep the American people informed of developments on this issue as we find
out more about these latest leads.

And let me just point out that the forthcoming comments by President Yeltsin is
just one more sign of this improved new relationship between Russia and the
United States of America. For him to go back and dig into these records, without
fear of embarrassment, is of enormous consequence to the people of the United
States of America.

                                    .  .  .

Q: Do you agree it's possible that some of those Americans may still be alive?

PRESIDENT BUSH: I would simply say that this -- I have no evidence of that, but
the cooperation that is, has been extended, and again is being extended by the
President of Russia will guarantee to the American people that if anyone's
alive, that person, those people would be found. And equally as important to the
loved ones is the accounting for any possible M.I.A.

And so we have no evidence of anyone being alive, but I would simply say again
that this, this is the best way to get to the bottom of it, and this new
approach by the President of Russia to go into these archives and to try to find
missing records will be the best assurance that I can give the American people
that the truth will, will be revealed, finally.

LOAD-DATE: June 17, 1992

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Text

                   Copyright 1992 The New York Times Company


                              225 of 281 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 June 18, 1992, Thursday, Late Edition - Final

SUMMIT IN WASHINGTON;
YELTSIN CHEERED AT CAPITOL AS HE PLEDGES ERA OF TRUST AND ASKS FOR ACTION ON AID

BYLINE: By ANDREW ROSENTHAL,  Special to The New York Times

SECTION: Section A; Page 1; Column 6; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 1790 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, June 17


On a day that the United States gave Russia a set of trade incentives to boost
its struggling economy, President Boris N. Yeltsin swept through official
Washington like a conquering hero today and announced that he was deactivating
the most potent nuclear missiles aimed at America.

Amid chants of "Boris, Boris, Boris!" reverberating through the House of
Representatives chamber, Mr. Yeltsin stirred Congress to 13 standing ovations as
he vowed that the "idol of Communism" had "collapsed, never to rise again."
[Excerpts, page A18.]

Having caused a furor on Monday by asserting that some Americans taken prisoner
in Vietnam or other wars may still be alive in Russia, Mr. Yeltsin pledged to do
whatever was needed to find them. He leaped ahead of the agreement to cut
long-range nuclear weapons that he and President Bush announced on Tuesday by
telling the joint meeting of Congress that he had ordered the 10-warhead SS-18
missiles that are to be destroyed under the accord removed immediately from
active status.

Money for Ex-Soviet Lands

Then he said it was time for the United States to repay Russia's good will by
approving a stalled package of aid that includes $12 billion the International
Monetary Fund says it needs to begin lending to Russia and the other former
Soviet republics.

Appearing later at a news conference with President Bush, Mr. Yeltsin was even
more direct.

"If we do not take measures now to support Russia," he said, "this will not be a
collapse of Russia only, it will be a collapse of the United States, because it
will mean new trillions of dollars for the arms race."

Mr. Yeltsin and Mr. Bush took a big step toward thawing commercial relations
today by signing agreements granting Russia most-favored-nation status in trade
and liberalizing rules for American investment in Russia. [Page A19.] But Mr.
Bush will have to expend considerable political capital to insure Congressional
passage of the stalled aid package.

Bush Appeals to Congress

He joined Mr. Yeltsin's appeal for action, asking lawmakers to put aside
election-year pressure to spend money only at home and move quickly to approve
the aid program for former Soviet republics.

"Let me just say to the American people, our support for Russia is unshakable
because it is in our interest," Mr. Bush said at the joint news conference,
which followed the signing ceremony in the White House East Room. "Success for
Russian democracy will enhance the security of every American. Think for just a
minute about what that means -- not for presidents, nor for heads of state, or
historians, but for parents and their children. It means a future free from
fear."

Mr. Yeltsin obtained the favorable tariff treatment he has long sought from
Washington when the two Presidents signed the packet of commercial agreements.
The documents also prohibit double taxation of profits, provide risk insurance
for American investors and expand the availability of export credits for
American companies.

Other agreements signed on the final day of the first Russian-American summit
meeting expand the official relationship between the two countries, including
cooperation in space and the formation of a joint early-warning system for
missile launches.

Russia at the Center

Similar accords are likely to be signed in time with Ukraine and other former
republics, but it seemed evident that Russia, by far the largest of the 15
countries that have emerged from the wreckage of the old Soviet Union, is at the
center of Washington's attention.

Lawmakers said Mr. Yeltsin appeared to have won some converts with his stirring
speech and dramatic personal confrontation of lawmakers who had been opposing
passage of the aid program. But the measure's prospects in Congress remained
uncertain and much certainly depended on how much private arm-twisting Mr. Bush
was prepared to do to back the public appeals for passage he has made at every
opportunity in the last two days.

Mr. Bush and Mr. Yeltsin also signed an agreement to produce a treaty that would
slash the two countries' strategic nuclear weapons to one-third of their current
size.

Mr. Bush said the two countries have "indeed formed a truly new relationship,
one of peace, friendship, trust and growing partnership." He added, "I am
confident that this new relationship and our historic agreements at this summit
will lead to a safer, more stable and peaceful world in the next century."

As important as the documents were, the most dramatic moment of the day came
when Mr. Yeltsin strode into the packed chamber of the House of Representatives
to a standing ovation that was more enthusiastic than the reception Mr. Yeltsin
gets in the Russian Parliament and rivaled Mr. Bush's own reception in Congress
after the American victory in the Persian Gulf.

The enthusiasm came as something of a surprise since before Mr. Yeltsin's
arrival there were few lawmakers who thought that he would outdo his political
rival, Mikhail S. Gorbachev, in popularity in Washington. But Mr. Yeltsin put
his political deftness on display and appeared to win over even those lawmakers
who had been demanding that the aid package be held up until Russia accounts for
all American prisoners of war who might have been taken to the former Soviet
Union.

A Display of Skills

He stood before the House's enormous American flag, with his broad shoulders and
swept-back silver hair towering over the rostrum. His broad face creasing
frequently into his easy grin, Mr. Yeltsin alternately flattered, cajoled,
pleaded, blustered and sternly lectured the assembled Senators and
Representatives about their responsibility to promote political and economic
reform in the former Soviet Union.

But he seemed bent primarily on assuring the lawmakers that they can now trust
the Russian Government, and in doing so he seemed to overshadow even the
powerful appearances in Washington by Mr. Gorbachev, the last Soviet President.

"We are firmly resolved not to lie anymore, either to our negotiating partners,
or to the Russian or American or any other people," he said, denouncing even the
vision of a more humane Communism offered by Mr. Gorbachev. "There will be no
more lies, ever."

Promise on Prisoners

Drawing a thundering ovation, Mr. Yeltsin promised to account for every American
prisoner of war that may have been brought to the Soviet Union during World War
II, the Korean War or the Vietnam War.

"Even if one American has been detained in my country and can still be found, I
will find him," Mr. Yeltsin said. "I will get him back to his family."

Then, as the applause died down, Mr. Yeltsin smiled almost mischievously and
chided lawmakers who had said the Russian aid package should be frozen until the
issue of missing servicemen is resolved.

"I thank you for the applause," he said. But he added, "Yeltsin has already
opened the archives and is inviting you to join us in investigating the fate of
each and every unaccounted-for American. So now you are telling me first to do
the job and then we shall support you in passing that act. I don't quite
understand you."

2 Legislators Yield

The two lawmakers who had called for linking the aid package to the prisoners
issues, Senator John McCain, Republican of Arizona, and Representative Robert K.
Dornan, Republican of California, both said later they were persuaded by Mr.
Yeltsin.

Mr. Yeltsin also promised to ferret out the truth about how a Soviet SU-15
fighter-bomber shot down the Korean Air Lines Boeing 747 in September 1983. He
said at a news conference later that Russian authorities had found a K.G.B.
document suggesting that there are hidden files on the subject and are now
searching for them.

Both Mr. Yeltsin and Mr. Bush, who lavished heavy praise on the Russian
President, spent the day seeking to underscore the notion that their meeting
marked a watershed in relations between their two countries.

"For many years, our two nations were the two poles, the two opposites," Mr.
Yeltsin told Congress. But he said, "That evil scenario is becoming a thing of
the past. Reason begins to triumph over madness. We have left behind the period
when America and Russia looked at each other through gunsights, ready to pull
the trigger at any time."

Anticipating the domestic political pressures he may face in light of the
agreement to cut long-range nuclear weapons, Mr. Bush warned at the news
conference that it would not produce a windfall "peace dividend" that might be
spent on American domestic programs.

"The dividend is declared when you make a profit and our Government is operating
at an enormous deficit," he said.

'No Human Face'

Seeking to persuade Congress that his country has taken steps toward democracy
and free markets that cannot be retraced, Mr. Yeltsin said, "There can be no
coexistence between a civic society, which is pluralistic by definition, and
Communist intolerance to dissent. The experience of the past decades has taught
us Communism has no human face. Freedom and Communism are incompatible."

He displayed a mastery of the American political dialect, making his speech
intensely personal. He thanked his wife and family for their support in troubled
times and offering himself as the bulwark of democratic reform. "It is
practically impossible to topple Yeltsin in Russia," he said. "I am in good
health and I will not say 'uncle' before I make the reforms irreversible.' "

He also reminded the lawmakers that it was he who defied the attempted coup in
the Kremlin nearly a year ago. "I will be candid with you," he said. "At that
moment I feared. But I had no fear for myself. I feared for the future of
democracy in Russia and throughout the world because I was aware what could
happen if we failed to win."

Recalling Bush's Support

At a final dinner tonight at the Russian Embassy, Mr. Yeltsin invoked the coup
attempt once again as he and Mr. Bush toasted each other with some of the most
personal comments to come from their meeting.

Mr. Yeltsin said that when Mr. Gorbachev was a captive of reactionaries and
Russia's fate hinged on the world's willingness to ratify a de facto coup, Mr.
Bush was the first leader to call him at Moscow's White House, then the seat of
Russia's government, and vow his support.

Other leaders followed, he said, but only at Mr. Bush's suggestion, and in many
cases only after the collapse of the coup was clear. The American President "was
the first to understand the true meaning of the victory of the Russian people,"
Mr. Yeltsin said.

Mr. Bush's response was brief and apparently heartfelt. "You leave with all of
us feeling you are going to make it, somehow," he said. "We are at your side."

LOAD-DATE: June 18, 1992

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photos: President Boris N. Yeltsin of Russia as he addressed a joint
meeting of Congress yesterday. At rear was the House Speaker, Thomas S. Foley
(Associated Press) (pg. A1); President Bush and President Boris N. Yeltsin
signed several agreements yesterday, including one to produce a treaty reducing
strategic nuclear weapons. As Mr. Yeltsin sought to exchange pens with Mr. Bush,
Mr. Bush indicated that there was one more document to sign. (Jose R. Lopez/The
New York Times) (pg. A18)

                   Copyright 1992 The New York Times Company


                              226 of 281 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 June 18, 1992, Thursday, Late Edition - Final

SUMMIT IN WASHINGTON;
Yeltsin Speaks, and Congressional Wall Tumbles

BYLINE: By CLIFFORD KRAUSS,  Special to The New York Times

SECTION: Section A; Page 19; Column 4; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 635 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, June 17


With oratory that thrilled even Congressional critics of aid, President Boris N.
Yeltsin of Russia appeared today to have virtually eliminated an important
obstacle to passage of an aid program for the former Soviet republics.

After his speech at a joint meeting of Congress interrupted by standing
ovations, legislative leaders said they thought that Mr. Yeltsin had persuaded
even skeptical lawmakers of his determination to help find missing American
servicemen, and had thus won vital votes for the American portion of a $24
billion international assistance package for former Soviet republics.

But lawmakers warned that the battle for Congressional approval would ultimately
be determined by whether Mr. Yeltsin's visit also overcame wide opposition among
their constituents to granting foreign aid at a time when many Americans are
unemployed or pessimistic about their future.

Senators and members of the House expressed pleasure and astonishment at Mr.
Yeltsin's emotional attack on the evils of Communism, his willingness to reduce
his country's nuclear arsenal and his invitation to American officials to
inspect the archives of the K.G.B. and Soviet Communist Party for clues to the
fate of Americans missing in the Vietnam War.

"None of us expected to see anything in our lifetime like this," said
Representative Newt Gingrich of Georgia, the Republican whip in the House.
"Emotionally, how can you abandon a man like this?"

Senator Patrick J. Leahy of Vermont, a senior Democrat on the Appropriations
Committee who has been skeptical about Administration proposals for aiding
Russia, said of the speech: "It was as historic a postwar event as the tearing
down of the Berlin wall. It will win him votes."

When Mr. Yeltsin arrived this morning on Capitol Hill, the aid he sought was
caught in the political gridlock that has paralyzed Congress and the White House
for most of the last year.

Most liberals were ready to delay aid to the former Soviet republics until
President Bush was willing to free up money for unemployment compensation and
aid to the cities. Conservatives were ready to block aid until the Russians
provided a full accounting of American servicemen from the Vietnam War who Mr.
Yeltsin said may still be alive somewhere in his country.

Legislation now before Congress would grant the Administration authority to
spend $610 million for the 12 former Soviet republics, excluding the Baltic
republics, in 1992 and 1993. It would also authorize the Administration to
augment its contribution to the International Monetary Fund by $12 billion,
which would go toward financing long-term projects in the republics.

But the measure awaits floor action in both houses, and 103 Democratic lawmakers
have signed a letter linking their votes for the aid effort to Republican
support for domestic programs.

Democratic leaders said they thought Mr. Yeltsin had gone a long way to bring
liberals along. Senator George J. Mitchell of Maine, the majority leader, said
he was preparing to bring an aid bill to the Senate floor.

Reassurances on Servicemen

But the Russian leader made the most headway with Republican conservatives who
had threatened to stall aid after Mr. Yeltsin disclosed on Monday that some
American servicemen captured in Vietnam, Korea and World War II had been
transferred to labor camps in the Soviet Union and might still be alive. Mr.
Yeltsin sought out Senator John McCain of Arizona, a Republican who was himself
a prisoner of war in Vietnam, for a private meeting to persuade him that he was
serious about investigating the whereabouts of the missing.

"I'm satisfied with his commitment," Mr. McCain said after the meeting. He
dropped his threat to block the aid package, adding, "I have to take his word
when he looks me in the eye."

LOAD-DATE: June 18, 1992

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1992 The New York Times Company


                              227 of 281 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 June 18, 1992, Thursday, Late Edition - Final

China Signs U.S. Oil Deal for Disputed Waters

BYLINE: By NICHOLAS D. KRISTOF,  Special to The New York Times

SECTION: Section A; Page 8; Column 1; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 550 words

DATELINE: BEIJING, June 17


In an aggressive move to take control of disputed territory in the South China
Sea, the Chinese Government has signed an oil exploration contract with an
American company for a stretch of the sea that is also claimed by Vietnam.

The contract marks the first time in many years that any country has acted
unilaterally to develop the rich mineral resources in the southern part of the
sea, which is the subject of overlapping claims by China, Vietnam, the
Philippines, Malaysia, Indonesia, Taiwan and Brunei.

The last time such a contract was awarded was apparently 1973, when the
collapsing Government of South Vietnam gave Western companies oil concessions
that included disputed territory. That led to a battle in January 1974 between
Chinese and Vietnamese naval forces.

China has pledged that it will use its navy to back the American oil company,
and the move seems certain to raise tensions in the area. Vietnam has protested
strongly, the Philippines has described the award of the contract as
"unhelpful," and other nations are concerned that Beijing now intends to use
force to assert its claims.

"There are some indications that China is changing its policy toward disputed
areas and taking a more aggressive stance," an Asian diplomat in Beijing said.
"But it's still too early to say if this is a turning point."

Randall C. Thompson, chairman of theCrestone Energy Corporation, the
Denver-based company that won the contract, said he knew that the area was
disputed but had strong backing from China.

"I was assured by top Chinese officials that they will protect me with their
full naval might," Mr. Thompson said by telephone. "That's what they told me in
negotiations -- that they'll have the entire full naval fleet out there backing
me up, if necessary."

Giving the contract to an American company was a canny move by China, because it
means that any forceful intervention by Vietnam might harm relations with
Washington as well as Beijing. Vietnam has made great efforts in recent years to
improve ties with China, and it particularly wants to establish diplomatic and
economic relations with the United States.

China claims a huge swath of the South China Sea, extending more than 1,000
miles south of the nearest populated Chinese island. The waters it claims
virtually lap against Vietnam, Malaysia and the Philippines. In 1988, China and
Vietnam fought a brief naval battle over the disputed waters.

The area includes the Spratly and Paracel island groups, which China calls the
Nansha and Xisha chains. These archipelagos, consisting mostly of uninhabited
islands, control fisheries and important international sea lanes and are also
thought to contain valuable oil and mineral deposits.

The contract, signed on May 8, covers 9,700 square miles that are claimed only
by Vietnam and China.

Mr. Thompson said that the area was extremely promising, but that Crestone would
first have to conduct extensive data analysis and that it would be a year or two
before it sends any boats into the area.

A United States Embassy officer was present at the signing of the contract, but
the embassy said later that it had no involvement in the negotiations, that
territorial disputes should be resolved peacefully and that freedom of
navigation should be preserved.

LOAD-DATE: June 18, 1992

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Map of South China Sea showing location of contract area.

                   Copyright 1992 The New York Times Company


                              228 of 281 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 June 18, 1992, Thursday, Late Edition - Final
                              Correction Appended

YELTSIN DESCRIBES A LIST OF MISSING

BYLINE: By BARBARA CROSSETTE,  Special to The New York Times

SECTION: Section A; Page 17; Column 1; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 867 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, June 17


President Boris N. Yeltsin today bolstered his assertion that American prisoners
of war were transferred to the Soviet Union from Vietnam, saying Russia had a
list of names under investigation that included United States servicemen
captured in Indochina.

His statement introduced more confusion into the debate over Americans
unaccounted for from half a century of conflicts involving the former Soviet
Union and its allies. Administration officials and Congressional leaders said
this was the first time they had heard of such a list.

Administration officials said they had no information to back up Mr. Yeltsin's
assertions, which included speculation that some Americans, brought to Soviet
labor camps or psychiatric hospitals, may still be alive.

A Congressional hearing to explore the issue was canceled today after the
Administration declined to let Malcolm Toon testify. Mr. Toon, who heads the
American contingent of the Russian-American commission investigating the
missing, is preparing to go to Moscow to examine old Soviet files. The
Administration would rather he testify after his return.

22,554 Names Investigated

Mr. Yeltsin, speaking to reporters after a lunch with Congressional leaders,
described the work being done by the Russian side, saying, "Among the 22,554
names that the commission has so far investigated, there were names of the
American prisoners of war in Vietnam which the Vietnamese at that time
transferred to the former Soviet Union."

Senator Robert C. Smith, Republican of Oregon and deputy chairman of the
committee, said, "What is significant is that he very specifically singled out
Vietnam."

At a news conference today, Mr. Yeltsin said: "The most important thing is that
we know the numerical picture. We know how many people there were on the
territory, how many were left, what camps the P.O.W.'s were held in, the
citizens of the United States, which war they were from."

"We know who died, where they are buried," he said, speaking through an
interpreter. "What we still don't know, we don't know a certain number of
people, really, where they belong, and we have no, simply no information about
them. And this is why we say that maybe some of them are still alive and still
in Russia, and this is where we say we'd like to find further documents on these
people."

'I Will Find Him'

Mr. Yeltsin earlier told a joint meeting of Congress: "I, as President, pledge
to you: If we had detained a single American, he can be found, and I will find
him and return him to his family."

Douglas Pike, director of the Indochina Studies and the Indochina Archives at
the University of California at Berkeley, said, "There were persistent stories
throughout the war that the Vietnamese were turning over P.O.W.'s to the
Russians." But he said many of the stories did not check out.

Nevertheless, Mr. Pike, a Foreign Service linguist in Vietnamese who was
assigned in the late 1970's to the Pentagon's International Security Agency as a
"Hanoi watcher," said he was inclined to believe that some Americans had
probably been turned over to Russians.

Mixed Emotions for Families

Among the families of American service personnel who are unaccounted for, the
developments have engendered a variety of emotions, from concern that false
hopes will be raised to outrage that the Russians may produce more information
than American officials have made public over decades.

All over the United States, families have been amassing small libraries of
information. They say that nothing Mr. Yeltsin said has surprised them.

A Seattle journalist, Mark Sauter, who has just completed a book on the issue of
half a century of missing Americans, has found letters and memos in public
records that show repeated efforts to limit or block the circulation of
information on United States servicemen or women taken into custody and thought
to be in Soviet hands after several wars.

Relatives of missing Americans appear not to want Mr. Yeltsin to pay a price in
Congress for his candor on this issue, however.

"Family members are not interested in withholding aid from the Russians," said
Dolores Apodaca Alfond, head of the National Alliance of Families, a group
representing the relatives of people lost in all conflicts since World War II.
"We don't blame the Russians for what's happened in the past. We just want the
truth."

                             --------------------


Inquiry Into a Sighting

MOSCOW, June 17 (Special to The New York Times) -- A Russian-American team of
investigators is to fly Thursday to a distant prison camp in the Komi Autonomous
Republic in Russia to investigate a report of a sighting of an American
prisoner, American officials said tonight.

The chairman of the Senate Select Committee, Senator John F. Kerry, said in a
telephone interview that the case involved someone missing from the Korean War
period.

The Associated Press reported the object of the search was First Lieut. Robert
Martin, a pilot captured by North Korea and sentenced to one year in prison for
striking an interrogator.

American officials in Moscow said the investigators would fly to Pechora, about
950 miles northeast of Moscow.

LOAD-DATE: June 18, 1992

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

CORRECTION-DATE: June 19, 1992, Friday

CORRECTION:

Because of an editing error, an article yesterday about a statement by President
Boris N. Yeltsin referred incorrectly to the home state of Bob Smith, the deputy
chairman of a Senate committee investigating missing American servicemen. He is
a Republican of New Hampshire, not Oregon.


                   Copyright 1992 The New York Times Company


                              229 of 281 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                  June 19, 1992, Friday, Late Edition - Final

NEWS SUMMARY

SECTION: Section A; Page 2; Column 5; Metropolitan Desk

LENGTH: 1017 words



International     A3-14

U.S. INTERCEDING FOR RUSSIA

Shifting its approach, the White House urged the International Monetary Fund to
ease demands for harsh reforms and approve an aid accord once Russia commits
itself to broad economic changes.  A1

PERMANENT U.N. FORCE IS URGED

The Secretary General has asked member countries of the U.N. to provide the
Security Council with a permanent armed force to deter aggression and serve as
"peace enforcement units." A1

WICHITA WARMS TO YELTSIN

Russia's President swept through Wichita like one of the tornadoes that have
made Kansas famous from Moscow to Oz.  A8

FALSE LEAD ON MISSING G.I.

In the flurry raised by President Yeltsin's statements about prisoners of war,
investigators flew to a Siberian labor camp where one American was reportedly
sighted. Indications are that it was a false lead.  A8

No papers to prove or disprove that Soviets held U.S. servicemen.  A8

MASSACRE IN SOUTH AFRICA

Mobs of armed attackers shot and hacked their way through a black township,
leaving at least 39 people dead and setting back talks on South Africa's
political future.  A7

TURNING POINT FOR VIETNAM

Free of domination by distant powers for the first time since 1858, Vietnam is
emerging from the umbrella of the old Soviet Union and seeking a new niche in a
rapidly developing region.  A3

IRISH VOTE ON EUROPEAN TREATY

Two weeks after Danish voters rejected a treaty on European union, the Continent
waited anxiously as people in Ireland went to the polls. Results are expected
today.  A10

ENVOY TAKES YUGOSLAVS TO HEART

The crisis that has torn Yugoslavia asunder is also a crisis for Deputy
Secretary of State Lawrence Eagleburger, who must balance his long friendship
for the country with American national interests.  A6

The White House won't let two aides testify on policy toward Iraq.  A14
After 10 weeks, Italy finally has a Prime Minister-designate.  A10

National     A16-25, D19

JACKSON-CLINTON RIFT GROWS

The Rev. Jesse Jackson charged that in an effort to win the backing of alienated
white voters, Governor Clinton had "again exposed a character flaw." A1

Hurt by Perot, the Clinton camp is badly in debt.  A24

Across from the White House, Clinton chatted with Yeltsin.  A24

On the Trail: Clinton all but disavowed a middle-class tax cut.  A25

At a California rally, Perot appealed for racial harmony.  A25

Bush vowed to ride out "a hurricane blowing out there." A24

VICTORY FOR TV NETWORKS

The F.C.C. decided to allow broadcast television networks to buy cable systems,
a move that could hasten the realignment of the television industry.  A1

JUSTICES RULE ON RACE AND JURIES

Six years after deciding that prosecutors may not exclude people from serving on
juries on the basis of race, the Supreme Court extended the same rule to
criminal defense lawyers.  A1

Excerpts from the ruling.  A22

The Court upheld California's uneven property-tax system.  A23

Backers of the California property-tax uprising rejoiced.  A23

WOMEN AND THE PRIESTHOOD

A Gallup poll found that two-thirds of American Catholics favored opening the
priesthood to women. That was an increase of 20 percentage points since 1985.
A16

Catholic bishops engaged in a divisive debate on women's role.  A16

ACCORD ON GEORGIA JUDGES

The Governor of Georgia and the leading plaintiffs challenging the way state
judges are selected reached an agreement that would change the system from
elective to appointive and bring an immediate and dramatic increase in the
number of black judges.  A18

NEW INQUIRY IN NAVY SEX CASE

At the behest of the Navy Secretary, the Pentagon's inspector general will look
into the sexual assault on 26 women at a convention of aviators and the Navy's
own resulting investigation.  A20

CONGRESS PASSES URBAN AID BILL

Both houses approved a compromise $1.3 billion urban aid bill. There were also
indications that White House and Congressional negotiators were narrowing their
differences on related legislation to increase private investment and law
enforcement in inner cities.  A20
Bush took a step to assist military contractors.  A20
The toll of death from Midwest tornadoes kept rising.  A16

Law Page   B8
A court battle over a question of African royalty and black pride.
Massachusetts looks at its courts through its newest citizens' eyes.
At the Bar

Metropolitan     Digest, B1

INQUIRY INTO POLICE

Federal law-enforcement officals are investigating allegations of drug-dealing
by police officers in one New York City precinct and suspect that there are
pockets of corruption in several other precincts, state and Federal
investigators say.  A1

U-TURN IN BUDGET

News analysis: The budget unveiled by the Republican legislative majority in
Trenton represents a stark repudiation of nearly two decades of moderate to
liberal government under both Democratic and Republican administrations.  A1

Business     Digest, D1

Weekend   C1-28
A supermarket of sounds.  C1
Rapper defends boycotted album.  C24
For Children C20
Theater: On Stage, and Off C2
Film: "Batman Returns." C1
Architecture: A Louis I. Kahn show at the Modern.  C1

Sports   B9-15
Baseball: Mets stumble again.  B9
Yankees slip past Red Sox.  B11
Concern deepens about Saberhagen.  B11
Column: Lipsyte on boxing.  B9
Golf: Morgan takes first-round lead at U.S. Open.  B9
Olympics: A new age at track and field trials.  B9

Obituaries   D18
Peter Allen, singer and pianist.
Rev. Daniel J. O'Hanlon, Jesuit priest.

Editorials/Op-Ed  A26-27
Editorials A26
Look who's adding missiles.
Weinberger's handwriting.
Freed in Lebanon.
The subways need Albany.

Letters A26
A. M. Rosenthal: Sixteen million slaves.  A27
Leslie H. Gelb: Israel's military superiority.  A27
Sam Johnson and Chris Marcil: Elite of the world, unite!  A27
John B. Oakes: Last stand for the Adirondacks?  A27

LOAD-DATE: June 19, 1992

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo: The Irish cast their ballots on European unity. (Reuters) A10

TYPE: Summary

                   Copyright 1992 The New York Times Company


                              230 of 281 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                  June 19, 1992, Friday, Late Edition - Final

No Leads on G.I.'s

SECTION: Section A; Page 1; Column 6; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 47 words


Russians are puzzling over assertions by President Yeltsin that some American
prisoners were moved from Vietnam to the Soviet Union.  Archivists say the only
Vietnam War-era servicemen who passed through Soviet territory were defectors,
and they were released.

Article, page A8.

LOAD-DATE: June 19, 1992

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Summary

                   Copyright 1992 The New York Times Company


                              231 of 281 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                  June 19, 1992, Friday, Late Edition - Final

AFTER THE SUMMIT;
M.I.A. Claims Confuse Russian Aides

BYLINE: By SERGE SCHMEMANN,  Special to The New York Times

SECTION: Section A; Page 8; Column 4; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 915 words

DATELINE: MOSCOW, June 18


President Boris N. Yeltsin's statements about Vietnam War-era American prisoners
supposedly held in the former Soviet Union have raised considerable confusion
among the Russians dealing with the issue, who say they have found no evidence
to support such an assertion.

In the flurry raised by Mr. Yeltsin's unexpected statement, a planeload of
investigators from the United States and Russia flew off this morning to a labor
camp in the heart of Siberia where one American was reportedly sighted. The
group included members of Mr. Yeltsin's staff and officials from the Foreign
Ministry, the Ministry of Internal Affairs and the Ministry of Security, the
former K.G.B.

All indications so far, however, are that this is another false lead. The head
of all penal colonies in the area where the American was supposed to have been
held has denied that any American has ever been kept at any of the camps in his
jurisdiction.

U.S. Defectors Are Cited

According to archivists assigned to the joint United States-Russian commission
formed to scour former Soviet archivists for missing Americans, the only Vietnam
War-era servicemen who passed through Soviet territory soil were several
defectors, who were used for propaganda purposes and released "to various
European countries."

That information was included in a communique issued by the joint commission on
June 6. It is possible that Mr. Yeltsin had access to other information, but so
far neither he nor any member of the commission has produced any evidence from
the archives that prisoners from the Vietnam War were kept in the Soviet Union.

Mr. Yeltsin created a stir in Washington, and provoked bafflement here, when on
his flight to the United States on Monday, he told an interviewer from NBC News
that "our archives" show that "some" American P.O.W.'s from the Vietnam War had
been "transferred" to labor camps in the former Soviet Union and that some may
still be alive. He subsequently repeated that to President Bush and again in
answer to a questioner on Wednesday. But no archival material about any American
P.O.W.'s was made available.

'We Have No Information'

"We were given 3,752 names by the Americans of people missing in Vietnam or
Korea," said an archivist with the commission. "So far we have no information
about any of them."

The communique issued after the second meeting of the commission in late May
noted that some Americans had been held at different times in the Soviet Union,
up through 1953 at least.

"In the course of the meeting," it said, "it was made known that despite the
denials of all Soviet leaders from Khrushchev to Gorbachev that there were any
American citizens on the territory of the U.S.S.R., a preliminary examination of
the archives confirms the presence in the past of American citizens on the
territory of the U.S.S.R. and the possibility that the remains of some are still
on the territory of the former U.S.S.R."

But the only evidence cited was of Americans held after World War II. The
communique said that some 23,000 Americans found themselves in Soviet camps
after World War II among some 3.5 million foreigners gathered in the Red Army's
sweep through Eastern Europe, and that the remains of some might still be in the
country.

Mr. Yeltsin has also said American air crews downed during the cold war were
held in the Soviet Union. According to Izvestia, 12 crewmen from nine downed
intelligence-gathering planes were in the Soviet Union as of 1953.

But the report said researchers had found no hard evidence that Americans listed
as missing in action from the Korean or Vietnam wars were kept in the former
Soviet Union.

"In connection with U.S.A. citizens who participated in the Vietnam War, it was
possible to establish that several American servicemen who refused military
service in Vietnam found themselves on the territory of the U.S.S.R. for a
non-extensive period," it said. "Their presence in the U.S.S.R. was actively
used in propaganda campaigns against the war in Vietnam. Subsequently, according
to existing information, these American citizens left for various European
countries."

Researchers assigned to the joint commission noted today that the commission is
still very young. The group held its first meeting only on March 26, and it is
only since the last meeting in late May that Americans have taken part
full-time.

One difficulty in the joint commission's search was the transliteration of
names. Thus the name of the American supposedly sighted in Siberia comes as
David Markin or Marken, but may be Martin. Thus checking the names provided by
the American often requires checking several variants through tens of thousands
of file cards and file folders in different archives. None of the archives are
computerized.

As for the American supposedly sighted, no word was expected from the search
team that flew to Pechora, 900 miles east of Moscow in Siberia, until Saturday.
But chances that they would learn anything were slim.

According to the unidentified tip, the American citizen was spotted in 1989 at a
top-security labor camp, PL-350. He was either born in 1925 and captured during
the Korean War, or born in 1942 and captured during the Vietnam War.

The assertion has been denied by local officials. The head of all penal colonies
in the Pechora region, Aleksandr Strelkov, was quoted in Izvestia as saying no
American prisoner is or ever was held either in PL-350 or in any of the 13 camps
under his command.

LOAD-DATE: June 19, 1992

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1992 The New York Times Company


                              232 of 281 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                  June 19, 1992, Friday, Late Edition - Final

AFTER THE SUMMIT;
Years to Search Soviet Archives

BYLINE: By BARBARA CROSSETTE,  Special to The New York Times

SECTION: Section A; Page 8; Column 5; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 378 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, June 18


Russia's chief archivist said today that most Soviet documents covering the
Vietnam War era have yet to be found and declassified, and it could be years if
not decades before conclusive evidence is available to prove or disprove whether
American prisoners of war were transferred from Hanoi to Soviet territory.

Rudolf G. Pikhoya, a history professor who heads the Russian Committee on
Archival Affairs and is a member of President Boris N. Yeltsin's Cabinet,
stopped short of saying Mr. Yeltsin spoke without evidence when he referred
repeatedly this week to the transfer of Americans and the possibility that some
might still be alive in former Soviet republics.

But he emphasized in an interview that Mr. Yeltsin's often baffling statements
were intended to be messages to those in Moscow who have been reluctant or slow
to release those files already accessible that might deal with possible American
prisoners.

Mr. Yeltsin, who pledged here to pursue investigations into reports of missing
Americans in Soviet custody, has called two days of meetings on the issue on
Monday and Tuesday.

"The statements by President Yeltsin were very strong signals to activate the
work of screening these documents," Mr. Pikhoya said after taking part in a
scholarly discussion at the Library of Congress on the newly accessible Soviet
archives.

Some Communist Party files on prisoners of earlier wars have been turned over to
the United States, Mr. Pikhoya said. They were summarized in a letter to the
Senate Select Committee on P.O.W.-M.I.A. Affairs on Friday. On Wednesday, Mr.
Yeltsin apparently confused figures from World War II in those documents when he
said that among 22,554 names on a Soviet list were Americans from the Vietnam
era.

Also taking part in the Library of Congress discussion was Dmitri A. Volkogonov,
a historian and adviser to Mr. Yeltsin who is head of the Russian contingent of
a joint United States-Russian commission on resolving the cases of Americans
missing from several conflicts and the cold war.

The two officials said Russian archivists were facing a decades-long task of
screening and declassifying several hundreds of millions of documents in a
variety of government, party, military and intelligence organization files.

LOAD-DATE: June 19, 1992

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1992 The New York Times Company


                              233 of 281 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                  June 19, 1992, Friday, Late Edition - Final

After the Cold War: Views From Vietnam;
Vietnam, Now Master of Its Own House, Tries to Mend Neighborhood Fences

BYLINE: By HENRY KAMM,  Special to The New York Times

SECTION: Section A; Page 3; Column 1; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 1258 words

DATELINE: HANOI, Vietnam


For the first time since French gunboats laid waste to the port of Da Nang in
1858 and began the colonization of what became French Indochina, Vietnam is free
of domination by distant powers. But the post-cold-war task of emerging from the
umbrella of the old Soviet Union and finding a new place in the rapidly
developing region of Southeast Asia is daunting.

"The collapse of the Soviet Union was a devastating blow for us," said Maj. Gen.
Tran Cong Man, a Vietnamese Government spokesman. "The Soviet Union was our
support, ideologically and psychologically, also militarily and economically. It
was our unique model. Now we find it was a false model."

The end of the unequal alliance between Hanoi and Moscow means much more than
political, diplomatic and economic disarray; it marks a turning point in
Vietnamese history.

France, temporarily succeeded by Japan during World War II, returned briefly as
a colonial power and was replaced, after the defeat at Dien Bien Phu in 1954, by
the United States in the southern half of the newly partitioned country. The
American defeat in 1975 enabled the Soviet Union to take over for 16 years as
the foreign power on which Vietnam depended.

"It was very unfortunate for us that Vietnam was put in the focus of superpower
conflicts for many decades, and it is good for us not to be tied into the
framework of bipolar confrontations," Deputy Foreign Minister Tran Quang Co said
in an interview here. "We would like to have the same fate as other Southeast
Asian countries -- independence, peace and stability. But unhappily for Vietnam,
there is still an enormous gap."

A Blow for the Old Guard

The end of Moscow's economic and military support has been a particularly heavy
blow for Vietnam's old-guard, orthodox Communist leadership, forcing this
country of 66 million people to abandon its dominant position over neighboring
Cambodia and Laos.

Its military forces and advisers have been mainly withdrawn, and its leaders now
assert that Hanoi never aspired to control the old French Indochina.

Vietnam's signature last October of the Paris agreement to settle the Cambodian
conflict formalized its fading from leadership in Indochina. A senior Laotian
diplomat said: "We can't speak any more of a special solidarity, as in the past.
Cooperation will no longer be on an ideological basis but on the basis of good
neighborliness."

The Soviet collapse has obliged all three nations to redirect their diplomacy
toward an accommodation with China. During their war against the United States,
the Communist leaders in the three countries had the full support of both the
Soviet Union and China, despite the rivalry between Moscow and Beijing. The
American withdrawal ended this marriage of convenience.

Soviet Clients

Vietnam and Laos slid into the Soviet orbit; Cambodia, under the Khmer Rouge,
followed its historic anti-Vietnamese outlook and accepted Chinese tutelage. The
Vietnamese invasion of Cambodia in 1979 and the installation of a puppet
government in Phnom Penh made all three Soviet clients.

"We committed the error of having one friend only and chose confrontation with
China," said General Man. "We should have been more flexible. We will always
live next to China. It is a demographic power. We must never confront them."

"We are very happy at having succeeded in normalizing our relations with China,"
said Mr. Co, the Deputy Foreign Minister, who also served as Vietnam's
Ambassador to Thailand. "We think China, at least for this decade, also needs
peace and stability for the modernization of the country. They have to shelve
any other ambition for another time."

Vietnam wants to use the respite in tension with China to achieve its
integration into Southeast Asia.

Le Bang, acting director of the Foreign Ministry's Americas Department, put it
succinctly. "After the cold war, we can't rely on anyone and must be friends
with everyone," he said.

An Old Rival

In its effort to make friends with the non-Communist countries in the region,
linked in the six-member Association of Southeast Asian Nations, Vietnam must
deal with the considerable challenge of its historic rival, Thailand.

Vietnamese officials feel their withdrawal from Cambodia has reassured Thailand,
but they say that Bangkok has asserted itself economically, in Cambodia and in
Laos, as if it wants to achieve through trade and investment what Vietnam failed
to gain through military and political might.

"The Thais show a bit of hegemonism," said General Man. "Economically it is
difficult for us to do anything against it, but politically and also militarily
we still have significant power to influence Laos and Cambodia."

But younger officials expressly deny any Vietnamese intention to act militarily
again.

"We gave up the burden of Cambodia," said Mr. Bang. "We are not committing the
mistake again of sending in troops and staying too long. The military is nothing
today. We can't invade Cambodia and hold it."

A Difference in Attitudes

The difference in attitudes between the older generation and the younger
officials is another consequence of Vietnam's loss of its Soviet ally and the
collapse of Communism.

Communist dogma persists in open contradiction to the laissez-faire economic
liberalism that has been instituted in Vietnam, and which has in great measure
succeeded in making up through trade and investment for the loss of Soviet aid,
estimated at $1 billion a year. Faced with this success, the leadership of Do
Muoi, the Communist Party Secretary General, and Prime Minister Vo Van Kiet
faces a general crisis of confidence in Communism and the party.

"Vietnam is gradually going away from socialism," a senior Russian diplomat of
long experience in Vietnam said. "Socialism here has become a tradition that is
more rhetorical than real. But contrary to us Russians, who were bothered by the
gap between ideology and real life, the Vietnamese know how to live with both.

"In the Vietnamese mind," the Russian continued, "there is peaceful coexistence
of the old gods and the pragmatism of peasants and traders. Now they are leaving
Marxism-Leninism behind on the altars of their ancestors. When they feel the
need, at night, they pray to these gods, but during the day they do business."

Looking to Washington

But there is unanimity throughout this country on what Vietnamese want from the
United States.

"The remaining big point in our diplomacy is normalization with the United
States," said Mr. Co. "I think we are now in the right direction in the process
of establishing diplomatic relations, but it's a little too slow."

This was a diplomatic expression of palpable impatience, most pronounced among
economic officials and independent-minded intellectuals, with the United States'
refusal to end its embargo on dealings with Vietnam.

"I don't think the United States is missing all opportunities," joked Pham Chi
Lan, deputy secretary general of the Chamber of Commerce. "But it shouldn't wait
too long.

The American embargo is perceived as particularly harmful because United States
opposition in the World Bank, International Monetary Fund and Asian Development
Bank is preventing development loans for major projects to improve Vietnam's
fragile infrastructure.

Several Vietnamese said they consider America's reluctance a potent asset to the
leadership in its refusal to loosen its grip.

"America has won the cold war," said a senior military officer. "It can afford
to be generous to us."

LOAD-DATE: June 19, 1992

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo: As Vietnam has normalized relations with China, some trade has
resumed between the two countries. It is often carried on the backs of Chinese
workers, like these leaving Guangxi Province, northwest of Vietnam. (Patrick
Zachmann/Magnum)

                   Copyright 1992 The New York Times Company


                              234 of 281 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                  June 19, 1992, Friday, Late Edition - Final

Gorbachev Is Skeptical on P.O.W. Claim

SECTION: Section A; Page 10; Column 4; Foreign Desk

LOAD-DATE: June 19, 1992

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo: The former Soviet leader Mikhail S. Gorbachev expressed doubt
yesterday about the suggestion by President Boris N. Yeltsin of Russia that
American prisoners from the Vietnam War may have been transferred to the Soviet
Union and he denied ever hearing of such a possibility. He concluded his visit
to Israel with a stop at the Western Wall, where he joined Rabbi Yehuda Getz,
right, in prayer. (Agence France-Presse)

TYPE: Caption

                   Copyright 1992 The New York Times Company


                              235 of 281 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                  June 19, 1992, Friday, Late Edition - Final

$25 and Under

BYLINE: By Eric Asimov

SECTION: Section C; Page 19; Column 1; Weekend Desk

LENGTH: 704 words


It's a verifiable equation: when a Government falls anywhere in the world,
restaurants rise in the United States. Let's face it, political change rarely
cures poverty or resolves antipathies, but it almost always benefits American
diners.

After the Vietnam War, Vietnamese restaurants opened all over the United States,
run by new immigrants and catering to a ready market of refugees missing the
tastes of home as well as to Americans. After Governments changed in Iran,
Ethiopia and, most recently, Haiti, new restaurants sprouted up all over,
replaying this centuries-old American process of immigration and assimilation.

Such was the case with Caravan, a four-year-old Afghan restaurant owned by
Ibrahim Muhammed and Ghulam Haider. Mr. Muhammed had been the chef at the Afghan
Embassy in Washington for four years when he decided to seek asylum in the
United States in 1979 for political and economic reasons. Mr. Haider, his
cousin, was then a refugee from the war in Afghanistan, staying in the United
States Embassy in India. Mr. Muhammed helped Mr. Haider come to New York, where
he attended City College. On finishing his studies, he and Mr. Muhammed, who had
cooked at and managed a number of restaurants, decided to open their own place
in New York.

Seeking a foothold in crowded, touristy midtown, they chose a steamy block on
Eighth Avenue near the theater district, an urban counterpart to the barren,
rugged terrain for which Afghanistan is famous. Adventurous diners must traverse
a Khyber Pass of adult-video stores and similarly seedy establishments to reach
Caravan, but their reward is a quiet, calm refuge where they can relax over
savory kebabs and fiery stews.

The carpeted, rectangular dining room, seating about 85, holds neat rows of
tables covered with soft tablecloths and bearing red linen napkins. Tapestries
depicting folky mountain scenes line the walls, and sinuous music lilts quietly
in the background. Mr. Haider, a gracious presence in the dining room, is quick
to offer suggestions or recommendations as he brings over a basket of oblong
wedges of fresh flatbread.

Ashak ($3.50), steamed scallion-and-meat dumplings covered with a refreshing
mint-scented yogurt sauce, is a delightful way to start. Sambusa ($2.95) is a
spicier appetizer, crisp fried triangular turnovers containing chickpeas, ground
beef and mixed vegetables, served with a yogurt-and-lemon dipping sauce.
Boulanee kadou ($3.25) is an unusual fried turnover filled with pureed pumpkin,
fragrant with cinnamon and nutmeg and almost sweet enough for dessert.

All 10 kebabs come with enormous portions of nutty basmati rice and grilled
tomatoes. The naan va kebab ($9.95), minced beef mixed with onions and spices
and fashioned into a submarine-size cylinder, is spicier than the shishlick
($10.25), a domino row of tender chunks of grilled beef. Morgh ($10.75),
bite-size chunks of chicken breast marinated in lemon and then grilled, was
almost hidden in the rice. Only the bareh kebab ($10.75), grilled lamb marinated
in yogurt, was tough.

Even the satisfying kebabs can't overshadow the delicious peppery slow-cooked
stews, including chalow sabzi ($9.25), tender lamb served in a sauce scented
with coriander and garlic over rice with spinach, and quorma badenjan ($9.25),
another lamb dish, served with eggplant, onion, peppers and tomatoes. There is
also an array of vegetarian dishes.

Desserts, including a creamy rice pudding ($2.25) and a gelatinous saffron
pudding studded with nuts ($2) are a bit of an afterthought, a bland contrast to
the spicy fare.

Four years at Caravan have taught Mr. Muhammed and Mr. Haider a lot about
running a business in America, they say. Like the importance of ambition and
expansion. They are now planning a second restaurant on the Upper East Side.

Caravan

741 Eighth Avenue, at 46th Street, Manhattan, (212) 262-2021.

Best dishes: Scallion-and-meat dumplings; chickpea, meat and vegetable
turnovers; minced beef kebab; chicken kebab; lamb-and-spinach stew, and
lamb-and-eggplant stew.

Price range: $10 to $16.

Credit cards: American Express, Diner's Club, Mastercard and Visa.

Hours: Noon to 11:30 P.M. daily

Wheelchair access: all on one level.

LOAD-DATE: June 19, 1992

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Review

                   Copyright 1992 The New York Times Company


                              236 of 281 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 June 20, 1992, Saturday, Late Edition - Final

THE 1992 CAMPIAGN: Undeclared Candidate;
Where Perot Exhibits A Lifetime of Memories

BYLINE: By MICHAEL KELLY,  Special to The New York Times

SECTION: Section 1; Page 8; Column 1; National Desk

LENGTH: 1834 words

DATELINE: DALLAS, June 17


When talking to reporters he suspects of not properly understanding him, Ross
Perot will sometimes offer an invitation: Come on up and see my office; then
you'll see what I'm all about.

And he is right. What Ross Perot is about -- what he has done in his life, what
he thinks, what he believes in, what he treasures -- is on permanent display in
what amounts to a Museum of Perot here in a suite of offices on the 17th floor
of a high-rise in North Dallas.

A lot of people maintain some sort of small shrine to their lives, modest
collections of diplomas and certificates and childhood awards. In politics,
where the public celebration of self is as much a matter of advertising as of
ego, such displays can get quite grand and are often quite false.

But Mr. Perot's museum is not like other people's, or even other politicians'.
Actually, it is not much like anything else in the world.

It is part Louvre, part yard sale and part Smithsonian. (The hall-length exhibit
cataloguing the helicopter circumnavigation by his son, Ross Jr., was once
displayed in the Smithsonian Institution's National Air and Space Museum.) It is
an eclectic collection of objets de Perot arranged over the course of half a
dozen chambers to present a picture of the life, times and thoughts of one man.

Taken as a whole, which is nearly impossible to do in one visit, the exhibits
offer a picture of the undeclared Presidential candidate as a man of diverse
great and small accomplishments, a cheerfully unbridled egoist and, above all, a
person possessed of a powerful sense of himself as a figure of destiny.

"Ross Perot has always been the curator of his own museum," Todd Mason, author
of "Perot" (Dow Jones-Irwin, 1990), an unauthorized biography, said in an
interview. "Even as a teen-ager, even when he was 12 years old, he saw himself
as potentially a great figure in history."

Plaques, Photographs Pistols and a Shovel

That assessment is echoed by Mr. Perot's childhood friend, Hayes McClerkin, a
lawyer from Texarkana, Tex., who recalls Mr. Perot, as a midshipman in the
United States Naval Academy during the height of the Korean War, saying that he
wished to join the Marines and go to Korea when he graduated from the academy.
"I reminded him that they were really chewing up second lieutenants in Korea at
that time; they were dying like flies," Mr. McClerkin said. "He said, 'Yes, but
if you survive, you make general a lot faster.' "

Mr. Mason is emphatic on an essential point: The diorama Mr. Perot has made of
his life is not a false one. "Heavens, no," he said. "Ross hasn't rigged up
something false. "He's just put his entire life on display."

Indeed, walking through Mr. Perot's offices does seem like a tour through the
events of a lifetime. The richness and variety of the landscape is overwhelming,
inspiring that familiar museum-going feeling of slack-jawed overload. Everything
that ever happened to Mr. Perot, it appears, is here somewhere, on a wall or
desk or table, each physical item representing some past point in the Perotian
time line.

There is much that is grand: the heavy, silver Winston Churchill Award,
presented to Mr. Perot by the Prince of Wales in 1985; the Raoul Wallenberg
Award, given in 1987 to recognize Mr. Perot's "tremendous efforts on behalf of
his fellow man;" walls full of public service awards, including the
Distinguished Public Service Award from the Department of Defense and awards
from the American Legion and the Veterans of Foreign Wars; walls full of
honorary degrees from colleges; more walls full of plaques and certificates
denoting Mr. Perot's civic and business triumphs.

There are Ross Perot commemoratives of silver, of brass, of crystal. There is a
Ross Perot shovel, a Ross Perot dueling pistol, a Ross Perot Smith & Wesson .357
Magnum, a Ross Perot combat fighter's helmet, a collection of Ross Perot gavels
and, just added to mark Mr. Perot's latest endeavor, a Ross for Boss desk pen
set. There are sections of wall where the words "H. Ross Perot" appear so often
that they constitute a design scheme.

Mementos of War, Tributes of Warriors

Even more impressive are the personal mementos of his long support of the armed
services, particularly of American prisoners in Southeast Asia. Two long walls
are filled with homemade commendations from various units and with letters and
signed photographs from soldiers, fliers and sailors.

Perhaps the most touching of these is a letter that accompanied the American
flag emblem that one slain soldier, Dale DeWolf, wore on his flak jacket, sent
to Mr. Perot by a friend of Mr. DeWolf's. "You are the only person who deserves
to be the caretaker of this flag, a flag I love because it represents all that
is noble in just one dead soldier," the friend wrote.

But there is much, too, that is neither grand nor touching: the telegram
informing the young Perot that he had been accepted into the naval academy; a
collection of coins gathered by Mr. Perot at various ports of call while in the
Navy; a photograph of "Lt. H. Ross Perot aboard destroyer during midshipman
summer training cruise, following 14 hours of duty cleaning boilers;" a copy of
the 1961 Readers' Digest in which Mr. Perot read a quote from Thoreau ("The mass
of men lead lives of quiet desperation.") that impelled him to found his own
business; a copy of a book, "A Message to Garcia," that Mr. Perot found
inspiring as a young man; a tube of Vientiane brand toothpaste from a trip to
Vietnam; the slim paperback just published with a collection of utterances by
Mr. Perot, "Ross Perot in His Own Words" (Warner Books, 1992).

There is an entire table devoted to Mr. Perot's most famous exploit, the 1979
mission to rescue two employees held prisoner in revolution-torn Iran. Here, in
a wood-and-glass box, is the Walther PPK pistol carried by Lieut. Col. Arthur D.
"Bull" Simons, the leader of the mission. Next to that, Colonel Simons's
compass, his ring and his watch; next to that, three leather-bound volumes of
letters and papers relating to the book about the rescue, "On Wings of Eagles"
(William Morrow & Company, 1983), by Ken Follett, whom Mr. Perot chose to tell
the story.

It would be easy to look at all this and see evidence of an ego of Pharaonic
proportions. But Mr. Perot's friends and longtime colleagues make a case for a
more complicated, and interesting, truth.

While no one says Mr. Perot is without ego (an exceedingly rare quality among
self-made billionaires and Presidential contenders), they suggest he is driven
not so much by a desire to glorify his life as to record its events, large and
small, as moments of his own history.

"The connecting theme is that the things in his office are things that reflect
something that happened to Ross, some result that mattered, different things in
his life," said Kenn Hill, who worked as an executive in Mr. Perot's Electronic
Data Systems Corporation for 20 years. "As long as I've known him, Ross has
always saved things that have personal meaning in his life."

As Mr. Hill, who now owns his own data processing company in California, sees
it, Mr. Perot may be impelled by a sense of marvel and slight disbelief at the
course of a life that has taken him from a routine small-town childhood to
billionairehood. "My view is that he still has a little trouble believing all
this happened to him," Mr. Hill said. "He's still a little bit in awe at what
happened. He likes to be able to see things around him that say that it really
did happen."

Hail the Eagle: A Future Foretold

Nowhere does that seem more apparently true than in the Ross Perot Scout Service
Center, the expensive center Mr. Perot had built for his boyhood Scouting
council in Texarkana.

There, in the lobby just to the right of the front door, under a large studio
photograph of Mr. Perot, is a large glass case, easily five feet long and two
feet high, labeled, simply and gloriously, "Ross Perot. Eagle Scout."

Inside, behind a brass plaque inscribed "Scouting Possessions of Ross Perot," is
the display of a boy's dreams, the souvenirs of Mr. Perot's first great triumph,
his Boy Scout career. His torn, stained cook kit and knapsack are there, his Sam
Browne hat (the left side of the broad brim still turned up in faint memory of
youthful cockiness), his hatchet, his hand-tooled leather coin purse, his 1940
Handbook for Boys, and so on, item after iconographic item. His Eagle badge,
dangling from a strip of ribbon, occupies a place of honor, next to the colorful
merit badge sash.

The point of the display is not to suggest something false. Mr. Perot really did
ascend from Second Class Scout to Eagle Scout in 15 months, arriving at the
pinnacle of Scouting by the age of 13, something that Sam Shuman, Mr. Perot's
old scoutmaster, recalls still as an exceptional achievement (although not
unheard of; his friend Mr. McClerkin also made Eagle in 18 months). The point,
rather, is to verify the event, and to signify it.

For Mr. Perot, it appears, the events of his life are important not just because
they happened, but because from them lessons may be learned, verities may be
illustrated. Those verities do not apply just to Mr. Perot, but are things
others may live by, too. Some are exhibits in the office museum, carved on
wooden plaques that hang on the walls: "Every Good and Excellent Thing Stands
Moment by Moment on the Razor's Edge of Danger and Must Be Fought For," and "A
Man Is Never So on Trial as in a Moment of Excessive Good Fortune."

A Vision of America In Totems and Icons

They suggest the ultimate point of Mr. Perot's amazing collection. The totems to
the events of his life do not stand alone but are interspersed with the totems
of his thoughts and with paintings and statues that are totems to larger lives
and thoughts. John Paul Jones, Thomas Edison, Winston Churchill and Abraham
Lincoln are all, in paintings or documents or sculpture, enshrined in Mr.
Perot's office.

Overarching Mr. Perot's vision of his life, and the lives of the men he admires,
is a vision of American life. That vision is most clearly articulated by the
paintings and prints that dominate Mr. Perot's outer office, of Norman Rockwell.

Mr. Perot, he of the broken nose and cider jug ears, could be a figure in a
Rockwell painting, and the America Mr. Perot evokes in speeches is the America
Mr. Rockwell put on canvas. Giving the tour of the office, Sharon Holman, a
hometown friend and longtime assistant to Mr. Perot, stopped to make the point
explicit. "If Ross was here," she said, pointing at a Rockwell, "he would say,
"This is America.' "

Mr. Hill, while admitting, "I don't know quite how to put this," nevertheless
mused: "I think the stuff in Ross's office about his own life, and the stuff
about John Paul Jones and so on, are all part of the same thing. He has a sense
of history, and of how that history moves forward, and of how he himself fits
into that flow of history. That's what it's all about, I think."

NAME: Ross Perot

LOAD-DATE: July 10, 1992

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo: A bronze sculpture depicting three soldiers that was the model
for the Vietnam War Memorial is one of many eclectic objects, awards and
mementos that depict the life and philosophy of Ross Perot. They are in half a
dozen rooms of a North Dallas high-rise. (Mark Perlstein for The New York Times)

TYPE: Biography

                   Copyright 1992 The New York Times Company


                              237 of 281 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 June 20, 1992, Saturday, Late Edition - Final

THE 1992 CAMPAIGN: Congress;
Perot and Senators Seem Headed for a Fight on P.O.W.'s-M.I.A.'s

BYLINE: By PATRICK E. TYLER,  Special to The New York Times

SECTION: Section 1; Page 8; Column 1; National Desk

LENGTH: 757 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, June 19


Ross Perot appears to be headed for a confrontation with the Senate over his
refusal to testify this month at a hearing on American servicemen missing in
Southeast Asia.

After a private meeting Thursday of the Senate Select Committee on
P.O.W.'s-M.I.A.'s, a committee spokeswoman said today, "The committee is
unanimous in feeling that we do have to have his testimony."

The largest and most influential organization of families of missing American
servicemen urged the Senate to compel Mr. Perot "to appear in open session and
provide evidence to support previous statements that American P.O.W.'s-M.I.A.'s
are alive in Southeast Asia."

Mr. Perot earlier this week canceled his appearance, saying in a letter to
Senator John F. Kerry, the Massachusetts Democrat who heads the committee, that
he did not want to submit to the "political circus" that the hearings "will tend
to become." Mr. Perot also said he could not appear at any alternative date
before the Presidential elections.

Alternatives Are Considered

"It is not feasible to wait until after the election," the committee spokeswoman
said today. Neither Mr. Kerry nor the committee's vice chairman, Senator Robert
C. Smith, Republican of New Hampshire, was available for comment today on the
status of negotiations with Mr. Perot. But Senate aides said the committee had
discussed issuing a subpoena to compel Mr. Perot to appear or, perhaps, taking a
formal deposition from him.

The conflict over Mr. Perot's appearance is significant because the hearings
were looked upon by many of his supporters and his opponents as an opportunity
to examine Mr. Perot's pointed assertions on issues about P.O.W.'s and
-M.I.A.'s, including his belief that hundreds of American servicemen were left
behind in Southeast Asia at the end of the Vietnam War.

The hearing was also expected to be a forum to examine Mr. Perot's confrontation
with the Reagan Administration over policies on P.O.W.'s and M.I.A.'s.

In recent months, new details about that confrontation have come to light, among
them that Mr. Perot carried on a private dialogue with senior Vietnamese
officials between 1988 and 1991 even as a senior Presidential envoy was carrying
on formal negotiations with Hanoi.

Mr. Perot, through his spokesman, has also conceded that he may have solicited
private investigative material to attack the reputation of a senior Pentagon
official, Richard Armitage, who helped supervise its policy on the matter.

Political Worries Are Strong

Mr. Perot's dispute with the Reagan White House over P.O.W.-M.I.A. policy led to
his estrangement from Mr. Reagan and from George Bush.

It seemed possible that committee members might be willing to forgo examining
Mr. Perot's more controversial actions in order to secure his testimony on the
central issue of missing Americans and his efforts to find them.

At the heart of these negotiations and Senate deliberations over using its
subpoena authority are political worries about how to handle Mr. Perot. On one
hand, members like Senator John McCain of Arizona, a former prisoner of war,
express a strong desire to conclude a nonpolitical investigation into claims
that Americans were left behind in Southeast Asia. Mr. Kerry has said that he
has assured Mr. Perot that any hearing on missing Americans will not become a
circus.

But at the same time, partisans who oppose Mr. Perot's expected independent
candidacy for President see an appearance on Capitol Hill by the Texas
billionaire as an opportunity to confront him with recent disclosures about his
activities that could be politically embarrassing.

Senate leaders appeared to be ambivalent about pressing Mr. Perot to testify and
concerned that the hearings could be poltically damaging to the Senate.

Mr. Perot has seized on this point in bolstering his argument to stay away,
referring to the Senate Judiciary Committee's stormy confirmation hearings on
the nomination of Clarence Thomas to the Supreme Court. "In the current
political climate," he wrote to Mr. Kerry on June 16, "it could become a rerun
of the Judge Thomas-Anita Hill hearings."

An influential organization of the families of P.O.W.'s and M.I.A.'s is urging
Senator Kerry and his colleagues to subpoena Mr. Perot.

"The league strongly objects to Mr. Perot's decision to renege on his commitment
to testify before the select committee," said a statement issued by Sue Scott,
the chairwoman of the National League of Families of American Prisoners and
Missing in Southeast Asia.

LOAD-DATE: July 12, 1992

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo: In 1969, Ross Perot, right, talked with Vu Tien, second from
right, an official at the North Vietnamese embassy in Vientiane, Laos. Mr. Perot
has refused to testify at a Senate hearing on American servicemen missing in
Southeast Asia. (Associated Press)

                   Copyright 1992 The New York Times Company


                              238 of 281 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 June 20, 1992, Saturday, Late Edition - Final

THE 1992 CAMPAIGN: Undeclared Candidate;
Where Perot Exhibits A Lifetime of Memories

BYLINE: By MICHAEL KELLY,  Special to The New York Times

SECTION: Section 1; Page 8; Column 1; National Desk

LENGTH: 1839 words

DATELINE: DALLAS, June 17


When talking to reporters he suspects of not properly understanding him, Ross
Perot will sometimes offer an invitation: Come on up and see my office; then
you'll see what I'm all about.

And he is right. What Ross Perot is about -- what he has done in his life, what
he thinks, what he believes in, what he treasures -- is on permanent display in
what amounts to a Museum of Perot here in a suite of offices on the 17th floor
of a high-rise in North Dallas.

A lot of people maintain some sort of small shrine to their lives, modest
collections of diplomas and certificates and childhood awards. In politics,
where the public celebration of self is as much a matter of advertising as of
ego, such displays can get quite grand and are often quite false.

But Mr. Perot's museum is not like other people's, or even other politicians'.
Actually, it is not much like anything else in the world.

It is part Louvre, part yard sale and part Smithsonian. (The hall-length exhibit
cataloguing the helicopter circumnavigation by his son, Ross Jr., was once
displayed in the Smithsonian Institution's National Air and Space Museum.) It is
an eclectic collection of objets de Perot arranged over the course of half a
dozen chambers to present a picture of the life, times and thoughts of one man.

Taken as a whole, which is nearly impossible to do in one visit, the exhibits
offer a picture of the undeclared Presidential candidate as a man of diverse
great and small accomplishments, a cheerfully unbridled egoist and, above all, a
person possessed of a powerful sense of himself as a figure of destiny.

"Ross Perot has always been the curator of his own museum," Todd Mason, author
of "Perot" (Dow Jones-Irwin, 1990), an unauthorized biography, said in an
interview. "Even as a teen-ager, even when he was 12 years old, he saw himself
as potentially a great figure in history."

Plaques, Photographs Pistols and a Shovel

That assessment is echoed by Mr. Perot's childhood friend, Hayes McClerkin, a
lawyer from Texarkana, Tex., who recalls Mr. Perot, as a midshipman in the
United States Naval Academy during the height of the Korean War, saying that he
wished to join the Marines and go to Korea when he graduated from the academy.
"I reminded him that they were really chewing up second lieutenants in Korea at
that time; they were dying like flies," Mr. McClerkin said. "He said, 'Yes, but
if you survive, you make general a lot faster.' "

Mr. Mason is emphatic on an essential point: The diorama Mr. Perot has made of
his life is not a false one. "Heavens, no," he said. "Ross hasn't rigged up
something false. "He's just put his entire life on display."

Indeed, walking through Mr. Perot's offices does seem like a tour through the
events of a lifetime. The richness and variety of the landscape is overwhelming,
inspiring that familiar museum-going feeling of slack-jawed overload. Everything
that ever happened to Mr. Perot, it appears, is here somewhere, on a wall or
desk or table, each physical item representing some past point in the Perotian
time line.

There is much that is grand: the heavy, silver Winston Churchill Award,
presented to Mr. Perot by the Prince of Wales in 1985; the Raoul Wallenberg
Award, given in 1987 to recognize Mr. Perot's "tremendous efforts on behalf of
his fellow man;" walls full of public service awards, including the
Distinguished Public Service Award from the Department of Defense and awards
from the American Legion and the Veterans of Foreign Wars; walls full of
honorary degrees from colleges; more walls full of plaques and certificates
denoting Mr. Perot's civic and business triumphs.

There are Ross Perot commemoratives of silver, of brass, of crystal. There is a
Ross Perot shovel, a Ross Perot dueling pistol, a Ross Perot Smith & Wesson .357
Magnum, a Ross Perot combat fighter's helmet, a collection of Ross Perot gavels
and, just added to mark Mr. Perot's latest endeavor, a Ross for Boss desk pen
set. There are sections of wall where the words "H. Ross Perot" appear so often
that they constitute a design scheme.

Mementos of War, Tributes of Warriors

Even more impressive are the personal mementos of his long support of the armed
services, particularly of American prisoners in Southeast Asia. Two long walls
are filled with homemade commendations from various units and with letters and
signed photographs from soldiers, fliers and sailors.

Perhaps the most touching of these is a letter that accompanied the American
flag emblem that one slain soldier, Dale DeWolf, wore on his flak jacket, sent
to Mr. Perot by a friend of Mr. DeWolf's. "You are the only person who deserves
to be the caretaker of this flag, a flag I love because it represents all that
is noble in just one dead soldier," the friend wrote.

But there is much, too, that is neither grand nor touching: the telegram
informing the young Perot that he had been accepted into the naval academy; a
collection of coins gathered by Mr. Perot at various ports of call while in the
Navy; a photograph of "Lt. H. Ross Perot aboard destroyer during midshipman
summer training cruise, following 14 hours of duty cleaning boilers;" a copy of
the 1961 Readers' Digest in which Mr. Perot read a quote from Thoreau ("The mass
of men lead lives of quiet desperation.") that impelled him to found his own
business; a copy of a book, "A Message to Garcia," that Mr. Perot found
inspiring as a young man; a tube of Vientiane brand toothpaste from a trip to
Vietnam; the slim paperback just published with a collection of utterances by
Mr. Perot, "Ross Perot in His Own Words" (Warner Books, 1992).

There is an entire table devoted to Mr. Perot's most famous exploit, the 1979
mission to rescue two employees held prisoner in revolution-torn Iran. Here, in
a wood-and-glass box, is the Walther PPK pistol carried by Lieut. Col. Arthur D.
"Bull" Simons, the leader of the mission. Next to that, Colonel Simons's
compass, his ring and his watch; next to that, three leather-bound volumes of
letters and papers relating to the book about the rescue, "On Wings of Eagles"
(William Morrow & Company, 1983), by Ken Follett, whom Mr. Perot chose to tell
the story.

It would be easy to look at all this and see evidence of an ego of Pharaonic
proportions. But Mr. Perot's friends and longtime colleagues make a case for a
more complicated, and interesting, truth.

While no one says Mr. Perot is without ego (an exceedingly rare quality among
self-made billionaires and Presidential contenders), they suggest he is driven
not so much by a desire to glorify his life as to record its events, large and
small, as moments of his own history.

"The connecting theme is that the things in his office are things that reflect
something that happened to Ross, some result that mattered, different things in
his life," said Kenn Hill, who worked as an executive in Mr. Perot's Electronic
Data Systems Corporation for 20 years. "As long as I've known him, Ross has
always saved things that have personal meaning in his life."

As Mr. Hill, who now owns his own data processing company in California, sees
it, Mr. Perot may be impelled by a sense of marvel and slight disbelief at the
course of a life that has taken him from a routine small-town childhood to
billionairehood. "My view is that he still has a little trouble believing all
this happened to him," Mr. Hill said. "He's still a little bit in awe at what
happened. He likes to be able to see things around him that say that it really
did happen."

Hail the Eagle: A Future Foretold

Nowhere does that seem more apparently true than in the Ross Perot Scout Service
Center, the expensive center Mr. Perot had built for his boyhood Scouting
council in Texarkana.

There, in the lobby just to the right of the front door, under a large studio
photograph of Mr. Perot, is a large glass case, easily five feet long and two
feet high, labeled, simply and gloriously, "Ross Perot. Eagle Scout."

Inside, behind a brass plaque inscribed "Scouting Possessions of Ross Perot," is
the display of a boy's dreams, the souvenirs of Mr. Perot's first great triumph,
his Boy Scout career. His torn, stained cook kit and knapsack are there, his Sam
Browne hat (the left side of the broad brim still turned up in faint memory of
youthful cockiness), his hatchet, his hand-tooled leather coin purse, his 1940
Handbook for Boys, and so on, item after iconographic item. His Eagle badge,
dangling from a strip of ribbon, occupies a place of honor, next to the colorful
merit badge sash.

The point of the display is not to suggest something false. Mr. Perot really did
ascend from Second Class Scout to Eagle Scout in 15 months, arriving at the
pinnacle of Scouting by the age of 13, something that Sam Shuman, Mr. Perot's
old scoutmaster, recalls still as an exceptional achievement (although not
unheard of; his friend Mr. McClerkin also made Eagle in 18 months). The point,
rather, is to verify the event, and to signify it.

For Mr. Perot, it appears, the events of his life are important not just because
they happened, but because from them lessons may be learned, verities may be
illustrated. Those verities do not apply just to Mr. Perot, but are things
others may live by, too. Some are exhibits in the office museum, carved on
wooden plaques that hang on the walls: "Every Good and Excellent Thing Stands
Moment by Moment on the Razor's Edge of Danger and Must Be Fought For," and "A
Man Is Never So on Trial as in a Moment of Excessive Good Fortune."

A Vision of America In Totems and Icons

They suggest the ultimate point of Mr. Perot's amazing collection. The totems to
the events of his life do not stand alone but are interspersed with the totems
of his thoughts and with paintings and statues that are totems to larger lives
and thoughts. John Paul Jones, Thomas Edison, Winston Churchill and Abraham
Lincoln are all, in paintings or documents or sculpture, enshrined in Mr.
Perot's office.

Overarching Mr. Perot's vision of his life, and the lives of the men he admires,
is a vision of American life. That vision is most clearly articulated by the
paintings and prints that dominate Mr. Perot's outer office, of Norman Rockwell.

Mr. Perot, he of the broken nose and cider jug ears, could be a figure in a
Rockwell painting, and the America Mr. Perot evokes in speeches is the America
Mr. Rockwell put on canvas. Giving the tour of the office, Sharon Holman, a
hometown friend and longtime assistant to Mr. Perot, stopped to make the point
explicit. "If Ross was here," she said, pointing at a Rockwell, "he would say,
"This is America.' "

Mr. Hill, while admitting, "I don't know quite how to put this," nevertheless
mused: "I think the stuff in Ross's office about his own life, and the stuff
about John Paul Jones and so on, are all part of the same thing. He has a sense
of history, and of how that history moves forward, and of how he himself fits
into that flow of history. That's what it's all about, I think."

LOAD-DATE: July 12, 1992

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo: A bronze sculpture depicting three soldiers that was the model
for the Vietnam War Memorial is one of many eclectic objects, awards and
mementos that depict the life and philosophy of Ross Perot. They are in half a
dozen rooms of a North Dallas high-rise. (Mark Perlstein for The New York Times)

                   Copyright 1992 The New York Times Company


                              239 of 281 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                  June 21, 1992, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

THE WORLD: Many Opinions, Few Facts;
Why Would Moscow Want U.S. P.O.W.'s?

BYLINE: By BARBARA CROSSETTE

SECTION: Section 4; Page 3; Column 3; Week in Review Desk

LENGTH: 306 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON


When evidence that American servicemen were detained in Soviet labor camps in
the 1940's and 50's was turned over to a Senate committee last week by the
Russians, and President Boris N. Yeltsin suggested that the practice may have
extended into the Vietnam era, an obvious question was: For what purpose would
Americans have been brought to the Soviet Union?

Some groups and relatives who monitor the missing say that if Moscow did obtain
such servicemen from the North Vietnamese, it may have been to learn more about
advanced American military technology.

Other groups challenge the high-tech theory. Ann Mills Griffiths, head of the
National League of Families, which represents the Vietnam-era missing, said that
exhaustive computer crosschecks of the 2,266 people unaccounted for in Indochina
-- especially the approximately 135 "discrepancy cases" where officials believe
the Vietnamese may be withholding information -- have never revealed a pattern
of experience with high technology.

Douglas Pike, a specialist on Vietnam at the Pentagon in the late 1970's who is
now director of the Indochina Studies Program at the University of California at
Berkeley, said Americans with special knowledge were kept from flying into areas
where they might be captured. The Pentagon closely watched personnel who might
be of unusual interest to Hanoi, Moscow or Beijing, he said.

He added that it was not unlikely that some American prisoners may have been
moved from Hanoi to Moscow, although he questioned why they could not have been
"deprogrammed" by the Russians in Vietnam. The Russian and Vietnamese presses
have been trading charges on the issue in recent years, he said, but he remains
skeptical.

The solid explanations, of course, will probably have to wait for years, for the
opening of more Russian archives.

LOAD-DATE: June 21, 1992

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo: American prisoners of war in Hanoi before their release in 1973.
(Associated Press)

                   Copyright 1992 The New York Times Company


                              240 of 281 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                  June 21, 1992, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

Dr. Alvin Knudson Is Dead at 81; Improved Treatment for Veterans

BYLINE: By BRUCE LAMBERT

SECTION: Section 1; Page 36; Column 1; National Desk

LENGTH: 482 words


Dr. Alvin B. C. Knudson, who created and ran the Veterans Administration
programs that restored hundreds of thousands of American soldiers injured in
World War II, Korea and Vietnam to useful lives, died on Thursday at Fairfax
Hospital in Fairfax, Va. He was 81 years old and lived in Fairfax Station.

He died of cardiopulmonary failure, his family said.

Dr. Knudson revolutionized rehabilitation treatment, said Thomas J. Fleming, a
longtime colleague.

For 23 years Dr. Knudson was the national director of the Veterans
Administration's Physical Medicine and Rehabilitation Service. Appointed in
1948, he overhauled the agency's 165 hospitals around the nation with the advice
of two experts, Dr. Howard Rusk and Dr. Karl Menninger, the psychiatrist.

Philosophy of Independence

Dr. Knudson's philosophy was that the right medical care and other support would
restore most disabled people to functional, independent living. He insisted on
patients' being involved in planning their recoveries.

The medical treatment featured operations, drugs, artificial limbs and physical
therapy. But he emphasized a team approach that also included psychological,
social, educational and vocational specialists helping a patient's transition to
a home life after leaving the hospital. For example, employers were recruited to
find jobs for those able to work so that they could be financially independent
and gain self-esteem.

Before Dr. Knudson's changes, the Veterans Administration provided largely
custodial care, still housing World War I veterans. Many of them benefited from
the new treatment and returned to their communities. Some learned to walk again
after being in wheelchairs for decades.

Among First Certified

When rehabilitation evolved as a new medical specialty, Dr. Knudson was among
the first certified in it and then served on the examining board. He was
president of the American Congress of Physical Medicine and Rehabilitation and
of the American Academy of Physical Medicine and Rehabilitation.

His honors included awards from the Association of Military Surgeons of the
United States and the President's Committee on Employment of the Physically
Handicapped.

Dr. Knudson was born in Waubay, S.D., and worked his way through college and
medical school at the University of Minnesota.

He joined the Veterans Administration in 1939, working at hospitals in St.
Cloud, Minn.; Battle Creek, Mich., and Dwight, Ill. He transferred to the Army
Medical Corps in World War II. In 1945 he won a fellowship to the Massachusetts
Institute of Technology and was later appointed to the V.A. headquarters in
Washington.

His wife of 58 years, the former Florence Rusche, died last year. Dr. Knudson is
survived by two sons, Dr. Alvin R. Knudson of Alexandria, Va., and Arthur B. C.
Knudson of Goldvein, Va.; eight grandchildren, and two great-grandchildren.

NAME: Alvin Knudson

LOAD-DATE: June 21, 1992

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo: Dr. Alvin B. C. Knudson (1953)

TYPE: Biography; Obituary (Obit)

                   Copyright 1992 The New York Times Company


                              241 of 281 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                  June 21, 1992, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

Hasty Fury on M.I.A.'s

SECTION: Section 4; Page 16; Column 1; Editorial Desk

LENGTH: 332 words


Enthusiastic shouts from Congress for "Boris, Boris!" . . . A historic
breakthrough on slashing nuclear stockpiles . . . Real momentum on approving an
aid package for Russia. President Yeltsin's summit meeting with President Bush
last week moved from success to success. There was only one cloud -- the
confusion Mr. Yeltsin himself created on the subject of M.I.A.'s, Americans
still missing in action in Vietnam, Korea and World War II.

But before the week ended, even that cloud was dispelled by Mr. Yeltsin's
unambiguous pledge to pry the truth from the records of the old Soviet gulag.
Even members of Congress who threatened to hold up U.S. aid to Russia now seem
satisfied with the Russian President's assurances.

In a series of interviews, initially with a Russian newspaper two weeks ago, Mr.
Yeltsin claimed he had seen evidence that U.S. personnel in various wars had
been secretly imprisoned in the Soviet Union. But he offered no details. Mr.
Yeltsin's allegations provoked an outcry among members of Congress who have long
blamed successive U.S. Administrations for doing too little about M.I.A.'s. Some
threatened to hold up aid to Russia until a full accounting was rendered, as if
Mr. Yeltsin were somehow culpable.

"I don't really quite understand you, ladies and gentlemen," a perplexed Mr.
Yeltsin told Congress. He has already opened secret archives, and he promises to
account for the fate of every missing P.O.W. and to explain what led to the
downing of the South Korean Flight 007 in 1985. A joint Russian-U.S. commission
is now combing files and searching prison camps, though thus far its
investigators say there is no proof that missing Americans are still alive.

After hearing Mr. Yeltsin, legislators who had rushed to judgment said they were
satisified with his assurances; well they should be. If Mr. Yeltsin's words on
M.I.A.'s were overstated or premature, his larger message could not be more
welcome: "There will be no more lies -- ever."

LOAD-DATE: June 21, 1992

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Editorial

                   Copyright 1992 The New York Times Company


                              242 of 281 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                  June 21, 1992, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

Washing Buddha's Face

BYLINE: BY PHILIP SHENON;  Philip Shenon is the Bangkok bureau chief of The New
York Times.

SECTION: Section 6; Page 19; Column 2; Magazine Desk

LENGTH: 4599 words


IN THE COOL BLUISH MIST OF THE CAMBODIAN DAWN, the hand-carved mountain of stone
that is Angkor Wat appears first in silhouette, the temple's massive central
towers dwarfing even the tallest of the surrounding jungle trees.

Down the dirt road leading to the temple, the dense grove of banyan and
silk-cotton trees gives way to a moat -- 4,800 feet long, wider than stretches
of the Mekong River, crossed by a stone causeway that eight centuries ago served
as the parade route for elephants that on festival days were draped with Khmer
silks and thick ropes of gold.

Beyond the water is the great temple itself. Angkor Wat overwhelms the eye,
rising in three massive square tiers, each a walled sandstone gallery sheltering
thousands of square feet of bas relief that are among the greatest artistic
treasures of the ancient world. Soaring more than 200 feet above the jungle
floor are the five central towers, designed, it is thought, to resemble lotus
buds close to bloom.

As the sun rises over the Cambodian jungle and the first rays of sunlight strike
the ancient stone, a 20th-century dispute over this 12th-century wonder becomes
clear. Angkor Wat is now half black and half white.

Angkor Wat -- the largest religious monument on earth, the grandest
architectural achievement of an empire that once stretched across Indochina, the
most important symbol of unity in a nation that has known nothing but war or
genocide for a generation -- is being scrubbed down and partly rebuilt by a team
of Indian archeologists and engineers.

Armed with hard brushes and buckets of a solution of ammonia and water, hundreds
of unskilled Khmer laborers, working at the Indians' direction, vigorously rub
over the delicate stonework as if it were a dirty kitchen floor. Other Cambodian
workers empty trowels of cement into cracks, large and small, in the ancient
sandstone. Small knots of Khmer laborers use steel hoists to reassemble stone
entryways that began to tumble down centuries ago.

The Indian team's restoration work, begun in 1986 and scheduled to go on for at
least two years more, has sparked one of the angriest debates of modern art
conservation. Depending on the expert asked the question, Angkor Wat is either
being restored to a lost glory or is being irreversibly damaged.

The Indians insist they are removing vegetation that is slowly eating away at
the monument, while carefully rebuilding collapsed stone structures. Their
critics say that the Indians are using outdated cleaning techniques and
dangerous, abrasive chemicals to scrub away detail on some of the best-preserved
statuary of the ancient world, while pouring cement with reckless abandon on a
structure that was originally built without mortar.

The furious dispute over the restoration of Angkor Wat is part of a larger
argument among scholars and diplomats over how, and whether, outside nations
should cooperate in preserving the complex of more than 70 major temples spread
across 25 square miles of the ancient Khmer capital. The United Nations --
through its Educational, Scientific and Cultural Organization, or Unesco -- is
trying to come up with a blueprint for conserving all of the great stone
monuments of Angkor.

Unesco's hope is to save the temples from the ravages of nature, of looting and
of unrestrained tourism. But its work has been hampered by shortage of money and
by bickering among outside experts over who should do the work and who should
serve on an international advisory panel that is being formed to counsel the
Cambodian Government on the restoration. Unesco's immediate goal is to secure
for Angkor Wat and the other Angkor temples a place on its World Heritage List,
a designation that would allow the United Nations to assume a more formal role
in overseeing -- and raising money for -- the restoration work.

While the Angkor temples are indisputably worthy of inclusion on the list, they
cannot be added unless the Cambodian Government offers up a formal, highly
detailed plan for maintaining and policing Angkor. "This Government is in such
chaos it's hard to imagine them coming up with a grocery list, let alone a
detailed plan to restore an archeological wonder like Angkor," says a Western
diplomat in Phnom Penh. Nevertheless, Unesco's local representative in Cambodia,
Richard A. Engelhardt, an American archeologist, is patiently working with
Cambodian Government officials in hopes of submitting the plan later this year.

Pich Keo, the director of Cambodia's national museum, is one of the few
Cambodian experts on Angkor -- the ancient capital of the Khmer empire and home
to Angkor Wat -- to have survived the Khmer Rouge terror of the 1970's. Pich Keo
says he appreciates the fact that in the early 1980's, when Phnom Penh made an
international appeal for help in restoring the Angkor monuments after a decade
of neglect, only India responded, offering the assistance of its 130-year-old
Archeological Survey, one of the world's largest and most experienced
art-conservation services. But he makes clear that he is appalled at what the
Indians have done to Angkor Wat.

There are areas of the temple, he says, where the stone has clearly been damaged
by the restoration efforts, and he fears what will become of the monument over
time because of the Indian team's mysterious mix of chemical cleaners and
preservatives. "I see this work and I think, no good," he says.

Cambodia is only now emerging from the shadow of the nightmare years of the Pol
Pot regime and of the more than 12 years of civil war that followed its ouster.
In the flawed restoration of the greatest of all Khmer temples, Pich Keo says,
there is a disquieting metaphor for the multibillion-dollar international effort
launched last fall to bring a lasting peace to his tortured nation. "Angkor Wat
is a symbol of Cambodia's greatness," Pich Keo explains. But what happens at
Angkor Wat, he says, "can also be a symbol of our disaster."

ANGKOR WAT WAS MEANT to be heaven on earth. It was the dream of a megalomaniacal
king, Suryavarman II, who enslaved tens of thousands of his subjects in order to
build at Angkor Wat an earthly replica of the Hindu cosmos. The moat around the
temple was designed to represent the great oceans, while the tiered walls
represent mountain ranges separating continents. The five central towers
symbolize Mount Meru, the Olympus of the Hindu gods.

"Erected by some ancient Michelangelo, it is grander than anything left to us by
Greece or Rome," wrote Henri Mouhot, the French naturalist who "discovered"
Angkor Wat in 1861. His discovery was the start of France's century-long romance
with Angkor. Before the French were forced to leave Cambodia in the early 1970's
because of the fighting, generations of French scholars had lived at Angkor,
working to conserve the temples of the great Khmer kings.

That Indian archeologists would want to take up the work of their French
counterparts is not surprising. As an historical and cultural artifact, Angkor
Wat -- wat means temple -- is the Asian equivalent of the Great Pyramids of
Egypt or Chartres in France. (It is, in fact, a contemporary of the French
cathedral.)

For India, Angkor Wat holds special significance, since it is a tribute to the
abiding influence of Indian culture on its Asian neighbors. At the time of
Suryavarman, the state religion of the Khmer empire was Hinduism, a legacy of
the peaceful Indian traders who centuries before had traveled to Cambodia in
search of spices and gems.

Most of all, the Indian restoration of Angkor Wat was born of cold-war
geopolitics. In 1978, Vietnam had invaded Cambodia, ending the genocidal rule of
the Chinese-backed Khmer Rouge. Taking their cue from the United States,
virtually all the non-Communist countries in the world shunned Cambodia as a
Vietnamese puppet state. The exception was India, which has close ties to
Vietnam in part because the two nations share a traditional adversary, China. It
became the only major nation outside the Soviet bloc to recognize the Phnom Penh
Government.

The Indians were given their pick of Angkor monuments to restore and they chose
the largest and most important: Angkor Wat. "We were very clear that we wanted
to do the work at Angkor Wat," says M. S. Nagaraja Rao, an archeologist trained
in India and at Cambridge who was then the director general of the Archeological
Survey.  "India is emotionally attached to the monument. There is so much Indian
inspiration."

The central structure of Angkor Wat, he discovered, had not been badly damaged
during the Khmer Rouge years, with the notable exception of several bullet holes
left in the temple walls by soldiers who had used the national landmark for
target practice. But the Khmer Rouge had at the same time done almost nothing to
conserve Angkor Wat. The temple had been left to the ravages of the fecund,
all-devouring jungle for more than a decade, and it was overgrown with
vegetation that the Indians describe as a type of stone cancer.

In April 1986, India and Cambodia reached agreement on the restoration, with
India providing the technical expertise -- archeologists, architects, engineers,
masons and chemists, in teams of about 15 that rotate annually. The Cambodians
provide the laborers and many of the materials. The project's cost to India has
been estimated at about $3 million.

The pact created an uproar in the small worlds of archeology and stone
conservation.

IN THE MOST SACRED PLACE, THE stone sanctuary where eight centuries ago the high
priests of the Khmer empire congregated at dawn to pray before the gilded shrine
of the Hindu god Vishnu, there is now only the sound of the gentle jungle breeze
-- and of the scrubbing.

Dozens of young Cambodian women sit precariously on metal scaffolding set
against a massive, 40-foot stone stairway leading to the pyramidical sanctuary
of Angkor Wat. Some of them clutch bundles of thin, stiff coconut-wood sticks
bound by a rubber band; others hold wooden-handled brushes with firm plastic
bristles. And they are rubbing down the stone, hard.

Every few minutes, the women pause to throw cups of an ammonia-and-water
solution against the stairway, waiting a moment for the ammonia to seep into the
porous stone, killing and dislodging a velvety coat of black moss. They begin to
scrub again, slowly revealing the pinkish-white stone beneath. A large,
ammonia-scented puddle forms beneath the scaffolding, and it is thick with the
pulverized vegetation scrubbed from the stone and with grains of the stone
itself.

Like ruins throughout the tropics, Angkor Wat is covered with layers of
humidity-loving vegetation -- black moss, whitish spots of fungus, leafy plants
and even small trees -- that eat away at the surface with the weak acids they
produce, or that grow so thick that the stone simply cracks open. Using a
variety of chemicals as well as the basic ammonia and water, the Indians are
trying to kill the vegetation and scrub it off, filling the cracks that are
revealed with cement.

"The chemicals we use are not controversial," says V. R. Mangiraj, who has led
the three-man team of Indian chemists working at Angkor Wat this year. He
watches as dozens of Khmer women, their clothes drenched with the cleaning
solution, scamper up and down the metal scaffolding to wash the delicately
carved walls in a shadowy enclosure known as the Gallery of the 1,000 Buddhas.
(Buddhism eventually replaced Hinduism as the dominant Khmer religion.)

"Archeologists don't like chemicals," adds Mangiraj, pulling off a white cap and
wiping his brow against the jungle heat. "They think that the vegetation forms
some sort of protective patina, but they are wrong. The vegetation destroys the
stone and must be removed."

To a layman watching the Indians bravely toil away at Angkor Wat despite
oppressive heat and wretched working conditions, there is little question of the
Indian team's dedication to the project. The cosmetic change is obvious and,
many visitors say, an improvement. But also obvious is the damage that is being
done to the stone. Few of the Cambodian laborers pay attention to their work,
and they seem neither to notice nor to care when fingernail-size chunks of the
carved sandstone give way and tumble down the stone mountain. The Indian team
insists that it keeps watch on the workers to prevent damage, but the Khmers
outnumber the Indians by more than 25 to one, making close supervision
impossible. (There are more than 400 laborers.) A layman visiting the sight is
also left to wonder about the need for cleaning the ancient stone, since the
vegetation will inevitably return. Dark patches have already reappeared on walls
bleached in 1988, the result of a shortage of chemical preservatives that year.

Some experts who recently visited the site say they have detected serious
damage. "This is housekeeping, not conservation," says Eleanor Mannikka, an art
historian at the University of Michigan who visited Angkor last year and came
away outraged. "The ancient stone is being eroded."

Patrick Matthiesen, a London art dealer who trained in stone conservation with
the Victoria and Albert Museum in London, has visited Angkor twice since the
Indians began their work. He says he was "horrified" by the chemical washing.

He recalls one relief that, he says, had lost all definition because of the
scrubbing. "Quite clearly it was the chemicals that had attacked the stone and
removed the whole surface as it was rubbed," he says. "I tried to photograph it,
but there was so little definition left it was futile." He worries about the
long-term effect, as the fungicides and preservatives settle into the stone. It
is a question that cannot be answered for now, since the Indians are keeping the
full list of chemicals a secret.

THE RUMORS ABOUT THE Indians' restoration work began to spread almost as soon as
the first Indian team arrived in Cambodia in 1986. Rumors were all that most
archeologists and other scholars had to go on, since the war raging between the
Vietnamese-backed Government and the rebel forces made travel to Angkor
difficult, sometimes dangerous. The most feverishly circulated rumor was that
the Indians had washed down the temple with Agent Orange, the herbicide that has
been linked to cancer in American veterans of the Vietnam War. The Indians deny
it.

The dispute over the Indians' work reflects a larger division within archeology
and art conservation. It can be split roughly into two schools of thought: those
who believe a monument should be returned as much as possible to its original
appearance and those in the so-called do-no-harm school, who believe the goal is
only to prevent further decay.

The French, who oversaw the conservation of Angkor for most of the century, fall
today into the latter category. At Ta Prohm, one of the largest of the Angkor
monuments, the French abandoned conservation altogether and left the temple to
the elements as a sort of object lesson in the battle between stone and jungle.
The scene of creepers and thick tree trunks entwined violently with the stone
walls is something out of "Indiana Jones," and it makes Ta Prohm today the most
romantic and in many ways the most beautiful of the Angkor temples.

The Archeological Survey of India is admired for its scholarship, and many of
its senior archeologists and stone conservators are ranked among the best in the
world. But it is a massive bureaucracy made up of thousands of employees and
others at the survey are not so widely respected. The organization is sometimes
criticized for taking conservation too far -- for trying too often to make
monuments look like new. There are disputes in India periodically over whether
the survey has damaged fragile national treasures with restoration projects that
were either too ambitious or relied on techniques that were insufficiently
tested.

"I have many friends in India, and I want to keep them," says Jacques Dumarcay,
a French architect long affiliated with the Ecole Francaise d'Extreme Orient.
But he can't find anything friendly to say about the Indians' work at Angkor
Wat. "I don't like it," he says.

Barkur Narasimhaiah, the archeologist who is head of this year's 15-member
Indian team, says criticism of the Indian work is misplaced, and he and his
colleagues wonder how much of the criticism is based on jealousy. The cleaning
and restoration techniques, he says, have been tested on the great monuments of
India and proved safe. "As long as this monument stands, our work will stand,"
he says, brushing sandstone dust from the pajamalike, Indian-style trousers he
wears on his daily inspections.

In 1989, Unesco decided to find out for itself what was going on at Angkor Wat
and dispatched Yoshiaki Ishizawa, director of Asian cultural studies at Sophia
University in Tokyo. Ishizawa returned from Cambodia with a report in which he
described elements of the Indian work as "unsuitable" and even "primitive," and
urged Unesco to step in.

His view is shared by other specialists, who describe the Indians' work as often
slapdash. Ishizawa, for example, found that to deal with water drainage problems
in one portion of the temple, the Indians had dug a large hole into the soft
sandstone. Other stone specialists and engineers say they are startled by the
Indians' liberal use of cement.

"The amount of cement is crazy," says Jean E. Launay, a French engineer who
worked at Angkor a quarter century ago. The cement ages at a different rate than
the sandstone, creating a jarring two-tone effect over time. In some instances,
the Indians have replaced original stone pillars with crude concrete replicas,
even though specialists say the originals could have been repaired and restored.

The Cambodian laborers criticize the work as well. "We are not doing a good
job," says one worker, as he uses a mud-encrusted wooden stick to mix a bucket
of gray cement. "We are just told to put cement when we see a hole. There are
uneducated teen-agers doing this work who do not appreciate the monument. They
do not know what is ugly and what is beautiful. So their work is ugly."

The cement masks what many archeologists and art conservators believe is the
largest problem at Angkor Wat: a foundation of sand and reddish laterite stone
that goes spongy in the annual monsoons.

"There is an endemic failure in the structure, which you can blame on the Khmers
of the 12th century," says John Sanday, a British architect who is a consultant
to the World Monuments Fund, a New York-based conservation group. "There comes a
time in any old building when it reaches a point where something desperate has
to be done. Angkor Wat is reaching that critical stage."

Launay, the French engineer, detected serious shifting of the stones when he
worked at Angkor in the 1960's. He proposed recently that whole galleries of
Angkor Wat be taken apart and reassembled atop a new cement foundation -- a
project that could easily cost tens of millions of dollars.

The Indians say it is unnecessary, that the Archeological Survey tested the
foundation in the early 1980's and found it solid. "There is no danger to the
foundation," Narasimhaiah contends. "We tested and we know." Asked about French
architectural drawings from 20 years ago showing dangerous faults in the
foundations, he replies, "The French had misunderstood." French scientists say
they have asked to see the Indians' research reports on the foundation. They say
they never received a reply.

IF THE TOOLS USED by the Indians at Angkor Wat, it is the chemicals that most
frighten many stone conservators. The Indian chemists store their supplies in
the temple's uppermost sanctuary, in the shaded, colonnaded sandstone gallery,
perhaps 20 feet high, that once held a grand statue of Vishnu and that today
contains a towering wooden image of the Buddha.

There are six small stone steps leading to the shrine -- they are worn down from
the bare feet of centuries of visiting faithful -- and they are covered with the
chemists' paraphernalia: plastic tubes, funnels and bottles, fungicide sprayers
and a metal lock box. The smell of ammonia from black plastic jugs a few feet
away overwhelms the sweet incense that is burning at the Buddha's feet.

Western art conservators tend to reject the claim of the Indian team that it is
using sodium hydroxide only to test acid samples. What seems more likely, the
conservators say, is that the Indians are using sodium hydroxide as a dangerous
shortcut for cleaning stone.

In 1988, Japanese scholars obtained a partial list of the chemicals. Frank D.
Preusser, an art conservator at the Getty Conservation Institute in Marina del
Rey, Calif. who holds a doctorate in chemistry, says the list contained
chemicals that were outdated, ineffective and had the potential of doing serious
damage to the stone. Zinc silicofluoride, a preservative, for instance, "can
create a thick surface layer on stone that has a tendency to slough off, taking
stone with it."

What is worse, says Preusser, is the threat to the health of workers using the
chemicals, which include sodium pentachlorophenate, a fungicide; toxic methyl
alcohol, and benzene, a carcinogen. Preusser, who spent a week at Angkor in
March, says he witnessed dozens of Khmer workers applying a noxious layer of
chemical preservatives to the stone. They were not provided with gloves or masks
or any other sort of protection. "It was very disturbing," he says, recalling
how the Cambodians stood in pools of the chemical solvents. "These women were
just sitting there in the full heat, breathing in those vapors. No one seemed to
be concerned for their safety."

The relationship between the Indians and the Cambodian laborers is poor, in part
a reflection of the difficult working conditions that both face at Angkor Wat.
For the Indians, Angkor is a hardship post and few volunteer to return for a
second seven-month tour. While in Cambodia, the Indians have almost no contact
with their families in India. Medical care is essentially nonexistent.

The Indians permit only women to do the actual scrubbing of Angkor Wat, an
effort, they say, to protect the temple's delicate stonework. "Because the girls
have weaker arms, there's no problem for the stone," says Ravi Kant, an Indian
chemist.

Away from the Indian team, many of the women laborers -- a large number are
teen-agers -- say they are frightened by their work. "The chemicals make your
hands feel hot and they turn red," says a 17-year-old Cambodian. "Why should
they be so red?" But the laborers say they are dependent on the salaries they
are paid by the Phnom Penh Government, 450 riel (about 50 cents) a day. It is a
reasonable salary in a nation in which the per capita income is about $170 a
year.

The Indians working at Angkor Wat do not speak Khmer and none of the Cambodian
workers speak more than a few words of English or Hindi, so there is little
communication apart from hand signals. Furthermore, no effort is being made to
train the Cambodians to take over detailed restoration work after the Indians
leave, even though some sort of training program is badly needed -- during the
anti-intellectual purges of the Khmer Rouge, most of Cambodia's archeologists
and art historians were killed or driven from the country.

In Phally, a lanky, 31-year-old Cambodian working with the Indian team as an
English-Khmer translator, recalls how one morning in 1977 his father -- who had
worked at Angkor conservation for 20 years -- was taken into custody by Khmer
Rouge soldiers and placed in chains and dragged away. "I could not yell out
because the Khmer Rouge would have killed me," says In Phally, who to this day
has no idea why his father was arrested. "I never saw my father again."

WHILE FIGHTING RAGES on in areas of central Cambodia, the civil war is formally
over, ended on paper by a peace settlement brokered last fall by the United
Nations. The peace process may be fragile, but it has benefited Angkor Wat and
the other monuments of the ancient Khmer empire by allowing foreign
archaeologists and art historians to visit freely for the first time in more
than two decades.

The French may soon be back at Angkor in force. They have been invited by the
Cambodians to complete work on the Baphuon, an 11th-century temple that French
conservators were restoring when they fled in the early 1970's. Japanese
conservators are planning to restore a smaller, 12th-century temple.

The task of organizing the international conservation effort at Angkor falls
largely to Richard Engelhardt, the Unesco representative. Unesco is also
assisting in the selection of an international advisory board to review
restoration proposals and prevent what Engelhardt describes as a "Disneyland
effect" in which each donor nation carries out its own interpretation of what
the Angkor monuments should look like. It could also, he says, prevent a
repetition of the sort of controversy created by the Indian project.

Yet the creation of the advisory board has been hampered by angry feuding among
archeologists and art historians over its membership and its authority. "The
French don't want the Japanese on the board, and the Japanese certainly don't
want the French," says a diplomat involved in the discussions. "And the French
and the Japanese don't want the Indians." The board will report to Cambodia's
newly restored head of state, Prince Norodom Sihanouk, who, before he was forced
into exile in 1970, was a regular visitor to Angkor.

Even as the United Nations prepares to spend more than $2 billion on the
peacekeeping operation, Engelhardt's job is to raise a few million dollars to
begin surveying the monuments at Angkor and, he hopes, to begin educational
programs that one day might allow Cambodians to take over the preservation work
themselves. Among his priorities is the creation of a professional force of
guards to prevent the still-widespread looting. Each month, two or three major
pieces of statuary disappear from Angkor Wat and the other temples, often stolen
with the help of Cambodian guards bribed with the equivalent of $5 or $10.

Security is also needed to deal with the growing number of tourists. Although
the Cambodian Government has no reliable figures on tourism, the daily flights
between Phnom Penh and Siem Reap, the Cambodian city nearest to Angkor, are
usually jammed with foreign sightseers, and there is talk of charter flights
from Bangkok to Siem Reap within a year.

Although he praises the Indians' commitment to restoring Angkor, Engelhardt
describes their work as a "cosmetic quick fix" that appears to be removing some
of the stone's delicate outer layer. He worries, too, that the Indians are not
dealing with what could prove to be catastrophic structural flaws.

Engelhardt's Phnom Penh office overlooks the royal palace from the top floor of
a graceful turn-of-the-century French colonial town house that has an ugly past.
Because it was one of the few buildings in the capital with a basement, the
house is said to have been used by the Khmer Rouge as a torture center in the
late 1970's.

Aware of what went on two floors below his elegantly decorated office,
Engelhardt acknowledges his fear that Angkor Wat -- and the nation it symbolizes
-- could be plunged into another generation of neglect and violence. In the end,
he says, Angkor Wat will survive whatever damage may result from a flawed
restoration attempt. The better question is how and whether the great stone
temple would survive another round of a vicious civil war. "No one," he says,
"wants to take that risk."

LOAD-DATE: June 21, 1992

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Cover photo: One of the Enigmatic faces of Lokesvara -- an incarnation
of the compassionate Bodhisattva, or Budda-to-be -- on the towers at the bayon
temple near Angkor Wat. Photos: On the third level of Angkor Wat's northern
side, a member of the Indian restoration team supervises Cambodian laborers as
they attack the vegetation. The western facade of the world's largest religious
monument at sunrise. (pg. 19); At the temple of Ta Prohm, near Angkor Wat, a
silk-cotton tree holds the stones together. French archeologists left the temple
in this precarious condition to show how destructive the trees can be. Two
apsaras, sensual dancers who entertain the gods and are awarded to heroes who
die bravely, at Angkor Wat. The one at right is not yet restored. (pg. 20);
Barkur Narasimhaiah, who leads this year's 15-member Indian team, wonders how
much of the criticism is based on professional jealousy. (pg. 21); Equipped with
a brush and an ammonia-and-water solution, a Khmer worker scrubs the face of
Angkor Wat. (pg. 38)(Photographs by Marc Riboud for The New York Times)

Map: At its height, the ancient city of Angkor spread over 25 square miles,
interconnected by canals and basins. (pg. 40)

                   Copyright 1992 The New York Times Company


                              243 of 281 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                  June 21, 1992, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

THE 1992 CAMPAIGN;
Perot Investigated Bush, Washington Post Reports

BYLINE: Special to The New York Times

SECTION: Section 1; Page 20; Column 3; National Desk

LENGTH: 337 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, June 21


After a bruising confrontation with Vice President George Bush over efforts to
track down American servicemen missing in Southeast Asia, Ross Perot paid
$10,000 to a Washington law firm in 1987 to help uncover information that might
prove damaging to Mr. Bush, The Washington Post reports in its Sunday issue.

The Post said its own investigation of Mr. Perot's efforts turned up no evidence
of improprieties by Mr. Bush. Nor did it find evidence that Mr. Perot or any of
his representatives engaged in anything improper in pursuit of their inquiries
into Mr. Bush.

But the article said Mr. Perot came to believe in his dealings with Mr. Bush
that the Vice President was weak and indecisive, and added that Mr. Perot was
tenacious in his efforts to demonstrate that he might also be corrupt.

In the process, the article said, Mr. Perot turned over to the newspaper in 1988
the information collected by the law firm, Verner, Liipfert, Bernhard, McPherson
& Hand, dealing with a transaction that Mr. Perot believed might constitute a
fraud on taxpayers. The Post said its own investigation of the matter uncovered
no fraud, and it published no article about it until now.

The documents provided by Mr. Perot filled two three-inch binders and dealt with
a $48 million tax deduction claimed by Pennzoil in 1981 that saved the oil
company about $20 million in taxes over several years. Pennzoil's chairman, J.
Hugh Liedtke, was Mr. Bush's oil partner in Texas in the 1950's.

When he provided The Post with the documents, the newspaper said, Mr. Perot
asserted that a senior Pennzoil official had admitted that he briefed Mr. Bush
on the tax deal, which Pennzoil got in in return for turning 100,000 acres of
land it owned in northern New Mexico over to the United States Forest Service.

The newspaper said that in pursuing the matter on its own at that time, Pennzoil
officials, as well as top aides to Mr. Bush and dozens of Reagan Administration
officials, denied that the Vice President was in any way involved.

LOAD-DATE: July 17, 1992

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1992 The New York Times Company


                              244 of 281 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                  June 21, 1992, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

Buoyed by Ottawa's Applause, Yeltsin Takes a Tour of Montreal

BYLINE: AP

SECTION: Section 1; Page 10; Column 3; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 591 words

DATELINE: MONTREAL, June 20


Buoyed by an enthusiastic welcome from Canadian lawmakers, President Boris N.
Yeltsin traveled to Montreal today to visit a dairy research center and meet
with Quebec's Prime Minister before heading home.

Mr. Yeltsin traveled by motorcade to Quebec from Ottawa, the Canadian capital,
where he received repeated standing ovations on Friday during a speech to the
Parliament.

Before flying back to Moscow tonight, the Russian President visited the dairy
research center at the McGill University School of Agriculture here before a
scheduled lunch with the province's Premier, Robert Bourassa, and a walking tour
of old Montreal.

Mr. Yeltsin has been trying to obtain concrete assurances from Canada and the
United States on their contributions to a $24 billion aid package promised by
Western industrialized nations. He is to confer with the leaders of the seven
leading industrialized democracies after they meet in July in Munich.

'Russia Has Made Her Choice'

He ended his six-day North American trip with a crucial accord with the United
States on reducing nuclear arms, pledges of billions of dollars in credit, the
privilege of most-favored-nation trade status with Washington and easier terms
for assistance from the International Montetary Fund.

Mr. Yeltsin vowed during his visit to carry on with democratic and
market-oriented reforms and exuded a mix of joviality and strength that appears
to have eased some Western doubts about his political future.

"Russia has made her choice on behalf of freedom, and no force will be able to
take it away from us," the Russian President told the Canadian Parliament in his
speech on Friday, adding, "We have chosen openness and cooperation with the
world community."

Prime Minister Brian Mulroney said at a joint news conference that he was
approving $170 million in insurance coverage to several Canadian companies
planning to invest in Russia.

Canada will quadruple its technical assistance to the former Soviet republics,
from $21 million to $85 million, with two-thirds of the money going to Russia,
he said, and spend $25 million on a three-year program to improve the safety of
Russia's nuclear reactors.

                             --------------------


'False Hopes' on Missing

WASHINGTON, June 20 (Reuters) -- Secretary of State James A. Baker 3d said today
that United States officials would make every effort to follow up on President
Yeltsin's statements that American prisoners of war had been held in the former
Soviet Union, but warned against "false hopes."

"I think we ought to take President Yeltsin's statements at face value and we
ought to make every effort to find out," Mr. Baker said in an interview on CNN.
"At the same time, I think we ought to be very careful not to raise false
hopes."

Mr. Baker said the significance of Mr. Yeltsin's statements on American
servicemen during his visit to the United States this week is that the Russian
Government is "willing to cooperate with us in every possible way to see whether
or not there are any P.O.W.'s left alive there."

"This is something that is totally different than anything that we've ever
experienced before," he said.

Mr. Yeltsin said on Monday that his Government had found secret documents
indicating that some captured American servicemen had been transferred to Soviet
prisons during or after the Korean and Vietnam wars and that some might still be
alive. He told a joint meeting of Congress on Wednesday that any American
prisoners held in Russia would be found and repatriated.

LOAD-DATE: July 17, 1992

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1992 The New York Times Company


                              245 of 281 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                  June 21, 1992, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

THE 1992 CAMPAIGN: On the Trail;
PEROT SAYS HE WON'T BE SUBPOENAED ON M.I.A.'s

BYLINE: Special to The New York Times

SECTION: Section 1; Page 20; Column 1; National Desk

LENGTH: 146 words

DATELINE: BOSTON, June 20


Ross Perot said today that he did not expect to be subpoenaed to testify before
a Senate committee about Americans missing in Southeast Asia. Asked at a
campaign stop here what he would do if he received a subpoena, the undeclared
Presidential candidate said, without elaborating, "I won't get one."

Mr. Perot canceled an appearance before Senators earlier this week, leading to
discussions of whether subpoena might be needed.

Asked later today about Mr. Perot's remark, his campaign spokesman, James
Squires said that as far as he knew, no deal had been struck with the Senate
panel. While acknowledging that it was possible Mr. Perot had reached a private
understanding, Mr. Squires said he did not believe that to be the case. "Mr.
Perot may be assuming that he is not going to be subpoenaed," Mr. Squires said.
But, he added, "I don't think he knows that."

LOAD-DATE: July 17, 1992

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1992 The New York Times Company


                              246 of 281 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                  June 21, 1992, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

Mythomania

BYLINE: By Mimi Swartz;  Mimi Swartz is senior editor of Texas Monthly magazine.

SECTION: Section 4; Page 17; Column 2; Editorial Desk

LENGTH: 913 words

DATELINE: DALLAS


No one is a shrewder student of American themes than Ross Perot, and no one
believes more ardently than he that his life embodies them. It stands to reason
that no one could build a more fitting and more convincing monument to the man
and his mythology than Mr. Perot himself: it exists on the 17th floor of Perot
Systems in Dallas, where the hallways and offices -- particularly his inner
sanctum -- do double duty as a Perot museum of awards, honors, gifts and
memorabilia.

Here the American dreams that have shaped his life are on display for anyone to
view; so too, the myths and themes he would use to guide the nation. To know the
man, you need only know his memorabilia. A partial inventory includes the
following.

Great Liberator Memorabilia. Photos of Dallas's "salute to the troops" parade
after the Persian Gulf War; award from officers and members of the American
Defenders of Bataan and Corregidor; Raoul Wallenberg Award, 1987; chunks from
the Berlin Wall; letter from Dwight D. Eisenhower to the troops on D-Day; bronze
model of the Statue of Liberty; bronze model of marines planting the flag at Iwo
Jima; bronze model of the Lincoln Memorial; life-sized portrait of Lincoln by
Norman Rockwell; nearly life-sized photograph of Col. Arthur (Bull) Simons, who
rescued two Electronic Data Systems employees held hostage in Iran; P.O.W.
paintings and sketches by Maxine McCaffrey; myriad letters from released
P.O.W.'s and their families; coffee mug inscribed "Hanoi Hilton"; belt worn by
captured P.O.W.; camouflage jacket with name "Perot"; one tube of Laotian
toothpaste; Aerial photograph of the U.S.S. Yorktown with the troops, in dress
whites, spelling out their thanks and Mr. Perots initials, "TKS HRP," after Mr.
Perot arranged for them to be entertained by Miss U.S.A.

Rugged Individual Memorabilia. A preponderance of eagles -- ceramic, painted,
carved, bronze -- flying unfettered and alone (Inspired perhaps by the
Electronic Data Systems motto, "Eagles don't flock, you have to find them one at
a time."); Paintings depicting great moments in aviation; the entire Smithsonian
exhibition of son Ross Jr's around-the-world-in-30-days helicopter flight.
Western bronzes, mostly by Frederick Remington; a framed horseshoe, from Mr.
Perot's youth, when he broke horses.

Stick to your Guns Memorabilia. Two books: "Irreconcilable Differences: Ross
Perot vs. General Motors," by Doron Levin, in Japanese; "Leadership Secrets of
Atilla the Hun," by Wess Roberts Ph.D.; assorted gavels; series of paintings
depicting great naval battles; numerous honorary guns and swords, including a
Laotian saber, Walther PPK pistol used by Colonel Simons in rescue operations, a
hand gun from the Dallas Police, a pistol carrying the inscription "In Times of
Conflict, A Man Can Do Little Wrong If He Will Only Ride Towards the Sound of
Guns"; Winston Churchill Foundation Leadership Award, 1986, for extraordinary
accomplishments, bold imagination, dynamic leadership, etc. Churchill's motto:
"Never Give In. Never Give In. Never. Never. Never."

Traditional Values Memorabilia. Boy Scout Handbook, 1910; copy of first Bible
ever printed in English; Saturday Evening Post covers depicting scenes from
American life -- a family says grace, a boy finds out there is no Santa Claus --
by Norman Rockwell; "The Four Freedoms" series -- worship, want, fear and speech
-- by Norman Rockwell; "The Homecoming" series by Norman Rockwell, depicting the
lives of returning servicemen; telegram announcing Mr. Perot's appointment to
U.S. Naval Academy, 1949.

Self-Made Man Memorabilia. Statue of newsboy selling the Dallas Times Herald;
Newspaper Carrier Hall of Fame Award, 1988; Distinguished Salesmen of Dallas
Award, 1973; coins and paper money collected by Ross Perot as a child; copy of
Reader's Digest in which Mr. Perot read Thoreau's "The mass of men lead lives of
quiet desperation," after which he decided to quit I.B.M. and start his own
company; $1,000 check Mr. Perot wrote to found Electronic Data Systems;
International Distinguished Entrepreneur Award, University of Manitoba; carved
tableau, birds of Texas, created by artist who learned his craft in an
orphanage; painting of schoolhouse done by a quadriplegic.

Flag Waving Memorabilia. Painting, "The Spirit of '76," by A.M. Willard;
replicas of antique flags that flew over Texas and the United States, complete
with bloodstains and bullet holes; flag worn by American soldier killed in
Vietnam in the line of duty; flag flown over the U.S. Capitol on the day of the
Apollo 11 moon landing, 1969.

Make It Quick Memorabilia. "The Lessons of History," by Will and Ariel Durant,
86 pages; "Life's Little Instruction Book," by H. Jackson Brown; pocket watch
belonging to Gabriel Perot, Ross's father, under glass; "If I like You, I Like
You," a poem, framed by Bess Becker; framed letter from Thomas A. Edison
containing the phrase, "I've raised hell about men on tables loafing"; aphorism,
framed, by Thomas A. Edison: "Everything comes to him that hustles while he
waits."

Miscellaneous Presidential Memorabilia. Painting of George Washington by Gilbert
Stuart; works of James Madison; bust and works of Theodore Roosevelt; note from
Franklin Delano Roosevelt praising Abe Lincoln.

Miscellaneous Undeclared Presidential Candidate Memorabilia. Another eagle,
painted in oils, bearing a "Go Perot" ribbon in its claws; "Ross for Boss '92"
pen holder.

LOAD-DATE: June 21, 1992

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Drawing

TYPE: Op-Ed

                   Copyright 1992 The New York Times Company


                              247 of 281 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                  June 21, 1992, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

Graves of Academe

BYLINE: By Richard Gid Powers;  Richard Gid Powers, the author of "Secrecy and
Power: The Life of J. Edgar Hoover," is a professor of history at the College of
Staten Island, City University of New York.

SECTION: Section 7; Page 9; Column 1; Book Review Desk

LENGTH: 1091 words



COMPROMISED CAMPUS
The Collaboration of Universities
With the Intelligence Community, 1945-1955.
By Sigmund Diamond.
371 pp. New York:
Oxford University Press.
$27.95.

IN the late 1940's and early 50's, many professors who refused to name names --
tell the full story of their days in the Communist Party -- lost their jobs. For
years they were unable to re-establish themselves. Excellent books by Ellen
Schrecker ("No Ivory Tower") and Lionel Lewis ("Cold War on Campus") have given
us a comprehensive picture of this repressive period.

Now Sigmund Diamond, the Giddings Professor of Sociology and History, Emeritus,
at Columbia University, reveals how major universities worked out formal
arrangements to trade information with the F.B.I. on professors who might cause
embarrassment if confronted by anti-Communist investigators.

"Compromised Campus: The Collaboration of Universities With the Intelligence
Community, 1945-1955" has its origins in Mr. Diamond's personal encounter with
anti-Communism. In 1954 Mr. Diamond, a former Communist, was working in Harvard
University's administration. He had received an offer of another administrative
post with some teaching duties, he writes, but because Mr. Diamond told McGeorge
Bundy, then the dean of the Faculty of Arts and Sciences, that he would refuse
to answer Government questions about people he had known in the party, the offer
was withdrawn.

This incident resurfaced in 1976, when the sociologists Seymour Martin Lipset
and David Riesman claimed in their book "Education and Politics at Harvard"
that, in Mr. Diamond's words, Harvard had been "a fortress of resistance to the
political purges of the period." In an article in The New York Review of Books,
Mr. Diamond wrote that such was not the case. Mr. Bundy wrote back defending
Harvard, and charging that Mr. Diamond was not telling the truth, specifically
when he said Mr. Bundy had recorded their 1954 meetings.

Mr. Diamond has now emerged with a much bigger tale. He demonstrates with
official documents that in the decade after World War II the presidents of Yale
and Harvard secretly cooperated with the F.B.I while publicly portraying their
institutions as bastions of academic freedom. But he never does come up with
that notorious recording from Mr. Bundy's office, though he makes so much of it
that we expect he will be waving it around at the end like the proverbial
smoking gun.

Such is Mr. Diamond's energy, persistence and imagination, and so rich are the
materials he has uncovered, that his book is a permanent addition to our
knowledge of American anti-Communism during the cold war and the relationship
between the F.B.I. and the universities. He documents the influence of the
F.B.I. on the development of Soviet studies at Harvard and elsewhere, and
provides surprising and significant examples of the bureau's impact on the
policies of institutions like the University of California, Berkeley, the
University of Washington and City College of New York. He also details exchanges
of information between the F.B.I. and such figures as Earl Warren, Henry
Kissinger, Adlai Stevenson and William F. Buckley Jr. about the political
opinions of particular professors.

But Mr. Diamond is not content with that. He sees his materials as evidence of a
vast plot of almost infinite dimensions and consequences. He maintains,
evidently paraphrasing the writer Shirley Hazzard, that "the secret arrangements
between the F.B.I. and the universities and labor unions affected those
organizations but, in addition, were of considerable importance in prolonging
the Vietnam War, producing the climate in which Watergate and Irangate could
flourish, and affecting the course of the civil rights movement. Dissenters were
purged; centers of potential dissent were destroyed; dissent itself became
illegitimate because unpatriotic; and, very quickly, the very conception that
there might be alternatives to current policy literally became unthinkable."

Needless to say, Mr. Diamond cannot prove such a preposterous idea; nobody
could, and Mr. Diamond does not even try. He assumes it is true because he knows
it is true. This is, I am afraid, a classic example of the paranoid style, and
Mr. Diamond diminishes the value of his researches by mouthing the cliches of
left-wing conspiracy theory.

We see the same failure to maintain a sense of proportion when Mr. Diamond ends
his book by drawing a parallel between himself and historian victims of the
Holocaust. The situation Mr. Diamond describes -- professors losing their jobs
and having to toil in less congenial surroundings -- was a bad one. But if a
historian does not know the difference between the Holocaust and losing a
college job, how can we have confidence in him when he renders judgment in areas
demanding truly acute sensibilities?

A touch of paranoia may be just what is needed to turn a researcher into a
relentless bloodhound, sniffing out facts that the less conspiratorially
inclined would tire of pursuing. But conspiracy theories also lead those who
believe in them to fit disparate events into readymade patterns, which does not
help the nonobsessed to make sense out of what is being said. That may be why
"Compromised Campus" is such a hard book to read. Mr. Diamond plows through his
files guided, it seems, only by the principles of free association, without
regard for conventional notions of thematic progression, context or even
paragraphing. How I longed to meet that trusty friend, the topic sentence.

All this is a pity, because when Mr. Diamond reins in his passion for sweeping
generalizations he can write brilliant history. His chapter on how Yale's
parietal rules evolved into the surveillance of political opinion is a
historical tour de force.

The controversy over Communists in American universities raised serious
questions of civil liberties, but it was not exclusively about civil liberties.
Also involved was an American consensus that the Soviet Union was dangerous, and
that those Americans who belonged to a secretive group supporting it were
dangerous as well. The resulting tension between the will of the majority and
the rights of minorities led to injustices against people like Mr. Diamond, who
obviously posed no threat to anyone. But by using his important research
findings so tendentiously, by refusing to place the era's repression of civil
liberties in their historical context, he ends up seeming a political polemicist
hiding behind the mask of a civil liberties purist.

LOAD-DATE: June 21, 1992

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Review

                   Copyright 1992 The New York Times Company


                              248 of 281 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                  June 21, 1992, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

'Work Hard, Trust in God, Have No Fear'

BYLINE: By Alan Brinkley;  Alan Brinkley is a professor of history at Columbia
University.

SECTION: Section 7; Page 1; Column 3; Book Review Desk

LENGTH: 2094 words



TRUMAN
By David McCullough.
Illustrated. 1,117 pp. New York:
Simon & Schuster. $30.

THROUGH most of his nearly eight years as President, Harry Truman was profoundly
unpopular. Joe Martin, the Republican Speaker of the House in the late 1940's,
called Truman "the worst President in history." Liberals so despaired of him
during his first term that they tried to draft Dwight D. Eisenhower to replace
him as the Democratic nominee in 1948. Even among the many who liked Truman
personally, there was always a tendency to view him as one member of the Cabinet
did on April 12, 1945, the day Franklin Roosevelt died. Truman was sitting alone
in a big leather chair against a wall in the Cabinet Room of the White House,
waiting for the Chief Justice to arrive and swear him in as President. The
Cabinet member glanced at him and later remembered thinking: "He looks like such
a little man."

Truman's popularity revived at times during his Presidency, most notably during
his remarkable campaign for re-election in 1948. But the revivals were always
brief. The real rehabilitation of his reputation -- the process that has turned
him into something of a folk hero -- began later, well after he left office, and
has accelerated in the 20 years since his death. Its culmination may be
"Truman," David McCullough's warm, affectionate and thoroughly captivating
biography. "Truman," Mr. McCullough writes near the end of this long book, "held
to the old guidelines: work hard, do your best, speak the truth, assume no airs,
trust in God, have no fear." He was "a figure of world stature, both a great and
good man, and a great American President."

MR. MCCULLOUGH, the author of several books, including "Mornings on Horseback"
and "The Path Between the Seas," supports this view in part by recounting
Truman's many important achievements: the reconstruction of American foreign
policy after World War II; the creation of the Marshall Plan and NATO; the
successful handling of a series of dangerous crises in the tense early years of
the cold war; the forceful response to the invasion of South Korea and, equally
significant, the firm resistance to those (most notably Douglas MacArthur) who
pressured him to expand the Korean War into China; the strong support for racial
justice and civil rights; the early recognition of the state of Israel; the
persistent, if seldom successful, efforts to expand upon the liberal programs of
the New Deal. Few Presidents in American history have entered office with so
little preparation for their task; few have presided over such difficult
problems; few have encountered so turbulent and bitter a political climate. And
yet, for all the many failures and frustrations Truman experienced, Mr.
McCullough argues, his administration almost always handled the crucial things
responsibly and well.

Scholars will find in this book a sound, thorough narrative of the major events
of the Truman Presidency and intelligent, straightforward accounts of its most
controversial moments. They will not, however, find much engagement in the
debates over such highly charged questions as the decision to use atomic bombs
on Japan, the origins of the cold war, the motives for the North Korean invasion
of South Korea in 1950 and Truman's policy in Vietnam. These and other contested
issues Mr. McCullough confronts largely by giving Truman's own view of events,
his own rationale for the decisions he made.

There is, in short, no important reinterpretation of the Truman Presidency here.
But that is not Mr. McCullough's intent. His real interest is less policy and
politics than Harry Truman himself. And the principal achievement of this
biography -- the most thorough account of Truman's life yet to appear -- is its
honest and revealing portrait of the "ordinary" man who became an extraordinary
historical figure.

Truman often said after his unexpected ascent to the Presidency that a million
men were better qualified for the office than he. That was certainly an
exaggeration. But it would have been hard in 1945 to have found many Americans,
even among those who knew Truman well, who would have disagreed. He had grown up
on the farms and in the small towns of western Missouri, and even years later he
retained many of the provincial idiosyncrasies and prejudices he had absorbed in
his childhood (including a romantic affection for the Confederacy and a tendency
to use demeaning racial and religious terms in private speech). Truman had
virtually no formal education beyond high school. He was 33 years old before he
left his family's struggling farm to enlist in the Army in 1917, and he may
never have left it at all had it not been for World War I. When he returned from
France, he married his former neighbor and longtime sweetheart, Bess Wallace,
whose genteel Independence, Mo., family always believed she had wed beneath her.
His youth was characterized by hard work, unfocused ambition and a string of
failed business ventures. In 1922, when he was almost 40 years old, he was
living in his mother-in-law's house, watching the haberdashery store he had
opened three years earlier go bankrupt and facing a future with no visible
prospects.

What transformed Truman's life, and what accounted for his advancement for
nearly two decades thereafter, was less his own ambition or effort than the
mighty Pendergast political machine of Kansas City. He had served in the Army
with the nephew of Tom Pendergast, one of the nation's most powerful Democratic
bosses. In 1922, the machine plucked Truman from obscurity and made him first a
county judge (a nonjudicial position that was the equivalent of a county
executive) and then, in 1934, a United States Senator.

TRUMAN campaigned energetically for and worked hard in all his public offices,
but his political successes were almost always more the result of someone else's
efforts than his own. He had no pronounced ideological positions other than a
vague commitment to the interests of the "common people." He was identified
clearly with no important public issue. He was scorned by many of his colleagues
during his first term in Washington as the "Senator from Pendergast." Even his
selection as Franklin Roosevelt's running mate in the summer of 1944 -- the
fateful decision that was to make him President less than a year later -- was
the result of no important popular support. It was not even the result of
personal ambition; Truman had worked strenuously to avoid being picked. His
effective running during World War II of the Senate committee to investigate war
industries -- the "Truman Committee" -- had made him a plausible Vice
Presidential candidate. But he was chosen in the end, with the unenthusiastic
agreement of the President, because party leaders considered him safe and
uncontroversial. "As so consistently through the Truman career," Mr. McCullough
notes, "it had been the system of politics, the boss system, that counted in
deciding his fate."

And yet, Mr. McCullough demonstrates, Truman was more than a machine politician
who got lucky. In the Presidency, as throughout his public career, he was
scrupulously honest (even if the people around him sometimes were not). He was
intelligent. He worked hard, read widely and was always willing to listen to
ideas and advice. He was unfailingly kind and generous to those who worked for
him. The same plainness of manner and directness of speech that led so many to
dismiss him as a "little man" helped him win the deep respect, loyalty and
affection of such figures as Winston Churchill, George Marshall and Dean
Acheson. Truman was a man of considerable self-confidence and self-regard. But
unlike most politicians, he was not consumed by ambition and self-importance. He
was always aware, sometimes proudly and sometimes resentfully, that he was a
small-town Midwesterner thrust into a world dominated by wealthier,
better-educated and more polished people than he. Perhaps most important, Mr.
McCullough argues, he was a decent man with common sense. Knowing that about
himself, he relied on his instincts, which were usually (although not always)
correct.

More than most Presidential biographers, Mr. McCullough manages to keep Truman
himself at the center of the story once he enters the White House, rather than
allowing him to become obscured by the complexity of events and institutions
that surrounded him. And he deals openly with Truman's many mistakes and
weaknesses as a leader: his occasional impulsiveness and recklessness, his
stubborn and often misplaced loyalty to old friends and associates, his frequent
inability to mobilize popular sentiment behind his initiatives. That Truman was
so unpopular during so much of his Presidency, that he had so little success in
winning approval of his programs in Congress, were partly because of the
pressures of national and world events over which he had little control; but
these problems were also, Mr. McCullough makes clear, a result of his own limits
as a politician.

Truman was not always politically maladroit, of course. His famous campaign in
1948, in which he astonished everyone except apparently himself by winning
re-election, was one of the most strenuous and effective in modern history. (Mr.
McCullough describes it with great skill.) He successfully shepherded some of
the most jarring and controversial foreign policy initiatives in American
history through a Republican Congress that would not even approve minor
appropriations bills without a struggle. But it was his ability to separate
himself from politics that Mr. McCullough finds most appealing. Truman
maintained a clear sense of the difference between the national interest and his
own; and more than most Presidents, he remembered that the national interest had
the greater importance.

Early in the 1960's, as Truman was watching, somewhat uneasily, the performance
of John Kennedy in the White House, he received a letter from Dean Acheson, his
close friend and former secretary of state, comparing Truman's approach in
office to Kennedy's. The new administration, Acheson complained, was too
preoccupied with image, too driven by its perception of popular opinion.

"This is a terrible weakness," Acheson wrote. "It makes one look at oneself
instead of at the problem. How will I look fielding this hot line drive to
shortstop? This is a good way to miss the ball altogether. I am amazed looking
back to how far you were from this. I don't remember a case where you stopped to
think of the effect on your fortunes -- or the party's for that matter -- of a
decision in foreign policy."

Acheson overstated the case, for Truman and perhaps also for Kennedy. But there
is enough truth in the statement to help explain why David McCullough has found
Harry Truman so appealing a model. In today's tawdry, troubled political world,
readers of this fine biography are likely to feel the same way.



'MY GOD, HE'S IN COLOR!'

"At 8 o'clock on the evening of Jan. 8 of this year," David McCullough recalled,
"I came staggering in from the studio where I work in back of the house and
announced to my wife that I was finished." And when his wife, Rosalee, finally
read "Truman," he added, she was astonished that he had managed to do it in only
10 years.

"I think if I had known what I was getting into, I wouldn't have dared," the
58-year-old author said in a telephone interview from his home on Martha's
Vineyard. Almost 11 years ago, when his publisher and editor suggested he do a
book about Franklin Roosevelt, he replied, "If I were going to do a 20th-century
President, I would do Harry Truman." The comment, he remembered, came "from
somewhere deep inside of me."

"Maybe one of the reasons was because he was the first President I ever saw with
my own eyes," he said. "I was coming out of the St. George Hotel subway station
in Brooklyn. The year was 1956. I was new to New York and still a bit
starry-eyed, and I had begun my first job on a new magazine, Sports Illustrated.
A small crowd had gathered on the sidewalk awaiting the Governor, who was
attending a dinner party. A limousine pulled up and out stepped Averell Harriman
and right behind him was Harry Truman. My first thought was, 'My God, he's in
color!'

"I think I chose to do this book because Truman comes in at a watershed time of
the century in 1945, and because there is something about him as a person that
appealed to me greatly." Truman's was a wonderful American story, Mr. McCullough
observed. "How could any novelist have invented it?" -- LYNN KARPEN

NAME: Harry Truman

LOAD-DATE: June 21, 1992

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo: David McCullough. (William B. McCullough/Simon & Schuster)(pg.
19); "Cannon to right of them, cannon to left of them." A Herblock cartoon,
1948. (Copyright 1948 by Herblock in the Washington Post)(pg. 20)

Drawing: Harry Truman (pg. 1)

TYPE: Biography; Review

                   Copyright 1992 The New York Times Company


                              249 of 281 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                  June 22, 1992, Monday, Late Edition - Final

NEWS SUMMARY

SECTION: Section A; Page 2; Column 1; Metropolitan Desk

LENGTH: 1003 words



International A3-10

2 STEPS BACK IN SOUTH AFRICA
The abyss between the African National Congress and the Government in South
Africa is deepening, and both sides are stepping back, raising questions about
the likelihood of an effective compromise.  A1

MATTERS OF SUBSTANCE IN ISRAEL
The world is watching Israel in the countdown to critical parliamentary
elections, but few of the dominant issues have been discussed by the politicians
in any depth.  A1



HOME TO DOMESTIC TURMOIL
President Yeltsin returned home to face ethnic fighting in the territories on
the borders of Russia.  A3

AIDS AND POPULATION IN AFRICA
A British scientist has predicted that populations in African countries with the
highest rates of infection with the AIDS virus will begin to decline within 20
years.  A8

FEARS RISE OVER KHMER ROUGE
A conference in Japan on reconstructing Cambodia is overshadowed by fears that
the Khmer Rouge could shatter the peace accord.  A5

OPENING ADOPTION IN CHINA
Chinese orphanages are filled with unwanted babies, and new procedures under
consideration would make it easier for foreigners to come to China to adopt
babies.  A5

TAKING BLAME FOR WAR CRIMES
A call has gone out for France to admit to crimes against Jews by the
collaborationist Vichy Government during World War II.  A10
Slovaks seem more reluctant than their leaders to split with Czechs.  A6

The arts feel Iran's conservative backlash.  A5

Coc Nam Journal: Carving a trade route from a battleground.  A4

National A11-15, B7

SENSITIVITY FOR THE NAVY
At the school that trains elite naval aviators, the Navy is giving trainees a
new message on sexual harassment: "Not in Our Navy." If the experimental program
wins the approval in Washington, it will become a obligatory part of training
for all active duty personnel.  A1

The Navy Secretary's name has surfaced in the Iran-contra affair.  A15

SEPARATE AREAS, SEPARATE VIEWS
Roseland and Mount Greenwood, two neighborhoods in Chicago, have many
similarities. But their vastly different racial makeups give residents far
different views on life.  A1

STORYTELLING WITH THE MASTER
To modern storytellers, Jay Hicks is a kind a Leadbelly, an old master who
embodies an unself-conscious tradition. He and his "Jack Tales" have become
legends in western North Carolina.  A1

PEACEFUL TO FULL ROAR
As the Air Force recalls planes from overseas and seeks to expand its share of
air space around the country for training missions, residents of Crestone,
Colo., have seen their quiet town come to resemble war zone.  A12

'LINKAGE' AND FOREIGN AID
Washington Talk: The fight over aid to the former Soviet Union is as much an
issue of domestic politics as one of foreign policy.  A11

A SOLEMN FATHER'S DAY
At the Vietnam Veterans Memorial in Washington, the children of war veterans
remembered their fathers and expressed relief at finally finding other sons and
daughters who understood the experience of losing a father in Vietnam.  A12

CLINTON'S NEW ECONOMIC PLAN
Bill Clinton proposed an economic plan today that called for steep increases in
taxes on the rich and corporations and major revisions and reallocations in
Government spending.  A14

HE'S NO TRUMAN
Increasingly voters are likening Ross Perot to Harry Truman. But in
Independence, Mo., Truman's hometown, the comparison has left many residents
confused and some former associates just plain angry.  A14
New reports, and new attacks, on
Ross Perot's judgment.  A14

Catholic bishops plan to deal aggressively with abuse by priests.  A12

Metropolitan Digest, B1

7 MILLION SINKS, NO DISPOSERS
The reasons why millions of New Yorkers in Manhattan, the Bronx, Brooklyn and
most of Queens continue to lead lives without garbage disposers lives are so
varied, complex and confusing that it is nearly impossible to find a city
official who can explain them.  A1

LIMITED WALL STREET ROMP
Flush with profits that have surpassed the best years of the booming 1980's,
Wall Street is offering glimmers of hope for the battered economies of New York,
New Jersey and Connecticut, but so far has failed to lift the region out of its
recession.  A1

Business Digest, D1

Arts/Entertainment C13-18

"Batman Returns" a box office hit.  C13
Theater: "Flaubert's Latest." C15
Art: "Documenta 9," Germany's enormous exhibition.  C13
Music: Tribute to Coltrane.  C13
Caramoor festival opens.  C13
Shonen Knife.  C16
Ringo Starr.  C18
From the Opera Festival of New Jersey.  C18
Examining rap live.  C18
Translating rage.  C18
JVC Jazz Festival opens.  C18
Tito Puente.  C18
"Jazz for the Fun of It." C18
Dance: Robbins and Martins.  C16
Dance in Review C14
Word and Image:
"Raptor," by Gary Jennings.  C15
Jackie Mason gets serious.  C16

Sports C1-10

Baseball: Mets rally. Really.  C9
Yankee bats are making noise.  C9
Dodgers lose 10th straight.  C9
Brewers stay hot. C9
Basketball: The Dream Team begins assembling.  C4
Colleges: Trying to abide with Title IX. C1
Column: Anderson on Kite C3
Golf: Kite wins Open.  C1
A course with split personality.  C3
Hockey: Time for the arbitrator. C6
Olympics: A solution to Reynolds affair?  C1
U.S. swim team has veteran look.  C4
Joyner-Kersee wins heptathlon.  C7
Sidelines C2
Soccer: Germany downs Sweden.  c6
Tennis: Stich and Graf have a mission.  C6

Obituaries D10

Perry London, psychologist and educator.
Joe Cordell, former chief of Walter Industries.

Editorials/Op-Ed A16-17

Editorials A16
Good health, good politics.
Fair juries, in black and white.
Joyce Purnick: Convention.
Letters A16
Leslie H. Gelb: Hear, O Islam.  A17
William Safire: Baker's guilty knowledge.  A17
Stuart Taylor Jr.: Keep the special counsel.  A17
Arthur Schlesinger Jr.: Reinhold Niebuhr's long shadow.  A17

LOAD-DATE: June 22, 1992

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo: Mandela considers breaking off South African talks. A1
(Associated Press)

TYPE: Summary

                   Copyright 1992 The New York Times Company


                              250 of 281 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                  June 22, 1992, Monday, Late Edition - Final

THE 1992 CAMPAIGN: Candidate's Record;
Bush Aide Assails Perot on Report of Snooping

BYLINE: By STEVEN A. HOLMES,  Special to The New York Times

SECTION: Section A; Page 14; Column 4; National Desk

LENGTH: 545 words

DATELINE: DALLAS, June 21


A top official of President Bush's re-election campaign said today that if
recent reports about the use of private investigators by Ross Perot were true
the billionaire Texan lacked judgment and did not have respect for the country's
laws.

The Bush campaign chairman, Robert M. Teeter, reacted strongly to articles in
The Washington Post today and in the New Republic last week reporting that Mr.
Perot had a penchant for hiring private detectives.

In one case, the newspaper reported that Mr. Perot wanted damaging information
about Mr. Bush when he was Vice President. In another, the magazine said he
wanted to make sure his children stayed out of trouble. Mr. Teeter said in a
telephone interview from Washington that the reports painted a portrait of Mr.
Perot as willing to work outside of established rules of conduct.

Reversal on Senate Panel

Apparently resolving another dispute, Mr. Perot changed his mind and agreed to
provide information to a Senate committee looking into the fate of American
military personnel missing in Southeast Asia, the head of the panel said.

Mr. Teeter said Mr. Perot "went out and had the Vice President of United States
investigated and two of his own kids."

"If true, he doesn't have the judgment or temperament or respect for our laws to
be President," he said.

In a front-page article today, The Washington Post said Mr. Perot became angry
at Mr. Bush in 1986 after the Vice President declined to support a plan to pay
$4.5 million to a British businessman with a questionable background for
information on servicemen missing in Southeast Asia.

Mr. Perot, the article reported, told Vice President Bush, "The world is full of
lions and tigers and rabbits, and you're a rabbit."

Mr. Perot has said he has evidence that Americans were held in Vietnam after the
exchange in 1973. In recent weeks, the Senate Select Committee on P.O.W.-M.I.A.
Affairs has been seeking his testimony on the subject at a hearing, but last
week he told the panel that he had feared an appearance could become a political
circus and that he would not appear. Senators said they were seeking ways to
change Mr. Perot's mind, including as a last resort, issuing a subpoena.

Tonight the committee chairman, John F. Kerry, Democrat of Massachusetts, said
Mr. Perot had agreed to submit a deposition instead of testifying in person.

"I think we're satisfied that is an intitial step that will help us," Mr. Kerry
said on "NBC Nightly News." "We're going to do that as soon as possible,
hopefully in the next days."

Post Was Given Documents

The Washington Post's article today said that after his clash with Mr. Bush, Mr.
Perot had sought through investigations to find evidence that the Vice President
was indecisive or corrupt.

Mr. Perot and his aides gave the investigators' documents to The Post in 1988,
but after examining them, the newspaper did not write any articles.

Mr. Perot's aides do not deny that he turned over the material to the newspaper
four years ago, but his campaign press secretary, James Squires, disputed Mr.
Teeter's remarks today, terming them part of a concerted effort to distort Mr.
Perot's past activities. "Obviously there is no indication that Mr. Perot
violated any laws," he said.

LOAD-DATE: June 22, 1992

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1992 The New York Times Company


                              251 of 281 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                  June 22, 1992, Monday, Late Edition - Final

Vietnam Dead Hailed on Father's Day

BYLINE: Special to The New York Times

SECTION: Section A; Page 12; Column 4; National Desk

LENGTH: 842 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, June 21


Mike McCoy, whose father was killed in action in Vietnam in September 1964, said
he had never celebrated Father's Day until today, when he joined more than 300
other surviving sons and daughters of Vietnam veterans at the memorial to their
fathers.

"This is the first Father's Day card I have ever given," said Mr. McCoy, 34
years old, of Riverside, Calif. His expression was as somber as the overcast
skies and the distant granite wall.

A weekend of Father's Day activities for children of American servicemen killed
in the Vietnam War ended with a ceremony today on the lawn overlooking the
Vietnam Veterans Memorial.  Then many family members walked to the memorial and
placed roses beneath panels bearing their fathers' names. Other events included
a picnic brunch, a banquet at the Sheraton National Hotel in Arlington, Va., a
wreath-laying at the Tomb of the Unknown Soldier and group discussions.

Trophies Were Disparaged

Many participants expressed relief at finally finding other sons and daughters
who understood the often stigmatizing experience of losing a father in the
Vietnam War.

"I once brought one of my father's trophies to school to show the class and
someone told me my dad was a baby killer," said Kathy Korth, who had come from
her home in Germany to join her two sisters, one from Connecticut and the other
from Idaho.

The Father's Day weekend was organized by Sons and Daughters in Touch, a group
formed in 1989 by Tony Cordero, who wanted to meet other people, like himself,
whose fathers were killed in Vietnam. The organization began with his telephone
call to the Friends of the Vietnam Veterans Memorial three years ago.

"I asked if there was any organization for the children of vets," said Mr.
Cordero, 30, of Portland, Ore. "I was told no, but the woman with whom I spoke
put me in touch with her daughter, who had also lost a dad to the war. From
there, the network grew by word of mouth."

In the three years, the organization brought together more and more surviving
sons and daughters to share common experiences.

"Until this weekend, we did not know anyone else whose father had died in the
war," said Ms. Korth, who was 4 when her father, William D. Petersen, an Army
officer, was killed in 1967.

"I have a vivid memory of that long black car driving up to the house," Ms.
Korth said. "I was sitting on the corner of the couch. We saw the car drive up
and my mother stood up and said 'No, it can't be,' but we knew what it meant."

Michael Cruden, who was 3 when his father, Staff Sgt. Donald Cruden of the
Marines, was killed in an ambush in December 1967, said he had also been angered
by the reaction of some people to his father's military service.

"After my father died, my mother received crank phone calls from people saying
he got what he deserved and he shouldn't have been there anyway," Mr. Cruden
said.

Today was the fourth Father's Day that Mr. Cruden had visited the Memorial, but
it was the first that he was able to share with other sons and daughters of
servicemen.

"It's like I have a bunch of other fathers," Mr. Cruden said. "They taught me to
be proud of my dad."

Pride was a common feeling at the memorial today.

'My Father Was a Hero'

"My father was a hero then and he is a hero today," said Nina McCoy, Mr. McCoy's
37-year-old sister, who lives in Wrightwood, Calif. "I don't care what other
people say. I'm here to show veterans that we are proud of them."

Ms. McCoy noted that unlike her, many children had no memories of their fathers.

"I remember my father kicking a football higher than our two-story house," she
said. "I remember he used to wear Levis and he loved to laugh and to dance. Most
people here don't have any memories like that."

Ms. McCoy's father, who had survived a World War II prison camp and was
decorated in three wars, was killed while serving as an adviser in South
Vietnam. She said her mother had not often talked about her father after his
death. Others at the service said the same about their mothers.

"My mom just has one tiny photograph of my father," Ms. McCoy said. "Everything
else is packed away. Until this weekend, we never talked about him because it
was too painful."

Travel Money Is Donated

Mr. Cordero said veterans' groups chipped in when families needed help paying
the travel fares to attend the weekend activities. The Vietnam Veterans
Association of California alone raised more than $10,000, he said.

Wayne Jones, 36, of The Woodlands, Tex., who visited the memorial for the first
time this weekend, sat in front of his father's inscribed name and leafed
through a scrapbook filled with photos and memorabilia of his father, Chief
Warrant Officer Wayne E. Jones, an Army pilot whose plane crashed in August
1967.

"This is all I have of my father," he said holding up a scrap book opened to the
telegram that informed the family of Warrant Officer Jones's death.

"It's all that remains," Mr. Jones said. "But I know his spirit is with me every
day."

And with that, he shut the book.

LOAD-DATE: June 22, 1992

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1992 The New York Times Company


                              252 of 281 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                  June 22, 1992, Monday, Late Edition - Final

U.N. Official for Cambodia Pressures the Khmer Rouge

BYLINE: By DAVID E. SANGER,  Special to The New York Times

SECTION: Section A; Page 5; Column 1; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 713 words

DATELINE: TOKYO, Monday, June 22


The chief United Nations official for Cambodia today told signers of a peace
accord that the Khmer Rouge were "regrettably violating the agreement" by
refusing to disarm and were creating "an obstacle to all United Nations
operations" in the country.

The comments, by Yasushi Akashi, came at a 32-nation conference aimed at
obtaining large financial pledges to rebuild the Cambodia's devastated
infrastructure and repratriate more than 350,000 refugees. Mr. Akashi's
statements were among the strongest yet in his recent campaign to force the
Khmer Rouge to abide by the accord, which was signed in Paris in October. The
conference, however, has been overshadowed by increasing violence in the
Cambodian countryside, most of which is attributed to the Khmer Rouge, whose
control of the country in the 1970's resulted in the deaths of perhaps a million
Cambodians.

The Khmer Rouge are one of four factions that signed the accord, agreeing to
disarm and allow the country to move toward free elections in 1993.

During the ministerial session that opened this morning at a hotel here, Japan
offered $150 to $200 million toward the reconstruction effort, or a quarter to a
third of the $600 million that the Secretary General of the United Nations,
Boutros Boutros-Ghali, said was needed immediately.

Japanese officials said the aid would be offered without conditions. But other
Japanese and Western diplomats suggested that Japan's contribution, and that of
other nations, were likely to be contingent on the successful completion of the
second phase of the peace accord, in which all four factions in the Cambodian
civil war place their soldiers under the supervision of the United Nations and
turn in their arms. The first phase created the Supreme National Council, which
is led by Prince Norodom Sihanouk and includes the leadership of the factions.

In a surprise development this morning, the nominal leader of the Khmer Rouge,
Khieu Sampan, attended in the conference. Urged to attend by the Japanese, he
sat expressionless as Mr. Akashi, using words that were somewhat toned down from
his prepared text, accused the Khmer Rouge of undercutting the peace process.

Assurances Are Sought

Mr. Khieu Sampan has insisted that the Khmer Rouge will not abide by the peace
treaty, which they signed, until they receive guarantees that Vietnam has
withdrawn all of its troops from Cambodia. Vietnam, which ousted the Khmer Rouge
in 1979 and installed the current Government of Prime Minister Hun Sen, says the
last of its troops left in 1989. Most diplomats in Cambodia agree that there is
no trace of the Vietnamese Army.

For Japan, the long-scheduled conference comes at a crucial time. Last week, the
Japanese Parliament passed a bill that will allow its military to join United
Nations peacekeeping forces in noncombat roles. This morning, Prime Minister
Kiichi Miyazawa told the conference that "we will hereafter strive to dispact
our personnel" to Cambodia" but said that the country must also take a lead in
the humanitarian and diplomatic sides of the dispute.

An unresolved question about the conference is how much pressure Japan, the
United States and Mr. Akashi will be able to place on the Khmer Rouge to relent.
Although the United States forbids direct contact between American officials and
Khmer Rouge leaders, senior Japanese officials spent the weekend meeting with
Mr. Khieu Samphan and Son Sen, the Khmer Rouge military leader, in an effort to
bring them back in line with the treaty. Mr. Khieu Samphan said nothing when he
left the morning session of the talks.

"The fact that the Khmer Rouge felt it was necessary to come to Tokyo rather
than boycott this conference is a sign that they are fearful of being cut out,"
a Japanese diplomat said. "They don't have the kind of power they once did."

Japanese officials suspect that the refusal to disarm is a bluff by the Khmer
Rouge to win concessions, especially part of the international funds. Countries
like China, which have surreptiously helped supply the rebels in the past, have
greatly reduced their support for the group. Eventually, Japanese officials say,
the Khmer Rouge leadership will understand that they have no choice but to
follow the terms of the Paris treaty.

LOAD-DATE: June 22, 1992

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo: Prince Norodom Sihanouk, left, the Cambodian head of state,
meeting yesterday in Tokyo with Khieu Samphan, the nominal leader of the Khmer
Rouge, before a meeting with leaders of the factions controlling Cambodia to
discuss the country's reconstruction. (Associated Press)

                   Copyright 1992 The New York Times Company


                              253 of 281 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                  June 22, 1992, Monday, Late Edition - Final

Coc Nam Journal;
Where Shells Once Whistled, Trade Now Hums

BYLINE: By HENRY KAMM,  Special to The New York Times

SECTION: Section A; Page 4; Column 3; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 890 words

DATELINE: COC NAM, Vietnam


The towns and villages that Vietnam vowed 13 years ago never to rebuild are
humming with more life than ever before.

Caravans of porters wind along the mountain paths that link Vietnam and China,
bent under huge bales of cloth, tools and household utensils, sacks of dried
fish, eels, turtles and frogs or the many herbs and leaves that people on both
sides use to try to cure their ills.

Villagers have not just put up shacks of caked mud or bamboo and thatch; many
have made the ultimate investment that ordinary people in Southeast Asia can
make: They have put their savings into brick, stone and cement. Over the
entrance doors, they proudly announce the year of construction: 1989 appears to
be the earliest.

Leveled by the Chinese

In 1979, after the Chinese Army poured south from the mountains of Guangxi
Province to punish Vietnam for having invaded Cambodia, this region and its
principal town, Lang Son, were among the most devastated in a war that was brief
but destructive.

The ruins of Lang Son, about 10 miles farther from the border, could be visited
shortly after the fighting ended, but officials then said the border area
remained a forbidden military zone, devastated and heavily mined. Leftover mines
remain a danger to this day.

After the Chinese intrusion, the official policy, stated in Lang Son and Hanoi,
the capital, was that Beijing had proved that it could never be trusted to let
Vietnam live in peace. Consequently, while some men might return in daylight to
till their fields, most of the population would be resettled out of reach of
China's guns, and Lang Son and the border villages would be left in ruins.

Make Trade, Not War

Nghiem Sang, whose fine house bears last year's date, says he hopes that peace
is here to stay. "We trust what the leaders say," said the 67-year-old member of
the Nung minority, which has long inhabited both sides of the border. He laughed
when reminded that leaders change. "We trust that people prefer to trade rather
than fight," he said.

Mr. Sang's house, whose ground floor serves as a tea shop, proves his
confidence. It stands right on what villagers said was the main invasion route
in 1979. The fighting left this border village a mass of wreckage, which is what
the inhabitants found when they moved back, starting in 1989.

Coc Nam now consists largely of rows of huts and houses lining the unpaved trade
route. Up and down, from dawn to dusk, ply porters bearing their loads on bamboo
yokes, ancient trucks whose continued roadworthiness belies their discouraging
appearance and battered motorcycles of Soviet manufacture, each bearing more
passengers and freight than their designers intended.

The noisy traffic in this remote corner bears witness to the new pragmatism of
what has always been one of the most dogmatic Communist leaderships.

Long before the collapse of the Soviet Union, Vietnam's principal ally, hastened
normalization with China, bustling trade across the border had been quietly
tolerated by both sides. Both Governments even collected duties on trade that
they officially refused to acknowledge.

Officials concede that the remoteness of the region and the unofficial nature of
the trade offered customs officers an opportunity to supplement their meager
earnings, perhaps $20 a month. "They collect a lot for the Government," said Bui
Ta Khanh, a provincial official, with a laugh. "For the rest, we can't tell."

The bustling trade also shows how actively even the northern Vietnamese, who
have lived since 1945 in an atmosphere hostile to private enterprise, have taken
the Government at its word now that Vietnam, following the Soviet example, has
allowed trade for private gain. What comes and goes across this porous border
feeds strictly private commercial circuits.

Those who use the motorcycle taxis are nickel-and-dime dealers who sell their
imports from village market stands.

But bolts of textiles and crates of electric fans or other appliances are
shipped on trucks chartered by factory owners or wholesalers, something new in
northern Vietnam. Mainly women of domineering presence and powerful voices, the
wholesalers stand by the trucks with watchful eyes on the loading.

The wages paid to bearers, toiling like pack animals in scorching heat
interrupted briefly by drenching downpours, reflect the pervasive poverty. For
carrying loads of about 200 pounds over mountainous, muddy terrain for a couple
of miles, a porter earns 20,000 dong, or well below $2. Two trips a day is the
average.

Smiling With One Eye

Because of Chinese road repairs, tourists have to walk through a no-man's land
on the main road leading to the Friendship Gate, which was built in the years
when North Vietnam was at war with the United States and Chinese arms flowed
here under its arch.

The arch now stands a few hundred yards inside China, a fact resented by
Vietnamese, who said that once the ground on which it stands marked the border.

Despite the new accommodation, interviews with senior officials in Hanoi made
clear that Vietnam remains far from feeling friendship for its northern
neighbor. All conceded that it was the loss of Vietnam's powerful Soviet ally
that necessitated the relaxation of tensions.

"We smile at them with one eye, but the other remains vigilant," one official
said.

LOAD-DATE: June 22, 1992

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo: Vietnamese border towns devastated in the 1979 Chinese punitive
incursion are showing signs of life. A caravan of porters entered Coc Nam
carrying a wide variety of trade goods from China. (Henry Kamm/The New York
Times)

Map of Vietnam showing location of Coc Nam.

                   Copyright 1992 The New York Times Company


                              254 of 281 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                  June 22, 1992, Monday, Late Edition - Final

Navy Chief Is Mentioned In Weinberger Charges

BYLINE: By ERIC SCHMITT,  Special to The New York Times

SECTION: Section A; Page 15; Column 5; National Desk

LENGTH: 561 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, June 21


Navy Secretary H. Lawrence Garrett 3d, already embroiled in an inquiry into the
assault of 26 women at a convention of naval aviators last year, has now seen
his name surface in a larger scandal: the Iran-contra affair.

Former Defense Secretary Caspar W. Weinberger was indicted last week on felony
charges, including lying to Congress about the existence of personal diary
entries involving his discussions with other officials about arms sales to Iran.
The indictment twice mentions Mr. Garrett, who served as the Pentagon's senior
lawyer from February 1986 to August 1987 and accompanied Mr. Weinberger when
Congressional investigators questioned the Pentagon chief in 1987.

The Navy Secretary, through a spokesman, declined to comment last week about his
knowledge of the diaries or whether he had been interviewed by the independent
prosecuter investigating the Iran-contra affair.

"The matter is in litigation, and it would be inappropriate to comment on it at
this time," said Comdr. Bill Harlow, Mr. Garrett's spokesman.

Involvement Seen as Unlikely

Friends and former colleagues say it is very unlikely that Mr. Garrett, a
52-year-old former counsel in the Reagan White House who specialized in ethics,
knew about the diaries or committed any wrongdoing. Even his critics say they
doubt that Mr. Garrett, a decorated Vietnam War seaplane officer, wittingly
participated in any cover-up.

There is no evidence or suggestion that the independent prosecuter's office is
pursuing any charges against Mr. Garrett, who has been the Navy Secretary since
1989.

The indictment says Mr. Weinberger instructed Mr. Garrett's office to produce
notes and diaries that satisfied the committee's request for documents
pertaining to what Mr. Weinberger might have known about the Iran-contra case.

Former senior Pentagon officials said Mr. Garrett probably assigned the task of
researching the extent of Mr. Weinberger's private notes to a junior lawyer on
his staff.

Central Evidence in Case

The diary notes, which Mr. Weinberger turned over to the Library of Congress in
1988, are the central and most hotly disputed evidence in the case and have
never been made public.

Mr. Garrett's name has also been mentioned in the Navy investigation of about 70
Navy and Marine aviators implicated in assaults on women at a convention of a
group of retired and active-duty naval aviators in Las Vegas last year. Mr.
Garrett was on a terrace near a hotel hallway where the assaults took place, but
he has said he saw no offensive activity.

The indictment of Mr. Weinberger said that on March 11, 1987, the Defense
Secretary, accompanied by Mr. Garrett, met with lawyers from the Senate select
committee investigating the affair.

According to a Senate committee staff memorandum included in the indictment,
"While Weinberger did not expressly deny that he kept diaries or dictated his
thoughts about a day's events, with these comments he clearly left the
impression that he did not make such notes or recordings."

On June 17, 1987, members of the House and Senate committees investigating the
Iran-contra case took testimony from Mr. Weinberger at his Pentagon office.
During the deposition, the indictment said, Mr. Weinberger concealed the
existence of his daily notes and the extent of notes he had taken in meetings in
1985 and 1986.

NAME: H. Lawrence Garrett 3d

LOAD-DATE: June 22, 1992

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo: Navy Secretary H. Lawrence Garrett 3d, was mentioned in the
latest Iran-contra indictment. (George Tames)

TYPE: Biography

                   Copyright 1992 The New York Times Company


                              255 of 281 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                  June 23, 1992, Tuesday, Late Edition - Final

$880 Million Is Set for Cambodia, But Khmer Rouge Pose a Threat

BYLINE: By DAVID E. SANGER,  Special to The New York Times

SECTION: Section A; Page 2; Column 3; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 1000 words

DATELINE: TOKYO, June 22


The nations that served as architects of the Cambodia peace process committed
over $880 million to reconstructing the country today, but said the effort could
collapse unless Pol Pot, the leader of the Khmer Rouge forces, agrees to disarm
and allow United Nations forces to deploy throughout the country.

The warning came at the end of a 32-nation conference here on reconstructing
Cambodia, one that quickly turned from the details of financing the rebuilding
of the country to a broad effort to keep the fragile peace from unwinding. But
senior officials of the Khmer Rouge attending the conference refused to commit
themselves to carrying out their obligations under the peace accord unless a
long series of new demands were met.

Instead, they simply watched in stoic silence as representatives of a host of
countries harshly criticized the faction for threatening to plunge the country
back into civil war and said Khmer Rouge-controlled parts of the country would
suffer most if the United Nations transitional authority in Cambodia was blocked
from dispensing aid.

"There is no peace without reconstruction," said Yasushi Akashi, who heads the
16,000-member United Nations transitional forces in Cambodia. "But there is no
reconstruction without peace."

The final declaration of the ministerial conference expressed "serious concern"
over "the refusal of one party to allow the deployment" of United Nations forces
throughout the country and called for "timely implementation" of the Paris
accord.

Japan Seeks a Leading Role

Despite the conflict over the Khmer Rouge, Japanese officials, who are making
the Cambodia peace process into a test of their ability to take the political
lead in an Asian crisis, declared that the ministerial conference that ended
tonight was a success. The $880 million in pledges made by more than a score of
nations today -- including $150 million to $200 million from Japan and $135
million from the United States -- was far above the $600 million that the United
Nations Secretary General, Boutros Boutros-Ghali, said was needed to complete
the first phase of rebuilding the country.

"It exceeds the very urgent needs we have identified," said William H. Draper
2d, the administrator of the United Nations Development Program.

The funds will go toward the resettlement of more than 350,000 refugees awaiting
repatriation from border camps in Thailand, the restoration of long-destroyed
ports, roads and railroads, and a last-ditch effort to halt the disintegration
of Cambodia's civil service, particularly teachers and health workers. Many are
paid little or nothing now, and are leaving their jobs.

The other large commitments came from France, which offered $57 million;
Australia, which offered $40 million, and Sweden, $38 million. A number of
international institutions -- including the Asian Development Bank, the World
Bank, the United Nations Development Program and the European Community --
offered a total of roughly $250 million.

The conference was overshadowed, however, by the challenge posed by the Khmer
Rouge, who controlled the country in the 1970's and were responsible for the
deaths of many Cambodians in a fanatical effort to build a wholly agrarian
society; estimates of the number of victims have ranged from hundreds of
thousands to more than a million.

U.N. Helicopter Attacked

The guerrilla group's power to disrupt was underscored by an attack on a United
Nations helicopter over the weekend, for which the Cambodian Government blamed
Khmer Rouge forces. There were injuries but no deaths.

At a news conference tonight, Prince Norodom Sihanouk, who was restored as the
head of state under the peace accord, charged that the Khmer Rouge's "final aim
is to take power again by military means." He said they were trying to sabotage
the peace process before it leads to national elections next year. "They cannot
understand democracy," Prince Sihanouk said, "only totalitarianism."

Under the second phase of the Paris peace plan, all four factions should be
entering United Nations-sponsored camps for disarmament and repatriation into
society as civilians. While several other factions have begun the process, the
Khmer Rouge have said they are refusing to disarm until there is proof that the
Vietnamese Army, which ousted them from Phnom Penh in 1979, had left the
country. They also maintain that the aid flowing through United Nations hands is
propping up the Government of Hun Sen, who was installed by Vietnam.

Mr. Akashi said today that he would insure that funds were distributed "in an
equitable manner" to areas controlled by each of the four factions. But he also
issued what sounded like a warning that Cambodians under the Khmer Rouge's
control would suffer the most for the refusal to comply with the peace accord.

Curbs by Khmer Rouge

"The Khmer Rouge has not allowed any freedom of movement for United Nations
military or civilians in areas they control," he said. "And it is very hard for
us to distribute aid and assistance under we determine needs in those areas."

Some Cambodia experts have suggested that the Khmer Rouge is engaged in a
negotiating ploy to obtain funds and more influence in the Supreme National
Council, headed by Prince Sihanouk and made up of all the warring factions. But
Mr. Akashi said in a brief conversation tonight: "I think it is more than just a
tactical move. It is fundamental. It goes back to their deep suspicion of
foreigners, of Vietnamese and of Prince Sihanouk."

Mr. Khieu Sampan, a veteran of the Pol Pot Government of the 1970's who has been
living under guard in Phnom Penh since dodging a lynch mob there in December,
seemed unmovable during the talks, perhaps because he was not authorized to make
compromises.

"Khieu Sampan is a figurehead," Prince Sihanouk said. "And he cannot take a
decision tonight until he reports to Pol Pot." Mr. Pol Pot is believed to be
hiding in the mountains in territory held by the Khmer Rouge.

LOAD-DATE: June 23, 1992

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1992 The New York Times Company


                              256 of 281 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                  June 23, 1992, Tuesday, Late Edition - Final

Cold War Past, Germans Ask Why Army Is Still Necessary

BYLINE: By CRAIG R. WHITNEY,  Special to The New York Times

SECTION: Section A; Page 1; Column 1; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 1637 words

DATELINE: BONN, June 19


With the cold war over and the Soviet Union gone, Germany sometimes seems unsure
whether it needs an army at all any more.

The political consensus that made Germany, as a member of NATO, a bulwark
against the Soviet threat for more than 35 years has been fraying at the edges
since the threat disappeared.  For some of those in uniform, many of them
draftees, the question is why they have to serve at all.

German military leaders are trying to define new missions now that the old
threat is gone, but German political parties and leaders have not yet decided
how the country should deal with the new problems that have replaced the old
Soviet threat -- civil war and millions of refugees in the Balkans, and disorder
in other parts of the old Communist bloc.

"The soldiers don't know what their duty is any more," said Manfred Opel, a
former military officer who is a member of the Social Democratic opposition in
the German Parliament.

Constitution Amended

The uncertainty is shaped by German history. The victorious Allies of World War
II disarmed the Germans completely after 1945. But with the cold war, the
Western allies encouraged West Germany to join the NATO alliance in 1955, and to
rearm.

The West German Constitution of 1949 was amended to allow "forces for defense,"
whose mission was limited to protecting German territory from the threat of
armed attack by the Warsaw Pact. Now, after unification, that threat is gone,
and so is the only postwar rationale for German defense forces.

"Our mission was defense of the national territory of the country from a threat
that was real," said Rear Adm. Ulrich A. Hundt, commander of the German armed
forces' leadership center in Coblenz. "We now have to define our national
interests in a new way and understand how our army helps to defend those
interests."

Germany's armed forces, like America's and Britain's, are being reduced in the
new, post-Soviet era -- from 500,000 to 370,000 by the end of 1994, a process
that poses its own problems for morale.

The German defense budget has been frozen at its current level of about $34
billion a year, with a goal of $28.4 billion in savings over the next 12 years.
Many officers fear the cutbacks will deprive the armed forces of the supersonic
European-built "Fighter 90" aircraft they had hoped would replace Germany's
aging fleet of American F-4 Phantoms, although they recognize that their
neighbors, too, are reducing their defense budgets.

Seeking a Purpose

But in Germany, there is a qualitative difference, as Lieut. Gen. Helge Hansen,
Chief of Staff of the German Army, put it in an interview. "Here, the question
isn't how much is enough," he said. "Here, the question is if, or if not."

This political disorientation may be caused by a larger question that has not
yet been clearly answered: What is Germany's national purpose after
reunification? Chancellor Helmut Kohl has attempted to define it as the
integration of Europe, and the preservation of free, democratic values in close
cooperation with its partners, now seeking to develop a clearer European defense
identity as well.

Most Germans support the abstract idea of Europe, but many don't seem to
understand how their own armed forces fit into the picture.

"In 1984, 75 percent of the West German population was convinced that Germany
needed the armed forces, but in the beginning of the 90's, only 47 percent are,"
said Renate Kocher, from the Allensbach public opinion institute, at a military
seminar organized by Welt am Sonntag in Berlin earlier this month.

Some See No Need for an Army

In the latest poll her organization took on the question, 42 percent thought
Germany could get along without armed forces, and 11 percent were undecided, she
said. About 20 percent of Germans are opposed in principle to armed forces,
about the same proportion as 30 years ago, according to Allensbach.

One consequence of this change is that the number of German draft-age young men
who claim the constitutional right to alternative civilian service -- 151,212
last year -- is about the same as the number who must be taken in to keep the
armed forces at planned levels.

"When I joined the army," one young private at the 15th Armored Brigade's base
in Coblenz said the other day, "three quarters of the graduating class in my
high school were going to do alternative service instead."

Talks with commanders and ordinary German soldiers, both professionals and
draftees, produce an impression of confusion, sometimes mixed with resentment,
that is not unlike some of the traumas the United States Army went through after
the Vietnam War. It is no clearer to German soldiers than it is to other German
citizens what their mission should be now that there is no more overt threat.

Opinions Vary

Martin Schneider, a 22-year-old tank gunner in the 15th Armored Brigade, said:
"I volunteered because I think it's simply essential that there should be
soldiers who will defend the fatherland. A lot of my friends say they are
objectors only because they make more money in alternative service than
soldiers."

Asked whether he thought Germany could ever become involved in United Nations
peacekeeping missions in the Balkans, Sgt. Thomas Krautkramer answered: "Why
should German soldiers intervene in another country's civil war? If we battle
with the Serbs in Bosnia, they'll just think we're their enemies. That won't
help establish peace at all."

But Staff Sgt. Volker Goller, 32, objected to the idea that German soldiers
would be unwelcome in the Balkans because they had been there before, as
aggressors and occupiers in Slovenia and Croatia during the war.

"I think the world should stop harping on the notion that Germany caused two
world wars," he said. "There's another generation now. People should not keep
pushing us down with this charge."

In the eastern part of the country, which as the German Democratic Republic
belonged to the Warsaw Pact until reunification in 1990, the population saw the
armed forces as the underpinning of the old regime. As a result, relations
between the army and the local population have to be transformed.

The number of people bearing arms in the east has been sharply reduced, with
only about 6,000 of the 65,000 "National People's Army" officers and
non-commissioned officers being taken into the federal armed forces.

According to General Hansen, many German professional soldiers are still nursing
the wounds inflicted by the long political hesitation in Bonn last year over
whether and how Germany should come to the aid of the United States, Britain and
France in the Persian Gulf war. For the first time since German unification,
Germany's principal allies were looking for support in military operations that
were clearly out of the NATO area.

The German Government provided billions of dollars, and the army provided
considerable logistical support for American troops who were transferred with
their equipment from Germany to Saudi Arabia. But Chancellor Kohl and most other
German political leaders decided that German soldiers could not take part in the
military operations that expelled Iraqi forces from Kuwait, because there was no
constitutional basis for German participation.

Gulf War Attitudes

"Subjectively, our allies had the feeling that we were looking for reasons not
to participate," General Hansen said. "They diagnosed our attitude as
malingering or even cowardice before the enemy, and of course for a military
force, that is very damaging. But we have to live with it, and to make clear
that these were political decisions that we had to support, and work on the
weaknesses which they revealed."

From the experience of the gulf war, he said, it is clear to German military
leaders that if they are to be sent off on peacekeeping missions in the future,
the constitutional basis for them has to be clear. A military mission, he said,
"can be politically disputable, but not constitutionally doubtful; otherwise,
people would say that the Constitution was being violated, and the German armed
forces were taking part in it."

This kind of demand from soldiers for a clear mission and full political support
for it before they climb into their airplanes and suit up with their military
gear will sound familiar to Americans who heard similar demands from American
senior officers nursing their wounds after Vietnam.

But Inspector General Klaus Naumann, the senior officer of all the German armed
forces, warned commanders at a meeting in Leipzig last month not to let their
soldiers become too "whiny" or "soft."

"The armed forces feel badly treated by the Government and the politicians," Mr.
Opel said.

Mr. Kohl's Government, like the opposition, believes that some kind of
clarification is necessary before German forces could accept such missions,
since, except for self-defense, the German armed forces can be used only as
expressly permitted in the Constitution, according to Article 87A.

In a sort of test mission, the Germans sent about 150 military medics to
Cambodia this spring, to help care for members of the United Nations mission
there, but it is not yet clear whether the German Parliament would muster a
consensus supporting involvement in more dangerous places.

The German military, at any rate, is planning for the possibility. "I can say
very concretely that we will be prepared, from next year on, to participate in
U.N. peacekeeping missions, from next year on, and we are making concrete
preparations for this," General Hansen said.

General Hansen, like most other soldiers of his generation, did not believe
German soldiers could serve in the Balkans, even in United Nations peacekeeping
missions. "We're wanted as tourists there," he said, "but not as soldiers."

LOAD-DATE: June 23, 1992

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1992 The New York Times Company


                              257 of 281 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                  June 23, 1992, Tuesday, Late Edition - Final

ON BASEBALL;
Again, Maddox Gets Himself in Position

BYLINE: By Claire Smith

SECTION: Section B; Page 11; Column 1; Sports Desk

LENGTH: 884 words


Bill White, the National League president who will leave office March 31, has
never been at ease with his crown.

Maybe that's because White is in a job he thought he had to take, for the cause,
if you will, on behalf of all the minorities he figured would be shut out if he,
the first black to be offered so lofty a position, had said no.

Since saying yes, though, White admittedly has not been comfortable working in a
bureaucracy. He has chafed at authority and in relations with journalists,
making for three and a half years of obvious disillusionment. The man who has
frankly stated that the league wanted a black president now states a desire that
the job be given to someone else, choosing not to seek a second term.

The league and White should learn a lesson from this disheartening experience.
The owners and the incumbent should advise any would-be successor that the
candidate should truly want the job, not take it because of a noble obligation
to assume the role. For the frustrations built into the often thankless and
somewhat nebulous position demand of its holder a greater capacity and tolerance
than the reluctant should be asked to give.

How many viable candidates the league and its search committee have has not been
revealed. Two names have, however, surfaced.

Bob Watson, the former major league first baseman and now an accomplished
assistant general manager with the Houston Astros, is a man that White has
publicly championed as a possible successor. Watson has recently stated,
however, that he wants to continue preparing to be a general manager. But,
Watson has also said, if he were called upon by owners to succeed White, he
would do it.

Then there is Garry Maddox, the former Gold Glove winner who was known as the
Secretary of Defense for his prowess in center field and who is now a successful
Philadelphia businessman. Maddox, a former San Francisco Giant and Philadelphia
Phillie, is not waiting to be drafted. He very much wants to be the president of
the league and has publicly said so.

Maddox has consulted with both a past league president (Chub Feeney) and a man
familiar with the position (Bill Giles, son of the former league president
Warren Giles as well as owner of the Phillies and Maddox's former employer).

So far, Maddox says, there is nothing in the parameters described by those men
that he believes would disqualify him.

"Bill says that the main thing they're interested in is having the National
League president be an ambassador, someone who will promote the game, the league
and its interests," Maddox said. "They also want someone who is capable of
receiving instructions from the owners and go about carrying out the decisions
made."

Maddox, who will turn 43 in September, says he has the energy, the time and the
desire to do all of that, and more.

Can he run an organization?

"I started a company -- World Wide Concessions -- the year before I retired and
turned it into a multimillion-dollar business," Maddox asserted. "That teaches
you a lot about responsibility, especially in these times. People's livelihoods
depend on you."

Can he survive the politics of major league baseball or, more important, brace
for questions of race and the accompanying inference that he will be given
special consideration because he is black?

"The way I see it, you can spend your time butting heads or you can do your job
and make some progress," Maddox said.

Maddox need only point to his own history to show that he has had that special
focus to get the job done. He served in Vietnam but wasn't broken by the
experience. Rather, he returned to the United States and rebuilt a career that
was derailed by war. And he built a reputation for being a leader on the field,
a distinguished force in the clubhouse and in his community.

So he looks past questions designed to trip him up, concentrating on the
positive, envisioning how to approach problems much the way he envisioned how to
approach the line drives that somehow never dropped in the territory he
patrolled. His first focus, Maddox said, would be in an area that seems dear to
a growing number of baseball executives: how to cultivate new fans in what many
now acknowledge to be the forgotten regions of the country, the inner cities.

Maddox believes he has the wherewithal to pull together coalitions with
corporations to make inroads into these communities.

Maddox knows he would have to be a presence in other areas. For a league
president also serves as a judge in player-umpire disputes and participates in
labor negotiations, not only with his league's umpires but with players.

"I am aware of the issues confronting baseball; I know the owners and the
players and know where the lines are drawn," said Maddox, who joined in
negotiations during the acrimonious 50-day strike in 1981 and, ironically, sat
across the table from Feeney.

Maddox said that, as president, he would make a strong push to be invited by the
owners to participate in the process.

Will he be given a chance? Well, history shows that no Secretary of Defense has
ever gone on to become President of the United States. President of the National
League? Perhaps, if Maddox keeps the focus, and the faith that someone who
really wants the job will be deemed capable of doing it well.


NAME: Garry Maddox

LOAD-DATE: June 23, 1992

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo: Garry Maddox says he very much wants to be president of the
National League. (Associated Press)

TYPE: Biography

                   Copyright 1992 The New York Times Company


                              258 of 281 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 June 24, 1992, Wednesday, Late Edition - Final

THE 1992 CAMPAIGN: Undeclared Candidate;
For First Time, Perot Finds Himself on Defensive

BYLINE: By STEVEN A. HOLMES,  Special to The New York Times

SECTION: Section A; Page 1; Column 2; National Desk

LENGTH: 1076 words

DATELINE: DALLAS, June 23


The budding Presidential campaign of Ross Perot today found itself for the first
time struggling to defend the past behavior of the Dallas billionaire in the
face of a growing attack from President Bush and his supporters.

Indicative of the concern in Mr. Perot's camp, the Dallas billionaire today
scheduled an interview for Wednesday morning on the NBC News program "Today."
The appearance will come 24 hours after his top lieutenant appeared on the same
show to respond to news reports about Mr. Perot's use of private investigators
to dig up damaging information on his enemies, including Mr. Bush.

Mr. Perot has also scheduled a news conference after a campaign rally in
Annapolis, Md., on Wednesday. If he holds the question-and-answer session with
reporters, it will be the first in nearly a month. He has scheduled such
sessions after other rallies but all have been called off.

Aides to Mr. Perot said the "Today" interview had been in the works. NBC
officials said they had been trying to arrange an interview for some time but
that Mr. Perot agreed only today.

President Bush has begun an aggressive attack on Mr. Perot, both personally and
through surrogates. In an interview to be broadcast on Friday night on the ABC
News program "20/20," Mr. Bush described news reports about Mr. Perot's
investigations as "beyond the pale."

"I am sick about it if it's true, and I think the American people will reject
that kind of tactic to go around investigating the family of the President of
the United States, or then Vice President, or another American," Mr. Bush said.

Vice President Dan Quayle joined the attack on Monday, when he referred to Mr.
Perot's "compulsion to investigate people" and remarked: "Imagine having the
I.R.S., the F.B.I. and the C.I.A. under his control. Who would be investigated
next?"

'Penchant for Skulduggery'

Other Republicans have also tried to portray Mr. Perot as unstable, dangerous or
unsuitable to be President. Bob Martinez, head of drug policy for the Bush
Administration, said in a speech before the nation's mayors today in Houston
that "this nation didn't gain a hard-won victory in the cold war only to
surrender its constitutional liberties to a secretive computer salesman with a
penchant for skulduggery."

In an interview in the Wednesday issue of The Washington Post, Mr. Perot accused
the Republican Party of a "dirty tricks" campaign that led to the recent news
reports.

"This has nothing to do with fact," he was quoted as saying. "It is
election-year fantasy carefully crafted by the Republicans."

Even as the Perot campaign organization seeks to fight back, explanations of Mr.
Perot's past activities have not laid the matter to rest.

Thomas W. Luce 3d, Mr. Perot's longtime lawyer and the chairman of his petition
drive, called the recent reports "character assassination" in an interview here
today. But he said he could not explain why Mr. Perot turned over his
investigative findings about a friend of Mr. Bush's to The Washington Post
rather than to legal authorities.

The transaction that Mr. Perot investigated involved the donation of 100,000
acres of land owned by the Pennzoil Company to the United States Forest Service
in 1982. In return, Pennzoil, whose chairman, Hugh Liedtke, was a former partner
of Mr. Bush's in the oil business in the 1950's, claimed a $48 million tax
deduction.

No Attempt to Discredit

Mr. Perot turned over material on the land transaction to The Washington Post in
1987, but Mr. Luce said today that he was not trying to discredit Mr. Bush.

But when asked, if Mr. Perot thought the tax deduction was improper, why he did
not give the material to the Internal Revenue Service rather than to a
newspaper, Mr. Luce replied: "I don't know. I haven't asked him that question."

Earlier today, in an interview on the "Today" program, Mr. Luce defended Mr.
Perot's investigation.

"No, he did not investigate the Vice President," Mr. Luce told the program's
host, Bryant Gumbel. "What we had here was a simple situation when Mr. Perot was
sitting at his desk, received information about a highly questionable tax
transaction and turned it over to Bob Woodward. There was no investigation, no
detectives."

Mr. Woodward, the Washington Post reporter, examined the material and decided
that it did not warrant a news article.

Mr. Luce denied on the television program that Mr. Perot had employed private
investigators, but in a telephone interview later today he was more ambiguous
when asked about the news report that Mr. Perot had arranged investigations to
check on the friends of his children.

"What we're talking about is a process whereby facts get distorted," Mr. Luce
said, "whether a man's simple concerns for the safety of his children gets
distorted into an investigation."

Such reports have given the White House and Republicans an opening to attack the
likely independent challenger for the Presidency. And it has given the
Democratic campaign of Gov. Bill Clinton of Arkansas a chance to watch gleefully
from the sidelines.

'Two Cat Fighters'

"If the American people are looking now, they'll see two cat fighters and one
serious candidate for President," said George Stephanopoulos, director of
communications for Mr. Clinton.

"We're learning a lot about Ross Perot," he added, "and I think the more people
learn, the less they're going to like him. Also I think it's a sign of how
frightened the White House is. The fact they're hitting so hard shows how scared
they are."

Mr. Martinez's speech to the mayors' conference today was typical of assault
that the White House has undertaken through surrogates speaking for Mr. Bush.

Referring to an accusation by a Dallas reporter that Mr. Perot once suggested
ringing a predominantly black section of Dallas with police officers and
conducting house-to-house searches for narcotics, he said: "Mr. Perot apparently
believes that Draconian quick fixes will rid the nation of drugs.  He has talked
about cordoning off entire inner-city neighborhoods and treat all who live there
as guilty until proven innocent."

Like Mr. Luce, aides in Mr. Perot's campaign are calling the Republican charges
character assassinations and distortions

"My general characterization of this is that it is just the Bush people doing
character assassinations, which is a specialty of Republican Presidential
politics," said James Squires, the Perot camp's press secretary.

LOAD-DATE: June 24, 1992

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1992 The New York Times Company


                              259 of 281 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 June 24, 1992, Wednesday, Late Edition - Final

Study Says Soviets Held 125 Lost by U.S. in Korea

BYLINE: By BARBARA CROSSETTE

SECTION: Section A; Page 11; Column 1; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 679 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, June 23


A Russian document given to a Senate committee discloses that 125 servicemen
previously listed as dead or missing in the Korean War actually survived and
were turned over to Soviet interrogators in North Korea, leaders of the Senate
Select Committtee on P.O.W.-M.I.A. Affairs said today.

An unknown number of those servicemen were later transferred to Chinese custody
and may have been sent to China, the Senators said. North Korea, China and the
former Soviet Union consistently denied that any captured Americans were turned
over to Soviet or Chinese officials.

At the Chinese Embassy here, Hu Ping, the spokesman, said Beijing had no comment
on the report. North Korea's mission to the United Nations did not return calls
made to Pak Gil Yon, the chief delegate, or Hyon Hak Bong, the mission
spokesman.

The Russian list reflects what Moscow knew in the 1950's and does not deal with
the issue of whether any of those Americans are still alive. The list also does
not shed light on the question of whether any of those servicemen were taken to
the Soviet Union.

The Korean War list, which is also in the possession of a Presidential
commission investigating the missing in cooperation with a Russian panel, was
released at a news conference by Senator Bob Smith, Republican of New Hampshire
and deputy committee chairman, who said that "this information belongs to the
American people."

Minutes later, the committee also announced in a news release that it had won
the declassification of more than 70 United States Government documents
concerning the search for missing Americans during and after the Vietnam War.

"We think the Korean documents are very significant because of the sources from
which they come, though I'm not at liberty to disclose those," said Senator John
F. Kerry, Democrat of Massachusetts and chairman of the select committee. "At
the time they were given to us in Moscow we were told point blank that these
people were given to China."

In an interview after the two announcements, Senator Kerry, saying that
information had been kept hidden from the American public for too long, said the
committee would vote next week to ask the Administration to release all relevant
documents from security and intelligence agencies, the White House and the
Pentagon.

"We believe this issue can be resolved only by airing it," Senator Kerry said.
"We are mindful of need to protect sources and methods."

Among the American documents whose declassification was announced today are
nearly 50 different and apparently conflicting lists of American prisoners of
war in Vietnam; Administration policy statements ordering officials first to
cover up losses and later to withhold information from families; military
intelligence analyses of prisoners held in Laos -- the largest number in
Indochina -- and a 1976 secret report indicating that there may have been five
deserters still in Vietnam whose names have not been disclosed.

Senator Smith told reporters that in many cases families of those missing in
Korea had been told that relatives had died in combat or captivity.

"We are now told by people in the Russian Government that they were in North
Korea," he said.

Relatives of Korean War-era servicemen can obtain a copy of the committee's
analysis of the list, with the names of the 125 Americans previously thought to
have died, by writing to the Senate Select Committee on P.O.W.-M.I.A. Affairs,
United States Senate, Washington D.C. 20510-6500.

Senator Smith said he believed that a similar situation, where not all Americans
declared dead had actually perished, prevailed after the Vietnam War. He told
reporters today that the committee had information, still being investigated,
that Americans were seen in Indochina as late as 1989.

The debate over missing Americans, particularly from the Vietnam years, revolves
around two separate issues: whether service personnel or covert agents were left
behind and then deliberately "forgotten" by successive American Administrations,
and whether any Americans might still be alive.

LOAD-DATE: June 24, 1992

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1992 The New York Times Company


                              260 of 281 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 June 24, 1992, Wednesday, Late Edition - Final

Books of The Times;
In Gulf War, Managing News and the News Media

BYLINE: By HERBERT MITGANG

SECTION: Section C; Page 19; Column 1; Cultural Desk; Word and Image Page

LENGTH: 1041 words



Second Front
Censorship and Propaganda in the Gulf War
By John R. MacArthur
260 pages. Hill & Wang. $20.

Hotel Warriors
Covering the Gulf War
By John J. Fialka
78 pages. Woodrow Wilson Center Press/John Hopkins University Press. $9.75,
paperback.

Read together, "Second Front" by John R. MacArthur and "Hotel Warriors" by John
J. Fialka are just about the most exciting and damning books on the Persian Gulf
war to have been published thus far. Anyone who thinks that the First Amendment
functioned at full throttle during that conflict will be surprised by their
revelations.

Mr. MacArthur, the publisher of Harper's Magazine and a journalist, jumps right
into his strongly opinionated book with a devastating scene in which the
Washington bureau chiefs of ABC, CBS, NBC and CNN appear deferentially before
Prince Bandar bin Sultan, Saudi Arabia's Ambassador to Washington.

They've come to his mansion in Virginia in August 1990 to seek visas for their
correspondents because American soldiers are being sent to save his country from
possible invasion by Iraq. The Prince's English is excellent; so is his
understanding of the networks, thanks to his American lobbyist, Fred Dutton,
whom the Saudis paid $1.4 million in regular compensation and a bonus from
December 1989 through December 1990.

Mr. MacArthur, who writes as if he enjoys the candor of his convictions,
editorializes:

"One may ask why the media representatives of a nation of 250 million people,
which had offered to spill its citizens' blood in defense of a kingdom of 16
million subjects, needed to plead for tickets to the coming conflict. The answer
is simple: President Bush, Secretary of Defense Dick Cheney, and U.S. Central
Command wanted the networks to beg on Bandar's doorstep. It was convenient for
the Administration, and would set the tone for all that was to come."

Then he says (recalling how the press was shut out of the invasions of Grenada
and Panama), "From the moment Bush committed troops to Saudi Arabia on Aug. 7,
the Administration never intended to allow the press to cover a war in the
Persian Gulf in any real sense, and it intended to tightly manage what coverage
it would permit."

"Second Front" is Mr. MacArthur's term for the other, less obvious war that was
being waged against the news media -- "newspaper against newspaper, network
against network, and television against print" -- for visas, privileges,
interviews, transportation and access to the troops. The game, he says, was to
manage the facts from the comfort of the official briefing front instead of
showing the real war on the gritty battle front.

Mr. MacArthur has dug up censorship documents and interviewed participants to
support many of his opinions. He quotes Pete Williams, the Pentagon spokesman,
as saying, "Every decision that we made during Just Cause was intended to
facilitate open, timely media coverage of the operation." To which the author
adds, "This, of course, was a lie."

In lively passages, President Bush is accused of "milking the flag." Gen. H.
Norman Schwarzkopf is remembered not as Stormin' Norman, the news media star,
but as the deputy commander of "the botched U.S. invasion of Grenada." Roger
Rosen blatt, the Life magazine writer, is ridiculed for a sentimental column
about children that the author labels "perhaps the outstanding example of
big-media rationalizations for the slaughter of innocent civilians." Andy
Rooney, the CBS "60 Minutes" humorist, is pilloried for a jingoistic essay in
which he said, "This war in the gulf has been, by all odds, the best war in
modern history, not only for America, but for the whole world, including Iraq,
probably."

In "Second Front," Mr. MacArthur insists that from the White House on down the
idea was to beat the Vietnam syndrome with a winning war, blame the messenger as
unpatriotic for any bad news, and keep the American press under control and the
public in the dark.

Not all the correspondents in Mr. Fialka's "Hotel Warriors" covered the gulf war
in air-conditioned comfort. The author, a reporter for The Wall Street Journal,
spent four and a half months in Saudi Arabia during the gulf crisis and was
among the 10 percent of reporters who somehow managed to accompany units in the
field. His cogently written book is packed with first-hand observations and
powerful conclusions.

Mr. Fialka writes that after all the experience of war coverage in World War II,
Korea and Vietnam -- and awareness of the Pentagon's blackout of the press in
Grenada and Panama -- there was "no coherent policy" in the gulf war. In the
literal sense, military censorship wasn't the problem. Instead, it was access to
the soldiers and the front. The pool system (shared information by a limited
number of reporters) didn't work and, despite all the fancy equipment,
technology stopped at the edge of the battlefield. It took hours and sometimes
days to transmit words and pictures.

In retrospect, the author makes a humorous point: the old interservice rivalries
were alive and well during the gulf war. The Marines courted journalists; the
Army not only blocked them but actually arrested reporters who broke the pool
rules by risking their necks for news. If the public relations rivalry between
the two services involved in the ground war had been a basketball game, he
writes, "the score would have been Marines 149, Army 10." As a result, he says,
the public received a truncated, distorted picture of the war.

The pool rules were sometimes circumvented for reporters who were willing to get
on the team. "General Schwarzkopf gave many interviews during the war," Mr.
Fialka writes. "He often used the opportunity as another lever of control over
the media, which he watched with an ever-vigilant eye. Reporters whose stories
he liked got interviews. Those whose stories didn't pass muster with the general
often found the opportunity postponed, sometimes indefinitely."

"Second Front" and "Hotel Warriors" are wonderfully readable books about the
news media and the war. Neither book goes into the aims and motives behind the
American engagement in the war itself -- the underlying reasons for the
censorship and the propaganda. But that's another story.


LOAD-DATE: June 24, 1992

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photos: John R. MacArthur (Vivian Selbo/Harper's Magazine); John J.
Fialka.

TYPE: Review

                   Copyright 1992 The New York Times Company


                              261 of 281 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 June 24, 1992, Wednesday, Late Edition - Final

Public & Private;
With Extreme Prejudice

BYLINE: By ANNA QUINDLEN

SECTION: Section A; Page 21; Column 1; Editorial Desk

LENGTH: 734 words


The story of Col. Margarethe Cammermeyer had a certain deja-vu-all-over-again
quality. It might as easily have been the story of Sgt. Leonard Matlovich or
Sgt. Miriam Ben Shalom or one of several other soldiers whose job histories
included decorations, promotions, excellent evaluations.

For Colonel Cammermeyer, the honors included a Bronze Star for her work as a
nurse in Vietnam and recognition as the Veterans Administration Nurse of the
Year. None of it made any difference when she was dismissed from the Washington
State National Guard, one of thousands of Americans whose exemplary service has
paled beside the military's determination to boot gay soldiers.

Many in the service will tell you that this is a difficult issue, as is the
question of women in combat and other adjustments the Army, Navy, Air Force and
Marines have been asked to make to the 20th century.

It is not difficult at all. It comes down to this: Will we continue to support
one of America's largest and best-known institutions as it, not simply by custom
but by regulation, engages in the rankest forms of discrimination?

The question is particularly apt as the Navy finds itself embroiled in a
sickening sexual harassment scandal. If you were wondering where your defense
dollars go, almost $200,000 of them were spent to fly naval aviators to a
military frat party in Las Vegas last year at which Navy women were passed down
a gantlet of their male colleagues, grabbed and mauled in a form of hand-to-hand
combat not taught in basic training. An aide to an admiral had to resort to
biting one flyboy who pushed his hand inside her bra during this group grope,
which apparently had become something of a Navy tradition.

There is wailing and gnashing of teeth about this by the brass, a search for
blame and underlying cause. It seems never to have occurred to them that if you
treat women like second-class citizens by denying them promotion to combat
positions, your male personnel will get the idea that they can treat them like
second-class citizens in other ways, too. And that if you make homosexuality the
modern equivalent of Godless Communism, then hetero conduct in even its most
abusive forms may seem sanctioned, even blessed.

The Vegas debacle renders almost comical one fear of allowing gay people into
the military. Same-sex propositions seem sedate compared to being pushed down a
long hallway of guys with nuclear hands and Cro-Magnon mores.

But that is not the underlying cause of this ban. It is the perceived comfort
level of straight male soldiers. The term of art is "cohesiveness," what we
civilians might call male bonding. In other words, they may have to fight or
serve beside those with whom they lack proper kinship.

This is the argument once used to keep black soldiers in segregated units, a bit
of military history that seems unthinkable today. And it's also been used to
oppose women in combat. (There's also the argument of the pedestal, the idea
that male soldiers will spend all their time protecting their female
counterparts. I imagine the admiral's aide would have some choice words about
that.)

It's funny to read about a new Navy training program which, for the first time
in history, features sexually integrated boot camp. After all the arguments
about fatal distractions, they've discovered that putting men and women together
actually improves training and fosters the much-vaunted cohesion. "It's more
cooperative and there's more teamwork," said one instructor. Armed forces, meet
real life.

According to the General Accounting Office, the prohibition on gay people in the
military costs us at least $27 million a year, given the fact that a thousand
men and women are dismissed and replaced. That's an absurd waste of time and
money.

But more important is the fact that the military continues to piously justify
retaining regulations that are no more than codified prejudice. Officials
sometimes say this is the will of the people; if they are keeping track, 7 in 10
think women should be permitted to occupy combat positions and 50 percent see no
reason to keep gay people out of the military.

Instead of stooping to a comfort level of ignorance, the military should reflect
the simple notion of performance as the gauge of job fitness. Besides, maybe
their notion of comfort level is all wrong. Maybe there are no homophobes in
foxholes.


LOAD-DATE: June 24, 1992

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Op-Ed

                   Copyright 1992 The New York Times Company


                              262 of 281 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 June 25, 1992, Thursday, Late Edition - Final

Perot Under Fire: Sifting Facts and Motives

BYLINE: By MICHAEL KELLY,  Special to The New York Times

SECTION: Section A; Page 1; Column 2; National Desk

LENGTH: 2155 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, June 24


Only a short while ago Ross Perot had the sort of public image that would make
any politician salivate: self-made billionaire, just-folks tycoon, scourge of
the Ayatollah, straight-talking guy. But lately a more ominous portrait has
emerged: J. Edgar Perot, a man obsessed by conspiracies and beset by enemies in
his mind, willing to use tactics of espionage and intimidation to destroy those
who stand in his way.

Mr. Perot, in an aggressive public relations campaign over the last few days,
has denounced that characterization as false -- "fairyland," "animal crackers"
and "Mickey Mouse tossed salad" were a few of his more colorful dismissals. And
he says this effort to redefine, and malign, his character has been orchestrated
by President Bush and his re-election committee.

It appears, so far, that both things are at least somewhat true. Mr. Perot does
have a history of using investigators and threats against opponents. And
officials of Mr. Bush's White House and re-election committee have not been shy
about publicly discussing that history while, more privately, an "opposition
research" team has been running the sort of aggressive investigation into Mr.
Perot's past that Mr. Perot has conducted against others.

"It is correct that we have opposition research, not just on Perot but on
Clinton, too" said the chairman of the Republican National Committee, Rich Bond.
He acknowleged that the opposition research does produce information about Mr.
Perot, and that this information is sometimes given to inquiring reporters.
"There are a number of reporters who call us looking for facts, and if we have
the facts, we provide them."

But he defended the research as legitimate politics, saying "Mr. Perot wants to
put a legitimate inquiry into the guise of so-called dirty tricks, and nothing
could be farther from the truth," he said.

Episodes Support Picture

There appears to be no proof that the Bush operation has fabricated accusations
that Mr. Perot has used investigators and threats from lawyers. It need not.
There have been a number of episodes in Mr. Perot's life that support the
picture of him that the Bush campaign is now happy to see displayed.

The most recent example of Mr. Perot's behind-the-scenes use of lawyers,
investigators and reporters against those who have displeased him can be found
in his now-revealed dealings with The Washington Post and its premiere
investigative reporter, Bob Woodward. It is an episode that illuminates the
close line Mr. Perot has walked in his efforts to embarrass Mr. Bush and the
risks inherent in those ways.

Mr. Perot and reporters at the Washington Post now acknowledge that in 1988 Mr.
Perot provided information in extended interviews and in two three-inch black
vinyl binders to the newspaper while he knew it was preparing to write a series
of articles about Mr. Bush.

The articles were prepared under the supervision of Mr. Woodward, who was not
available for comment today.

Information on a Deal

The information came largely from a Washington law firm that was paid $10,000 by
Mr. Perot and his longtime aide, Tom Luce, to gather details about a highly
profitable land deal engineered by the Pennzoil Company and its head, J. Hugh
Liedke, a close friend and former business partner of Mr. Bush.

The lawyers, from the firm of Verner, Liipfert, Bernhard, McPheron & Hand, had
investigated a deal involving a 500,000-acre parcel in Northern New Mexico known
as Vermejo Ranch. Mr. Perot said he was offered the ranch for $24 million in the
early 1970's. It was instead acquired by Pennzoil.

The investigation never showed that Mr. Bush had done anything improper, and Mr.
Perot insisted today that his motives were not to harm Mr. Bush. But Walter
Pincus, one of the Washington Post reporters who received the information from
Mr. Perot in 1988, said, "I don't think he was doing it to help him."

Mr. Perot said that in 1986, Pennzoil came to him and offered to sell 400,000
acres of the ranch for $50 million and that he learned that Pennzoil had
received a $48 million tax credit for donating the other 100,000 acres to the
Forest Service.

Contacts With Reporters

Mr. Pincus recalled today that Mr. Perot had been providing information to Mr.
Woodward in January 1988 about the Iran-contra scandal when he happened to
volunteer that he also had information on the land transaction. Mr. Perot
arranged for a Washington breakfast with Mr. Luce and the two Post reporters.

Mr. Perot said today that some information was provided after it was requested
by the Post. Mr. Perot's spokesman, James Squires, said that Mr. Perot provided
the information to The Post "to find out whether a fraud had been committed on
taxpayers."

Last Sunday, Mr. Woodward wrote a front page article in the Post outlining Mr.
Perot's investigation into the land deal. Mr. Squires, the Perot spokesman,
suggested today that the article violated an agreement Mr. Perot had with the
Post that his identity be kept confidential.

Mr. Pincus said that he recalled The Post had originally received the
information about the Pennzoil deal in a confidential manner but that he did not
know what had occurred in recent weeks between Mr. Woodward and Mr. Perot that
might have altered that agreement.

"Bob's got his own sort of view," Mr. Pincus said, adding that he felt his
remarks had been made off the record.

Mr. Perot's anger with Mr. Bush, then the Vice President, reportedly stemmed
from a feeling that he and Administration officials in general, were paying
insufficient attention to Mr. Perot's effort on behalf American servicemen he
believed were still held in Southast Asia.

More than a decade ago, Mr. Perot provided seed money to the Vietnam Veterans
Memorial Fund for construction of a memorial in Washington, but he openly
criticized the design picked by the fund's selection committee. Several
officials involved in the memorial said that to get his way, Mr. Perot began a
campaign to discredit them.

As part of the effort Mr. Perot hired Roy M. Cohn, the New York lawyer who, in
his most famous role, had been counsel to Senator Joseph R. McCarthy during the
heyday of the Senator's power.

Battle Over Vietnam Memorial

"We trusted him at the beginning, but then he wanted to get rid of the wall,"
said John Wheeler, who was the chairman of the veteran's fund. "He wanted me as
chairman to abandon the wall. He pushed me and pushed me to give up the wall. He
said, 'I'll wipe you out.' It was like being sliced with a knife. The next thing
I knew I was getting threatening phone calls."

Officials involved in the memorial said in interviews that in the early 1980's
Mr. Perot repeatedly asserted that the memorial fund had been tainted by
financial improprieties. Both Mr. Perot and Mr. Cohn demanded access to the
fund's records to conduct their own audit but were rebuffed.

Rather than give the records to Mr. Cohn, the fund assembled its own independent
audit committee to investigate Mr. Perot's allegations. But that did not satisfy
Mr. Perot either, officials said, so the fund turned to the General Accounting
Office, an investigative arm of Congress, to conduct an inquiry.

Finding no evidence of impropriety, the agency concluded that the fund's
operations "were proper and that the numerous allegations raised regarding the
fund were not valid."

In business dealings, Mr. Perot has sometimes been accused of similarly rough
tactics. In 1980 he led an extremely aggressive campaign to overturn a decision
by a Texas agency to take away a contract for processing Medicaid claims from
his company, the Electronic Data Systems Corporation, and award it to a bidder
from New York.

Mr. Perot's efforts to reverse the decision included private meetings with the
Governor, the Attorney General and the members of the board of human resources,
which awarded the contract.

His efforts also included gathering a dossier of negative information about the
New York bidder, the Bradford National Corporation, and some of its directors,
said the chairman of the human resources board.

Hilmar Moore, the mayor of Richmond, Tex., who was at the time the board
chairman, said Mr. Perot had tracked him down to Salt Lake City, where he was
vacationing. He said Mr. Perot told him he had some information about Bradford
and wanted to come up and show it to him.

$2 Billion Contract

"He just called and asked if he could come on up," recalled Mr. Moore. He said
Mr. Perot flew from Texas to Utah on a private plane with one aide and presented
him with a folder, which he recalled contained copies of legal complaints
against Bradford and some of its directors.

"There was nothing personal in it," Mr. Moore said. "It was all designed to show
that Bradford couldn't handle the business." The contract was worth about $2
billion a year to Mr. Perot's company.

Mr. Perot also convinced Mr. Moore that senior state accountants had been
incorrect in concluding that giving the contract to Bradford would save the
state money. Mr. Moore said he had welcomed the information and decided to work
to rescind the award to Bradford.

In another Texas case, Mr. Perot has been accused of using both his wealth and
threats to expose extramarital affairs to overwhelm an opponent who had battled
for two years to collect $250 million in damages from Mr. Perot and his son,
Ross Perot Jr.

Near the end of a two-year court fight that ended in April 1990, the opponent,
Richard Salwen who was once a close legal adviser to Mr. Perot, said in court
documents that the Perot camp was trying to "economically harass and punish"
him.

Mr. Salwen, who was hired as the chief legal officer for the Dell Computer
Corporation in 1989, worked for Mr. Perot first as a lawyer at the Electronic
Data Systems and then for the Perot Group after Mr. Perot resigned as chairman
and chief executive of E.D.S. at the end of 1986.

In his last few years at E.D.S., and until 1988 at the Perot Group, Mr. Salwen
said he had worked mainly as an agent for the Perots on projects to acquire
16,000 acres north of Fort Worth and Dallas, and then on several projects
related to the development an airfield owned by the City of Fort Worth.

Mr. Salwen's lawsuit against the Perots asserted that his work enhanced the
value of the Perots' land by $250 million. Yet he contended that the Perots had
never granted him the ownership stake in the property that they had promised
when they lured him to leave his job at E.D.S.

In court documents, the Perots said Mr. Salwen was never promised an ownership
position. In related affidavits, two other participants in the land investments
with the Perots and Mr. Salwen, Mervin L. Stauffer and J. Michael Poss, who had
close ties to the Perots, said the Perots were not obligated in 1988 to grant
them specific ownership positions. Mr. Salwen acknowledged in court documents
that he had no written commitment from the Perots.

In February 1990, J. Patrick Horner, president of Perot Systems, the
computer-services company controlled by Mr. Perot, informed the chief financial
officer at Dell Computer, Donald D. Collis, in two telephone conversations that
the Perots had information about Mr. Salwen's involvement in an extra-marital
affair. Mr. Collis was Mr. Salwen's supervisor at Dell.

Mr. Salwen's lawyer, C. L. (Mike) Schmidt said that when he learned of Mr.
Horner's contacts, "I hit the ceiling." He protested the contacts by Mr. Horner
in court documents, asserting that they had caused Mr. Salwen "emotional
distress and loss of his professional reputation." Within a matter of weeks, Mr.
Schmidt said in an interview, the case was settled for an undisclosed amount of
money.

In 1990, Mr. Perot took the unusual step of obtaining a court order permitting
the inspections of a house he rented and hiring off-duty Dallas police officers
to conduct three inspections of the house each day.

According to a 1990 lawsuit, Mr. Perot took the action because the tenant, H.
Wayne Hayes Jr., had failed to pay his rent in March 1990 and because Mr. Perot
feared he might damage the house next to Mr. Perot's North Dallas estate. Mr.
Hayes paid $7,500 a month in rent on the home, which is valued at nearly $2
million.

Patrol Cars and Dogs

In remarks today on the NBC News program "Today," Mr. Perot said he had been
obliged to take action because of drug use and fistfights on the property.

A lawyer for Mr. Hayes, Tim Jones, said there was no reason to believe Mr. Hayes
would damage the property.

A report by a private investigating team, which was made public by Mr. Hayes's
wife, said officers for Mr. Perot drove marked patrol cars and led a
drug-sniffing dog through the house. Mr. Jones said that went beyond the court
order approved by both sides.

Mr. Hayes, 35, is now in prison in Hawaii after pleading guilty last year to two
charges of mail fraud in a Federal securities case.

NAME: Ross Perot

LOAD-DATE: June 25, 1992

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Chart: "The Perot Disputes: Attack and Parry"

Land deal involving Bush friend

Background

Mr. Perot said he was surprised to discover that the Pannzoil Company, when
headed by a close firend of then Vice President Bush, received a $48 million
Federal tax credit for donating to the Government one-fifth of a larger parcel
of land that he was offered a few years earlier for $24 million.

Accusation

Mr. Perot hired Washington lawyers to investigate the transaction and secretly
provided information to The Washington Post in an effort to embarass Mr. Bush.

Perot's Response

Mr. Perot said he gathered the information only to decide whether to buy the
land, and that he provided information to The Post mostly because the paper
asked for it, although a Post reporter said that Mr. Perot volunteered it. A
spokesman for Mr. Perot said Mr. Perot investigated the deal to determine
whether a fraud had been perpetrated on taxpayers.

Richard L. Armitage investigation

Background

Mr. Perot was active in efforts to locate American servicemen who were missing
in Vietnam and believed that the Defense Department was not not making adequate
efforts to search for them.

Accusation

Mr. Perot asserted that Richard Armitage, an Assistant Secretary of Defense, had
a friendship with a Vietnamese-American woman that compromised efforts to find
missing American servicemen in Asia. Mr. Perot spread unfounded information
about Mr. Armitage, including data gathered by an undercover police officer in
Virginia.

Perot's Response

Mr. Perot said he did not solicit the information about Mr. Armitage but
received an unsolicited file from the officer. In follow-up interviews, Mr.
Perot admitted he made the initial call to the police officer who had the
information. Mr. Perot said he passed on the information to "appropriate law
enforcement authorities" by handling it to the F.B.I. But he also acknowledged
keeping a copy in his safe.

Vietnam War Memorial

Background

Mr. Perot provided nearly $200,000 in seed money for design and construction of
a Vietnam Veterans Memorial in Washington. But he was openly critical of the
design selected for the memorial by a panel.

Accusation

To undermine the project, Mr. Perot sought to dig up improprieties about
officials of the fund. He demanded financial records from the fund, and hired
Roy M. Cohn, who was former chief counsel to Senator Joseph R. McCarthy, to help
him.

Perot's Response

Mr. Perot has denied that he was seeking to discredit officials of the fund. He
said he had concerns about the fund's business practices and was acting on
behalf of many veterans who did not like the memorial's design.

Dispute with business partner

Background

Richard Salwen, once a close legal adviser to Mr. Perot, filed a $250 million
lawsuit against him, contending that Mr. Perot and his son had reneged on giving
him an ownership stake in property. He left the Perot family businesses over the
dispute in 1988.

Accusation

Mr. Perot, through an intermediary, spread rumors linking Mr. Salwen to an
extra-marital affair. Mr. Salwen also accused Mr. Perot of intimidation, saying
he threatened him and his lawyer: "I will bury you guys with hourly-rate
lawyers."

Perot's Response

Perot spokesman James Squires said Mr. Perot "never sought to intimidate Mr.
Salwen with the use of personal information."   -- RICHARD L. BERKE

TYPE: Biography

                   Copyright 1992 The New York Times Company


                              263 of 281 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 June 25, 1992, Thursday, Late Edition - Final

NEWS SUMMARY

SECTION: Section A; Page 2; Column 5; Metropolitan Desk

LENGTH: 1048 words



International A3-17

RABIN ESTABLISHES PRIORITIES
Yitzhak Rabin said his priorities as Israel's Prime Minister would be peace
talks to bring about Palestinian self-rule in the occupied West Bank and Gaza
Strip and an end to "political settlements" there. A1

Palestinians in the occupied territories voice hope and caution. A14

Secretary Baker called for a quick resumption of the peace talks. A14

Rabin made clear right away who will be in charge. A14

Arab leaders see better chances for a peace accord with Israel.  A15

ACCORD ON GEORGIAN REGION
The leader of Georgia and the Russian President signed an agreement to end
fighting in secessionist South Ossetia. Yeltsin then flew off to Turkey for a
meeting that is expected to focus on ethnic fighting between Azerbaijanis and
Armenians.  A3

PANAMANIAN MAYOR'S ANGER
For the Mayor of Panama City, the interruption of the American Presidential
visit by police officers firing tear gas at protesters was a rare setback in a
career that has taken her ever upward.  A4

ROUGH WELCOME FOR U.S. ENVOY
In his first week as Ambassador to Ireland, William FitzGerald has been hit by
what a diplomat called "the Irish Welcome Wagon." A5

DISPUTING RECORD ON P.O.W.'S
Senator Kerry took issue with almost two decades of statements by U.S.
Administrations that all Vietnam War prisoners were accounted for when
Washington and Hanoi signed a cease-fire in 1973. A7

A QUICK BILLION FOR RUSSIA
The I.M.F. plans to lend $1 billion to Moscow to help pay for crucial imports in
a simplified reform agreement that the fund hopes to complete in the next
several weeks. A10

SARAJEVO SEEKS DELIVERANCE
As the Serbian siege of Sarajevo intensifies and the city descends ever deeper
into a nightmare, residents look desperately to the outside world for relief.
A10

DE KLERK OFFERS CONCESSION
President F. W. de Klerk said he would accept an investigation by foreign
experts into violence in black townships, but the African National Congress
rejected the concession and stepped up its campaign for an international boycott
against South African athletes. A12

The London Zoo received a $1.85 million gift from Kuwait.  A17

National A18-28, B10-12

DECISION ON SMOKING LIABILITY
In an exceptionally broad decision, the Supreme Court opened the door wide to
damage suits against the cigarette industry.  A1

The ruling came nine years after a dying smoker brought suit.  B10

JUSTICES RULE ON SCHOOL PRAYER
In a narrow but decisive rebuff to the Administration, the Court ruled that a
clergyman's invocation and benediction at a junior high school graduation in
Providence, R.I., had transgressed the constitutional boundary between church
and state.  A1

The ruling happily surprised the couple who brought the case.  B11

THE PRESIDENT ON GEORGE BUSH
With the Communist menace vanished, the economy still weak and deepening social
problems confronting the nation, a crisis of leadership threatens President
Bush's re-election. And, during an Oval Office interview, he seemed keenly aware
of that crisis as he made his arguments for another term.  A1

INVESTIGATOR PEROT
Ross Perot does indeed have a history of using investigators and threats against
opponents. Now officials of the White House and the Bush re-election committee,
who have not been shy about publicly discussing that history, are running the
same sort of aggressive inquiry into his past that he has conducted against
others.  A1

Perot lashed out at a Republican "dirty tricks crowd." A26

News analysis: Will the "spying issue" burst Perot's bubble?  A27

U.S. TRADE RULING FAVORS JAPAN
The Federal trade agency ruled that Detroit's auto makers had not suffered
significant harm from Japanese mini-vans and that tariffs on the imports would
therefore not be imposed.  A1

VAST RAIL SHUTDOWN
Most freight railroads shut down in response to a strike against one of them,
and they urged Congress to intervene. Amtrak was also hobbled, but many commuter
lines, including those in the New York area, were not much affected.  A18

Congress appeared in no hurry to step in.  A18

New York commuters face another deadline tonight.  A18

FETAL RESEARCH BILL DIES
The House upheld President Bush's veto of legislation that would have allowed
the Government to finance research on aborted fetuses.  A23

WHO DISCOVERED H.I.V.?
A former senior American health official said that the Government had been
misled by Dr. Robert Gallo's claim to have been the sole discoverer of the cause
of AIDS and that the United States now had a "moral duty" to give credit and the
royalties to the French.  A22

Metropolitan Digest, B1

CIVILIAN REVIEW BOARD
Mayor Dinkins will propose an all-civilian review board to investigate charges
of police brutality, officials in the Dinkins administration said yesterday. The
Mayor's plan is a setback to Police Commissioner Brown, who has long opposed
such a board. A1

Business Digest D1

The Home Section C1-12

These shops sell the fine art of decorating.  C1
Around City Hall with Andy Logan: Memories of eight mayors.  C1
Rare species and red tape.  C1

Arts/Entertainment C13-20

Paderewski to be returned to Poland.  C16
Theater: The last bastion of stubborn culture.  C13
"The Night Larry Kramer Kissed Me." C19
Film: Talk of Hollywood C13
Music: Spinal Tap.  C13

Sports B13-19

Baseball: Howe permanently suspended.  B13
Gooden and Mets stop Cubs.  B13
Bonilla suspended for charging mound.  B15
Yanks beat Royals.  B15
Basketball: Knicks get Blackman, draft Davis.  B13
Columns: Moran on Title IX.  B13
Lapointe on pro hockey.  B15
Olympics: A quandary over Reynolds.  B19
Powell outjumps Lewis.  B19

Obituaries D26-27

Editorials/Op-Ed A30-31

Editorials A30
Promise for peace in Israel.
A threat to veto democracy.
Religion remains free, 5-4.
Keep the U.N.

Letters A30

William Safire: "Not in the system." A31
Anthony Lewis: The Kimberlin case.  A31
Robert B. Costello: Salesman or strategist?  A31
Jamie Ann Conway: Let women fly in combat.  A31

LOAD-DATE: June 25, 1992

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo: The London Zoo has a $1.85 million friend in Kuwait. A17
(Associated Press)

TYPE: Summary

                   Copyright 1992 The New York Times Company


                              264 of 281 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 June 25, 1992, Thursday, Late Edition - Final

Senator Disputes U.S. Tally of Vietnam Prisoners

BYLINE: By BARBARA CROSSETTE,  Special to The New York Times

SECTION: Section A; Page 7; Column 1; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 653 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, June 24


A Senate committee chairman took issue today with almost two decades of
Administration assertions that all Vietnam War prisoners were accounted for when
Washington and Hanoi signed a cease-fire accord in 1973. He said his committee's
reading of official documents led him to believe that as many as 133 might have
still been alive and in captivity at the time.

Opening two days of hearings, questioning present and former government
officials whose job it was to keep track of missing Americans, Senator John
Kerry, Democrat of Massachusetts and chairman of the committee, also said that
from 1965 to 1972 files on people involved in covert operations, often in Laos
or Cambodia, were deliberately falsified to protect secrecy.

This deception, he said, fueled conspiracy theories and fed the perception in
many families "that the Government was not dealing straight with them."

Senator Kerry's conclusions were not challenged substantially by a panel of
officials from the armed services, the Defense Intelligence Agency and the
Pentagon's Directorate of Information, Operations and Reports.

"Taken together, the information available to the committee does constitute
evidence that some Americans remained alive in Indochina after Operation
Homecoming," said Senator Kerry, referring to to the final prisoner exchange
early in 1973, when 591 Americans were returned by Hanoi. "This is enough in my
mind to contradict official statements made then and repeated for almost two
decades."

He said the documents showed that 244 servicemen should have been listed as
captives, besides the 591 returned. Of that number, 111 were later reported to
have died in Vietnam, leaving 133 Americans whose cases have not been explained.

Mr. Kerry said that there was no absolute proof that the 133 were alive at the
end of the war, or that any had survived since then.

He said that evidence of American officials' pressing Hanoi at the highest
levels for information on servicemen in captivity at the end of the war and
immediately after indicated that the Government knew of more possible prisoners
but never said so publicly.

The issue had been complicated by Vietnam's inconsistency in disclosing the
names of prisoners. It did not provide them to the International Committee of
the Red Cross, but occasionally made some public through various Senate offices.

Thus, when the prisoners were released it was not possible to be sure whether
every prisoner was accounted for. There were many pilots, for instance, who had
been seen to bail out successfully, or who had radioed their location on the
ground but were not returned in 1973.

Henry A. Kissinger, who was national security adviser in the Nixon
Administration in early 1973 and who negotiated the cease-fire accord, told of
confronting Hanoi after the Paris peace accord with 80 names of servicemen who
were believed to have been prisoners but who had not been returned in Operation
Homecoming.

Mr. Kissinger has agreed to make his papers available to the Senate panel, the
Select Committee on P.O.W.-M.I.A Affairs, pending White House approval, Mr.
Kerry said. The White House has not yet given that permission.

Witnesses at today's hearing, almost all of whom were at the crux of the
prisoner issue in 1973, said that it was not possible to explain some of the
decisions made at that time without recalling the intense desire of American
politicians and the American people to put Vietnam behind them.

Adm. Thomas Moorer, Retired, who was Chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff from
1971 to 1975, said that the atmosphere of the period made the Vietnam War "a
very painful experience."

"Demonstrators were pouring blood on the Pentagon steps, lying down on
Constitution Avenue and blocking traffic, harassing military personnel,
instigating riots such as the tragedy at Kent State University, and many young
men were escaping to Canada," he said.

LOAD-DATE: June 25, 1992

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1992 The New York Times Company


                              265 of 281 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                  June 26, 1992, Friday, Late Edition - Final

NEWS SUMMARY

SECTION: Section A; Page 2; Column 5; Metropolitan Desk

LENGTH: 1086 words



International    A2-8

BOOMERANG HITS SERBIA

With the economy all but capsized and politics turning stormy, it is no longer
possible for people in Belgrade to view the ferocious fighting in Bosnia and
Herzegovina as remote from their daily lives. The war has come home to Serbia.
A1
Shelling abated around much of Sarajevo, the Bosnian capital.  A8

LESS RIGOR FOR LITTLE PIONEERS

Children who once marched in stiff salute have shed their red kerchiefs at a
summer camp in Russia. The former "Pioneers" seem more relaxed, but the camps
are threatened by the new attention paid to the bottom line.  A1

BRIDGING THE BLACK SEA

Eleven nations of the Balkan peninsula and former Soviet Union signed a
declaration of cooperation in Istanbul. In a productive development, leaders of
Russia, Ukraine, Moldova and Romania discussed ethnic fighting in a Moldovan
region bordering the Dniester River. A6

The split in the Trans-Dniester region is not as simple as it seems. A6

HOUSE WOULD CUT FOREIGN AID

The House voted in Washington to spend just $13.8 billion on foreign aid, the
lowest total since 1977. The bill included $417 million in aid for countries of
the former Soviet Union, only a small part of what the Bush Administration has
pledged.  A2

GERMANS AFFIRM ABORTION RIGHTS

After a long debate, eastern Germans prevailed, and the German Parliament voted
to adopt a law greatly liberalizing a woman's right to end a pregnancy by
abortion. A6

PLAINTIVE PLEA IN PRAGUE

At the opening session of what may be the nation's last federal Parliament,
President Havel appealed to Czechs and Slovaks with a touch of sadness to remain
one nation.  A2

RABIN VOWS TO CURB SETTLERS

One of his first orders of business as Israel's next Prime Minister, Yitzhak
Rabin says, will be to scale back settlement construction in the occupied West
Bank and Gaza Strip.  A3

PRESSING HANOI ON WAR FILES

A special Presidential envoy to Hanoi, Gen. John W. Vessey, said he found no
evidence in five years of talks with the Vietnamese that any missing American
servicemen are still alive in Vietnam. But his perception remains that some were
left behind in 1973.  A8

Tokyo Journal: Where aging leaders fear to cough.  A4

National    A10-18, D17

POLLUTION RULE BACKS INDUSTRY

The Administration gave manufacturers broad authority to raise the level of
hazardous pollutants that they release into the atmosphere. Chemical and drug
manufacturers, concerned about the costs of meeting the Clean Air Act's
requirements, had sought the rule, saying they needed a flexible standard.  A1

STARTLING RESULTS AT THE COURT

News analysis: Defying almost all expectations, the Supreme Court within the
last week has rebuffed the Administration on both religion and habeas corpus
issues. Did the Administration's lawyers miscalculate, or is the Court changing?
A1
The Justices may soon take up another church-state case.  A16

BUSH THE STATESMAN

President Bush's argument for a second term is built largely on his image as a
skilled architect of foreign policy. But not every foreign-policy pursuit has
gone well during his stewardship.  A1

WAR ACROSS THE AIRWAVES

With the kind of intense television campaigning previously unheard of this early
in a Presidential race, the Bush and Perot organizations are battling for air
time to accuse each other of gutter-level tactics.  A1

Bush said the 1990 tax increase undermined his credibility.  A13

The Democratic platform draft spurns "big government." A13

Clinton and Tsongas met, but their differences remained.  A13

CONGRESS BACKS RAIL PLAN

The House and Senate approved binding arbitration to settle the labor dispute
that has shut down most of the nation's freight lines and intercity passenger
lines. The bill, which imposes a 20-day cooling off period and then binding
arbitration, was expected to be quickly signed by President Bush.  A1

The shutdown's effect was felt broadly among businesses.  D17

News analysis: Which side created the crisis?  D17

STUDY BACKS USE OF SEAT BELTS

The first Federal study of automobile air bags in actual traffic accidents found
that they are far more effective than seat belts alone, reducing the risk of
death in head-on collisions by 26 percent.  A10

SHUTTLE OFF ON TWO-WEEK FLIGHT

Dashing skyward ahead of approaching thunderstorms, the space shuttle Columbia
roared into orbit on a 13-day mission to see if the lack of gravity in space can
be put to use solving problems on earth.  A17

HEALTH CARE BILL BY DEMOCRATS

House Democratic leaders presented a health care proposal intended to limit
costs and insure more than half of the 30 million Americans not covered by
health insurance. But the fate of the measure is uncertain, at best.  A10

The National Commission on AIDS assailed the Administration.  A18

Law Page    B8

Between a former Nixon law office and history: a wrecker's ball

A warning for Bush on Supreme Court nominations

Metropolitan    Digest, B1

RIFT OVER POLICE

Widening a rift with Police Commissioner Lee P. Brown, Mayor David N. Dinkins
took two strong moves yesterday to assert more civilian control over the New
York City Police Department.  A1

Business    Digest, D1

Weekend    C1-28

Illiterate movies.  C1

Wanted: tomorrow's superstars.  C1

Theater: Al Pacino in repertory.  C3

Film: "Unlawful Entry." C10

Dance: The Kirov Ballet.  C5

Art: "Painters of a New Century," at the Brooklyn Museum.  C21

Sports    B9-16

Baseball: Cubs rout Mets.  B9

Maas lifts Yankees over Royals.  B11

Boxing: Rhode Island court intercedes in Tyson case. B9

Football: Eagles' Brown killed in car crash. B9

Hockey: Lindros appears before arbitrator. B15

Tennis: McEnroe defeats Cash at Wimbledon. B15

Track: Reynolds gathering support. B12

Olympics: Ewing is injured at practice. B12

Obituaries    D17-18

James Stirling, architect D18

Editorials/Op-Ed    A26-27

Editorials A26

The Perot pendulum.

Doing right by Russia.

Smokers' day in court.

Perceptions of Columbus.

Letters A26

A. M. Rosenthal: Perot's best day.  A27

Leslie H. Gelb: Death and indecision.  A27

Doris Lessing: Language and the lunatic fringe.  A27

LOAD-DATE: June 26, 1992

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo: A declaration of Black Sea economic cooperation.  A6 (Agence
France-Presse)

TYPE: Summary

                   Copyright 1992 The New York Times Company


                              266 of 281 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                  June 26, 1992, Friday, Late Edition - Final

Interstate S.& L.'s Approved

BYLINE: AP

SECTION: Section D; Page 2; Column 5; Financial Desk

LENGTH: 262 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, June 25


A Federal judge upheld today a new Government rule that allows healthy savings
and loan associations to branch out across state lines.

State bank regulators had challenged the rule as putting banks at a competitive
disadvantage to savings institutions.

Federal District Judge Royce C. Lamberth ruled that the regulation adopted by
the Office of Thrift Supervision was not "arbitrary and capricious," as the
state bank regulators and other plaintiffs had claimed in a civil lawsuit.

The Independent Bankers Association of America, which represents smaller banks,
had joined the suit.

Timothy Ryan, director of the Office of Thrift Supervision, praised Judge
Lamberth's decision as "vindication of the reasonableness" of his agency's rule.

"This decision underscores the authority the agency had in adopting the
branching rule, that the agency provided a reasoned basis for adopting this
interstate branching policy, and that we properly followed procedures in
adopting it," Mr. Ryan said in a statement.

But Ellen Lamb, a spokeswoman for the Conference of State Bank Supervisors, said
the new rule "establishes a very uneven playing field" because banks are not
allowed to set up branches in other states.

The rule, Ms. Lamb said, is "a dramatic change in policy for S.& L.'s that was
very sudden and, we thought, not very well justified."

A spokesman for the Office of Thrift Supervision noted that the rule allowed
only financially healthy savings institutions to open branches in other states,
with each case subject to the Federal agency's clearance.

LOAD-DATE: June 26, 1992

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1992 The New York Times Company


                              267 of 281 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                  June 26, 1992, Friday, Late Edition - Final

U.S. Envoy Says Talks Find No News on Viet Missing

BYLINE: By BARBARA CROSSETTE,  Special to The New York Times

SECTION: Section A; Page 8; Column 5; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 735 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, June 25


A special Presidential envoy to Hanoi said today that five years of discussions
with the Vietnamese about missing United States servicemen have produced no
evidence that any of the Americans are still alive in Vietnam.

But the envoy, Gen. John W. Vessey, also said in testimony to the Senate Select
Committee on P.O.W.-M.I.A. Affairs that he had found no new information to
change the perception that Americans were left behind in Vietnam in 1973, when
United States forces withdrew from Indochina.

General Vessey, who was appointed by President Reagan in 1987 and reappointed by
President Bush in 1989, said the Vietnamese were not cooperative enough in
opening official records to answer questions about missing Americans.

135 'Discrepancy Cases'

In particular, General Vessey has been pressing for the resolution of 135
"discrepancy cases" among 2,266 Americans still unaccounted for in Indochina.
These are cases that the United States beleives Hanoi could resolve "readily,"
he said.

"A few of them were people we believed to have died in captivity and whose
remains were not returned," he said. "Most of them were people who the U.S.
believed the evidence showed had survived their loss incident and were likely to
have been captured and who did not return at Homecoming, and whose remains had
not been returned nor had any other explanation been given." Operation
Homecoming was the name given the postwar prisoner exchange.

The committee's chairman, Senator John F. Kerry, Democrat of Massachusetts,
today released further evidence that in 1973 it was widely assumed within the
Nixon Administration that Americans were still alive in Vietnamese custody. The
evidence was contained in a confidential memorandum in April 1973 to the
Pentagon from Ambassador Ellsworth Bunker in Saigon outlining a strategy for
approaching the North Vietnamese and Viet Cong on the subject of unrecovered
bodies and remaining prisoners.

The memo was written three months after the Paris peace agreement, the exchange
of prisoner lists with Hanoi and a public statement by President Nixon that all
the Americans had come home.

80 Believed Captured Alive

The memo refers to 80 Americans, "who, according to U.S. records, were believed
to be captured alive." It advised the United States to develop a more
comprehensive list of the missing and dead "on whom there is considered to be a
reasonable probablity of obtaining information."

In the second of two days of public hearings, officials in the State and Defense
Departments who were responsible for tracking the missing at the end of the
Vietnam War said that Vietnam's refusal to abide by an article in the Paris
agreement relating to the accounting for servicemen, compounded by the
ineffectiveness of the International Commission of Control and Supervision
charged with monitoring the accord, made the active search for Americans
virtually impossible on the ground.

On the American side, the continued covert United States military operations in
Laos, also in violation of the peace treaty, considerably complicated the search
in that country, where a large number of cases remain unresolved.

Tempers rose today in the hearing room when Senator Kerry and others on the
panel questioned Roger E. Shields, a former Deputy Assistant Secretary of
Defense for P.O.W.-M.I.A. Affairs.

A Tape and a Memo

Mr. Shields had made an oft-quoted declaration on April 12, 1973 -- which Mr.
Kerry replayed on tape today -- that the United States had "no indication at
this time that there are any Americans alive in Indochina."

Senator Kerry confronted Mr. Shields, who stood by his statement, with copies of
a memo he wrote the following month in which he said that the position adopted
by the Defense Department was "no longer satisfactory." Mr. Kerry called him
"disingenuous" in defending his 1973 statement.

In an earlier deposition to the committee, Mr. Shields was also quoted
describing a meeting in 1973 with Deputy Secretary of Defense William Clements.
According to the deposition, Mr. Clements, speaking of missing Americans, told
Mr. Shields, "They're all dead," and Mr. Shields replied, "You can't say that."

"You didn't hear me," Mr. Clements was reported to have said. "They're all
dead."

Mr. Clements had earlier agreed to testify before the committee. Today Mr. Kerry
said the former assistant secretary had changed his mind.

LOAD-DATE: June 26, 1992

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1992 The New York Times Company


                              268 of 281 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                  June 26, 1992, Friday, Late Edition - Final

The Perot Pendulum

SECTION: Section A; Page 26; Column 1; Editorial Desk

LENGTH: 516 words


Ross Perot was swimming along nicely a few weeks ago, riding a wave of public
discontent with established parties and politicians. Quite suddenly, the can-do
billionaire with the common touch now finds himself portrayed as a sinister
gumshoe with an uncommon taste for intrigue, investigations and conspiracy.

The political pendulum has swung back against Ross Perot, as it usually does
when politicians stay in the limelight long enough for people to begin asking
questions. It's the same pendulum that, for various reasons, smacked into Gary
Hart in 1984, Michael Dukakis in 1988 and, in the last year, President Bush.

Yet Mr. Perot is behaving as though he's exempt from the normal rhythms of
politics. In one breath he derides the controversy about him as "all Mickey
Mouse tossed salad." In the next he dismissively blames President Bush
personally and Republican operatives generally for "saturation bombing" designed
to "create a new personality that doesn't exist."

Mr. Perot's personality is precisely what these stories are all about. How a
citizen views the world, how he chooses friends and answers critics, how he
responds when challenged -- these qualities matter in a candidate for President.
They indicate how that person would govern.

Ross Perot has so far disclosed precious little about what he thinks. The public
knows even less about who he is. Its questions are sustained by legitimate
curiosity. Those questions deserve a better response than Mr. Perot's reflexive
and unenlightening tendency to blame every allegation on the Republicans' "dirty
tricks" operation.

What are the critical newspaper stories about? Mainly they deal with Mr. Perot's
ambitions and grievances. On June 12, for example, The Wall Street Journal
reported that in 1987 Mr. Perot -- long obsessed with finding missing prisoners
of war in Vietnam -- used an undercover policeman and compromising photographs
to intimidate a high Defense Department official. Mr. Perot felt the official
was moving too slowly to repatriate the P.O.W.'s.

One month ago The New York Times reported that Mr. Perot, furious at coverage of
his son's business dealings, called the publisher of The Fort Worth
Star-Telegram to say that he had compromising photographs of one of the paper's
employees and a city official.

And last Sunday The Washington Post reported that Mr. Perot paid a Washington
law firm $10,000 in 1987 to investigate the business transactions of a friend of
Mr. Bush. Mr. Perot later gave the details to the Post's investigative reporters
as part of a larger campaign to "uncover improper conduct" by then-Vice
President Bush.

Mr. Perot and his associates deny all or part of each of these charges, as they
do a host of other similar allegations. Yet the cumulative evidence of Mr.
Perot's penchant for espionage and intimidation is impressive; and unless
everyone is lying, the straight-talking just-folks Texan is not the political
innocent he claims to be.

The character questions can't simply be dismissed, denounced, derided. They are
still out there for Ross Perot to answer.

LOAD-DATE: June 26, 1992

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Editorial

                   Copyright 1992 The New York Times Company


                              269 of 281 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 June 27, 1992, Saturday, Late Edition - Final

Ex-U.S. Envoy Says Yeltsin Misspoke on M.I.A.'s

BYLINE: By SERGE SCHMEMANN,  Special to The New York Times

SECTION: Section 1; Page 1; Column 2; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 625 words

DATELINE: MOSCOW, June 26


The American co-chairman of the commission searching for missing Americans in
Russia said today that President Boris N. Yeltsin "misspoke" when he said
American prisoners of war might still be there.

"It's clear to me that he misspoke, because we have found nobody here that will
tell us that Mr. Yeltsin's information was correct based on solid information,"
Malcolm Toon, a former United States Ambassador to Moscow, told reporters here.
"I think he was acting genuinely, but I think he misspoke."

Mr. Toon, the commission co-chairman, made his remarks as he ended a five-day
mission prompted by comments the Russian President made as he flew to Washington
for a state visit last week.

Mr. Toon's conclusion that Mr. Yeltsin misspoke supported previous responses
from Moscow, Hanoi and Washington, where baffled officials insisted that no
evidence had been found to support his assertion that Vietnam-era prisoners had
been held in the Soviet Union. The commission is also looking into reports about
prisoners from World War II and the Korean War.

Mr. Yeltsin's comments prompted a flurry of questions and demands. A group of
American and Soviet investigators rushed off to Pechora, in the heart of
Siberia, to check out a vague report that an American named David Markin or
Marken had been spotted in a labor camp.

Mr. Toon said that no such person had been found and that although the
investigation continues, "I think we're going to wind up with absolutely zero."

He said the Russians had agreed to issue a statement within two weeks declaring
unequivocally whether any Americans were still alive in the former Soviet Union.
But after his meetings in Moscow, he said, "my gut feeling is that there's
nobody alive under Russian control."

Mr. Toon said a team of American investigators would remain in Moscow. He said
that some of them had "intelligence backgrounds," and that the Russians were
wary that their only purpose "was to get into their files." He said he had
warned the investigators against any extra snooping. The Russian files, he
added, were a "mess."

He said Mr. Yeltsin "probably misunderstood some of the information that was
given him" when he made his statement.

In an interview with NBC during his flight to Washington last week, Mr. Yeltsin
was asked if it was true that American prisoners of war from Vietnam had been
transferred to the Soviet Union. He replied: "Our archives have shown that it is
true. Some of them were transferred to the territory of the former U.S.S.R. and
were kept in labor camps. We don't have complete data and can only surmise that
some of them may still be alive."

No Evidence Found

Bush Administration officials and members of the Senate Committee on
P.O.W.-M.I.A. Affairs have maintained since Mr. Yeltsin made those remarks that
they have seen no evidence to back up his statements.

In a letter delivered to the committee on June 12 accompanying documents about
American prisoners sent to the Soviet Union in World War II and Korea, Mr.
Yeltsin wrote:

"With respect to the U.S. citizens listed as missing in action in Vietnam and
other countries in Southeast Asia, no data are yet available. We know only that
several American soldiers who evaded fighting in Vietnam were clandestinely
moved from the territory of Japan to the territory of the U.S.S.R. The records
show that these Americans stayed in the U.S.S.R. for a short period of time and
later went to various European countries."

Russian archivists have said it may be years or even decades before archives
from the Vietnam War are opened.

Before leaving, Mr. Toon taped an appeal that will be broadcast nationwide on
Sunday over Russian television asking for any information on missing Americans.

LOAD-DATE: June 27, 1992

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1992 The New York Times Company


                              270 of 281 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 June 27, 1992, Saturday, Late Edition - Final

Friends See Secretary as Honorable but Ill-Served

BYLINE: By ERIC SCHMITT,  Special to The New York Times

SECTION: Section 1; Page 7; Column 3; National Desk

LENGTH: 1538 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, June 26


Friends and colleagues of Navy Secretary H. Lawrence Garrett 3d say he has
always been a meticulous lawyer, an unflappable crisis manager, a loyal public
servant and an absolute "straight arrow."

But as Mr. Garrett's distinguished career began to disintegrate in recent
months, ending with his resignation today, his admirers perceived a puzzling
flip side to the traits they find so admirable.

What his friends saw was a man of high integrity who trusts others too easily; a
team player who assumes others will be just as loyal; a former Navy officer who
is overly reverential of star-spangled admirals.

That portrait emerged against the backdrop of a Pentagon investigation into the
assault of at least 26 women, including 14 female Navy officers, at a convention
of naval aviators in Las Vegas, Nev., last year.

'They've Let Him Down'

"In terms of personal ethics, this is a man of the utmost personal and
professional probity," said Richard L. Armitage, a former assistant secretary of
defense who now works for the State Department directing American assistance to
the former Soviet republics. "But he assumes that all his military personnel
share his same views and values, and quite often they've let him down."

Lawmakers and Pentagon officials say Mr. Garrett has naively trusted
subordinates to carry out orders and policies, only to be sorely disappointed
when simmering problems suddenly blow up in his face.

The Navy Secretary's "zero tolerance" policy on sexual harassment was widely
ignored at the rowdy annual gathering of the Tailhook Association, a private
group of active-duty and retired Marine Corps and Navy aviators, even though Mr.
Garrett attended the last night of the three-day convention and sipped drinks
with Navy pilots on an outdoor terrace near a hotel hallway where the assaults
took place.

Damage on Capitol Hill

Until now, Mr. Garrett's career has been an impeccable success story: a
decorated Vietnam War veteran and respected White House lawyer who became the
first seaman in modern Navy history to rise to Secretary of the Navy, a
political appointment.

A dry, taciturn technician who confidently uses a pen to zip through crossword
puzzles, Mr. Garrett's lawyerly precision extends to the straight-edge he uses
to sign his name, a legacy of his youthful training as a draftsman.

But the sexual harassment scandal, and a string of other debacles that plagued
the Navy on Mr. Garrett's watch, add up to a pattern of incidents that damaged
the Navy Secretary on Capitol Hill, where there were calls for his head before
his resignation tonight.

"I have never been more disappointed in an organization than I am now with the
Navy," said Representative John P. Murtha, a Pennsylvania Democrat who heads the
House Appropriations subcommittee on defense.

Mr. Garrett has a reputation for reacting quickly to investigate and correct
problems that are brought to his attention, and he ordered disciplinary
proceedings and sensitivity training after the Tailhook scandal.

But lawmakers and Pentagon officials say the causes of many of the Navy's ills
stem partly from Mr. Garrett's failure to understand the complex web of parallel
loyalties in the tradition-bound Navy that do not always close ranks around
their civilian boss once a difficult decision is made.

"Where Larry went off the track was by not fully understanding that the uniforms
were not always with him," said a former Pentagon official. "He supports them
200 percent, but they support him only when it suits their interests."

Several Embarrassments

Friends and even critics of Mr. Garrett say he is too smart and industrious
simply to fall asleep at the switch. Yet his supporters are at a loss to explain
how so straight an arrow has found himself at the scene of several accidents and
embarrassments in his Navy career.

Born in Washington and raised in Miami, Mr. Garrett, who turned 53 years old on
Wednesday, graduated from the University of West Florida in Pensacola, working a
variety of jobs during the day and attending school at night.

Mr. Garrett enlisted in the Navy in 1961, qualifying as a submarine machinist
mate. As a 23-year-old seaman, he served on the attack submarine Sea Poacher off
Cuba during the Cuban missile crisis.

He was later commissioned as a flight officer and served in a Navy seaplane
squadron in Vietnam, VP-50, narrowly averting serious injury on a mission in
1966, when his P-5M aircraft was hit by gunfire off the Cambodian coast.

In 1972, after graduating from the University of San Diego's law school, Mr.
Garrett joined the Navy Judge Advocate General's office, the service's legal
corps. After retiring from the Navy in 1981, Mr. Garrett was a lawyer in the
Reagan White House specializing in ethics.

Colleagues say Mr. Garrett logged long hours checking the personal backgrounds
of White House political nominations for Senate confirmation.

"It was mind-boggling to me that I'd come in at 8:30 and he'd have been in for
three hours," said John G. Roberts, the deputy United States solicitor general,
who worked with Mr. Garrett in the White House counsel's office.

Mr. Garrett served as the Pentagon's general counsel from February 1986 to
August 1987, before returning to the Navy to become Under Secretary and chief
acquisition officer.

He earned high marks there for navigating the Navy through the shoals of a
Justice Department inquiry into Pentagon corruption known as the Ill Wind
Scandal. Mr. Garrett recommended to senior Pentagon officials which contractors
to punish and which to exonerate.

"He had excellent judgment," former Defense Secretary Frank C. Carlucci said in
an interview.

Task of Shrinking Fleet

Mr. Garrett was named Navy Secretary in 1989, inheriting the task of shrinking
the Navy from its 1980's goal of a 600-ship fleet to about 450 vessels by 1995.
That was just the beginning of his headaches.

In 1991, Mr. Garrett and the Navy were deeply embarrassed when the Navy reversed
a conclusion that an explosion on the battleship Iowa in 1989, in which 47
sailors were killed, was probably caused by a suicidal sailor despondent over a
falling out with a shipmate. Mr. Garrett avoided interfering in the
investigation, but lawmakers faulted him for not taking a more active early
role.

In January 1991, Secretary Cheney canceled plans to build a new Navy attack
plane, the A-12. The action was embarrassing to Mr. Garrett, the Navy's former
acquisition chief, who was not informed by subordinates of problems with the
plane's weight, cost and schedule.

Mr. Garrett also seemed out of touch in the aftermath of the assaults at last
year's Tailhook convention, whose annual gatherings were renowned for rowdy
parties that featured strippers, pornographic movies and heavy drinking.

The party on the third-floor of the Las Vegas Hilton was well known to the
conventioneers, male and female aviators later told Navy investigators, as was
the existence of gangs of drunken aviators that groped, fondled and assaulted
women as they stepped off an elevator.

Mr. Garrett said that he spent 45 minutes on a terrace next to "hospitality
suites" that lined the hallway, and that he even walked over to the entrance of
one suite to get a beer.  But he says he never saw any offensive conduct or
heard about the gantlet.

Mr. Garrett, a former Navy commander, said he he was appalled at the aviators'
misconduct and disturbed by the revelation that commanding officers at the hotel
tacitly condoned the assaults, failed to stop them and later covered them up.

"While each individual must be accountable for his or her own actions,
commanding officers have a unique responsibility for leadership in ensuring
appropriate behavior and attitudes of those under their command," Mr. Garrett
wrote in a June 2 memorandum to his ranking Navy and Marine officers.

Mr. Garrett's name recently surfaced around the edges of another scandal, the
Iran-contra affair. A Federal grand jury last week indicted former Defense
Secretary Caspar W. Weinberger on felony charges, including lying to Congress
about the existence of diary recordings about his discussions with other
officials about arms sales to Iran.

At the time Congress questioned Mr. Weinberger, Mr. Garrett was the Pentagon's
senior lawyer and accompanied the Pentagon chief in the depositions. Mr. Garrett
has declined to comment on his role in the affair, citing the pending
litigation.

Former senior Pentagon officials say Mr. Garrett did not know about Mr.
Weinberger's diaries. Even so, lawmakers say, the omission begs the question of
how an experienced lawyer, trained in troubleshooting the backgrounds of
nominees for Senate confirmation, could have overlooked such a glaring land
mine.

Mr. Garrett would not be interviewed for this article, and friends say he will
not defend himself publicly precisely because of his damn-the-torpedoes
dedication to his job and to the Navy.

"He feels he's given his life to the service and forgone opportunities to make a
lot of money on the outside," said Rear Adm. Norman Ray, who has known Mr.
Garrett since they flew together in Vietnam. "So it bothers him that he's now
getting an unjust reward."

NAME: Henry Lawrence Garrett 3d

LOAD-DATE: June 27, 1992

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Chart: "Henry Lawrence Garrett 3d"

Born: June 24, 1939.

Hometown: Miami.

Education: Miami Edison High School; B.S., University of West Florida; J.D.,
University of San Diego Law School.

Career Highlights: 1961-64, enlisted member of the United States Navy; 1964-81,
commissioned as a Naval officer, rising to the rank of commander; 1972-79,
attorney, Judge Advocate General's Corps, Department of the Navy; 1979-81,
supervisory attorney, Office of Government Ethics; 1981, assistant counsel,
Office of Counsel to the President; 1981-82, executive assistant to the
President, U.S. Synthetic Fuels Corporation; 1982-83, Regional Director, Merit
Systems Protection Board; 1983-86, Associate Counsel to the President; 1986-87,
General Counsel, Department of the Navy; 1987-89, Under Secretary of the Navy;
1989-present, Secretary of the Navy.

Hobbies: Golf, reading.

TYPE: Biography

                   Copyright 1992 The New York Times Company


                              271 of 281 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 June 27, 1992, Saturday, Late Edition - Final

THE 1992 CAMPAIGN: Voices -- Atlanta;
On Political Expediency and the Price of War

SECTION: Section 1; Page 8; Column 1; National Desk

LENGTH: 607 words


Political experts, local officials and ordinary voters in several cities were
asked to appraise President Bush's handling of the Persian Gulf war.

Charles W. Scott

60 years old; retired Army colonel who is now a consultant and lecturer on the
Middle East; one of the American hostages in Iran in 1979-80

In the broadest sense, the Persian Gulf war was a tremendous military victory in
terms of logistics, tactics and strategy.

There have been some very positive things that have come out of the war. One is
the realization that American technology and American power is real. The Vietnam
syndrome has been set aside. On the negative side, we've learned that we can't
afford to do that very often.

It's an oversimplification to say General Schwarzkopf should just have gone all
the way to Baghdad. If he had done that, the United Nations coalition that
supported this operation certainly would have fallen apart.  And by the time he
got to Baghdad, Norm probably would have gotten a phone call from Saddam sitting
in Tripoli or Algeria.

Kenneth W. Stein

46 years old; associate professor of Middle Eastern history and political
science at Emory University and director of Middle Eastern Studies at the Carter
Presidential Center

During the 1980's, the United States' attitude toward Iraq was characteristic of
the way we shaped our foreign policy in the Middle East -- in a stealth fashion,
essentially by the executive branch.

We developed our attitude toward Iraq out of political expediency: "The enemy of
my enemy is my friend." And since Iraq was Iran's enemy, therefore Iraq was our
friend. We did not want to know more than we needed to know about Saddam's
domestic behavior. It was not so much a policy as a stopgap of political
expediency.

After the war, the Bush Administration took the attitude that one of two things
would happen: either there would be a coup within the military that would oust
Saddam, or that economic sanctions would cause internal turmoil that would bring
him to his knees. But Saddam is the quintessential survivor. Saddam lives to
fight another day. And the irony is that he may well outlast in power the man
who defeated him militarily.

 Daniel S. Papp

40 years old; professor of international affairs at the Georgia Institute of
Technology

It's been said that United States policy in the Persian Gulf has been
inconsistent over the past few years. But, in fact, the United States policy for
the last 50 years in the headwaters of Persian Gulf has been very consistent: to
guarantee, to the greatest extent, that the area not fall under the control of a
hegemonic power who may have intentions adverse to American interests.

I would argue that the Persian Gulf war was worth the price we paid because it
did have two positive outcomes aside from getting Saddam Hussein out of Kuwait.
First, it illustrated the American capability to put together a very diverse
coalition. It was one of the most adroit diplomatic, political maneuvers of
recent years. Second, it was a crucial factor in bringing the Israelis and the
Arabs to the peace table.

The Persian Gulf war was not a war fought purely for oil. For one thing, it was
appropriate to demonstrate that in the 1990's invading one's neighbor is not the
way to solve one's problems. The international community did come together in
strong support of getting Saddam out of Kuwait. At the same time, had we left
Saddam there, he would have had control of something like 38 percent of the
world's known oil reserves and he would have been sitting there menacing Saudi
Arabia. On that basis, it had to be done.

LOAD-DATE: June 27, 1992

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photos of Charles W. Scott, Jenneth W. Stein and Daniel S. Papp.

                   Copyright 1992 The New York Times Company


                              272 of 281 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                  June 28, 1992, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

Stress Test;
Once Again, Questions of Character

BYLINE: By MAUREEN DOWD

SECTION: Section 4; Page 1; Column 2; Week in Review Desk

LENGTH: 1248 words


WHEN Robert S. McNamara went from running the Ford Motor Company to running the
Pentagon, he impressed President Kennedy at first with his bluntness and
managerial skills. But Mr. Kennedy soon realized that Mr. McNamara's lack of
political seasoning could be dangerous.

In 1963, the Defense Secretary blithely told Congress that the United States had
sold some missiles to Canada hoping that, in the event of a war, the Soviets
would divert a few missiles from America and send them winging toward Canadian
targets.

When Ottawa got angry at this unneighborly warheads-across-the-border plan, John
Kennedy grumbled: "Everyone ought to run for office. That's all there is to it."

There is, in politics, something that Michael Beschloss, the historian, calls "a
street personality." Politicians who have not mastered it, he said, do not wear
well.

"Perot does not have the talent that most effective leaders do have, which is to
obscure that Machiavellian side," Mr. Beschloss said. "F.D.R. could be
duplicitous and mean toward many of the people who worked for him, but in public
what people saw was a very warm, smiling, magnetic person. Reagan, as we know
more and more, could be very tough and ruthless, but publicly, he was a wizard
at coming across as the nice guy."

The campaign magnifying glass turned last week on the man now jeered by some as
Hercule Perot. Just as George Bush and Bill Clinton have been scrutinized
intensively, now comes the moment to inspect Ross Perot's character and
political adroitness.

In a series of waspish exchanges with Republicans and reporters about his
purported penchant for snooping, Mr. Perot discovered just how difficult it is
to perform without the political mask worn comfortably by those who have eaten
endless bad chicken dinners and suffered an impudent press corps.

Questioned on the details of his reported investigations of friends and foes,
Mr. Perot's laugh seemed a bit too intense, his tone a bit too sarcastic, and
his dismissals a bit too snappish. At moments, in his televised appearances, the
mood was more Captain Queeg than Harry Truman.

Mr. Perot's strained smile reflected his discomfort. "I love this, I love this,"
he observed to Bryant Gumbel on NBC's "Today" show, biting off his words in a
manner that suggested it was not going down well with him at all. "Everybody
loves to bing, bing, bing me on specifics."

He repeatedly told interrogators he would do things on his own terms, at his own
time, in his own way.

Mr. Perot may not like the kind of sharp-edged attention he has received of
late, but James David Barber, the author of "The Presidential Character," said
it is essential to fill in the biographical portrait.

'In Charge of Our Lives'

"When we look at character, we're not talking about whether this guy will go to
hell or to heaven or whether we like him or not," Mr. Barber said. "This person
will be in charge of our lives."

There is much to be learned about temperament from the way a leader deals with
his opponents. Ronald Reagan deftly brushed off Jimmy Carter by saying, "There
you go again," and disarmed his Soviet foes with jokes and tales of Hollywood.
Franklin Roosevelt mocked criticism that he had used a cruiser to pick up his
terrier, Fala, by saying that the charge of wasting money made the little dog's
"Scotch soul furious."

Richard Nixon, by contrast, drew up enemies' lists and tapped the telephones of
his own White House aides. And George Bush was willing to exploit the racially
charged symbol of Willie Horton to best Michael Dukakis. Although Mr. Bush and
Mr. Perot have made a great show of promising not to use personal attacks
against their opponents, they both have a history that's rife with just such
activity. Kevin Phillips, a conservative political analyst, points up the irony
of Mr. Perot, who has gotten all the attention this week for his investigations,
matched against George Bush, the first former Central Intelligence Agency
director to become president. Mr. Bush, who loved his C.I.A. appointment so much
that he began signing notes "Head Spook," was deeply influenced by his time at
the agency. "It's not as if Perot is showing his investigative mode against an
ordinary president," Mr. Phillips said.

Certainly, Mr. Perot is a master at media manipulation -- he even arranged to
have his own hagiography written by Ken Follett in "On Wings of Eagles." But
while he has developed a plain-speaking, tough-talking persona that has worked
for him in business, a campaign in full cry is another story. The Texas tycoon
replaced Dan ("You say potato, I say potatoe") Quayle as last week's target of
late-night comics. Ross Perot not only sicced a gumshoe on the President's sons,
Jay Leno joked, but also "had Millie investigated by McGruff the Crime Dog."

Echoes of Reagan

Evidently, Mr. Perot's plan is to paint himself as a take-charge Ronald Reagan
sort, even as he casts George Bush as an ineffectual Jimmy Carter type.

In some ways, Mr. Perot is strikingly similar to Mr. Reagan. He casts himself as
the outsider with homespun homilies and a few simple ideas: Let's face the
facts. Let's all stop bickering. Let's get the job done.

And he would like to persuade Americans, as Mr. Reagan once did, that they are
not better off than they were four years ago and that they should not put up
with, as a headline about Mr. Carter put it, "more mush from the wimp."

The message has a strong appeal at a time when the economy is lousy and when
there is a sense of national drift and disgust with government -- a time, in
fact, much like 1980, when Mr. Carter presided.

If Mr. Perot is starting to look like a shorter, snippier Mr. Reagan, then Mr.
Bush has taken on that Carter glaze. Just as Mr. Carter began to look small and
lonely in his photographs, so Mr. Bush looked slumped and isolated as he walked
across the White House lawn with an old raincoat in a recent photograph. "George
Bush starring as Willie Loman," Dennis Miller, the comedian, called the picture.

Mr. Bush's photograph is on the latest cover of National Review, attached to a
balloon quote that says of the Perot challenge, "And then right out of nowhere
comes this killer rabbit." The Bush-Carter analogy was reinforced by Mr. Perot's
published recollection that once, upset about the way Vice President Bush was
handling the issue of servicemen missing in Vietnam, he snapped at him: "This
world is full of lions and tigers and rabbits. And you're a rabbit."

It is beginning to dawn on the Bush people that, while they drove the stake
through the heart of Michael Dukakis' message of competence, they did not kill
the public's yearning for competence.

It is this bleak mood that Mr. Perot has divined, presenting himself as a
mechanic who will crawl under the hood and fix the engine. "I will give them
everything I've got, night and day, to rebuild the cities, reindustrialize
America, pay down the debt, and rebuild the schools," he said.

In recent days, Mr. Bush has suddenly rediscovered the name of his predecessor.
In a speech to the Republican college students in Washington on Thursday, he
mentioned Mr. Reagan's name four times.

Meanwhile, Bill Clinton looks better, but only because he has been beleaguered
for so long that merely fading from view is an improvement. "He's like the big
friendly bassett watching the two snarling whippets," fretted a Republican
campaign official.

Once again, the 1992 race is turning on negatives.

LOAD-DATE: June 28, 1992

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1992 The New York Times Company


                              273 of 281 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                  June 28, 1992, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

Conversations/Margery Tabankin;
Hollywood Takes Politics Seriously, But Wants a Little Respect

BYLINE: By BERNARD WEINRAUB

SECTION: Section 4; Page 7; Column 1; Week in Review Desk

LENGTH: 1219 words


HOLLYWOOD'S liberals are in turmoil. What to do? "The Perot factor has everybody
stupefied," said Margery Tabankin, executive director of the Hollywood Women's
Political Committee, whose members include many of the powerful filmmakers,
agents and performers in Hollywood who donate fistfuls of dollars to Democratic
candidates who come out and ask -- even plead -- for funds.

As a Democrat, she's worried about the Clinton campaign. "I guess I'm surprised
at how long it's taking people here to get involved in it."

Ms. Tabankin, a respected political organizer, is at the center of Hollywood's
Democratic community, an activist who chooses her words carefully about the rich
and liberal who serve as patrons to Democrats trooping into their hilltop
fortresses. (The most common sign on lawns in Beverly Hills doesn't say "Bush,"
"Clinton" or "Perot," but "Armed Response.")

Now, with Hollywood's liberal community in limbo over the Presidential race, Ms.
Tabankin and her committee are concentrating almost entirely on raising money
for candidates in the effort to elect more women to the Senate. This Wednesday,
the group, led by stars like Barbra Streisand and Goldie Hawn, expects to raise
$300,000 for nine Democratic women Senate challengers who will show up at a
reception at a Beverly Hills hotel. For the town's power brokers, attendance is
mandatory. The players in Hollywood take their politics very seriously.

Ms. Tabankin has heard all the criticisms of the way Hollywood anoints
politicians. She knows that Presidential candidates like Jimmy Carter, Walter F.
Mondale and Michael S. Dukakis rolled their eyes whenever they came here for
campaign money and had to pass litmus tests on issues ranging from Central
America to abortion rights to the environment. (Once, when the singer Diana Ross
inexplicably asked Mr. Carter what he was going to do about Vietnam, he replied
tartly: "The war's over.")

If the candidates feel so put upon, says Ms. Tabankin, "They shouldn't come out
here. Just because you live in Hollywood doesn't mean you shouldn't have a
passport to be involved. You say why should these candidates come into people's
living rooms to justify their lives?

'An Awful, Stupid System'

"Well in the best possible world, they wouldn't have to do that. There'd be a
campaign finance bill. It's an awful, stupid system. There should be some kind
of spending limit or no political action committees. But this is the way it is.
The system set up this process and Hollywood gets criticized for its generosity
and then gets further criticized for the way it responds. The people here can't
be pure about everything."

She knows about the millionaire producers who lecture politicians on
environmental issues, but who are driven about in gas-guzzling limos and live in
homes that burn enough electricity to light a dozen villages in India. She knows
how silly some Hollywood liberals sound when they're convinced their opinions
carry great weight. Just the other day, Norman Lear was asked by a reporter
whether he was supporting Mr. Perot. "I can't tell you," he said sternly. "I'm
writing an Op-Ed page piece about it."

Ms. Tabankin says with a shrug, "In terms of hypocrisy, I don't think
Hollywood's different than any other town. It has its hypocrites. It has its
summer soldiers. It has its people who think social change is a party. But I
also think that it's a much more public place than other places and maybe you
see the hypocrisy a little bit more."

Ms. Tabankin has been a political activist since she was a teenager. During the
Carter Administration, Ms. Tabankin was director of VISTA (Volunteers In Service
to America), which sought to educate and organize the poor. In the 1980's, she
moved from Washington to Los Angeles to help Ms. Streisand set up a
philanthropic foundation. In 1988 she was named executive director of the
Hollywood Women's Political Committee, which had been established four years
earlier in response to the conservative swing across the country. The group,
which has 200 members who pay dues of $1,500 a year, has raised close to $4
million for Democratic candidates.

Ms. Tabankin shuttles back and forth between Washington and Los Angeles. In Los
Angeles, she says, "People don't feel depressed, they don't feel cynical, they
still feel change is possible. I just returned from Washington and the
difference is very stark. Washington is so negative because of the attitude of
the country towards them. People haven't given up here.

"The people I deal with have chosen to leave their corporate entertainment
industry at the door," she said. Ms. Tabankin says the Hollywood liberal
community can afford to take absolutist positions on issues precisely because
they aren't politicians. She doesn't quite acknowledge that many people she
works with are startlingly naive.

"Now they may have some pure standards," she allows. "And it is not so much out
of naivete, which I know the candidates think it is. It's more about compromise.
Everything about politics is compromise.

'Why Compromise?'

"But in Hollywood, people say 'Why compromise?' They have no real self-interest.
Rather than look at people in Hollywood as a naive group who put candidates
through a litmus test to see if they are pure on apartheid or another issue, I
think they are a group of really privileged wealthy people who can take an
honest position and put it on the line to these candidates." But critics
consider the views of the really privileged with extreme bemusement.

"Of course there's a group of people who wait for something to be the trendy,
cool thing, to see which way the wind is blowing, who don't want to be
associated with failure," she said. "But on the flip side are people who are
willing to go out on a limb and be controversial. Nobody's manager or agent
wants them to be controversial.

"Showing up at a fund-raiser to fight a disease or help a charity is important
-- I'm not putting that down at all. But it's a lot different from giving money
and being photographed at an abortion rights march, which is bound to upset some
of your audience."

Ms. Tabankin works part-time as an adviser to Ms. Streisand, whose foundation
gives about $1 million annually to groups that deal largely with environmental
issues, AIDS, civil liberties, abortion rights and Jewish affairs. She gave a
partial list of celebrities committed to specific causes: Robert Redford, Ted
Danson and Ed Begley, Jr. on the environment. Jill Eikenberry, Polly Bergen,
Morgan Fairchild and Dana Delany on abortion rights.

"I try to work with celebrities who live the values they speak," she said. "I
try never to work with them where it's a direct conflict with what would be
believable about their lives." A couple of film producers even spend Sundays now
on clothing and food distribution at the First A.M.E. Church in South-Central
Los Angeles, she said. (Most celebrities spend their Sundays in Malibu.)

"What I like most is the incredible energy and lack of cynicism of the people I
work with," Ms. Tabankin said. "This is not, 'Let's show up at somebody's house
for wine and cheese.' They want to get involved. A lot of them don't think of
themselves as experts or don't take themselves that seriously. That's certainly
different than Washington."

NAME: Margery Tabankin

LOAD-DATE: June 28, 1992

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo: Margery Tabankin in her Los Angeles office last week. (Bart
Bartholomew for The New York Times)

TYPE: Biography

                   Copyright 1992 The New York Times Company


                              274 of 281 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                  June 28, 1992, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

The Man From Texarkana

SECTION: Section 1; Page 1; Column 5; National Desk

LENGTH: 145 words


"You can talk about I.B.M., E.D.S., the Naval Academy -- they all had an
influence on Ross," a longtime business associate says. "But none of that really
matters. Ross was formed before he left Texarkana."

Ever since childhood, Ross Perot has been driven by a powerful impulse to rescue
people and things. In his very first rescue mission, at the age of 12, he
surrendered his own name and took that of his dead older brother to assuage his
father's grief.

But as he embarks on what he sees as his grandest rescue mission yet, a familiar
pattern emerges: from the P.O.W.'s in Vietnam to his employees in Teheran to the
troubles at General Motors, Ross Perot's rescue missions never quite go
according to plan.

In a 15,000-word article, Law
rence Wright, a Texas author, takes a close look at the life and legend of Ross
Perot.

Magazine, Section 6.

LOAD-DATE: June 28, 1992

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo: Cover of New York Times magazine.

TYPE: Summary

                   Copyright 1992 The New York Times Company


                              275 of 281 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                  June 28, 1992, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

Spies & Thrillers

BYLINE: By Newgate Callendar

SECTION: Section 7; Page 28; Column 2; Book Review Desk

LENGTH: 808 words


Suppose Hitler had won World War II. That is the premise of Robert Harris's
absorbing, expertly written novel, FATHERLAND (Random House, $21).

"Churchill and his gang of warmongers had fled to Canada," Mr. Harris's
protagonist recalls 20 years later. "When America had defeated Japan by
detonating an atomic bomb, the Fuhrer had sent a V-3 rocket to explode in the
skies over New York to prove he could retaliate in kind if struck. After that,
the war had dwindled to a series of bloody guerrilla conflicts at the fringes of
the new German Empire: a nuclear stalemate the diplomats called the cold war."

It is 1964. Hitler's 75th birthday is coming up, and the fatherland prepares to
celebrate. The climax, and a big birthday present it is, will be the arrival in
Berlin of the President of the United States -- Joseph P. Kennedy Sr.

Mr. Harris, a columnist for The Sunday Times of London and the author of
"Selling Hitler: The Story of the Hitler Diaries," depicts a fearsome German
state, completely regimented. Everybody spies on everybody else, and that
includes a 10-year-old boy who informs on his father. The boy is the son of a
homicide investigator, Xavier March, who is not a Nazi and tries to maintain
some kind of independence.

March is working on a case. The body of an elderly man has been fished out of
the river, and he turns out to be one of the founders of the Nazi Party. It
appears to be death by accidental drowning. But March finds a witness who saw
three men at the scene of the murder and can identify one of them, a Nazi thug
high up in police circles.

The Gestapo eventually orders March off the case, since his investigation may
serve to undermine the detente that Hitler seeks with the United States. In the
best traditions of the American private eye, March takes matters into his own
hands, to his extreme peril. He is helped by an American journalist, a woman,
and suddenly her life is in peril too. There are twists and turns, and one or
two surprises before the requiemlike ending.

"Fatherland" is a bleak book. But what concerns the author is the
indestructibility of the human spirit, as exemplified by Xavier March. If
Hitler's Germany is hell, at least a few angels are floating around.

Albert Guerard describes his novel GABRIELLE (Donald I. Fine, $20) as "an
entertainment." Entertaining it is. Gabri elle is a Parisian chambermaid who
helps an American diplomat escape his duties for a night on the town. The man is
just looking for harmless fun, but Gabrielle gets him into trouble that you
wouldn't believe.

This young woman is Lilith by way of Frank Wedekind's Lulu. She is evil
incarnate, yet a seemingly innocent child. She is every man's sex symbol and she
understands men, using her body the way Heifetz used his violin.

Almost everybody in the book symbolizes greed, lust, amorality or hypocrisy.
Does this sound grim? Yes; but the book is not. Mr. Guerard, who has taught
English at Harvard and Stanford, is a wonderful stylist who writes with wry wit,
sophistication and amused detachment.

Two popular authors not at their best in new works are Len Deighton in CITY OF
GOLD (HarperCollins, $20) and Jack Higgins in EYE OF THE STORM (Putnam, $22.95).

Mr. Deighton's City of Gold is Cairo, and the time is 1942. Rommel is on the
move, and the city waits to see what will happen when he arrives. He has
conquered Allied forces because somebody is feeding him information about their
plans.

A British captain is put in charge of an investigation to dig out the mole. We
get a good picture of Egypt and its decadent King Farouk, and we are introduced
to Palestinian Jews fighting for the formation of a Jewish state. But the book
is rather slow-moving. Mr. Deighton turns in a smooth enough but totally
unmemorable performance.

"Eye of the Storm" represents Mr. Higgins at his worst. He is writing about Sean
Dillon, a highly skilled former I.R.A. terrorist, now a freelance hired by Iraq
during the gulf war. Opposed to him is a retired I.R.A. terrorist, now a good
guy, the only one capable of stopping Dillon.

The characters have as much credibility as Saturday morning cartoons. Also, the
ending leaves room for a follow-up. Beware.

If you want really tough stuff, try WINTER OF THE WOLVES, by James N. Frey
(Holt, $19.95). There is a parallel with "Eye of the Storm," in that both books
deal with top killers pitted against each other. But here the writing has punch.
An American agent from a hush-hush agency has retired in disgust. He is called
back, against his will, to deal with an agency man who has defected -- his best
friend.

There are flashbacks to Vietnam and elsewhere. There are moral struggles. There
is a romance. At the end there is a surprise, and disillusion and bitterness
after the two men come face to face. Mr. Frey keeps everything at a constant
boil.

LOAD-DATE: June 28, 1992

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Review

                   Copyright 1992 The New York Times Company


                              276 of 281 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                  June 28, 1992, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

THE 1992 CAMPAIGN;
Excerpts From Interview With Clinton on Goals for Presidency

BYLINE: Special to The New York Times

SECTION: Section 1; Page 17; Column 1; National Desk

LENGTH: 3873 words

DATELINE: LITTLE ROCK, Ark., June 25


Following are excerpts from an interview with Gov. Bill Clinton in the
Governor's Mansion here on Thursday. The questioners were R. W. Apple Jr., B.
Drummond Ayres Jr., Thomas L. Friedman, Steven Greenhouse and Gwen Ifill of The
New York Times. Some questions have been edited or paraphrased because of space
limitations.

Q.  You're about to be nominated by the Democratic Party. Since 1968, when
Lyndon Johnson left office under fire because of the Vietnam War, the Democratic
Party has not nominated a candidate who has managed to attract and sustain a
large following in this country. Only one has won, and he became fairly
unpopular fairly quickly. I wonder if you could summarize for us how you think
you are different from that string of people and how you hope to tell the
American people that you're different.

GOVERNOR CLINTON: The Democrats have had a lot of trouble.

First of all, why they've had trouble. I think it's obvious what happened in
1968. But since then, the American people, or at least the majority of them,
have had questions about whether the Democrats were strong enough to manage the
economy at home, stick up for the interests of the country abroad and articulate
the broad public interest rather than a collection of particular interests.

The American people have voted for Republican Presidents and Democratic
Congresses, a situation which has given us gridlock and quadrupled the debt and
undermined our investments and our economic potential. But I think largely on
something like this, you know: "Republicans would be better Presidents because
they manage the economy better, keep taxes low, stick up for the country abroad,
but the Congress should be Democratic because they care more about the people
that really need help."

What I have tried to do during this campaign, and before through my work with
the Democratic Leadership Council, is to articulate a new approach for the
Democrats that goes beyond where both parties have been, one that emphasizes a
commitment to strong economic growth and opportunity, one that recognizes the
importance of citizens' assuming more responsibility in certain critical areas,
moving from welfare to work, strong child-support enforcement, changes in the
nature of the American workplace and the nature of the American schools. Changes
in the behavior of our corporate executives, up and down the line. And one that
was unabashedly pro-growth and for rebuilding in America a sense of American
strength based on mainstream values.

I have also been a Governor, not a member of Congress, so that I have shown the
ability to stand up to and contend with entrenched forces, to make tough budget
decisions and to bring people together in new and nonconventional partnerships
to make progress. . . .

I think the Democrats have allowed themselves to be put in a very narrow box by
making false choices. I think you can be pro-business and pro-labor. I think you
can be pro-growth and pro-environment. I think you can be tough on crime and
pro-civil rights.

In order for a Democrat to win, you have to broaden the base of the Democratic
Party. You have to be able to do that. You have to prove that you can go beyond
the little boxes that have characterized the Democrats for the last 20-plus
years.

The National Mood

Q.  There is evidence that the common sense of civility and community in this
country is on the point of breaking down: the riots, the low voting pattern, the
crime rates, the sense of disengagement of many people who would normally be
leaders or the sense of isolation and hopelessness of many on the bottom. Are we
dangerously close to having a breakdown in the commonweal, and if so, what would
you do to alter that?

A.  I'm always uncomfortable being a predicter of doom, but I think we're in
real trouble. I think our society is coming apart when it desperately needs to
be coming together. You can see it in rising crime rates; you can see it in the
increasing amount of violence among our young people. And you can see it in
declining participation in elections. You can see it in the number of people who
themselves decline to participate by running. You can see it in the profound
skepticism, bordering on cynicism, of voters who really just don't -- or
citizens who just don't -- think it makes any sense to vote, or who if they vote
basically don't believe their vote will amount to anything, that the system
doesn't work.

I think what you have to do about it is, first of all, remind the American
people that we've been around for 200 years, that is the longest-lasting
democracy, I guess, except for Iceland, in the history of the world.

With all due respect to Iceland, we've got a few more problems. And it's worked
because more than half the time people have done the right thing, and here we've
produced the leadership we've needed, and we've done what we had to do.

The world has changed, and what is killing us today is not the dimensions of our
problems. Although they are quite significant, they are, I believe, in a
historic context not as profound as we faced during the Civil War, the Great
Depression or the two World Wars.

What is killing us is people no longer believe that they're part of a larger
community where they matter, and where they can make a difference. That's why
I've taken the unusual step of doing my best and exposing myself to considerable
criticism in putting forward this plan and hammering it out.

Roosevelt ran for President on a balanced budget. Kennedy ran for President on
getting the country moving again. I've tried to do it in part to break through
the wall of cynicism that exists out there. I don't know -- if it were easy to
do I'd have done it already. But I do think that people are aching to see
America work again, and I think, frankly, a lot of what we're faced with is the
product of a long, slow loss of our economic standing, which is of nearly two
decades' duration now.

Twelve years of Presidents who've told us that Government was bad, taxes were
evil, nothing would ever work, and a system that plainly works only for
organized interest groups and people at the top of the totem poll.

Your newspaper has documented it I guess as graphically as any, the fact that in
the last decade-plus the top 1 percent of the American people have garnered 60
percent, 70 percent of the economic gains and now control more wealth than the
bottom 90 percent for the first time since the 1920's. And I think people just
feel there is nothing they can do about that.

So all I can do about it is run, is tell them what they can do about it and tell
them what I'm trying to do about it, and trying to engage their ears and their
interest. The results so far has been mixed, but I think there's a real shot
that we can do it.

.  .  .

Middle-Class Tax Cuts

Q.  The economic package that you unveiled last Sunday in Atlanta builds in
large part upon some of your previous economic speeches. One place, however,
where it makes a significant departure involves middle-class tax cuts. Why did
you scale back your plan on middle-class tax cuts?

A.  One is, when I originally proposed it in New Hampshire I proposed it as part
of a short-term chance to pump up the economy, as part of a series of five or
six short-term strategies I thought ought to be taken. And secondly, when I did
it, the projected deficit was about $150 billion less than it is now.

Underlying all that was my conviction that there is a great unfairness in our
tax system because we lowered taxes on upper-income Americans, whose incomes
rose steeply in the 1980's, while we raised taxes on middle-class Americans
while their incomes declined.

So what I attempted to do when I revised the program was to merge the
middle-class tax cut at roughly the same size that I proposed in New Hampshire
with the children's tax credit recommended by the National Commission on
Children, which I had also embraced but recommended for a four-year phase-in.
And then let people make a selection: you can have one but not both. You still
wind up with the same middle-class tax relief, more or less, as the
Congressional bills provided, and the children's tax credit, which will be more
helpful to families with children at about half the cost.

I think that is appropriate because I thought we ought to put more money into
investment into this economy, and do that without giving up on trying to make
some attempt at fairness for the people who basically paid for the bill in the
1980's and got the shaft.

.  .  .

The Violence in Sarajevo

Q.  Switching to foreign policy for a second, Governor. In Yugoslavia the
Administration finds itself in a dilemma. They've been waiting for a cease-fire
in Sarajevo, in order to bring in relief convoys. But it's becoming increasingly
apparent that there is going to be no cease-fire, and if you want to bring
humanitarian relief to Sarajevo, you're going to have to do it in the middle of
a war. Clearly, the Administration is on the horns of that dilemma. Do you go
ahead in the middle of a war, or do you wait for a cease-fire that's not going
to happen? If you were in the Oval Office now, what would be your
recommendation?

A.  My recommendation would be to try to get some U.N. agreement about how to
open the airport, and whether to go in with an armed force to keep the airport
open or to go in with an announcement that the United Nations is going in to
open the airport, to bring in humanitarian supplies, and that if any action was
taken, multilateral military support would follow. I think I would be for those
two options.

Q. You would be ready to participate in a multilateral military operation that
could conceivably have to go into Sarajevo to open the airport, to shoot its way
in?

A.  Yes.

.  .  .

America After the Cold War

Q. What is your post-cold-war vision of America's role in the world?

A.  I don't know if there will be a new world order, but there ought to be some
new world principles. I think, I feel, that for the first time in my lifetime,
because of the collapse of the Soviet empire, and the Soviet Union itself, that
it is more possible for us than ever before to be more consistent in the
advocacy of freedom and democracy and human rights, and global economic growth
based on market principles, than ever before.

And I think, my own view, is that one of the things that has gotten the
President in trouble is that while at various junctures he and I have agreed,
and I thought he had good instincts in a particular crisis -- I supported Desert
Storm, for example -- I think there is an inconsistency in a lot of his actions
because of the pull between the impulse, the deep American impulse to support
freedom and democracy, and his own preference for stability in his relationships
with foreign leaders in a given area. So that perhaps, not perhaps, we ended
Desert Storm before we spent another day to destroy 700 tanks and a substantial
portion of the Republican Guard, and then left the Kurds and the Shiites
twisting.

We had a very tepid response to Tiananmen Square, and then restored
most-favored-nation status without requiring any meaningful concessions on human
rights in China. We supported, laudably, the O.A.S. embargo of Haiti but were
too quick to characterize the Haitians as economic rather than political
refugees.

My view would be that the world is not so orderly as it once was, and that gives
us some pause. If you've got Iraq, Iran, North Korea, these other countries
trying to become nuclear powers, we should do all in our power to stop that, and
to keep big, bad things from happening.

But in the absence of that, what we ought to do is to do what we can, whether
it's in South Africa, the Middle East or Asia, to promote the things we believe
in: freedom and democracy and human rights and market economics and global
growth.

.  .  .

The First 100 Days

Q.  You set forward a pretty ambitious plan, not only economic plans but just in
general, for what you would want to do your first 100 days in office. How do you
put priorities on what you can actually get accomplished in the first 100 days?<
HE>

A.  First, I think you have to pass the economic reform package, which includes
incentives for private investment, increased public investment and the education
initiatives. Then I want to try to pass the health-care package, with rigorous
health-care cost controls and a basic package of affordable health care for all
Americans. I think if you don't do those things, it's going to be difficult to
recover our economic growth and to control the budget deficit.

And I realize that's fairly daunting, but we have had bursts of activity in the
first 100 days of Presidencies before, in times of national emergencies, and I
think that people perceive this as a time of crisis, when we need to make a real
turn in what we're doing.

And my belief is we can do it if the people decide to elect me because I'm
running on it. That is, the reason I've gone to the trouble of trying to lay out
my priorities in real detail is so that we can not only give the American people
a referendum on it but send a message to Congress that it's O.K. to do this,
that this is what the American people want, that they're ready to take this kind
of a stand and to take this kind of action.

And in a more simple way, but equally effective, that's what Reagan did in 1980.


.  .  .

Q.  As part of your plan for changing the way the Federal Government deals with
welfare, you talk about leaving people on welfare for two years tops, and then
cutting them if they are able to get a job. What if the economy doesn't allow --
for some reason all your growth plans don't take hold, there aren't a lot of
jobs out there and Congress, or someone, is pressuring you to provide
extentions, exceptions, to the rule. How does a program like that work?

A.  My argument will be that we should have a network of community-service
employment, that it ought to be part of this whole national service movement
that I'm trying to create, and that four years from now there'll still be a lot
of work that needs to be done in communities throughout the country that can be
done by people who will move from welfare to a public service-related job like
working in day care centers, for example, or other community-related work. . . .

That will make the notion of welfare as a second chance, not a way of life, a
reality. If you don't create an undergirding of public-service jobs,
community-service jobs, you won't be able to do it.

Bringing About Change

Q.  You put considerable emphasis on what you want to do by way of changing the
culture of Washington that has existed since the New Deal: the idea that more
employees are better, that new programs require new departments, that spending
is the most logical solution to problems. Quite a number of Presidents have come
to Washington and said we have to reverse this. The people in these entrenched
institutions will say,  "We've heard all this before?" How are you going to go
after them, what do you have in store for them?

A.  . . . We have got to engage the American Government in the same sort of
restructuring -- or perestroika, if you will -- that a lot of private companies
have been going through for the last 10 years. They did it because they had no
choice, they were in the global economy. . . .

And let me make one little point on that. Productivity growth in America is
quite low compared to Germany and Japan. In manufacturing, it's actually pretty
brisk, it's about 4 percent a year. So in the services and in Government, it's
very low. We still have more Government employees per capita at the national
level in America than German and Japan and Great Britain, even though we have a
more active local government system through states and localities than they do.

That gives you an idea of how basically we have not kept up in the productivity
curve. And I'm going to make it a general argument that we have to be productive
in Government, we need to invest more and consume less of tax dollars, and that
here is a specific agenda. And I know that it hasn't worked in times past, but I
think partly the times may not have been right. I think this is a better time
now.

.  .  .

Cutting Entitlement Programs

Q.  One of the questions many people have about your economics plan is that it
fails to say how much money would be saved by cutting entitlements. Many people
say that the heart of the deficit problem is spiraling entitlement costs,
especially Medicare and Medicaid. How much money do you think you could save
through changing the programs? And how would you change them?

A.  Well, I say, in outline at least, in my plan how I would change them. But
the reason I didn't put those numbers in there is that I assume that the money
we save in reforming the Medicare and Medicaid system will be approximately what
would be needed to pay for the Government's part of providing the basic package
of health care to uninsured Americans. And we are working on those numbers now,
so I, you know, explicitly left that out.

Let me back up just a minute, if I may, if we could just discuss the
entitlements issue, because I do think that the people are concerned about --
they are right to be concerned about it -- the entitlements are driving the
deficit. But most people have the wrong prescription for it. That is, most
people think that the thing that would fix the entitlements is to subject more
Social Security income to taxation and to raise the costs of Medicare to
upper-income people. When we ran any conceivable set of numbers on that is very
modest revenues. The next big chunk of the entitlements is the growth of poverty
in the 80's.

Now one of the things we don't have in our numbers that we should have put in
that we're trying to work out now is what the impact on entitlements will be
with the earned-income tax credit to lift the working poor out of poverty. If
you really want people from welfare to work, if you do get the growth and you,
by definition, reduce poverty, what will that impact be on the entitlements?
That's the second, that's the second-biggest contributor to entitlements.

And the biggest contributor is what you pointed out: it's health-care cost
increases. They're being budgeted now at 11, 12 percent a year, more or less
indefinitely. What we've got to do is to bring them down, you know, as close to
inflation as we can.

I think in order to do it you're going to have to reorganize the entire
health-care marketplace. I think you have to do the following things: One,
mandate national insurance reform. . . . That is, everybody gets broad-base
rating systems, so that no one gets turned down, you don't lose your job -- your
health care -- if you change jobs. And there's a broad pool . . . which will
eliminate some of the insurers from the market, if Hawaii's experience is any
guide.

And two, a basic package of comprehensive benefits that has to be at the core of
any private or public package, which will enable you to simplify billing and
slash a lot of administrative costs. Only 84 cents on the dollar in America in
health insurance goes to health care. . . .

The third thing you have to do is give people strong incentives to be in health
networks and organizations that basically enable you to pay for a year and get
what you need.

.  .  .

Relations With Japan

Q.  As we now enter this post-cold-war era, it seems increasingly obvious that
we need a coherent economic, political, diplomatic policy toward Japan to repair
what is clearly an increasingly fraying relationship. I wonder if you've given
any thought to that question.

A.  I think that the United States policy toward Japan should begin with the
statement that this may well be our most important bilateral relationship now,
with the collapse of the Soviet Union, both positive and negative. That we have
serious differences of opinion . . . but that we are two great democracies, the
two greatest economic powers along with the emerging unified Europe. And that
the world is very much dependent on our having arrangements between the United
States, Japan and Europe which promote global growth. So that it would not be in
Japan's interest or America's to continually struggle economically. . . .

Then I think we should, the beginning of it should be, try to articulate kind of
a comprehensive agreement that we're going to try to work out a shared
understanding of our acknowledged relationship, of our respective national
security and multinational and multilateral responsibilities, and our
responsibilities for the developing world.

.  .  .

Foreign-Policy Experience

Q.  Why should I as a voter want to put the management of foreign affairs in the
hands of a man who's been nothing more than the Governor of Arkansas?

A.  Because the first and most urgent task for us to do is to rebuild our
strength here at home, as the Japanese trade mission pointed out as painfully as
anything ever could. That if we're not strong at home we can't be strong abroad.
The foot-dragging, which I lament, on the Soviet aid package is another evidence
of that. If the Congress tries to find a way to justify to its constituents
something that America, in my view, plainly ought to do. . . .

So because -- and because I'm -- of the three choices, I am the best, most
likely to rebuild America's strength at home and therefore to give us the
emotional and political freedom to engage the world. Because as a Governor I
have been involved heavily in international economics over the last 10 years,
and that is the core of our, our new foreign policy, at least a part of it.
Because I have been willing to outline the conditions under which I thought it
would be appropriate to use force, and what other things we ought to do. And I
have been more detailed on how I think we should proceed in the future even than
President Bush and certainly than Mr. Perot.

So for all those reasons, I think I can be trusted to be Commander in Chief.

.  .  .

The Perot Factor

Q.  Governor, there has been quite a little dust-up going on with Mr. Perot in
the last four or five days. Where do you think this has left Mr. Perot, and what
is your situation in relation to it?<HE>

A.  I think it's a little soon to be absolutely sure of where it's left him.
It's obvious that you're dealing with two guys who really don't like each other,
who really, really don't like each other. And it's now become apparent to the
public that this goes back some years, at least to 1986, maybe years before. I
mean, they've both been Republican insiders since the Nixon years. And so, you
know, who knows how far it goes back.

What I've been saying on the stump, and it's about the same as anything I could
say to you, is that Bush has complained that Perot has investigated him, and we
know that the Republican committee has got, now with the demise of the K.G.B.,
they've got the best investigative apparatus in the world.

I'm spending my time trying to investigate the problems of the country. . . .

NAME: Bill Clinton

LOAD-DATE: July 20, 1992

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo: "In order for a Democrat to win, you have to broaden the base of
the Democratic Party," said Gov. Bill Clinton, shown in his office in Little
Rock, Ark. (Paul Hosefros/The New York Times)

TYPE: BiographyText

                   Copyright 1992 The New York Times Company


                              277 of 281 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                  June 28, 1992, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

Pinch-Hitting for Dostoyevsky

BYLINE: By Bill Kent;  Bill Kent's latest novel, "Down by the Sea," will be
published next year.

SECTION: Section 7; Page 14; Column 1; Book Review Desk

LENGTH: 1194 words



THE BROTHERS K
By David James Duncan.
645 pp. New York:
Doubleday.
$22.50.

THE 19th-century Russian novel has been born again in "The Brothers K," David
James Duncan's wildly excessive, flamboyantly sentimental, tear-jerking,
thigh-slapping homage to Dostoyevsky and Tolstoy -- and the game of baseball.

For the title isn't merely a spin on "The Brothers Karamazov," though Mr. Duncan
makes frequent references to that heavy tome. "K," we are reminded, is also the
baseball-scorecard symbol for striking out -- and thus, as Mr. Duncan
extrapolates it, for failing, flunking, pratfalling, making a bad situation even
worse. But it can have a positive side as well. "To lose your very self for the
sake of another," he adds, "is . . . the only way you're ever going to save it."

The strikeout kids are the brothers Chance, four boys of the baby-boom
generation born to Hugh Chance, a worldly-wise and weary fastball-slinging
minor-league pitcher, and Laura, Hugh's staunchly conservative Seventh-day
Adventist wife. Kincaid, the novel's principal narrator; his brothers, Everett,
Irwin and Peter, and their twin sisters, Beatrice and Winifred, grow up in
Camas, Wash., a working-class town where Hugh supplements his meager baseball
salary by working at the local paper mill.

Everyone believes that Papa Chance is destined for the big leagues -- until an
accident at the mill crushes the thumb on his pitching hand. Laura declares that
this, like all tragedies, is God's will, and that nothing can be done to make it
better. The family settles for a life of noisy desperation until a foulmouthed
surgeon offers to repair the injured thumb with bones from Papa's toe. Thus Hugh
Chance is reborn as his team's pitching coach and "stupid situation reliever,"
known, of course, as Papa Toe.

For a while, the national pastime, seen on television and from rump-punishing
bleachers far from the bright lights of the major leagues, becomes a complex
metaphor for all that Papa Chance and his sons hold sacred. Everett, the eldest,
even goes so far as to mark the beginning of the turbulent 60's not with the
Kennedy assassination or the arrival of the Beatles but with the day Roger Maris
became "the assassin of a legend," hitting 61 home runs and breaking Babe Ruth's
single-season record.

But the family romance with baseball fades a bit as the brothers mature. In a
manner similar to Dostoyevsky's manipulation of the Karamazovs, Mr. Duncan's
Chance brothers become representative types of America's countercultural youth,
whose passions, he suggests with oversimplified hindsight, were due more to
spiritual uncertainty than to politics, the Vietnam War or that famed hedonistic
trio -- sex, drugs and rock-and-roll.

Everett declares himself an atheist and becomes a long-haired campus radical,
eventually fleeing to Canada to escape the draft. Peter, the family
intellectual, embraces Eastern mysticism and departs for India to study obscure
religious texts. Irwin, who clings to his mother's rigorous faith, trusts
blindly that God will protect him when he is drafted and sent to Vietnam. And
Kincaid, who escapes the military because of an eye injury, tries to hold an
increasingly estranged family together as he sees his older brothers venture out
into the world beyond Camas.

After taking a swipe at the sentimental, up-from-despair endings of Frank Capra
movies, Mr. Duncan delivers a more drawn-out but no less crowd-pleasing
conclusion. Along the way we are shown that evil exists in the world to make
more good, that villains are needed to bring out the heroic in common men and
that faith in some kind of divine presence lies at the end of all quests,
whether or not we are aware that we are questing.

Those who have lived through, perhaps even inhaled, the intoxicating fervor of
the 1960's and early 70's will delight in Mr. Duncan's flip wisdom and period
nostalgia. The pages of "The Brothers K" sparkle with puns and jokes, with
tie-dyed references to pop culture. And they're tinged with Mr. Duncan's
steadfastly romantic view of baseball and its thankless, gritty farm-team
circuit.

Still, one can't help noticing that Mr. Duncan's attempt to define the secular
passions of the era in spiritual terms avoids two major movements: civil rights
and feminism. Blacks are hardly seen or heard in this book and, with the
exception of proud, suffering Laura Chance, women surface mostly as incomplete
characters content to be the objects -- or victims -- of male desire.

Mr. Duncan's first novel, "The River Why," celebrated and satirized the
Emersonian quest for mystical transcendence in fly fishing. "The Brothers K,"
published almost a decade later, goes further to plumb America's soul, trying to
find common ground between the rigid fundamentalism of the religious right and
the feckless, go-with-the-flow spirituality of the counter culture.

In trying to justify the ways of God to man, fathers to sons, sinners to saints,
the United States to Vietnam and baseball to everything under the sun, Mr.
Duncan seems a trifle overambitious. And this, along with his tendency to
sermonize, leads him away from his book's true strength: his warm, unabashedly
sentimental celebration of the American family. As individuals, the Chances may
be strikeouts. But as a family, they can survive the stolen bases, spitballs and
dumb luck that keep life, and the national pastime, interesting. In "The
Brothers K," this message lands with the loud, confident smack of a high fly
ball caught in an outfielder's glove. One leaves Mr. Duncan's stadium with a
happy glow.



'K' IS FOR FAILURE

David James Duncan had been working on his second novel for two years when he
happened to reread "The Brothers Karamazov." "I found there were a lot of
parallels," he said in a recent telephone interview from his home in Portland,
Ore. "There's an inquisition scene of sorts, an exile, a murder scene, a public
scandal." He decided to call his own novel "The Brothers K," and use it "to poke
fun at the similarities."

"But the main thing I was thinking," he added, explaining the book's title, "is
the baseball statistician's lingo. A 'K' is a strikeout, which is a personal
failure. I love the fact that a man who is considered a success in baseball has
a 30 percent success rate -- in other words, a 70 percent failure rate."

Like Hugh Chance in the novel, Mr. Duncan's father was a pitcher. "He was an
outstanding city-league softball pitcher. He batted about .500 every year." Like
Peter, one of Hugh Chance's sons, Mr. Duncan studied Eastern religions. But
unlike Irwin, the youngest, he did not go to Vietnam.

"I was spared that one by a high lottery number," he recalled. "I was actually a
fruitarian at the time and was planning to escape the draft by being
underweight."

Also like the Chance children, Mr. Duncan, who is 40 years old, was raised in
the Seventh-day Adventist faith. "I knew I was going to take on the
fundamentalist upbringing," he said. "It feels natural to me to waffle between
extreme reverence and extreme irreverence -- and nothing makes me feel less
reverent than a church." -- SUSANNAH HUNNEWELL

LOAD-DATE: June 28, 1992

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo: David James Duncan. (Douglas Frank/Doubleday)

TYPE: Review

                   Copyright 1992 The New York Times Company


                              278 of 281 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                  June 28, 1992, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

THE 1992 CAMPAIGN: Candidate's Record;
Perot Pursued Charges Against Official for Years

BYLINE: By KAREN DE WITT with MICHAEL KELLY,  Special to The New York Times

SECTION: Section 1; Page 18; Column 1; National Desk

LENGTH: 1726 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, June 26


The rivalry between Ross Perot and Richard L. Armitage, the senior Pentagon
official on prisoner of war issues in the Reagan Administration, is now a
well-known part of the lore surrounding Mr. Perot's candidacy.

To counter the impression that he is vengeful and prone to vendettas, Mr.  Perot
has depicted his involvement with investigations of Mr. Armitage as an isolated
incident motivated by patriotic concern and inspired largely by a chance meeting
with a police officer who brought his suspicions of Mr. Armitage to Mr. Perot.

But a review of the matter shows that Mr. Perot's pursuit of accusations against
Mr. Armitage stretched over more than three years and involved an elaborate set
of purposeful contacts.

As recently as Wednesday, in an interview on the NBC News program "Today," Mr.
Perot left the impression that his interest in Mr. Armitage began and largely
ended with accusations brought, unsolicited, to him by a police officer from
Arlington, Va. in 1986.

"An undercover police officer brought me a complete file," Mr. Perot told the
interviewer, Bryant Gumbel.

'I Handed It to the F.B.I.'

"People said he wanted to talk to me, asked me to call him, set up a meeting,"
Mr. Perot said. "I asked him if he wanted to see me. He came to my hotel room.
He presented this information. And here is what I did with it: I gave it to the
appropriate law-enforcement authorities, walked away from it, and that's it.
Now, that is not chasing down information on someone. That's having someone
bring it to you. And I handed it to the F.B.I., and that's the end of that."

In interviews and public statements since he became an unannounced Presidential
contender in late February, Mr. Perot has often described his meeting with the
police officer, James L. Badey, as being at Mr. Badey's instigation, a
mysterious encounter in which Mr. Badey appeared out of the night, knocked on
Mr. Perot's hotel room door, and handed over a file on Mr. Armitage. But after
Mr. Badey began challenging that account in interviews over the last few weeks,
Mr. Perot began to back off his earlier story, saying, when pressed, that he
could not really recall the details.

In fact, Mr. Perot did not drop the matter after simply passing the information
on to the F.B.I. For more than three years after this initial encounter, he
sought information about Mr. Armitage, then the Assistant Secretary of Defense
for International Security Affairs, and encouraged Government investigations
into the case.

James Squires, Mr. Perot's campaign spokesman, says Mr. Perot took up the issue
with the Vice President, George Bush, with the Secretary of Defense and with the
F.B.I. director at the time, William H. Webster. He also broached the matter
with reporters. He served as a conduit for a wide array of assertions about Mr.
Armitage, supplying, among other items, information to the F.B.I. in 1986 on Mr.
Armitage's relationship with a Vietnamese-American restaurant owner, a woman who
had been convicted of running an illicit gambling operation, a football pool, in
Northern Virginia.

Cleared After Investigation

An F.B.I. investigation cleared Mr. Armitage of any criminal activity.

Mr. Armitage, who now coordinates United States aid to the former Soviet Union,
has said he was a longtime friend of the Vietnamese-American woman and her
family. He acknowledges that he erred in writing a recommendation of leniency
for the woman on Pentagon stationery.

Mr. Badey, the police officer who provided information to Mr. Perot, said in an
interview on Wednesday that he had discovered the connection between Mr.
Armitage and the Vietnamese-American woman and had become frustrated by the lack
of response when he had given the information to "the respective Federal
authorities." Mr. Badey said that he put out word among "activists and concerned
citizens" that he would be willing to share his information with someone who
could make the Government pay attention.

"I'm sure someone along the line said, 'Would you share this with Perot,' " said
Mr. Badey. "In the summer of '86, he called and we had a conversation. He said,
'Do you want to share this information.' "

Mr. Badey said he met Mr. Perot in the Texan's room at the Madison Hotel here.
"I just went over and knocked on his door," he said.

Elaborate Conspiracy Theory

In that same period, Mr. Perot was also in touch with Daniel Sheehan about Mr.
Armitage. Mr. Sheehan is general counsel to a not-for-profit investigative group
in Washington, the Christic Institute, which uses civil suits as its primary
weapon in support of leftist political causes.

Mr. Squires says Mr. Perot cannot remember who initiated his contact with Mr.
Sheehan.

Mr. Sheehan had named Mr. Armitage as a defendant in a Federal civil lawsuit
that also charged two dozen leaders of the contra rebels in Nicaragua and a
number of former Central Intelligence Agency and military officials with being
part of an elaborate conspiracy. The suit said Mr. Armitage had been involved in
arms and narcotics smuggling in Southeast Asia in the 1970's and that this was
tied to financing for covert activities stretching from Central America to the
Middle East.

In 1988, Judge James L. King of Federal district court dismissed the suit as
baseless, accused Mr. Sheehan of fraud and fined the Christic Institute $1
million, a verdict later upheld by the Supreme Court.

A Call From Perot

Mr. Sheehan said Mr. Perot first telephoned him on Oct. 21, 1986, after seeing
Mr. Sheehan giving televised testimony before a Congressional committee. "He
said, 'Hello, this is Ross Perot. I heard you've got all kinds of important
information about some really bad actors. I've gotten wind of the same stuff,
and we need to talk about it.' "

According to Mr. Sheehan, the suspicions about Mr. Armitage were only a small
part of a gigantic conspiracy he described as arching over several decades and
continents, stretching from the Vietnam War to the Iran-contra affair, with
stops at various smaller wars and scandals in between.

Mr. Sheehan is the principal author of that conspiracy theory, an elaborate
construct involving assertions about a cabal of Nicaraguan contra leaders, drug
lords, United States military officers, intelligence agents and other Government
officials. Mr. Sheehan claims this group, which he calls the Secret Team, had
plotted and executed something called the Enterprise, a vast and almost
impossibly complicated scheme of smuggling drugs and weapons, assassinations and
the corruption of United States foreign policy. In his suit, Mr. Sheehan's
written explanation of the conspiracy consumes 287 pages of densely plotted
story.

Mr. Squires said today that Mr. Perot met Mr. Sheehan only once and that he "had
no influence at all on his feelings about Armitage." Mr. Squires could not say
whether Mr. Perot accepted Mr. Sheehan's conspiracy theory.

'Only Contact They Ever Had'

"Mr. Perot remembered Sheehan spilling out his ideas about what was going on in
Nicaragua," said Mr. Squires. "That's the only contact they ever had, that plane
ride, and Perot remembers that as a conversation primarily being about
Nicaragua. He does not have a precise recollection that mirrors what Sheehan's
theory was. It's very difficult for me to characterize what Mr. Perot believed
or did not believe. I cannot characterize what he believed."

Mr. Sheehan, however, says there at least six occasions, giving dates and
circumstances, when he discussed the conspiracy theory with Mr. Perot.

Mr. Perot, Mr. Sheehan said, proposed taking information to George Bush, then
the Vice President. But Mr. Sheehan suggested to Mr. Perot that Mr. Bush was
part of the conspiracy and advised Mr. Perot to go instead to the F.B.I.
Director, Mr. Webster.

Mr. Perot did, and he apparently took Mr. Sheehan's accusations to several other
high Government officials, including Mr. Bush, as well.

"I believe he had repeated them to a number of people in Washington, to Bill
Webster, to people in the White House and to the Secretary of Defense," said
Oliver B. (Buck) Revell, who was then the assistant deputy director of the
F.B.I. in charge of field investigations, and is now the chief of the agency's
Dallas bureau.

When President Bush nominated Mr. Armitage in April 1989 to be Secretary of the
Army, Mr. Revell authorized a standard White House investigation into the
nomination, including the charges about him that Mr. Perot had raised with Mr.
Webster.

Mr. Revell said he was speaking on the Armitage matter because Mr. Armitage had
asked him to and because he felt strongly that Mr. Armitage had been wrongly
accused and unfairly treated. "I don't blame Armitage for being sick of the
whole thing," he said. "When you get down to questions of a man's character like
this, based on wild charges, it's pretty tough."

He added: "I have never found anything the Christics have said of any substance
to be accurate. They follow an agenda that has nothing to do with the facts, and
it's unfortunate that people give credence to this sort of stuff."

The outcome of the F.B.I. investigation was "absolutely no evidence of
complicity in drug smuggling on the part of Mr. Armitage or that he was covering
up the existence of M.I.A.'s," or of any criminal activity whatsoever, Mr.
Revell said. "I don't blame Perot for this; if he had allegations of this sort,
he had not only a right but an obligation to bring them forward," Mr. Revell
said. "But I think the whole thing was unfair to Armitage."

On May 25, 1989, Mr. Armitage withdrew himself from consideration for the job of
Secretary of the Army. "He knew this stuff was going to continue, and he had
already been through Iran-contra, the Christic stuff and our investigation, and
I think he felt it just wasn't worth it any more," Mr. Revell said.

In an interview this week, Mr. Armitage said the suggestions of impropriety
"have been investigated and found groundless," and then, referring to Mr. Perot,
he added: "There's no there there. Why am I being pilloried by this guy?"

Mr. Squires said Mr. Perot "had obviously concluded after getting that
information that what he saw in it disqualified Mr. Armitage from continuing in
high Government office and he made that clear to Mr. Armitage and to other
people in the Government."

LOAD-DATE: June 28, 1992

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo: Richard L. Armitage, the senior Pentagon official on
prisoner-of-war issues in the Reagan Administration. (Associated Press)

                   Copyright 1992 The New York Times Company


                              279 of 281 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                  June 29, 1992, Monday, Late Edition - Final

Prisoners of War -- and Deception

SECTION: Section A; Page 14; Column 1; Editorial Desk

LENGTH: 432 words


The Pentagon knew better. Hanoi knew better. Yet in April 1973, the Nixon
Administration insisted it had no indication "that there are any Americans alive
in Indochina." Those words concealed a startling fact: The Administration did
have the names of 244 Americans who had been captured alive but who failed to
return with the other prisoners of war Hanoi released that year.

That news and more was disclosed last week by the Senate Committee on
P.O.W.-M.I.A. Affairs. Led by two Vietnam veterans, Democrat John Kerry of
Massachusetts and Republican Robert Smith of New Hampshire, the committee is
giving Americans the chance to judge how successive Administrations handled the
P.O.W.-M.I.A. issue.

The effort deserves full cooperation from the Bush Administration. Instead, the
White House threatens to withhold documents.

Returning P.O.W.'s reported that 111 of those 244 missing Americans had
definitely died in captivity. What about the other 133? If there was no
"indication" they were alive, there was also no "indication" they were dead.

Yet according to sworn testimony released by the committee, William Clements,
then the Deputy Secretary of Defense, bluntly proclaimed, "they're all dead."
When an informed subordinate corrected him, Mr. Clements reportedly replied:
"You didn't hear me. . . . They're all dead."

At the least, officials twisted the truth. If their goal was to stifle public
debate, their efforts backfired spectacularly and the price in credibility is
still being paid. P.O.W. relatives were stonewalled along with everyone else;
some later became easy marks for hustlers.

The cost may have been crueler still. Hanoi began bidding for U.S. recognition
and aid in 1973. Washington might well have exploited Hanoi's need for
international assistance to win a more satisfactory accounting of the missing
soldiers. And additional Americans might have been located and returned alive.

Once-promising trails have grown cold. Americans who might have been under
Hanoi's control in 1973 may have died or disappeared. Yet the committee is right
to press forward. Ross Perot is scheduled to make a sworn deposition this week.
Henry Kissinger has agreed to let the committee examine records of his
negotiations with Hanoi over P.O.W. issues.

The Bush Administration, however, citing executive privilege, denies access to
these records. That's perverse, for at last Americans have a chance to learn the
truth about this painful legacy of a painful war. It may be too late to bring
back any American prisoners. It's not too late to bring back the truth.

LOAD-DATE: June 29, 1992

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Editorial

                   Copyright 1992 The New York Times Company


                              280 of 281 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                  June 29, 1992, Monday, Late Edition - Final

Essay;
'Deep Ross'

BYLINE: By WILLIAM SAFIRE;  Leslie H. Gelb is on vacation.

SECTION: Section A; Page 15; Column 5; Editorial Desk

LENGTH: 701 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON


Much more is to be learned about the secret political-media power connections of
Ross Perot.

1. The Rockefeller Connection. On Feb. 2, 1973, New York State's welfare
department chose three data-processing companies to bid on a contract; because
Ross Perot's company had a poor record in other states, it was not selected to
be a bidder.

To the amazement of professionals in the field, the State Welfare Commissioner
was summoned to the office of Gov. Nelson Rockefeller to explain to Mr. Perot,
who was sitting there, why his firm was not on the list.

The bureaucrat apologized profusely for the "mistake," made Perot a bidder on
the spot and later awarded him contracts, despite lower bids.

When a Congressman and a labor leader charged corruption, Rocky had one of his
stalwart appointees launch an investigation -- not into the sweet Perot
contract, but into the motives of those who dared complain about it.

But the late Representative Rosenthal's investigation was embarrassing. A mutual
friend brought the Congressman to the Governor's Fifth Avenue apartment for
breakfast; Rocky urgently asked for a political favor; the intermediary tells me
the Congressman acceded to the Governor's wishes and took the heat off Perot.

Why was Rocky so interested in advancing Perot's business and protecting his
reputation?

2. The Roy Cohn Connection. When the Vietnam Veterans Memorial committee would
not take direction from Perot, its members found themselves under a barrage of
rumors about misappropriated funds. A San Antonio businessman named John Delavan
Baines sought to retain Roy M. Cohn, then the nation's most-feared,
take-no-prisoners lawyer, to investigate Perot's opponents.

Mr. Baines insists to me he did this on his own, not at the behest of Ross
Perot; he says Cohn discussed the case with fellow lawyer Edward Bennett
Williams, representing the memorial committee, and my late pal Roy decided not
to savage its members.

But Tom Bolan, who was Roy Cohn's trusted law partner, says as he sifts old
records: "Cohn was told that the real client was Perot but that the client of
record would be Baines. This I got from Roy: Perot was the guy behind it. I
cannot conceive that Perot would claim that Cohn was not asked to act in his
behalf."

3. The Woodward Connection. Why, some of us wondered, was The Washington Post
being such a patsy for Perot? The Wall Street Journal exposed his penchant for
harassing opponents with private detectives; The New York Times's Michael Kelly
revealed his shady business dealings; but the uncharacteristically docile Post
went to great lengths, in a front-page article, to justify Lieutenant Perot's
attempt to get out of his post-Annapolis naval hitch.

As rumors circulated that The Post was paying back a longtime source for past
services, editor Bob Woodward -- perhaps fearful of his symbiotic relationship
with Perot being exposed by a competitor -- launched a pre-emptive strike: he
confessed, in effect, that for at least four years Ross Perot had been a valued
anonymous source for The Post.

Of course, that was not how the story was presented. "Perot Launched
Investigations of Bush" was the headline, with much made of a $10,000 fee paid
by Perot to a Democratic law firm in Washington to dig up dirt on President Bush
and his family.

But buried down in the story was the lead: Perot brought the anti-Bush dossier
he purchased to The Washington Post during the 1988 campaign, triggering "an
extensive investigation" by reporters that led nowhere. Written more fuzzily
were hints that Perot kept The Post busy with rumors about servicemen missing in
action, Iran-contra leads, "October surprise" charges and a tip from a Florida
private eye that a Bush son had visited a gun smuggler.

Woodward, who for 20 years has been claiming to protect "Deep Throat," claims
now he was given permission to reveal "Deep Ross"; Perot's man disputes that.

Newsies will debate the ethics of ratting on a source when circumstances change,
but voters will want to know: what other media have been manipulated by the
Perot Bureau of Investigation? What other snoops were hired to feed the press
tidbits about Perot's enemies list?

LOAD-DATE: July 9, 1992

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Op-Ed

                   Copyright 1992 The New York Times Company


                              281 of 281 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                  June 30, 1992, Tuesday, Late Edition - Final

THE 1992 CAMPAIGN: Political Memo;
Clinton Is Quiet as Running-Mate Game Roars On

BYLINE: By GWEN IFILL,  Special to The New York Times

SECTION: Section A; Page 21; Column 1; National Desk

LENGTH: 1124 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, June 29


It may be a little difficult to detect this year, with all the fuss involving
Ross Perot and President Bush, but the customary parlor games that surround the
selection of a candidate for Vice President have begun.

The lists of possibilities are as varied as they are endless. The main thing
they seem to have in common is one inescapable fact: Virtually none of the
people speculating have any idea what they are talking about.

"The hardest thing for a Washington type to say in a story is, 'I don't know,' "
a Clinton adviser said.

As names are batted about like birdies in some high-stakes badminton game, Gov.
Bill Clinton, who is poised to accept the Democratic Party's Presidential
nomination in New York next month, has mostly stayed on the sidelines. During
the primary campaign, he learned it was better to say nothing than to speculate
about the suitability of every politician who shared a podium with him.

"I have almost completely kept my own counsel about what I really think about
this," Mr. Clinton said in an interview last week. "What I've said to other
people is almost exclusively in terms of letting them express their opinions to
me."

Clinton's Criteria

The 45-year-old Arkansas Governor has said he wants a running mate whom voters
can imagine as President and who would not be a transparently political choice
based on geography, sex or age.

Warren Christopher, the Los Angeles lawyer heading Mr. Clinton's search, said
that he has discussed prospects with the Governor "several times" and that the
search committee -- which includes former Gov. Madeleine M. Kunin of Vermont and
Vernon E. Jordan, a Washington lawyer who once headed the National Urban League
-- has asked 40 or 50 people for their opinions.

"I feel quite a sense of confidentiality about it," Mr. Christopher said last
week. "I want to preserve the options for him."

But the popular wisdom, some from supporters of those named and some from
wishful thinkers inside and outside the campaign, has the list looking,
alphabetically, like this:

SENATOR BILL BRADLEY.  A thousand times no, the 48-year-old New Jersey Senator
has said. And Mr. Clinton has said he will take the Senator at his word. Last
week, the Democrats announced that Mr. Bradley would be one of three featured
speakers at the convention, another sign that he will remain out of the
running-mate contest because holding dual leading roles at the convention would
be deemed undesirable. Still, some Democrats long for Mr. Bradley's standing and
credibility on issues like race.

GOV. MARIO M. CUOMO.  Mr. Cuomo, 60, has said he is not interested. And although
the New York Governor and Mr. Clinton appear to have put some of their early bad
feelings behind them, the potential for volatility in such a pairing would be
tremendous.

REPRESENTATIVE RICHARD A. GEPHARDT.  Mr. Gephardt, of Missouri, is a strong
campaigner who hails from a swing state. He is well liked and has led the charge
against Mr. Bush's policies on Capitol Hill. Mr. Gephardt, 51, is experienced,
having run for President in 1988, but he is also House majority leader and could
be painted as the consummate Washington insider.

SENATOR AL GORE.  Mr. Gore has several advantages, including a Presidential race
in 1988 and a wife who was speaking out about family values before was
politically fashionable. The Tennessee Senator, 44, also has credentials as an
environmentalist, which would lend the ticket strength in states like California
where the environment is an important issue. He broke with the Democratic
leadership in Congress last year to support using force in the Persian Gulf, and
putting him on the ticket might check Mr. Bush from accusing Democrats of being
weak on defense.

REPRESENTATIVE LEE H. HAMILTON.  Mr. Hamilton, who has a severe haircut to match
Mr. Perot's, has an attractive reputation as a model of probity and credibility
on foreign policy and ethics. He earned a national reputation when he chaired
the special committee investigating the Iran-contra scandal. Mr. Clinton, 61, is
from Indiana, a Republican state in Presidential elections, and emerged
untouched from the House bank furor.

SENATOR BOB KERREY.  A veteran of this year's Democratic Presidential
sweepstakes, the Nebraska Senator has said it would take something "remarkable"
for him to consider being Mr. Clinton's running mate, "like being asked." Mr.
Kerrey, 48, could bring some strengths to the ticket, including his credentials
as a Vietnam War hero.

SENATOR JOHN KERRY.  Mr. Kerry, another Vietnam veteran, has been in the
limelight lately for leading renewed investigations into the fate of Americans
missing in Southeast Asia. Aides to Mr. Kerry told The Boston Herald last week
that Mr. Clinton's recruiters have not been knocking at the 48-year-old
Massachusetts Senator's door.

SENATOR JOSEPH I. LIEBERMAN.  Mr. Lieberman, 50, campaigned heavily in
Connecticut, his home state, for Mr. Clinton, but voters there handed the
Arkansas Governor one of his more stinging defeats. The Senator, like Mr.
Clinton, has carved a niche as a moderate, unconventional Democrat. He would
also help Mr. Clinton establish a toehold in the Northeast, where he ran into
significant problems during the primaries.

SENATOR JOHN D. ROCKEFELLER 4TH The 55-year-old West Virginia Senator came close
to running for President himself this year, but has since remained largely on
the sidelines. He has a reputation as a strong advocate of improving the
nation's health-care system and is well liked among Democrats. But West Virginia
is small, votes reliably Democratic and does not represent the type of strength
Mr. Clinton needs to shore up his chances in a three-way race.

GOV. ANN W. RICHARDS.  The Texas Governor's standing on the list of likely
running mates dropped dramatically last week when the Democrats announced she
would be the convention chairwoman. But Mr. Clinton likes Ms. Richards and she
delivers a much better speech than he does. Still, during her rough-and-tumble
campaign for governor in 1990 she was attacked over questions of drug use, and
Mr. Clinton cannot afford to carry any more baggage on personal and character
issues. Like Mr. Gore, Ms. Richards, 58, would be a choice contrary to the
popular wisdom that running mates should not come from the same region.

SENATOR HARRIS WOFFORD.  Mr. Wofford, 66, beat former Attorney General Dick
Thornburgh to win the Pennsylvania Senate seat left vacant by the death of John
Heinz in April 1991. Mr. Clinton has a warm relationship with Mr. Wofford, who
worked hard for him during the Pennsylvania primary campaign, and Mr. Wofford
has been in the Senate for such a short time that he can probably still qualify
as an outsider.


LOAD-DATE: June 30, 1992

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo: Gov. Bill Clinton has said he wants a running mate whom voters
can imagine as President and who would not be a transparently political choice
based on geography, sex or age. He and his wife, Hillary, spoke to supporters
after he delivered an abortion-rights speech in Little Rock. (Associated Press)

                   Copyright 1992 The New York Times Company
