



Download Request: All Documents: 1-211
Time Of Request: Thursday, November 23, 2017  13:09:52 EST
Send To:

MEGADEAL, ACADEMIC UNIVERSE
UNIVERSITY OF CHICAGO
LIBRARY
CHICAGO, IL


Terms: ((Vietnam OR Viet Nam) and Date(geq(01/01/1995) and leq(03/31/1995)))


Source: The New York Times
Project ID:



                               1 of 211 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 January 1, 1995, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

BEST SELLERS: January 1, 1995

SECTION: Section 7; Page 18; Column 2; Book Review Desk

LENGTH: 1482 words



          Weeks
This Last    On
Week Week  List Fiction

 1      1  28   POLITICALLY CORRECT BEDTIME STORIES, by James Finn Garner.
                (Macmillan, $8.95.) Classic tales respun to avoid offending
                current sensibilities.

 2      4  18   DEBT OF HONOR, by Tom Clancy. (Putnam, $25.95.) Jack Ryan and
                C.I.A. agents vs. a Japanese plot to strike America's territory
                and economy.

 3      2  44   THE CELESTINE PROPHECY, by James Redfield. (Warner, $17.95.) An
                ancient manuscript, found in Peru, provides insights into
                achieving a fulfilling life.

 4      5  11   INSOMNIA, by Stephen King. (Viking, $27.95.) A widower and a
                widow, victims of sleeplessness, behold sinister forces at work
                in their small Maine town.

 5      3   5   WINGS, by Danielle Steel. (Delacorte, $23.95.) A woman pursues
                her ambition to become a record-setting aviator in pre-World
                War II America.

 6      6   8   THE LOTTERY WINNER, by Mary Higgins Clark. (Simon & Schuster,
                $22.) Stories about a couple who win a lottery and devote
                themselves to solving crimes.

 7      8  125  THE BRIDGES OF MADISON COUNTY, by Robert James Waller. (Warner,
                $16.95.) A photographer and a farmer's lonely wife in Iowa.

 8     12  25   THE CHAMBER, by John Grisham. (Doubleday, $24.95.) A lawyer
                represents a racist who is on death row for his part in a 1967
                bombing in Mississippi.

 9     10  13   TALTOS, by Anne Rice. (Knopf, $25.) The survivor of a species
                of witches copes with his heritage; a sequel to "The Witching
                Hour" and "Lasher."

 10     7   6   DARK RIVERS OF THE HEART, by Dean Koontz. (Knopf, $24.) A man
                and a woman, who meet by chance, must flee a powerful
                Government agency.

 11    11  23   THE GIFT, by Danielle Steel. (Delacorte, $15.) A woman's casual
                visit to a small town changes the lives of many of its
                inhabitants, as well as her own.

 12         4   A CUP OF CHRISTMAS TEA, by Tom Hegg. (Waldman House, $10.95.) A
                book of verses, illustrated by Warren Hanson.

 13     9   6   GOD'S OTHER SON, by Don Imus. (Simon & Schuster, $23.) A 1981
                novel about Billy Sol Hargus, a lecherous television evangelist
                from Texas.

 14    14  13   MUTANT MESSAGE DOWN UNDER, by Marlo Morgan. (HarperCollins,
                $18.) In Australia's outback, an American woman learns about
                aboriginal philosophy.

 15    13  15   NOTHING LASTS FOREVER, by Sidney Sheldon. (Morrow, $23.) Three
                women doctors in San Francisco contend with lovers, betrayers
                and killers.

          Weeks
This Last    On
Week Week  List Nonfiction

 1      1  13   DON'T STAND TOO CLOSE TO A NAKED MAN, by Tim Allen. (Hyperion,
                $19.95.) Anecdotes and meditations on life by the star of "Home
                Improvement."

 2      2   9   CROSSING THE THRESHOLD OF HOPE, by John Paul II. Edited by
                Vittorio Messori. (Knopf, $20.) The Pope discusses matters of
                belief, suffering and hope, and Christianity's relationship to
                other faiths.

 3      4  14   JAMES HERRIOT'S CAT STORIES, by James Herriot. (St. Martin's,
                $16.95.) A collection of tales by the Yorkshire veterinarian.

 4      3  17   COUPLEHOOD, by Paul Reiser. (Bantam, $19.95.) Essays on the ups
                and downs of marriage by the television star and stand-up
                comedian.

 5      6  16   BARBARA BUSH: A Memoir, by Barbara Bush. (Drew/Scribners, $25.)
                The former First Lady recalls her life, from childhood to the
                present.

 6      5  54   THE BOOK OF VIRTUES, by William J. Bennett. (Simon & Schuster,
                $30.) Moral stories adapted from the Greeks, the Bible,
                folklore and elsewhere.

 7      7  12   DOLLY, by Dolly Parton. (HarperCollins, $25.) The autobiography
                of the country singer.

 8      8  12   THE HOT ZONE, by Richard Preston. (Random House, $23.) The
                discovery of a lethal virus, more infectious than H.I.V., and
                the efforts to keep it from spreading.

 9     10   5   THE WARREN BUFFETT WAY, by Robert G. Hagstrom Jr. (Wiley,
                $24.95.) An account of the career of the man said to be the
                world's most successful investor.

 10     9   9   THE BELL CURVE, by Richard J. Herrnstein and Charles Murray.
                (Free Press, $30.) Ways in which differences in intelligence
                affect American life.

 11    11  13   BASEBALL, by Geoffrey C. Ward and Ken Burns. (Knopf, $60.) An
                illustrated history of the game.

 12    14  43   MIDNIGHT IN THE GARDEN OF GOOD AND EVIL, by John Berendt.
                (Random House, $23.) The mysterious death of a young man in
                Savannah, Ga.

 13    13   3   IT WASN'T ALWAYS EASY, BUT I SURE HAD FUN, by Lewis Grizzard.
                (Villard, $20.) A collection of essays by the late Southern
                humorist.

 14    15  11   NO ORDINARY TIME, by Doris Kearns Goodwin. (Simon & Schuster,
                $30.) The roles of Franklin and Eleanor Roosevelt during World
                War II.

 15    12   2   SISTERS, by Carol Saline. Photographs by Sharon J. Wohlmuth.
                (Running Press, $27.50.) The relationships of 36 sets of
                sisters of varied callings and backgrounds, reported in words
                and pictures.

          Weeks
This Last    On
Week Week  List Advice, How-to and Miscellaneous

 1          1   ILLUMINATA, by Marianne Williamson. (Random House, $20.) A
                celebration of the power of prayers, with examples of those
                fitting a variety of situations.

 2      1  84   MEN ARE FROM MARS, WOMEN ARE FROM VENUS, by John Gray.
                (HarperCollins, $23.) Communicating.

 3      2  36   IN THE KITCHEN WITH ROSIE, by Rosie Daley. (Knopf, $14.95.)
                Recipes by Oprah Winfrey's cook.

 4      3  14   MAGIC EYE III, by N.E. Thing Enterprises. (Andrews & McMeel,
                $12.95.) Designs in color that take on new qualities when
                scrutinized at length.


Rankings reflect sales figures, for the week ending Dec. 17, at 3,050 bookstores
plus wholesalers serving 28,000 other retailers (gift shops, department stores,
newsstands, supermarkets), statistically weighted to represent sales in all such
outlets nationwide. An asterisk indicates that a book's sales are barely
distinguishable from those of the book above.
And Bear in Mind
(Editor's Choices of other recent books of particular interest)

THE ART AND ARCHITECTURE OF ISLAM, 1250-1800, by Sheila S. Blair and Jonathan M.
Bloom. (Yale University, $65.) A bold, competent and fresh attempt to rewrite
the history of later Islamic art from scratch, with plenty of splendid color
illustrations and other useful graphics.

BOREDOM: The Literary History of a State of Mind, by Patricia Meyer Spacks.
(University of Chicago, $24.95.) A persuasive account of a concept invented in
the 18th century; its roots include a growing concentration on "inner
experience" as the locus of personal reality.

THE FIRST WORLD WAR: A Complete History, by Martin Gilbert. (Holt, $35.) Mr.
Gilbert's enormous breadth of view seeks to render this dreadful conflict as
soldiers lived it on many fronts, often relying on the poetry and prose of the
many gifted writers who saw action.

GENTLEMAN SPY: The Life of Allen Dulles, by Peter Grose. (Richard Todd/Houghton
Mifflin, $30.) A biography, full of new information, of the irresistibly
charming (and manipulative) man who headed -- and embodied -- the Central
Intelligence Agency from 1953 to 1961.

IN PHARAOH'S ARMY: Memories of the Lost War, by Tobias Wolff. (Knopf, $23.) The
follow-up volume to Mr. Wolff's memoir "This Boy's Life" is a series of small,
elegant, personal sketches of his year in Vietnam.

KONFIDENZ, by Ariel Dorfman. (Farrar, Straus & Giroux, $17.) This novel in
dialogue reveals only gradually that its frightening political developments are
taking place in 1939, suggesting that fear is always appropriate.

LONG WALK TO FREEDOM: The Autobiography of Nelson Mandela, by Nelson Mandela.
(Little, Brown, $24.95.) On the evidence of his own version of his amazing life,
the President of South Africa is no moralist or messiah but a pragmatic
politician who always chose what might work over what was ideologically
agreeable.

THE MASTER OF PETERSBURG, by J.M. Coetzee. (Viking, $21.95.) The hero of Mr.
Coetzee's grimmest novel yet is Dostoyevsky himself, trapped in generational and
political clashes, trying to scrape meaning from the death of a son.

MASTER OF THE DAY OF JUDGMENT, by Leo Perutz. (Arcade, $19.95.) First published
in Austria in 1921, after the empire's collapse in the Great War, this elaborate
joke of a novel takes the genre itself as a stage for brilliant clowning.

A NATION UNDER LAWYERS: How the Crisis in the Legal Profession Is Transforming
American Society, by Mary Ann Glendon. (Farrar, Straus & Giroux, $24.) A Harvard
law professor sees hyperactive litigators and "romantic" judges as depriving the
nation of lawyers' real talents: solving problems and designing social
structures.

ROBERT LOUIS STEVENSON: A Biography, by Frank McLynn. (Random House, $30.) A
thoroughly detailed life, taking the most recent scholarship into account, of
the great Scottish writer of English prose who died at 44 in 1894.

LOAD-DATE: January 4, 1995

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: List

                   Copyright 1995 The New York Times Company


                               2 of 211 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 January 1, 1995, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

PAPERBACK BEST SELLERS: January 1, 1995

SECTION: Section 7; Page 20; Column 2; Book Review Desk

LENGTH: 848 words



     Weeks
This    On
Week  List Fiction

 1    16   DISCLOSURE, by Michael Crichton. (Ballantine, $6.99.) An executive
           who rejected his boss is accused by her of sexual harassment.

 2     1   THE CHRISTMAS BOX, by Richard Paul Evans. (Steinway, $4.95.) When a
           young family moves in with an elderly widow, they all learn about
           the significance of Christmas.

 3    33   INTERVIEW WITH THE VAMPIRE, by Anne Rice. (Ballantine, $6.99.) The
           1976 novel that began "The Vampire Chronicles."

 4     6   A DANGEROUS FORTUNE, by Ken Follett. (Island/Dell, $6.99.) A young
           student's mysterious drowning in Victorian England.

 5    29   THE SHIPPING NEWS, by E. Annie Proulx. (Touchstone/S&S, $12.) A man
           mourns his adulterous wife in Newfoundland.

 6    14   THE VAMPIRE LESTAT, by Anne Rice. (Ballantine, $6.99.) Eerie
           carryings-on in a tale ranging from ancient Egypt to the 20th
           century.

 7     9   MR. MURDER, by Dean Koontz. (Berkley, $6.99.) A mystery writer's
           happy family life -- and the madman determined to take his place.

 8     5   SLOW WALTZ IN CEDAR BEND, by Robert James Waller. (Warner, $4.99.)
           The romance of a professor and a colleague's wife.

 9    18   SMILLA'S SENSE OF SNOW, by Peter Hoeg. (Dell, $6.50.) In Copenhagen
           and Greenland, a woman investigates a child's death.

 10   14   VANISHED, by Danielle Steel. (Dell, $6.99.) The abduction of a young
           boy creates a crisis.

 11*  26   WITHOUT REMORSE, by Tom Clancy. (Berkley, $6.99.) John Kelly in
           North Vietnam.

 12   11   THE QUEEN OF THE DAMNED, by Anne Rice. (Ballantine, $6.99.)
           Continuing the author's chronicle of 6,000 years of vampirism.

 13    4   MCNALLY'S CAPER, by Lawrence Sanders. (Berkley, $6.50.) Archy
           McNally on the trail of a malefactor at large in a Palm Beach
           mansion.

 14   21   FORREST GUMP, by Winston Groom. (Pocket, $5.50.) A slow-witted man
           makes his way through three decades of American history.

 15    1   NATURAL CAUSES, by Michael Palmer. (Bantam, $5.99.) The ordeal of a
           physician after she is accused of being responsible for the deaths
           of pregnant women.

     Weeks
This    On
Week  List NonFiction

 1    15   EMBRACED BY THE LIGHT, by Betty J. Eadie with Curtis Taylor.
           (Bantam, $5.99.) A woman's near-death experience.

 2     2   SEINLANGUAGE, by Jerry Seinfeld. (Bantam, $5.99.) Observations on
           life's pleasures and ordeals by the star of "Seinfeld."

 3    14   HAVING OUR SAY, by Sarah L. Delany and A. Elizabeth Delany with Amy
           Hill Hearth. (Dell, $5.99.) Two black sisters, both of them over
           100, reflect on their lives.

 4    51   CARE OF THE SOUL, by Thomas Moore. (Harper Perennial, $12.) A
           psychotherapist discusses spirituality and everyday life.

 5    10   WOULDN'T TAKE NOTHING FOR MY JOURNEY NOW, by Maya Angelou. (Bantam,
           $5.50.) Essays on life and death, good and evil.

 6    10   SEE, I TOLD YOU SO, by Rush Limbaugh. (Pocket, $6.99.) More comments
           on the state of the nation by the talk show host.

 7     3   SOUL MATES, by Thomas Moore. (Harper Perennial, $13.) A
           psychotherapist discusses love and relationships.

 8    49   WHERE ANGELS WALK, by Joan Wester Anderson. (Ballantine, $10.)
           Stories about angelic intervention in human affairs.

 9    582  THE ROAD LESS TRAVELED, by M. Scott Peck. (Touchstone/S&S, $10.95.)
           Inspiration.

 10   33   MAMA MAKES UP HER MIND, by Bailey White. (Vintage, $10.) Life in a
           tiny Georgia town, as seen by a first-grade teacher.

 11   18   A HISTORY OF GOD, by Karen Armstrong. (Ballantine, $14.) The
           development of monotheism over the past 4,000 years.

 12*   8   ARMORED CAV, by Tom Clancy. (Berkley, $15.) A "guided tour" of an
           armored cavalry regiment.

 13   14   PRIVATE PARTS, by Howard Stern. (Pocket, $6.99.) The memoirs of the
           radio and television personality.

 14   37   THE CAT WHO CAME FOR CHRISTMAS, by Cleveland Amory. (Penguin,
           $8.95.) A self-styled curmudgeon's memoir of a cat.

 15   97   I KNOW WHY THE CAGED BIRD SINGS, by Maya Angelou. (Bantam, $4.99.)
           The poet's depiction of her childhood and adolescence.

     Weeks
This    On
Week  List Advice, How-To and Miscellaneous

 1    13   HOMICIDAL PSYCHO JUNGLE CAT, by Bill Watterson. (Andrews & McMeel,
           $12.95.) A collection of "Calvin and Hobbes" cartoons.

 2     1   THE WORLD ALMANAC AND BOOK OF FACTS 1995. (World Almanac/Funk &
           Wagnalls, $8.95.) The latest edition of the reference work.

 3    14   CHICKEN SOUP FOR THE SOUL, compiled by Jack Canfield and Mark Victor
           Hansen. (Health Communications, $12.) Stories meant to "open the
           heart and rekindle the spirit."

 4     5   THE CURSE OF MADAME "C," by Gary Larson. (Andrews & McMeel, $8.95.)
           A collection of "Far Side" cartoons.


Rankings reflect sales figures, for the week ending Dec. 17, at 3,050 bookstores
plus wholesalers serving 38,000 other retailers, statistically weighted to
represent sales in all such outlets nationwide. An asterisk indicates that a
book's sales are barely distinguishable from those of the book above.

LOAD-DATE: January 4, 1995

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: LIST

                   Copyright 1995 The New York Times Company


                               3 of 211 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 January 1, 1995, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

LIVES WELL LIVED: LEWIS B. PULLER JR.;
Coming Home

BYLINE: By Michael Norman

SECTION: Section 6;  Page 34;  Column 1;  Magazine Desk

LENGTH: 310 words


1946-1994 Lewis Burwell Puller Jr. picked up a gun one afternoon last May and
killed himself. He was 48, a winner of the Pulitzer Prize for his 1991
autobiography, "Fortunate Son: The Healing of a Vietnam Vet." His father was the
late Gen. Chesty Puller, the most decorated Marine in history. To those who
fought in Vietnam, the son displayed a different kind of heroism -- attesting to
the horror of war.
   Michael Norman

I NEVER MET OR TALKED TO LEW PULLER, BUT I KNEW him, the woeful part of him
anyway. We fought on the same ground at the same time, I-Corps, Vietnam, in the
bloody year 1968. I came home whole however. He came home a mess, both legs
gone, hands mangled, guts in a knot, his loss literally the result of a misstep,
a booby trap.

His recovery -- if it can be called that -- was long and hard. Between
operations and hospital stays, he fought addictions to liquor and painkillers.
Along the way, he tried to commit suicide but got so drunk preparing himself he
failed. He didn't make the same mistake twice. His friends and family said he
had been despondent over the breakup of his marriage and a certain inertia that
had crept into his life. But I think it might have been something else.

For men with blood on their hands, men stained by the butchery of combat, the
real fight for survival starts when the guns grow silent. For us, suicide is a
chronic afterthought, a dark idea that follows dark memories. Most of us resist
the incessant impulse to destroy ourselves, but many of our comrades, too many,
do not. They lose the war long after the fighting has stopped.

At the very end of his book -- in his last line, in fact -- Lew Puller takes as
his coda a lesson he learned along his way: "Often the only way to keep that
which we hold most dear is to give it away." He was talking about his medals. Or
was he?


LOAD-DATE: January 4, 1995

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1995 The New York Times Company


                               4 of 211 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 January 1, 1995, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

TRAVEL ADVISORY: CORRESPONDENT'S REPORT;
Khmer Rouge Threaten Cambodian Tourism

BYLINE: By PHILIP SHENON

SECTION: Section 5;  Page 3;  Column 1;  Travel Desk

LENGTH: 598 words

DATELINE: PHNOM PENH, Cambodia


THE killings of six Western travelers in Cambodia last year and the continuing
menace of the Khmer Rouge have threatened to cripple this nation's tourism
industry just as it was recovering from a generation of civil war.

Travel to the nation's leading tourist attraction, the ancient stone temples of
Angkor in northwestern Cambodia, is still generally considered safe. And there
have been few problems for visitors to Phnom Penh, the capital, and the southern
port city of Kompong Som, also known as Sihanoukville. But venturing almost
anywhere else, especially by train or car, can be a risk.

The Khmer Rouge, the Maoist-inspired guerrillas responsible for the deaths of
more than one million Cambodians in the 1970's, have made clear that they are
targeting foreign travelers for kidnapping and murder, apparently in the hope of
frightening away investment that would bolster Cambodia's democratically elected
Government.

In the most recent killings, three young backpackers -- an Australian, a Briton
and a Frenchman -- were executed in September, two months after they were taken
hostage by the Khmer Rouge in a train ambush in the southern Cambodian
countryside.

The Khmer Rouge are also being blamed by some diplomats for the murder last
spring of two other Britons and an Australian. Their car was seized, also in the
southern countryside.

Reacting to the murders, the head of state, King Norodom Sihanouk, in November
urged foreign tourists to avoid Cambodia. The British Embassy here has advised
its citizens against traveling to the country, while the Australian Embassy has
asked that travelers put off "nonessential" visits outside Phnom Penh, the
capital. In a November travel advisory, the State Department warned American
visitors against travel by car at night and by train anytime.

King Sihanouk, who has spent most of the last year in China for cancer
treatment, does not speak for the elected Government, and his warning to foreign
travelers angered officials who are trying to revive a tourism industry that
could someday be the lifeblood of the nation's economy.

The Government insists that travelers are safe in Cambodia so long as they limit
their travels to Phnom Penh, Kompong Som and the ancient Khmer capital of
Angkor, which is on the outskirts of northwestern city of Siem Reap. (Khmer
Rouge soldiers often roam within 20 miles of Angkor, but they are kept away from
the temples by heavy deployments of government soldiers.)

The Government is advising against visits to the countryside, especially to
areas of southern and western Cambodia where the Khmer Rouge maintain a large
presence, and is urging travel within the country only by air. "Now it's better
to fly," said Information Minister Ieng Mouly.

A year and a half after the United Nations sponsored the first truly free
elections in the modern history of Cambodia, the newly installed Government has
made significant efforts to ease travel for foreigners.

Tourist visas are now issued on arrival at the newly renovated airport in Phnom
Penh, and the city now has a wealth of hotels in all categories, from
guesthouses to luxury. The lifting of the American embargo on Cambodia means
that American travelers may now use credit cards in many hotels and restaurants.
After a decade in which Cambodia could be reached only by a handful of flights a
week from Vietnam, there are now frequent nonstop flights to Phnom Penh from
Bangkok, Thailand; Hong Kong; Kuala Lumpur, Malaysia and Singapore, as well as
from Hanoi, the Vietnamese capital, and Ho Chi Minh City, formerly Saigon.

LOAD-DATE: January 4, 1995

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Map of Cambodia

                   Copyright 1995 The New York Times Company


                               5 of 211 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 January 1, 1995, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

Deadline Is Eased on Agent Orange Claims

BYLINE: By The Associated Press

SECTION: Section 1;   Page 25;   Column 5;   National Desk

LENGTH: 164 words


A Federal judge has extended a deadline for disabled Vietnam veterans who were
sprayed with Agent Orange during the war to apply for money from an injury
compensation fund.

Judge Jack B. Weinstein of Federal District Court in New York signed an order on
Wednesday pushing the deadline for veterans and their families to apply for
payment to Jan. 17. The deadline had been Saturday. About $21 million of the
fund has yet to be claimed.

Agent Orange kills vegetation, and it was sprayed by American military aircraft
to make it difficult for enemy soldiers to hide and find food. Veterans said the
chemical had caused them to contract cancer and other illnesses and had produced
birth defects in their children.

To qualify for money, veterans must be totally disabled and unable to work and
must have served in the Vietnam War between 1961 and 1971. Survivors of veterans
can receive from $340 to a maximum of $3,400. Disabled veterans who apply can
get from $256 to $12,800.

LOAD-DATE: January 4, 1995

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1995 The New York Times Company


                               6 of 211 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 January 1, 1995, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

A Life in Collage

BYLINE: By Valerie Sayers;   Valerie Sayers's latest novel is "The Distance
Between Us." She is the director of the creative writing program at the
University of Notre Dame.

SECTION: Section 7;  Page 6;  Column 1;  Book Review Desk

LENGTH: 714 words



LILIANE
Resurrection of the Daughter.
By Ntozake Shange.
288 pp. New York: St. Martin's Press. $18.95.

LILIANE LINCOLN, "anybody's colored child, anybody's daughter," is raised among
her mother's orchids, and her story is told in hothouse prose: Ntozake Shange's
new novel, "Liliane: Resurrection of the Daughter," is warm, damp and bright.
The portrait of a post-modern artist whose works are political and conceptual,
the novel is driven by an esthetic that seems more firmly rooted in modernism:
its lush metaphors are akin to Jean Toomer's; its puckish delight in sexual
imagery has a Man Ray feel.

As it happens, I'm big on Jean Toomer and Man Ray, and as a reviewer I suppose I
should admit to my other prejudices. In fiction, I generally prefer the spare to
the lush, the implicit to the explicit. I'm in favor of maximalism, not
minimalism, but I like my emotions expressed in action, and get nervous when the
narrative frets too much. That said, much of "Liliane" -- which is certainly
maximalist, lush, explicit and emotional -- is moving and evocative. Ms. Shange,
a playwright and poet, is best known for her 1976 hit play, "For Colored Girls
Who Have Considered Suicide / When the Rainbow Is Enuf." "Liliane" is her third
and most formally playful novel. It is constructed as a psychoanalytic puzzle:
Liliane's conversations with her analyst, punctuated by silences, alternate with
first-person accounts from her childhood friends, lovers and Liliane herself.
The collage form is particularly well suited to the story; we get the picture,
piece by piece.

In the course of the narrative, Liliane makes art, travels, takes lovers, casts
lovers aside, sustains her girlhood friends, mourns some of their deaths and
celebrates. She grew up in the last days of segregation, when a little girl
could think that if she went to church she "could be so much blood-soaked cloud
and dust, scraggly blackened wood beam smoldering in my glowing flesh, so many
colored buds, colored blossoms, to be picked at by coroners." Her father was a
judge; she sprang from that social class whose decision whether to send a child
to Princeton or Tennessee A & T "depended on how one's parents felt about
uplifting the race." She was a colored girl -- equal emphasis on each word --
and her sense of self was shattered again and again by those who found that
identity threatening.

Like any "black colored Negro person" in America, Liliane has seen too much
violence and has lost too many loved ones. As a little girl visiting
Mississippi, she witnessed a (strangely abbreviated) Klan attack, and as a
teen-ager she was set upon by Italian-Americans in Queens. (A friend says, "If
you black in the 'burg you outta bounds.") Sawyer, the boy she had seen in her
childhood as her "destiny," was shot four times in the head by "somebody from
East St. Louis," and Liliane says that he "died just like the little hoodlum
boys I grew up with who lost all they sense or all they bones in Vietnam or
Oakland. Sawyer wasn't all he coulda been, maybe. But like Papa used to say, he
was definitely one of us."

The identification "one of us" is a central concern as Liliane struggles to
construct a vision of self. The phrase is apt: she is one, wholly herself, and
she is part of her race, part of her sex. Her choice of a white lover turns out
to be of tremendous significance.

The plot hinges on revelations made in her psychoanalytic sessions concerning
her mother's death. I admire Ms. Shange's decision to make the events and the
cause of their revelation large enough for tragedy; if anything, the frenetic
drama of the session in which we learn of her mother's disappearance could have
been slowed down. The pacing here, and in the traumatizing racial attacks, is
intentionally abrupt; the artistic reason for the speed is clear, but the reader
is disoriented.

Ms. Shange takes pains to bring the novel to true resolution in the novel's most
engaging character, one of Liliane's lovers, a photographer named Victor-Jesus
Maria, who tells his part of the story in a voice that is emphatically male,
Spanglish and empathetic. What a pleasure it is to hear Ntozake Shange singing
in so many different keys, so many different tempos. Her "Liliane" is a dense,
ambitious, worthy song.

LOAD-DATE: January 4, 1995

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Drawing

TYPE: Review

                   Copyright 1995 The New York Times Company


                               7 of 211 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 January 2, 1995, Monday, Late Edition - Final

China Revamps Forces With Eye to Sea Claims

BYLINE: By PATRICK E. TYLER,    Special to The New York Times

SECTION: Section 1;   Page 2;   Column 3;   Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 1312 words

DATELINE: BEIJING, Jan. 1


As Chinese diplomats talk of peaceful coexistence with their Southeast Asian
neighbors, China's military leaders are refurbishing a portion of their large
and antiquated military to enforce claims of sovereignty over the South China
Sea and its resources, Chinese and Western experts say.

In this effort, Chinese military leaders have nurtured specific industries to
develop advanced weapons technology and are tailoring their naval and air forces
for the region, the experts say, even as the country's overall level of military
production is declining.

At stake are potentially vast oil reserves, minerals and fishing grounds that
intersect some of the world's busiest shipping lanes. With energy demands
surging along with the population, oil supplies are falling behind in China,
which in 1993 became a net importer of oil for the first time. So any major oil
discovery in the South China Sea is likely to draw Beijing's immediate attention
on securing it.

A group of former American military leaders who visited China last year has
reported that China is forming a limited military force "capable of rapid
response" and intended to protect "island claims in the South China Sea as a
matter of national priority."

The group was led by former Defense Secretary Robert S. McNamara and four
recently retired four-star military officers, including David E. Jeremiah, a
former Vice Chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff, and James P. McCarthy, a
former deputy commander of United States forces in Europe.

Although comprehensive military modernization remains a distant goal for China,
these and other experts say, Beijing has in recent years taken these steps to
build up its military:

*Improved its ability to fight a sustained sea battle with its fleet of surface
warships, support vessels and submarine forces.

*Negotiated with Russia to buy 72 advanced Su-27 attack aircraft capable of
providing close air support for naval operations at extended range. (The first
24 Su-27s were delivered in 1992 but negotiations over the terms for the rest
have been troublesome.)

*Organized a handful of marine units for amphibious assault and trained airborne
forces for rapid deployment in Soviet-made transport aircraft. (One such force
is based on Hainan Island for quick dispatch to the Spratlys and the Paracels,
two island chains in the South China Sea.)

*Developed mobile, conventional-warhead missiles to threaten any foe within
1,000 miles.

"By the year 2005, they would like to achieve a core force of 500,000 to one
million across their services who are fairly modern," said one specialist on
Chinese military affairs.

Apart from the recent efforts, however, this goal seems illusive to other
experts because China is still technologically unsophisticated in some areas.

Chinese warships, for example, have little or no effective air defense, and
their targeting radars cannot reach over the horizon. China has no hope of
financing aircraft-carrier development for at least a decade. Its submarines are
noisy and vulnerable and are equipped with poorly functioning torpedoes.

The Chinese Air Force has yet to produce a modern, supersonic aircraft with
all-weather air-to-air combat abilities. And China's air defense system could
not stop penetration by the French Mirage 2000 attack planes recently purchased
by Taiwan, whose pilots get more flight training hours in a month than Chinese
pilots get in a year, experts say.

"We are aware that our weaponry of all services is far behind the present
equipment of the United States," Adm. Liu Huaqing, China's top military officer,
told the McNamara group. "We hope to modernize, but the problem is that we have
no resources; and if we compete with economic needs, we will be in competition
with the economy, and that is not in China's interest."

Still, Chinese and Western specialists say, Beijing's limited buildup is
threatening to neighbors like Vietnam, which lost two vessels in a clash with
Chinese forces in 1988.

"The danger of what we have on the question of China's military is that people
are beginning to make the case that China is benign," said James R. Lilley, a
former Ambassador to Beijing and longtime Central Intelligence Agency officer in
Asia.

"China says it has no military objectives, that on the South China Sea it wants
to cooperate to find a diplomatic solution while exploiting the resources, that
there are no military solutions and that China is focusing on the economy," he
said.

Arguing that by all appearances, China's military buildup is tightly focused on
the South China Sea area, Mr. Lilley added: "I'm afraid the evidence tells us
otherwise. And it is quite clear that that is their objective in 10 to 20
years."

Experts point out that Admiral Liu, a member of the ruling Politburo and former
chief of the navy, has been a leading advocate for seizing the rich mineral and
fishing grounds of the South China Sea to support China's swelling population.
The diet of China's population, Admiral Liu once told the New China News Agency,
will increasingly require the protein supplied from fish. As exploitation of
sea-based resources becomes more important, he added, China will need a modern
navy. Indeed, China's consumption of seafood has quadrupled since 1978.

In February 1992, the National People's Congress issued its "Law on the
Territorial Waters and Their Contiguous Areas," which laid claim to 80 percent
of the South China Sea with a horseshoe-shaped boundary that runs the length of
Vietnam's coastline and then swings southwest to waters off Malaysia, Brunei and
the Philippines.

The law laid down regulations for transit through the area and called for
"immediate eviction of foreign military vessels or vessels owned by foreign
governments and used for noncommercial purposes that violate the laws and
regulations" of China. Seventy percent of Japan's crude oil imports traverses
the area.

Last month, the official Guangming Daily said 400 Chinese scholars recently
completed 10 years of research on the Spratly Islands and "proved historically"
that China "discovered and developed the Spratly Islands."

The Spratlys -- comprising 21 islands and atolls, 50 submerged land spits and 28
partly submerged bits of rock and reef spread out over 340,000 square miles --
"are a sacred and inviolable part of Chinese territory," the newspaper said.

The United States has never taken a position on the territorial disputes in the
South China Sea, which also involve claims by Malaysia, the Philippines, Taiwan,
Indonesia and Brunei. By far the most contentious dispute is between China and
Vietnam, whose naval forces clashed most recently in 1988 when Chinese warships
sank two Vietnamese vessels with the loss of more than 70 lives.

In 1990, Prime Minister Li Peng offered to put the sovereignty question aside
and called for joint development of oil resources by all the claimants, but
there were no takers.

In mid-1992, China contracted with a small American company, the Crestone Energy
Corporation, to begin oil exploration off Vietnam's coast near Ho Chi Minh City.
Vietnam replied last year by granting the Mobil Oil Corporation drilling rights
in adjacent waters.

Diplomats in the region say China and Vietnam pledged in November to "refrain
from all acts" that could "broaden conflicts" or lead to the use of force in the
region. But a state visit to Hanoi by Chinese President Jiang Zemin did little
to allay Vietnam's concern about China's long-term intentions.

While future use of military force by Beijing in the South China Sea is
considered possible, Michael Swaine, an expert on the Chinese military at the
Rand Corporation, argues that by occupying islands and drilling for oil, China
has seized "a negotiating position" and may want to avoid further military
conflict.

Map of China showing location of South China Sea.

LOAD-DATE: January 4, 1995

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1995 The New York Times Company


                               8 of 211 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 January 3, 1995, Tuesday, Late Edition - Final

OUTLOOK 1995: Global Economic Prospects Are Brighter for Most;
Continued Vitality For Southeast Asia

BYLINE: By PHILIP SHENON

SECTION: Section C;  Part 1;  Page 10;  Column 5;  Business/Financial Desk

LENGTH: 542 words

DATELINE: BANGKOK, Thailand


Economic prospects around the world look better this year than last. The
decision by several large countries to sell off Government-controlled industries
is one big engine of growth. Yet deficits, inflation and joblessness keep
hampering the pace of recovery in many countries.

For many nations, 1994 was a turnaround year as they began pulling out of
recession. Some of the hottest economies, and targets of foreign investment,
emerged in once-overlooked markets of Southeast Asia and Latin America.

China, a favored destination for foreign investment, slowed down its unrelenting
growth last year to 11 percent, a still-formidable rate that strained the
capacity of aging industries and power grids. Japan, no longer the growth model
for Asia, tried to climb out of its prolonged slump, with growth of barely 1
percent in 1994.

Political developments rattled countries like Mexico, where the peso plummeted
after being freed to float against the dollar. Eastern Europe continued to
slough off old Communist habits. But in Russia, the best economic news may have
been that growth dropped off only 8 percent in 1994, compared with double-digit
declines in the previous two years.

Trade liberalization became an international byword, notably with the North
American Free Trade Association, now a year old. But frontier barriers were also
lowered within Europe and Latin America, even as Washington's trade frictions
with Japan and China festered. The European Union expanded to 15 countries. And
the General Agreement on Tariffs and Trade transformed itself into a sleeker new
World Trade Organization.

The economic dragons of Southeast Asia kept spitting fire in 1994, and every bit
of evidence suggests that this year will be no different.

Even the economic laggards of the region -- the Philippines, Cambodia, Laos and
Myanmar, formerly Burma -- are showing new vitality. With Washington's lifting
of a 17-year-old trade embargo last February, Vietnam could be poised for the
sort of economic boom that it had long envied among its neighbors.

Southeast Asia, capitalizing on its large numbers of low-wage but relatively
well-educated workers, remains the most economically vibrant region on earth,
with 1994 growth of 7 percent or more in Indonesia, Malaysia, Thailand and
Singapore, the tiny city-state that increasingly serves as the area's economic
hub.

Economic forecasts say the growth should be just as impressive this year. In
1994, foreign investment continued to pour in, notably from Japan,

Furthermore, the creation of a vast middle class in Southeast Asia means that
many of the products produced in factories here,from cars to TV sets to running
shoes, are no longer intended strictly for export.

For the richest Southeast Asians, the problem is where to put all that new-found
wealth, and many of them are investing elsewhere in the region.

The downside of the unrestrained economic boom here is the environmental
devastation of the region, especially in urban areas, as well as the vast
disparity between rich and poor. Simply put, cities like Bangkok, the Thai
capital, and Jakarta, the Indonesian capital, are now so overbuilt and congested
that they may never again be pleasant places to live.   PHILIP SHENON

LOAD-DATE: January 4, 1995

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1995 The New York Times Company


                               9 of 211 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                January 4, 1995, Wednesday, Late Edition - Final

HEALTH WATCH;
A Downside to Breast-Feeding

BYLINE: By JANE E. BRODY

SECTION: Section C;   Page 8;   Column 4;   National Desk;   Health Page

LENGTH: 618 words


PUBLICITY about the benefits of breast-feeding has prompted many women who might
otherwise have weaned their babies after a few months to continue to nurse them
for six months or longer. The benefits to the baby of breast-feeding are not in
question. They include improved resistance to infection, less risk of allergies
and, presumably, psychological comfort. But what about the mother?

A new study monitored psychological, physical and sexual factors among 19
Australian mothers every day for two months before and two months after they
weaned their first babies. The women kept daily records of 14 measures of
psychological, physical and sexual variables, noting them at the same time each
day on a three-point or five-point scale of well-being. All were considered in
good physical and psychological health and had been nursing their babies for 6
to 23 months.

Among those who were not pregnant at weaning time, stopping nursing was
associated with a significant decrease in fatigue, improved mood and an increase
in sexual feelings and activity, the women's diaries revealed. But no such
improvement in physical, psychological or sexual well-being was noted among the
five women who became pregnant before they stopped nursing.

The researchers, from the University of Sydney and Macquarie University in
Australia, reported their findings in a recent issue of Obstetrics and
Gynecology, an American journal. They suggested that the post-lactation decline
in fatigue alone could account for the women's improved mood and sexual
interest, since fatigue is known to have an adverse effect on the libido.

The researchers said many previous studies of the effects of nursing on mothers
suffered from methodological flaws. They noted that some studies had found no
change in mood or sexual behavior among nursing mothers, whereas others had
found an increased incidence of emotional problems, including depression, and a
decrease in sexual interest and behavior among them. The researchers contended
their study was far more precise and their findings were more likely to reflect
the actual effects of nursing and weaning.

Impotent Smokers

Men who smoke cigarettes are 50 percent more likely than nonsmokers to become
impotent before the age of 50, according to a newly published survey of nearly
4,500 American veterans of the Vietnam War. Among men who were smokers at the
time of the telephone interview survey in 1985 and 1986, 3.7 percent reported
being impotent, whereas only 2.2 percent of those who never smoked and 2 percent
of former smokers said they were impotent.

The researchers, headed by Dr. David M. Mannino of the National Center for
Environmental Health in Atlanta, reported in a recent issue of The American
Journal of Epidemiology that after they had adjusted their data for other
factors that could cause impotence, they found that "current smokers had 50
percent more reported impotence than nonsmokers." The researchers took into
account potential influences on sexual potency like alcohol and drug abuse,
hormonal factors, psychiatric illness, blood vessel disease and marital status.

The survey revealed no link between the incidence of impotence and the number of
years the men had smoked or the number of cigarettes they smoked each day. This
suggests that smoking per se has an immediate deleterious effect on potency,
prompting the researchers to suggest that men who seek assistance for sexual
dysfunction be questioned about their smoking behavior.

"This association between smoking and impotence should provide clinicians with
yet another opportunity to encourage patients, especially men with impotence, to
stop smoking," the researchers concluded.

LOAD-DATE: January 4, 1995

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1995 The New York Times Company


                              10 of 211 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                January 4, 1995, Wednesday, Late Edition - Final

In America;
A Reckless Journey

BYLINE: By BOB HERBERT

SECTION: Section A;   Page 19;   Column 5;   Editorial Desk

LENGTH: 703 words


In a segment of "Eyes on the Prize," the brilliant documentary series on the
civil rights movement, the Rev. Dr. Martin Luther King Jr. is shown at a press
conference, saying, "There is nothing more dangerous than to build a society
with a large segment of people in that society who feel that they have no stake
in it, who feel that they have nothing to lose."

Aristotle understood this. "Poverty," he said, "is the parent of revolution and
crime."

In some sense, the American people understand it. A national survey conducted
last fall showed that 72 percent of Americans believe that reducing poverty
would help reduce racial tension and crime.

And yet, in a reckless new journey, with maps scrawled by sneering, cynical men
with an utter contempt for history, the nation is moving fast toward policies
guaranteed to increase poverty and suffering and to expand radically that
dangerous segment of the population that feels it has nothing to lose.

Henry Hampton, executive producer of "Eyes on the Prize" and "The Great
Depression," has completed a five-hour documentary series called "America's War
on Poverty," which will appear on PBS on Jan. 16, 17 and 18. It's an honest look
at a period in American history that has been profoundly misrepresented,
distorted and lied about by politicians and others who have built marvelous
careers exploiting misery.

Mr. Hampton's series arrives at a crucial moment. The number of Americans in
poverty is growing, as is the number of middle-class Americans who are falling
into poverty. One might have expected a sense of urgency to develop, a sense
that these are serious problems that must be dealt with -- trends that must be
reversed. Instead, the opposite is happening. The newest and most successful
leaders in government have gotten where they are by promising to mug the poor.

"It seems to me so obvious that we have to do something about poverty," said Mr.
Hampton during an interview at the headquarters of his production company,
Blackside Inc., in Boston. "But this obvious need to act is buried in this
litany that we've heard for so long: 'They don't want to work, they're taking
your money, they want to sit and drink and watch television.' That kind of
blatant appeal continues to work."

An "unconditional war on poverty" was declared by President Lyndon Johnson in
his State of the Union address on Jan. 8, 1964. It was an appeal to the best in
America at a time when the country seemed economically strong, militarily
powerful and, in some quarters, deeply idealistic. It was also a time when the
nation was hurtling into the tragedy of Vietnam, and when violence at home was
eroding important reserves of good will and depriving the nation of some of its
greatest leaders.

The war on poverty went forward but it was handicapped. Nevertheless there was
progress. A companion volume to Mr. Hampton's series points out that in 1965,
some 33.2 million Americans -- 17 percent of the population -- lived in poverty.
By 1973, both the absolute numbers and the rate of poverty had declined, to 23
million and 11 percent, respectively. And then came the reversal. By 1988, after
eight years of the Reagan revolution and its cruel assault on social services,
the number of people in poverty had risen to 31.9 million, or 13.1 percent of
the population, and the numbers are still rising.

It would have been enormously helpful to the country and to the various segments
of its population if we had built on the successes of the war on poverty (there
were many) and learned from the failures, which should have been corrected or
eliminated. That is not what happened. Cheap politics and widespread ill will
prevailed. The poor got poorer and, according to a study that looked at the
years 1978 to 1986, the percentage of adults in the middle class in that period
declined from 75 to 67 percent.

The rich got richer, of course. And the demagogues -- who do all in their power
to foment hatred of the lower classes -- flourished.

This won't go on indefinitely. At some point a reckoning is inevitable. Echoing
Dr. King, Mr. Hampton said, "A nation cannot live peaceably when the gap between
affluence and poverty becomes as wide as ours is becoming."

LOAD-DATE: January 4, 1995

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Op-Ed

                   Copyright 1995 The New York Times Company


                              11 of 211 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                January 5, 1995, Thursday, Late Edition - Final

Dole Offers Foreign Policy Initiatives

BYLINE: By ELAINE SCIOLINO,    Special to The New York Times

SECTION: Section A;   Page 3;   Column 1;   Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 843 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, Jan. 4


Bob Dole took up his role as Senate majority leader today with a two-pronged
attack on the Administration's foreign policy, introducing legislation to stop
observing the arms embargo against Bosnia and to give Congress more control over
the scope and financing of United Nations peacekeeping.

The move represented the first foreign policy confrontation between the new
Republican majority in Congress and the Administration. And it underscored the
intention of the Republican-dominated Congress in general -- and Mr. Dole in
particular -- to put the Administration on the defensive and try to wrest
control of at least part of the foreign policy agenda from the Democrats.

In another sign of things to come, Mr. Dole also pledged that the Senate would
question the legality of giving economic aid to North Korea as part of a
far-reaching nuclear agreement, and examine closely the cost of helping Haiti.

In recent weeks the Kansas Senator has cast himself as a sort of shadow
secretary of state, challenging NATO generals during a visit to Brussels on
their inaction on Bosnia and Herzegovina, chastising the Europeans for failing
to arm the Bosnian Government and threatening to block the nuclear deal with
North Korea in the days before an American pilot was freed.

Under one bill by Mr. Dole, the United States would cease to honor the United
Nations arms embargo on Bosnia either at the request of the Bosnian Government
or at the end of a four-month cease-fire on May 1.

Mr. Dole's move could not have come as a total surprise to the Administration,
because it largely repeated the language of a similar Dole initiative that
passed the Senate in August. But it complicates Administration efforts to assure
the allies that Washington will not unilaterally allow the sale of arms to the
Bosnian Government.

Although the Administration stopped enforcing the embargo, it has opposed
violating it on its own, arguing that such a move would set a precedent for
other countries to ignore United Nations resolutions and would widen the war.

In denouncing the move, the State Department spokesman, Michael D.  McCurry,
said, "If you take on the unilateral responsibility of lifting the arms embargo,
the United States would also unilaterally take on the consequences of that
action, and that would include, in our view as a moral responsibility, the
arming, training and equipping of the Bosnian Muslims who would have to defend
themselves." Another consequence, he said, would be to legitimize Iran's
shipment of weapons to the Muslims in Bosnia.

Today's bill confounded the Administration because it would allow the United
States to send arms to the Bosnian Government in violation of the United Nations
embargo, but would prohibit the United States from sending ground troops to
deliver the arms or train the Bosnians in how to use them.

"How that could be achieved without massive use of U.S. force unilaterally, and
very, very likely the introduction of U.S. ground troops, is a question that
someone I hope will pose to Senator Dole," Mr. McCurry told reporters.

Mr. Dole also proposed a "Post-Cold War Powers Act" that would redesign and
restrict the American contribution to the financing of United Nations
peacekeeping operations and place strict limits on allowing American troops to
serve under United Nations command.

It would require the Administration to identify specific budget sources of
financing before it votes to create or extend a peacekeeping mission, and under
a complicated formula, would allow the Pentagon to charge the United Nations for
much of the equipment and services it now provides for free.

The bill would also set a maximum of 25 percent for the United States share of
the total United Nations peacekeeping budget, down from the current share of 31
percent. That goal is shared by the Administration as well.

Mr. Dole's proposal would also eliminate all but two sections of the War Powers
Resolution, apparently in an effort to increase the authority of a President to
keep combat troops abroad without explicit approval from Congress and to trim
the law to its least sensitive provisions.

As the Vietnam War was nearing its end in 1973, Congress enacted the law in an
effort to reassert its authority while not compromising a President's need to
act quickly. The law requires a President to notify Congress in a timely fashion
when American troops are being sent abroad with a strong probability that they
will engage in combat. The troops must be withdrawn within 90 days unless
Congress explicitly approves their mission.

But the law has proved largely ineffective because of Presidential resistance,
and because Congress is usually willing to let the White House assume the
political risk of sending troops abroad. In practice, Presidents have consulted
with Congress about sending troops abroad but have rejected the part of the law
that requires them to bring troops home unless they are given Congressional
approval. Mr. Dole's proposal would bring the law into line with that practice.

LOAD-DATE: January 5, 1995

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1995 The New York Times Company


                              12 of 211 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                January 7, 1995, Saturday, Late Edition - Final

Helicopter Pilot Unlikely to Be Punished for Statement

BYLINE: By ERIC SCHMITT,   Special to The New York Times

SECTION: Section 1;  Page 11;  Column 1;  National Desk

LENGTH: 721 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, Jan. 6


The Army pilot whose helicopter was shot down over North Korea last month did
not violate the military's Code of Conduct when, before his release, he signed a
statement saying he had committed an "intolerable crime" when his aircraft
"illegally intruded" into North Korean territory, Pentagon officials said today.

Military officials say the statement by the pilot, Chief Warrant Officer Bobby
Hall, merely recounted that he and his co-pilot, Chief Warrant Officer David
Hilemon, became lost on a routine training flight and strayed into North Korea
on Dec. 17. Mr. Hilemon was killed when the copter was shot down.

"Although there is an ongoing investigation into the circumstances of the
accident, I don't believe that his statement violates the tenets of the Code of
Conduct," said Maj. Bob Potter of the Air Force, a Defense Department spokesman.

The fifth article of the Code of Conduct states: "When questioned, should I
become a prisoner of war, I am required to give name, rank, service number and
date of birth. I will evade answering questions to the utmost of my ability. I
will make no oral or written statements disloyal to my country and its allies or
harmful to their causes."

Military officials say the language is intended to allow prisoners some
discretion if they are facing torture or other life-threatening circumstances.

The military adopted the code in 1955, in part as a response to the use of
prisoners for political propaganda in the Korean War, said David Burrelli, a
national defense specialist at the Congressional Research Service.

But the code has always been open to interpretation. Mr. Burrelli said it was
intended to give young, inexperienced ground troops a standard of conduct if
captured. But it was also flexible enough for more experienced officers,
typically pilots, to exercise their judgment to survive in life-threatening
situations.

The military modified the language and interpretation after the Vietnam War to
account for the pressures to make propaganda statements that American prisoners
of war might face.

Lieut. Comdr. Jeffrey Zaun, a Navy A-6 bombardier shot down during the Persian
Gulf war and captured by Iraq, said in a telephone interview today that he had
read statements critical of the United States on television because "they had a
gun and told me they were going to kill me."

Each of the armed services teaches the code to officers and enlisted personnel
in their regular training. Pilots, commandos and others who are exposed to
greater risks typically receive additional training in survival school.

Commander Zaun, who said he was beaten by his Iraqi captors, said the Navy's
weeklong course taught pilots how to handle hostile interrogations. "It's about
as stressful as it can get and still be safe," he said.

Mr. Hall, 28, said in interviews on four television networks on Thursday that he
wrote only what the North Koreans dictated to him, and agreed to do that only
after arguing with his captors for four days about exactly what he would sign.

Mr. Hall told the NBC-TV "Today" program that he had ultimately agreed to the
statement out of "fear." When a "Today" interviewer asked if he had any regrets,
he said he did, "because as a service member that's what we're basically trained
to try to avoid doing."

A senior military official said that while Mr. Hall was under "no physical
duress to sign the statement," he was under some "mental duress, as would be
natural."

To win Mr. Hall's freedom and defuse the crisis, American officials ended up
repeating similar language. Gen. Gary E. Luck, the commander of 37,000 American
troops in South Korea, sent a letter to North Korea expressing "regret" for
violating its airspace and citing "navigational error." The State Department
voiced similar regret.

After returning to a hero's welcome that included a congratulatory call from
President Clinton, Mr. Hall is not likely to face any disciplinary action for
the mishap, Pentagon officials said.

Nonetheless, questions remain about his navigational competence, why he was
permitted to fly so near the demilitarized zone that divides the Korean
Peninsula with only 10 hours' flying time near the zone, and why his OH-58
helicopter was not equipped with advanced navigational equipment in such a
sensitive flight area.

LOAD-DATE: January 7, 1995

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1995 The New York Times Company


                              13 of 211 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                January 7, 1995, Saturday, Late Edition - Final

The Dole Challenge

SECTION: Section 1;  Page 22;  Column 1;  Editorial Desk

LENGTH: 564 words


Congressional Republicans may be talking truce with the White House on key
domestic issues. But on foreign policy, Senator Bob Dole has already declared
war, submitting one bill this week that would allow U.S. arms sales to Bosnia in
defiance of the U.N. embargo and another that would restrict U.S. participation
in U.N. peacekeeping. He also promised early hearings aimed at unraveling the
Administration's nuclear deal with North Korea.

There is some merit in the Bosnia proposal, not much in the U.N. measure and a
capacity for major mischief on Korea. Like it or not, Mr. Dole now leads the
majority party in the Senate, and his policy challenges need to be taken more
seriously by the White House than they have so far.

On Bosnia, Senator Dole's bill would end U.S. participation in the arms embargo
either at the request of the Bosnian Government or when the current four-month
cease-fire expires May 1. The embargo makes it impossible for Bosnian Government
forces, the main victims of the war, to counter the heavy arms used by the
besieging Serbs.

The Administration says it opposes the arms embargo, but fears the precedent of
openly violating sanctions imposed by the Security Council. Yet despite months
of Congressional pressure, the Administration has failed to make an all-out
effort to get the embargo lifted in the Security Council. Instead, it ended U.S.
military enforcement of the embargo in the Adriatic Sea. Even that symbolic act
drew protests from Britain and France, and the Administration then tried visibly
distancing itself from Bosnian Government positions on the shape of the pending
peace plan.

The whole sorry show, which did nothing for the Bosnians, failed to satisfy
Congress and irritated the Europeans, was halted only by Jimmy Carter's
mediation mission, which produced the current cease-fire. Mr. Dole is prepared
to give that cease-fire a chance to bring peace. But the Administration needs to
use that same period to warn its European allies that the only sure way to avoid
U.S. withdrawal from the embargo is for the Security Council to lift it as part
of a broader peace package.

Mr. Dole's other bill, which he grandiloquently calls the "Post-Cold War Powers
Act," would reduce U.S. contributions to U.N. peacekeeping, restrict the
possibility of U.S. troops serving under a non-American U.N. commander and
repeal most of the Vietnam-era War Powers Resolution, which requires Presidents
to seek Congressional approval when they expose U.S. troops to possible combat.

Some of the financial restrictions are reasonable. But there are circumstances
where peacekeeping under non-U.S. command makes sense and could actually save
American lives by broadening international participation. Meanwhile, any step
away from Congressional accountability for foreign combat would be a serious
mistake.

On North Korea, Mr. Dole objects to U.S. payment for oil being used to replace
idled nuclear reactors. Surely that swap is a good deal for the United States.
In the hearings, the Administration may be able to find some bipartisan support,
perhaps from Senator Frank Murkowski, who recently returned from a trip to North
Korea more sympathetic toward the Administration's approach.

Congress cannot make foreign policy very well. But this Republican Congress will
try if the Administration does not face up to the challenge now.

LOAD-DATE: January 7, 1995

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Editorial

                   Copyright 1995 The New York Times Company


                              14 of 211 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 January 8, 1995, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

BEST SELLERS: January 8, 1995

SECTION: Section 7; Page 30; Column 2; Book Review Desk

LENGTH: 1480 words



          Weeks
This Last    On
Week Week  List Fiction

 1      1  29   POLITICALLY CORRECT BEDTIME STORIES, by James Finn Garner.
                (Macmillan, $8.95.) Classic tales respun to avoid offending
                current sensibilities.

 2      3  45   THE CELESTINE PROPHECY, by James Redfield. (Warner, $17.95.) An
                ancient manuscript, found in Peru, provides insights into
                achieving a fulfilling life.

 3*     2  19   DEBT OF HONOR, by Tom Clancy. (Putnam, $25.95.) Jack Ryan and
                C.I.A. agents vs. a Japanese plot to strike America's territory
                and economy.

 4*     4  12   INSOMNIA, by Stephen King. (Viking, $27.95.) A widower and a
                widow, victims of sleeplessness, behold sinister forces at work
                in their small Maine town.

 5      5   6   WINGS, by Danielle Steel. (Delacorte, $23.95.) A woman pursues
                her ambition to become a record-setting aviator in pre-World
                War II America.

 6      8  26   THE CHAMBER, by John Grisham. (Doubleday, $24.95.) A lawyer
                represents a racist who is on death row for his part in a 1967
                bombing in Mississippi.

 7      7  126  THE BRIDGES OF MADISON COUNTY, by Robert James Waller. (Warner,
                $16.95.) A photographer and a farmer's lonely wife in Iowa.

 8      6   9   THE LOTTERY WINNER, by Mary Higgins Clark. (Simon & Schuster,
                $22.) Stories about a couple who win a lottery and devote
                themselves to solving crimes.

 9     10   7   DARK RIVERS OF THE HEART, by Dean Koontz. (Knopf, $24.) A man
                and a woman, who meet by chance, must flee a powerful
                Government agency.

 10    11  24   THE GIFT, by Danielle Steel. (Delacorte, $15.) A woman's casual
                visit to a small town changes the lives of many of its
                inhabitants, as well as her own.

 11     9  14   TALTOS, by Anne Rice. (Knopf, $25.) The survivor of a species
                of witches copes with his heritage; a sequel to "The Witching
                Hour" and "Lasher."

 12    15  16   NOTHING LASTS FOREVER, by Sidney Sheldon. (Morrow, $23.) Three
                women doctors in San Francisco contend with lovers, betrayers
                and killers.

 13    13   7   GOD'S OTHER SON, by Don Imus. (Simon & Schuster, $23.) A 1981
                novel about Billy Sol Hargus, a lecherous television evangelist
                from Texas.

 14    14  14   MUTANT MESSAGE DOWN UNDER, by Marlo Morgan. (HarperCollins,
                $18.) In Australia's outback, an American woman learns about
                aboriginal philosophy.

 15    12   5   A CUP OF CHRISTMAS TEA, by Tom Hegg. (Waldman House, $10.95.) A
                book of verses, illustrated by Warren Hanson.

          Weeks
This Last    On
Week Week  List Nonfiction

 1      2  10   CROSSING THE THRESHOLD OF HOPE, by John Paul II. Edited by
                Vittorio Messori. (Knopf, $20.) The Pope discusses matters of
                belief, suffering and hope.

 2      1  14   DON'T STAND TOO CLOSE TO A NAKED MAN, by Tim Allen. (Hyperion,
                $19.95.) Anecdotes and meditations on life by the star of "Home
                Improvement."

 3      4  18   COUPLEHOOD, by Paul Reiser. (Bantam, $19.95.) Essays on the ups
                and downs of marriage by the television star and stand-up
                comedian.

 4      6  55   THE BOOK OF VIRTUES, by William J. Bennett. (Simon & Schuster,
                $30.) Moral stories adapted from the Greeks, the Bible,
                folklore and elsewhere.

 5      3  15   JAMES HERRIOT'S CAT STORIES, by James Herriot. (St. Martin's,
                $16.95.) A collection of tales.

 6      5  17   BARBARA BUSH: A Memoir, by Barbara Bush. (Drew/Scribners, $25.)
                The life of the former First Lady.

 7      8  13   THE HOT ZONE, by Richard Preston. (Random House, $23.) The
                discovery of a lethal virus, more infectious than H.I.V., and
                the efforts to keep it from spreading.

 8      7  13   DOLLY, by Dolly Parton. (HarperCollins, $25.) The autobiography
                of the country singer.

 9     10  10   THE BELL CURVE, by Richard J. Herrnstein and Charles Murray.
                (Free Press, $30.) Ways in which differences in intelligence
                affect American life.

 10     9   6   THE WARREN BUFFETT WAY, by Robert G. Hagstrom Jr. (Wiley,
                $24.95.) An account of the career of the man said to be the
                world's most successful investor.

 11    11  14   BASEBALL, by Geoffrey C. Ward and Ken Burns. (Knopf, $60.) An
                illustrated history of the game.

 12    12  44   MIDNIGHT IN THE GARDEN OF GOOD AND EVIL, by John Berendt.
                (Random House, $23.) The mysterious death of a young man in
                Savannah, Ga.

 13    13   4   IT WASN'T ALWAYS EASY, BUT I SURE HAD FUN, by Lewis Grizzard.
                (Villard, $20.) A collection of essays by the late Southern
                humorist.

 14         9   ALL THE TROUBLE IN THE WORLD, by P.J. O'Rourke. (Atlantic
                Monthly, $22.) A humorist considers problems like
                overpopulation, famine and plague.

 15*   14  12   NO ORDINARY TIME, by Doris Kearns Goodwin. (Simon & Schuster,
                $30.) The roles of Franklin and Eleanor Roosevelt during World
                War II.

 16*        1   PALE BLUE DOT, by Carl Sagan. (Random House, $35.) The
                astronomer's vision of the future role of human beings in the
                universe.

          Weeks
This Last    On
Week Week  List Advice, How-to and Miscellaneous

 1      3  37   IN THE KITCHEN WITH ROSIE, by Rosie Daley. (Knopf, $14.95.)
                Recipes by Oprah Winfrey's cook.

 2      2  85   MEN ARE FROM MARS, WOMEN ARE FROM VENUS, by John Gray.
                (HarperCollins, $23.) Ways to improve communication and
                relationships between the sexes.

 3      1   2   ILLUMINATA, by Marianne Williamson. (Random House, $20.) A
                celebration of the power of prayers, with examples of those
                fitting a variety of situations.

 4      4  15   MAGIC EYE III, by N.E. Thing Enterprises. (Andrews & McMeel,
                $12.95.) Oscillating designs in color.


Rankings reflect sales figures, for the week ending Dec. 24, at 3,050 bookstores
plus wholesalers serving 28,000 other retailers (gift shops, department stores,
newsstands, supermarkets), statistically weighted to represent sales in all such
outlets nationwide. An asterisk indicates that a book's sales are barely
distinguishable from those of the book above.

And Bear in Mind
(Editor's Choices of other recent books of particular interest)

THE ART AND ARCHITECTURE OF ISLAM, 1250-1800, by Sheila S. Blair and Jonathan M.
Bloom. (Yale University, $65.) A bold, competent and fresh attempt to rewrite
the history of later Islamic art from scratch, with plenty of splendid color
illustrations and other useful graphics.

BOREDOM: The Literary History of a State of Mind, by Patricia Meyer Spacks.
(University of Chicago, $24.95.) A persuasive account of a concept invented in
the 18th century; its roots include a growing concentration on "inner
experience" as the locus of personal reality.

THE FIRST WORLD WAR: A Complete History, by Martin Gilbert. (Holt, $35.) Mr.
Gilbert's enormous breadth of view seeks to render this dreadful conflict as
soldiers lived it on many fronts, often relying on the poetry and prose of the
many gifted writers who saw action.

GENTLEMAN SPY: The Life of Allen Dulles, by Peter Grose. (Richard Todd/Houghton
Mifflin, $30.) A biography, full of new information, of the irresistibly
charming (and manipulative) man who headed -- and embodied -- the Central
Intelligence Agency from 1953 to 1961.

THE INFERNO OF DANTE: A New Verse Translation, by Robert Pinsky. (Farrar, Straus
& Giroux, $35.) A gripping and near-symphonic rendition of the tour through hell
attains a truly Dantean velocity without missing a jot or a tittle.

IN PHARAOH'S ARMY: Memories of the Lost War, by Tobias Wolff. (Knopf, $23.) The
follow-up volume to Mr. Wolff's memoir "This Boy's Life" is a series of small,
elegant, personal sketches of his year in Vietnam.

LONG WALK TO FREEDOM: The Autobiography of Nelson Mandela, by Nelson Mandela.
(Little, Brown, $24.95.) The President of South Africa comes across not as
moralist or messiah but as a pragmatic politician who chose what might work over
what was ideologically agreeable.

THE MASTER OF PETERSBURG, by J.M. Coetzee. (Viking, $21.95.) The hero of Mr.
Coetzee's grimmest novel yet is Dostoyevsky himself, trapped in generational and
political clashes, trying to scrape meaning from the death of a son.

A NATION UNDER LAWYERS: How the Crisis in the Legal Profession Is Transforming
American Society, by Mary Ann Glendon. (Farrar, Straus & Giroux, $24.) A Harvard
law professor sees hyperactive litigators and "romantic" judges as depriving the
nation of lawyers' real talents: solving problems and designing social
structures.

ROBERT LOUIS STEVENSON: A Biography, by Frank McLynn. (Random House, $30.) A
thoroughly detailed life, taking the most recent scholarship into account, of
the great Scottish writer of English prose who died at 44 in 1894.

THE ROCKET AND THE REICH: Peenemunde and the Coming of the Ballistic Missile
Era, by Michael J. Neufeld. (Free Press, $25.) A chronicle of the Nazis' brutal
V-2 rocket program and the German scientists who became the American space
technologists of 1945 and after.

LOAD-DATE: January 8, 1995

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: List

                   Copyright 1995 The New York Times Company


This document could not be formatted for delivery. If your delivery request
included other documents, they completed successfully.

                              16 of 211 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 January 8, 1995, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

New & Noteworthy Paperbacks

BYLINE: By Laurel Graeber

SECTION: Section 7;  Page 32;  Column 1;  Book Review Desk

LENGTH: 961 words


LIVE FROM THE BATTLEFIELD. From Vietnam to Baghdad: 35 Years in the World's War
Zones
By Peter Arnett. Touchstone/Simon & Schuster, $14.
A reporter who has covered conflicts all over the globe, most recently the gulf
war, describes the dangerous work that has earned him many distinguished prizes,
but also the criticism of senators and Presidents. His memoir is "lean and clear
. . . rich in anecdote, redolent in its description," Bill Keller said here last
year.


THE SILENT CRY
By Kenzaburo Oe. Translated by John Bester.
Kodansha International, $11.
This 1967 novel by last year's winner of the Nobel Prize in Literature concerns
two brothers who have come back to their ancestral village in western Japan. One
turns inward, contemplating personal crises; the other tries to mobilize the
local youth against a predatory Korean merchant. Writing in The New York Times
last year, Sarah Lyall called the book "among Mr. Oe's most famous works." Grove
has also reissued new paperback editions of two works of fiction by Mr. Oe, both
translated by John Nathan, and an anthology he edited. A PERSONAL MATTER ($7.95)
draws on the author's own experiences as the father of a handicapped child. The
protagonist, called Bird, cannot accept the birth of his brain-damaged son, and
withdraws into thoughts of escape and infanticide before accepting
responsibility for the frail baby. "It owes obvious debts to Kierkegaard: the
search for -- and confrontation with -- the self," James Toback said here in
1968. TEACH US TO OUTGROW OUR MADNESS ($11) consists of four short novels that
explore themes ranging from mental and physical illness to Japanese-American
relations. THE CRAZY IRIS: And Other Stories of the Atomic Aftermath ($11),
edited by Mr. Oe, includes work by various writers and translators. Most of the
authors were victims of the bombings of Hiroshima and Nagasaki, and their
fiction captures their history and that of their country. In 1985 our reviewer,
Fumiko Mori Halloran, said they "seem to have reached the same conclusion -- the
best way to express their feelings was to restrain emotions and concentrate on
facts."
AT THE HAND OF MAN: Peril and Hope for Africa's Wildlife
By Raymond Bonner. Vintage, $12.
The author concentrates on the African elephant, a species that can be as
destructive to its environment as man is to his. He argues that culling the
herds is necessary to preserve them -- a view many animal rights proponents
oppose. The book's "greatest value . . . is that it shows how complex the
realities of conservation really are," Ian Tattersall said here in 1993.
THE PALACE THIEF
By Ethan Canin. Picador USA, 175 Fifth Avenue, New York, N.Y. 10010, $10.
These four long fictions illuminate the lives of men who are trying to make
their way in a world that has passed them by, largely because of their own
failings. Last year our reviewer, Abby Frucht, praised "Mr. Canin's habit of
tightening a character's grip on ordinary, dependable objects, only to allow
those objects to detonate in a vast psychological minefield."
DEN OF LIONS: Memoirs of Seven Years
By Terry Anderson. Ballantine, $5.99.
The author recalls both his ordeal as a hostage of Islamic fundamentalists in
Beirut and his relationship with the Lebanese woman, now his wife, who gave
birth to their daughter while he was captive. "Beyond its compelling reportage,"
the book is "an improbable and moving love story," Eugene Kennedy said here in
1993.
DOGS OF GOD
By Pinckney Benedict. Plume, $10.95.
The scene is the West Virginia mountains, where an amoral drug lord named
Tannhauser rules over an abandoned military post until he is challenged by an
idealistic boxer. Last year our reviewer, Marilyn Stasio, said the author writes
"with the lyrical exactitude of Henry Thoreau on a metaphysical field trip to
hell."
MORE HOME COOKING: A Writer Returns to the Kitchen
By Laurie Colwin. Harper Perennial, $12.
This posthumously published collection includes more of the author's tributes to
food and its pleasures, whether it is fresh biscuits, free-range eggs or a
chocolate cake from childhood. "Read as they were meant to be, Laurie Colwin's
food thoughts are like phone calls from a dear friend," Laura Shapiro said here
in 1993.
PALAIS-ROYAL
By Richard Sennett. Norton, $11.95.
Two brothers, one an architect and the other a priest, illustrate different
sides of the Romantic imagination in this novel, which takes place in
mid-19th-century Paris and London and features cameos by the likes of Balzac and
George Sand. In 1987 our reviewer, Richard Holmes, called it "exhilarating and
amusing to read."
SONGBIRDS, TRUFFLES, AND WOLVES: An American
Naturalist in Italy
By Gary Paul Nabhan. Penguin, $10.95.
The author, an ethnobotanist, trekked 200 miles across the Italian heartland in
1990 for both professional and personal reasons: to study the world embraced by
St. Francis and to seek solace from a messy divorce. The result is "as
satisfying as a shot of grappa with a plate of anisette cookies," Peter
Bernhardt said here in 1993. More reflections on nature are to be found in two
books by Roger B. Swain, both reissued, with new introductions, by Lyons &
Burford. FIELD DAYS: Journal of an Itinerant Biologist ($12.95) explores
everything from "hamburgers and houseplants" to "sophisticated fly paper." In
1984 our reviewer, Linda Yang, called it "subtle and positively sparkling."
EARTHLY PLEASURES: Tales From a Biologist's Garden ($12.95) celebrates the
cultivation of human relationships as well as the planting and preparing of
vegetables. In 1981 our reviewer, Ken Emerson, said the author "is able, like
most good essayists, to think big thoughts and small thoughts at the same time."

   LAUREL GRAEBER

LOAD-DATE: January 8, 1995

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Review

                   Copyright 1995 The New York Times Company

                              17 of 211 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 January 8, 1995, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

Off the Grid

BYLINE: By Philip Weiss;    Philip Weiss is a contributing writer to the
Magazine.

SECTION: Section 6;   Page 24;   Column 1;   Magazine Desk

LENGTH: 8360 words


A warming morning late in October, and James (Bo) Gritz stands on a mountaintop
in north-central Idaho, addressing the faggot press. His words. Still, look at
them: a Brit with blond hair fringing his round head -- The London Times
calling; a reporter from People with long hair and a goatee; the neo-beat
novelist William T. Vollmann, on assignment from Spin magazine and accompanied
by a friend, a birdlike woman with bright red lipstick and purple gloves. And
there are three or four others, including a photographer from this magazine who
has slipped his earring into his pocket to get under the faggot radar.

Gritz (rhymes with "bites") is long-winded.

"I don't know about you, friends, but I look at everything from my guerrilla
perspective," he explains, alluding to his years as a Green Beret colonel. "The
Government will do a threat analysis. They'll look and say, Jiminy Christmas,
this is not Waco. We're going to have to completely encircle this whole area
here if we're going to control it, and as you know there's only one road. . . .
"

He turns and motions over the hills to the north, toward a dirt road that winds
11 miles to the small town of Kamiah, population 1,100.

"I know what they're going to say. 'Gritz is going to have a .50-caliber up
here, he's going to have cannons, he's going to have explosives in the trees.'
So they're going to have to try vertical envelopment." He's referring to
helicopters. "Non-habit-forming. Five thousand helicopters shot down in Vietnam.
No way! So I think they're going to leave us alone. So we don't have to shoot at
them. We don't even have to have the capability. As long as they think that
there is that threat."

Gritz is talking about a place he calls Almost Heaven. It will rise right here,
in northern Idaho -- 200 acres that he and his partners bought and subdivided
into 30 lots that they're selling, at $3,000 an acre, to people who want to
escape Government tyranny and Armageddon in the lowlands. The lots are going
fast, as are those Gritz is selling on higher hilltops nearby -- he calls one
Shenandoah, the other Woodland Acres. Up here, with a view of the Clearwater
River and Gospel Hump Wilderness Area, buyers will form a "covenant community."
They will agree to stand by one another and defend one another, and maybe not
pay any taxes either. "Off the umbilical," he calls it. Off the grid.

Gritz, who was briefly on the ticket with David Duke in '88 and ran for
President himself in '92, is, at 55, a leader of the radical right-wing
survivalist movement. He quotes Scripture, prophesying end times in the next few
years, times when we shall all have to accept the mark of the beast: a bar code
implant in the forehead or right hand that means the cashless society is upon
us, and that every transaction an individual makes will be subject to
surveillance. Just as Revelation 13 describes.

"We are going to live our lives according to our ways," Gritz is saying now.
"Let's say it comes down to the fact that eventually you cannot go down to the
7-Eleven and buy bread and milk and meat. Then yes, up here there's an abundance
of game, and if it did come to that -- and according to biblical prophecies
there are times like that ahead -- then we would be prepared. If it never comes,
hallelujah. But personally I'm going to go off the grid, because every time I've
lived off the grid, like Vietnam, I've been very happy."

Gritz does what the photographers want him to do: he props one of his black
cowboy boots on a barbed-wire fence and stares off squinting and box-headed. He
hugs his wife, Claudia, and walks across the land. Claudia is nearly 20 years
younger than he is -- she's wife No. 3 -- and doesn't seem like much of a
survivalist. Pretty with Liz Taylor eyes, she wears two large diamonds rings on
her fingers. She and Bo may be going off the grid, but Claudia is going to have
a washer and dryer, a lawn.

"I'm hungry," she says. "I need to go to the bathroom, so do one more shot."

"There's a port-a-potty," one of Gritz's partners, Jerry Gillespie, tells her.

"No way," she says.

So, just one more shot. The top couple of buttons on Gritz's shirt are open, and
sprigs of gray chest hair peek over his undershirt and catch the morning light,
and the same sunlight takes in the valley of the Clearwater and the pale blue
berries on the elderberry bushes. If you live off the grid you can make wine and
pancakes with the crunchy, bittersweet elderberry.

GO A HALF MILE EAST. THE SAME SUNLIGHT picks out honey-colored chinking on the
log-house homestead of the first people to buy into Gritz's message and move up
here: the Fullers, Dan and Barb, formerly of St. George, Utah. They are prepared
for end times. They have a $20,000 solar-energy system and are storing food --
stuff that looks like dried cat food and takes a long time to get used to.
T.V.P.: textured vegetable protein. Taco-flavored T.V.P. Magic Barbecue T.V.P.

You get invited into their kitchen. Boy, that T.V.P. takes a while to get used
to. They say Bo's got the Gospel. They say that years of study have convinced
them that political collapse is a real possibility. They hand you literature
from Florida that will open your eyes -- The Revelator. In which it is written
that the Anti-Christ Banksters are squeezing the life out of America in
preparation for the New World Order. Shrewd goldsmiths are plotting to deceive
the goyim, the goy states. Mayer Amschel Rothschild. Haym Solomon. There is a
long bit from the Protocols of the Elders of Zion.

Dan Fuller, 68, is a retired crop-duster, and he tells you: "There are two
choices. Go along with the New World Order, or change your life. They're going
to decide everything about your life. Where you can work. Where you can live.
Where you can go for groceries. They will tell you all of that. You're not going
to be a free man, you're going to be a slave."

You're skeptical. "I don't know."

"Nothing would please me more than for it all not to be true." But, he
continues, "Your clothes are not going to be yours. They're going to belong to
the state."

"Who will decide?"

"World bankers."

"The Queen of England," Barb says.

"Rothschild," he says.

You say, "How will it be in the middle of winter when you have to drive down 10
miles of snaking dirt road to get some milk?"

Dan shakes his head once. "Well, let me ask you this: What are you going to do
when they ask you to accept the mark of the beast?

THE ANTI-GOVERNMENT MOOD THAT HAS seemingly swept the nation is nowhere more
pronounced than in Idaho. This is not the state that elected Frank Church to the
Senate, not any more. Idaho is sending no Democrats at all to Washington this
month, and the Statehouse, which only a few years ago was roughly balanced
between the two parties, now counts only 21 Democrats among its 105 members. The
most powerful Democrat in the state, indeed the only Democrat holding statewide
office, is J. D. Williams, the auditor. And Idaho's Republicans are not in the
William Weld-Christine Whitman mold. There is Helen Chenoweth, for instance.
During her successful campaign last fall to unseat Representative Larry LaRocco,
a Democrat, Chenoweth declared that "white Anglo-Saxon males are an endangered
species."

White Anglo-Saxons are not endangered in Idaho. The state, with a population of
roughly 1,100,000, is virtually all white. The 1990 census counted about 9,000
Asians and Pacific Islanders in Idaho and slightly more than 3,000 blacks. This
goes some way toward explaining why Idaho is suddenly one of the most attractive
destinations for whites in flight. (A third of the state's newcomers are said to
be coming from California.) So far in the 90's, only Nevada's and Arizona's
population growth rates are greater than Idaho's.

"Our real estate is going nuts here because people are trying to get away from
the real world," Clint Engledow, a real-estate agent in Kamiah, says. "Downtown
Houston, downtown Denver, downtown Vallejo. You name it, they're fleeing. They
say they're sick of drive-by shootings and 14-year-old orange-haired mall rats.
They want to pick huckleberries and not be near any population base."

The appeal of Idaho is not simply its whiteness, though. There are good jobs in
Boise, and affordable homes in suburbs here that still feel like small towns.
And for those looking for a last frontier, there is the terrain. Idaho has
magnificent scale, its dry Western air yielding long views of rugged river
breaks and serried mountains. These vistas are preserved thanks in large part to
the Federal Government. Nearly two-thirds of the state is publicly owned land,
mainly national forests and wilderness.

Survivalists and conspiratorialists, Christian constitutionalists and New Age
back-to-the-landers would seem to number in the several thousands in Idaho.
Steve Willey, owner of Backwoods Solar Electric in Sandpoint, says he has 1,000
customers in northern Idaho, all off the grid.  "There's a wide variety here
that come from opposite ends philosophically to the same situation physically,"
Willey says. Jess Walter, a reporter for The Spokesman-Review in Spokane, Wash.,
who has done considerable reporting on survivalists, estimates that there are
more than 10,000 people living off the grid, both literally and philosophically,
in the hills of eastern Washington, northern Idaho and western Montana. He has
encountered a Vietnam vet who says he's hiding in the woods, a loner who shares
a cabin with a grand piano, a man living in a trailer with his children and new
wife, on the lam from a custody dispute, and a commune that sells food.

"If you follow a dirt road anywhere in northeast Washington or Idaho, chances
are you're going to find them," he says. "They're harder to count than homeless
people, because they're just gone."

In the 60's and 70's, hippies came to Idaho's empty spaces, and you can still
find them growing garlic and tanning hides and holding barter fairs. And the
promise of being left alone has drawn other kinds of free spirits. People like
the novelist Denis Johnson, who lives near the Canadian border and who brings
along bungee cords when he goes out with a chain saw so he can tourniquet
himself in case of an accident.

"You come here with a vague notion of getting away from it all," Johnson says.
"Then when you get out into the woods, you see how wonderful it is to be
self-sufficient to any degree, how essential it is to being human. I feel I
robbed myself by living in cities. The city itself is like a big baby, being
supplied from outside."

Self-reliance is Idaho's byword. The landscape fosters an American romance about
working out one's own fate in nature that is equal parts Thoreau and manifest
destiny -- and one big part pure hatred of government. Up in the mountains of
the panhandle, Idahoans bring those feelings to a high art. Local newspapers are
filled with laments like the one that a husband and wife, new to the state, sent
to The Clearwater Progress in Kamiah to complain about Federal policy on land
use and schooling: "We eat the bitter bread of tyranny and the cake of
oppression."

For people like this, Idaho offers not only a landscape but a coherent politics,
a world view: survivalism, tax protest, apocalypse, conspiracy theories. A woman
in Kamiah urges you to investigate sightings of black helicopters, which, she
has heard, are a sign that the United Nations is about to take over America's
Armed Forces. At breakfast in the Lewis Clark Motel outside Kamiah, a retiree
tells you, "In California they put a meter on your well and you get charged
twice, once when it comes in and once when it flows out, as sewage," then gives
you information about how to build a house from tires. And the publisher of The
Clearwater Progress, Bill Glenn, shows you the plastic security strip they're
putting into $20 bills, and says this is a step toward one world government.

Out here, there's room for such thinking, room for everything. Bo Gritz tells
you that Idaho County, Idaho, is ideal for Almost Heaven because, among other
things, there is only one traffic light and the citizens have rejected all
efforts to impose a building code. He tells you other things too. He says that
as the global tide toward world government grows stronger, "we will need a
pivotal state" -- Idaho as base camp.

Gritz's attraction to Idaho, his sense of having found a place here, also has to
do with his role in an episode that, for Idaho's survivalists, has become a
legend -- one about a first taste of end times. In August 1992 a 44-year-old
survivalist named Randall Weaver garrisoned himself and his family and a friend
in a mountaintop cabin outside of Naples, Idaho, 30 miles from the Canadian
border. Federal agents were moving in through the woods with a warrant for
Weaver's arrest. (He had failed to appear at a trial on a gun charge in 1991.)
During an unintended encounter, a deputy marshal was killed and Federal
sharpshooters killed Weaver's 14-year-old son, Sam. The next day a sharpshooter
killed Weaver's wife, Vicki, 43, as she stood in the doorway of the cabin
holding her infant daughter. For eight days Randy Weaver huddled in his cabin
with his three daughters a few feet from Vicki's body.

A vigil gathered at the base of the mountain, known as Ruby Ridge. There were
neo-Nazis, tax protesters, enraged neighbors. Children held posters saying Death
to ZOG -- Zionist-Occupied Government. Skinheads shaved their heads in nearby
Ruby Creek. The standoff ended when Bo Gritz showed up and forced himself on the
hostage rescue team. He wore a special negotiator's outfit -- a midnight blue
jacket with epaulets that he had made for him in Thailand years before, and he
eventually helped convince Weaver to give up and fight the battle in court.

The destruction of the Weaver family, and Randy Weaver's subsequent exoneration
on Federal conspiracy charges, is today the parable by which many living off the
grid in Idaho and elsewhere understand government's relationship to the American
family. The story has the same resonance for survivalists today as
confrontations between the Black Panthers and the police had for the radically
alienated left in the 70's.

WHERE ARE THESE PEOPLE COMING from that can inflict so much pain. I don't sleep
at night."

Leah Balint hugs herself as she recalls the death of Vicki Weaver.

You're back at Almost Heaven. Two horses in a field. An apple tree. Leah's
husband, Stewart, 41, in a Cochise belt buckle and a cowboy hat with a piece of
polished stone, malachite or something, dangling from the band. And Leah herself
walking around with just gray wool socks on her feet, a 22-year-old with a
fragile piping voice and clear skin and thick Venus hair. Their two small boys
play with a hammer. Solar panels lean against the trailer, charging the car
battery that runs their television.

They're off the grid and going further. Because Stew is engaged in the study of
law. His studies began when his family lost its farm in Washington state. First
he read "None Dare Call It Conspiracy," by Gary Allen, a former speech writer
for George Wallace; that opened his eyes to the designs of the international
bankers who, in league with the Government, fix prices arbitrarily and cripple
the nation. Now Stew is renouncing all of what he regards as his contracts with
government. Driver's license. Social Security. Birth certificate. Hunting
license. He has torn them up.

"The Government wasn't designed for people like us," Leah says.

She goes to the trailer and comes back out with Birkenstocks. A bird tweets from
a barbed-wire fence.

"You see the magpie?"

You turn and there's a magpie perched on a wire, iridescent and strange.
Meriwether Lewis was enchanted by them when he traveled here 190 years ago.

"Do you sleep at night?" she asks.

LIKE SO MANY OTHER STANCES of the late 60's, the back-to-the-land movement was
mostly talk. People on the coasts had visions of throwing off the traces of a
sick imperialist society and making a homestead, but it took a special sort to
act on those beliefs and go off the grid. It wasn't people who shouted about
revolution till they were hoarse. That was first chakra energy, from the groin.
The true back-to-the-lander was drawing on integrative energy, higher in the
body, fourth or fifth chakra.

Greg Sempel was confused by his football coaches at the University of Montana
who screamed about winning and fed him 21 pills a day to bulk him up -- but said
he was wrong to smoke pot. He felt abused. He dropped out, did some ranch work
-- and eventually found himself on a remote hillside near Santa, Idaho, 80 miles
north of Kamiah, with other hippies. He bought five acres (at $100 down, $50 a
month), and melted snow for water. He formed a tree-planting co-op. It was
grueling work, it tore at your back and your knees; men tended to be better cut
out for it. That was a cruel truth about going back to the land; it might be
saner, but it sorted out gender in a hurry. His wife, Leah, sewed quilts to
exchange at the annual barter fair and gathered with the other women for home
birthing.

"Ruby was born in a tepee," Leah says now, reaching for her, a friend's
10-year-old child.

"No, I was born in a bus," Ruby says.

Sheryl and Larry Nims came out to Kamiah from Portland in 1970. The land they
bought had a grove of locusts in a draw, and the trees made William Blake-like
silhouettes against the darkening sky. They bought a tepee for $324. They had a
son they named Asa, and after he broke a pitchfork trying to pole-vault, they
got him a pole and built standards out of lodgepole pines and a crossbar from a
piece of thornwood. (He would later be state champ.) Sheryl farmed with horses
and their hippie friends up the hill ate puppies because the Indians had done
that. The Nimses found they didn't like to kill pigs or cows but they could kill
goats. Goats were stupid. When it came time Larry would lead the goats they'd
raised to a hollow and throw out grain for the one they'd chosen to eat that
winter, and then he'd balance his rifle on a fence post 15 feet away and aim for
the head. Sheryl cooked the goat and canned it, and the dogs ate the bones.

No chain saws. Chain saws were noisy, they smelled. To use one was to be fully
implicated in the economy of fossil fuels. The metal blade of a crosscut saw
going through the trunk of a cedar made a bright song that filled their hearts.
Sheryl rode horseback and Larry walked over their land with a pruning saw hung
around his neck, and they were the last people they knew who did physical
eradication of weeds, pulling, no chemicals, and Sheryl wore nothing at all in
the summer, even rode the horse naked. And when a surveyor came across the land
one day and asked for a glass of water, Sheryl walked calmly back to the house
with him in tow, naked as Eve before the fall, and got it for him in the house.

No phone. No electricity. Their lives were harder than the lives the University
of Oregon had trained them for, but they were sinewy people, they liked things
hard, and they abided by the frontier ethos: tolerance and distance. Everyone is
escaping something. Mind your own business. Don't crowd him. Don't come on
strong. Don't drop in, don't touch. A handshake means a lot more here than it
does other places. Pay attention to the No Trespassing sign.

THE HIPPIES WEREN'T THE ONLY PEOPLE IN northern Idaho who were convinced that
society was out of whack.

There was Paul Palmer, tall and wry, who came from New Mexico in the 60's. He
was an electrician by training, but now lives and farms with his family on Clear
Creek, a remote spot 17 miles from Kamiah. "After the Watts riots our feeling
was that things were not right," he says. "But you don't wait for a crisis and
then put up a tent in the wilderness. You go early and get prepared." For a time
he pulled two of his boys from the public schools in Idaho because, he says, "a
full-fledged Communist and a sex pervert" were teaching there. Meanwhile, his
studies of the law convinced him that the Federal Government had grossly
overstepped its limits.  The income tax was voluntary, as he read the law. His
refusal to file a 1040 form made it hard for him to find work.

"After my difficulties with the I.R.S,, I was in the ragbag," he says. So he
learned the ways of the land -- how to farm with horses and dry fruit and grow
beans.

Steve Majors, 41, came from Illinois and settled on a hillside not far from
Palmer's place. He also began to read law books. "When I was farming, I began to
have a conviction from God about not being on Social Security," he tells you.
"You farm your land, when you're too old to farm it your son can farm it. That's
your Social Security. The Government's Social Security program just didn't make
sense to me. I inwardly felt the conviction that it's wrong for me to be in the
system, and I better study the law to find out how best to protect myself. I
started with the Bible, the basis of law in our country. The I.R.S. doesn't like
my position."

A few miles down the Clearwater River in the town of Stites, (Grandpa) John
Brandt sold building supplies to the hippies and said that building codes were
Communism. He hung the Governor in effigy outside his store. Grandpa John had a
library of literature.

You go to his store, Stites Ace Hardware. Grandpa John's having lunch. Just a
minute. He finishes up and comes into his office, a big jovial man with antic
eyebrows and a little mouth. Napkins his hands, talks about history.

"Hitler didn't get started on the Jews," he tells you. "He was trying to build
the country up. The reason Hitler had a problem with them, there was inflation,
and everything kept falling down and the Jews picked it up, for pennies on the
dollar. Did you hear the expression I'm going to Jew you? That expression didn't
come out of thin air. I know a lot of people got killed, but they run that
Holocaust thing ragged, and that's going to stop. Now the Indians are taking
that over. The Germans got credit for killing, or blame for killing, more Jews
than there were at the time. Many times over. Who do you think, when we go into
debt -- who owns the Federal Reserve System? I've known this for at least 25
years. The first time people told me that, I thought, that's crazy. But they
gave me books. I've spent a lot of time reading this. Roosevelt started
socialism and ruined the country. I've heard one story that Eleanor shot him in
the back of the head. He was with his mistress. The way this story goes -- he
gave away so much to the Russians, he was sick. That's normal. We know that. But
he was going to confess this and she shot him, because she was a card-carrying
Communist. They said it was a cerebral hemmorhage."

THE HIPPIES HAD THEIR PROBLEMS WITH THE Government, too. When a D.E.A.
helicopter dips over the trees on the hillsides around Santa and looks into the
gardens, Hari Heath runs from his tepee, giving them the finger with one hand
and waving his assault rifle with the other.  Hari got to Idaho as a hippie. He
still makes bows and arrows, but now he tells you how every commune he has seen
fell apart because of inequities in power. Over the years he learned a lot from
the right-wing survivalists and the local rednecks. He has learned that his
ability to walk into a gun shop and buy anything he wants guarantees democracy.

Hari says: "The World Bank 10 white guys socialist economic scam U.N. one world
government? They're doing it very slowly. They know they can't pull it off if we
maintain an armed population."

Larry Nims has a less alienated view of politics. He sees the American
Constitution as beautifully designed. Still, as self-reliant people, he and
Sheryl have self-reliant fantasies of end times. They, too, imagine the crunch,
a time of bank failure, riots, social collapse. What if the dispossessed swarmed
up from the lowlands? What if they came for Sheryl's canned goat and canned corn
and potatoes?  Would Larry be willing to shoot them?

He has met a survivalist who spoke about how you could use high land to get the
drop on the hordes. And there was a way to use a handkerchief to improve your
accuracy with a revolver. You wrap one corner of the handkerchief around the
revolver grip, then you grip it with your hand and take the opposite corner of
the handkerchief and clasp it in your teeth. Now aim the gun out from your body,
strain with your mouth and your arm so you have two points of support. Here,
like this. . . .

IN THE 1980'S IDAHO became strongly identified with right-wing apocalypticism.
This was in large part because of the presence in the panhandle of Richard
Butler, a neo-Nazi from California who bought 20 acres outside Coeur d'Alene, a
short drive east of Spokane, Wash., and founded the Aryan Nations. He built a
compound on his land, and it became an outpost of Christian Identity thinking,
which generally holds that white Christians are the true Israelis; that blacks
and other people of color are mud people, soulless animals; that Jews are the
mongrelized descendants of Esau, hated by God, and that homosexuals should be
exterminated. Conspiracies abound: notably, that the Government is controlled by
a corrupt Babylonian system that includes the Jewish Defense League, the
Anti-Defamation League of the B'nai B'rith, the Council of Foreign Relations and
the Trilateral Commission.

Today Richard Butler is 75 and in seeming decline, but he will spend an hour or
two with you in his compound (even if you have identified yourself as a Jew). A
fuzzy, crocheted swastika turns slowly in the window, his German shepherd, Bonn,
rests nearby and Butler lays out the finer points of neo-Nazi practice.

"We had a cross lighting down there----"

"Most people call it a cross burning."

"Well, Jesus Christ is the light of the world, he's the one who removes the
darkness, so we call it a lighting. We don't burn the cross, we just light it."

"Gasoline?"

"No we use diesel oil. Wrap the cross in burlap. Light it, and the cross itself
still stands."

"So it's the same cross year after year?"

"Oh yeah."

Ten years ago Butler was more puissant. He reached out to prisoners and other
rootless young men with terrifying warnings about the crippling of the white
race. Homosexuality is financed by the Jews, he'd say. That's why you never see
a poor homosexual. . . . Pregnant black women are coming by the millions to your
neighborhood, he'd say. "Want to live in an all-white area?" Idaho beckons you.
Butler and other Identity spokesmen envisioned the Idaho panhandle as the center
of "a territorial imperative," a nation embracing portions of five Northwestern
states in which blacks, Jews and Indians would have few rights and face
deportation or worse. In "The Politics of Righteousness," a study of Idaho
extremists, James A. Aho says Butler's training included living off the grid:
"survivalist workshops, and classes in health, diet, food storage and nuclear
protection."

The growing prominence of the Aryan Nations in the early 1980's presented the
Coeur d'Alene community with a dilemma: leave Butler alone or come out against
him. Civic leaders spoke of the state's tradition of tolerance. Ignore him and
his appeal will die away. Besides, in northern Idaho his anti-Government views
were widely shared.

On the other side of the debate were some Coeur d'Alene residents who organized
as the Kootenai County Task Force on Human Relations. They came together in 1981
after a restaurant owned by a Jewish family was daubed with swastikas. The
activists wanted to publicize Butler's message and decry it. At great personal
risk -- one task force leader's house was bombed as he sat in his living room --
they spoke out against the Aryan Nations.  And later they supported the first
prosecution of an Aryan Nations follower after the man, a devotee of Hitler's,
issued biblically inflected threats to a young white man whose mother had
married a black man.

Inevitably Butler seeded violence. In 1984 a group linked to the Aryan Nations
and calling itself the Order went on a crime spree of bank robberies and
bombings and killings, notably the murder in June of that year of a Denver radio
talk-show host -- an outspoken liberal, and a Jew -- named Alan Berg. The
group's leader, Robert Jay Matthews, wrote: "I realized that white America,
indeed my entire race, was headed for oblivion unless white men rose and turned
the tide."

By December 1984, when Matthews died in a fiery shootout with the police on
Whidbey Island in Washington, the Kootenai County Task Force was no longer
lonely. Developers and the owner of several panhandle newspapers were on its
side. The Nazis in the neighborhood were now a quality-of-life issue. "We had
three problems," Marshall Mend, a local real-estate developer, said in "Stand Up
to Hate Crimes," a 1991 documentary celebrating the task force's first 10 years.
"One, our community's image was being destroyed by the media. Two, we saw
minorities being discouraged from moving to the area. Three, we saw these same
articles encouraging racists, bigots and other hate groups to move into our
area."

Law-enforcement agencies were at first rather slow to respond. The F.B.I. was
"absolutely . . . behind the ball" on the Order, recalled Wayne Manis, then the
special agent in charge of the F.B.I.'s Coeur d'Alene office. But officials were
far better organized when a second Order group with connections to the Aryan
Nations began a crime spree in 1986, setting off several bombs in the Coeur
d'Alene area and threatening greater destruction: bombs for gay discos in
Portland, cyanide for the water supply of Los Angeles.

"The F.B.I. did Order 1," says Tony Stewart, the current president of the
Kootenai County Task Force. "Order 2 was F.B.I., A.T.F., Secret Service, the
sheriff's office and the state police."

Stewart grows enthused describing this phalanx. Liberals are comfortable with
government. And the Kootenai County task force worked closely with the state,
helping legislators in Boise, for example, to pass far-reaching state
hate-crimes laws in the 1980's. Incidents of racist graffiti and harassment
dropped sharply, and the hive of angry young men at the Aryan Nations began to
decamp to a less sensitized region 60 miles away: the flats of Sanders County in
Montana.

Coeur d'Alene began to earn recognition for its achievement. Its Mayor went to
New York City in 1987 to accept a civic award from the Raoul Wallenberg
Committee of the United States. The F.B.I. was all over northern Idaho; they
weren't going to be surprised again. The agency, Wayne Manis says, had run up
against "without a doubt the best organized and most serious terrorist threat
that this country has ever seen." That the F.B.I. itself was feeling a little
apocalyptic might explain the Government's actions on Ruby Ridge, the bloody
standoff with the Weavers.

OCTOBER. BLACK HOUNDS are baying outside. The barrel stove is going. Cougar and
bear skins are draped over the couch. You're in the cabin of Jackie and Tony
Brown in the hills not far from Naples, 70 miles north of Coeur d'Alene, not far
from Ruby Ridge. The Browns were good friends of the Weavers.

"The Weavers were a curious blend of religious holy rollers and tactical
soldiers of God, plus reactionaries," Tony says. "They reacted to things around
them. So you're on the defensive, things aren't going the way you want them to
do. Which is why I dropped out of the egomaniac-driven society in Oregon and
followed a path of my own. But Weaver believes the Bible tells people of the
knowledge and that they should expound that knowledge to their brothers and
sisters. Form a body of true believers. Part of their life was sharing with
people what they thought. They weren't pushy, but they thought a remnant or
small group of people would bring about a new kingdom. Over the sheep type."

"The sheeple," Jackie says.

"Randy thought everyone was in for higher taxes, more restrictions, erosion of
rights till you were a slave," Tony says. "One thing that sets his mental tone,
he was a believer in absolute truth. I think the truth is pretty relative to
what you know, two ideas can coexist. He was an idealist. The mission's right,
we're going to do it."

Jackie says: "He was an all-American guy to the core. An angry, orientated
farmer's kid."

In 1983, Randall Weaver was a machinist at the John Deere plant in Waterloo,
Iowa. Vicki Weaver was an executive secretary. They studied religion but wanted
no part of churches. He was a thin man with cavernous, troubled eyes and a
strong jaw. He had trained as a Green Beret in demolitions. His wife was pretty
and small, with dark hair and a wide face. She was more studious, she was the
scripturalist. They were both intense, they both talked religion, they drew
people to them. Don't believe me, Randall Weaver would say, according to later
testimony at his trial. (Weaver declined to be interviewed.) Decide for yourself
if this is the truth. But he knew it was the truth himself.

They learned that in the Idaho panhandle, they could find a mountaintop and live
off the grid. There they could weather the chaos of martial law and the downfall
of democracy. They would be there when the great tribulation came. Because in
Matthew 24, it says, "When you see the abomination of desolation, which was
spoken of by Daniel the prophet, stand in the holy place, then let them which be
Judee's flee into the mountains."

They learned about the Great Illuminati that rules in Babylon, they learned
about the Trilateral Commission and Council on Foreign Relations that are
pushing one world government.

Which is spoken of in Revelation: "I saw a beast rising out of the sea, with 10
horns and seven heads. . . .  One of its heads seemed to have a mortal wound,
but its mortal wound was healed, and the whole earth followed the beast with
wonder."

The seven heads being the G-7. And the wounded head Germany.

In the Idaho panhandle they could home-school their three children. Home
schooling was illegal in Iowa. They would dehydrate food and arm themselves.
Because in Luke 22:36, a man is commanded to sell his cloak and buy a sword if
he have none, Randy Weaver got himself two Ruger Mini-14 semiautomatics. And a
pump-action Remington shotgun. And plenty of ammo.

The Weavers bought land on a knob 4,000 feet up in the Selkirk Mountains. The
road up was a steep, rocky, bulldozed strip that twirled and did switchbacks.
Weaver built a cabin at the top. It wasn't built to last. Did he know something?
Two-by-fours and uninsulated plywood walls. Before long the 2-by-4's began to
belly. A big open room with a sleeping loft, and a shed nearby where Vicki and
the girls went when they were menstruating.

They had a rocker on the rickety back porch, and, believing themselves to be
true Israelites, they smeared the blood of a goat over their door frame to
celebrate the Passover. They had a view from that porch that could make you weep
for the power of God's hand. Washington and Montana you could see, and the plain
of the Kootenai River Valley, and the shimmering golden white shanks of the
Cabinet Mountains. Government land -- but the Weavers' private view.

Vicki had visions with people's faces looming in them. She wrote a booklet
called "Feed Our Sheep," setting out what she believed to be the true Hebrew
names for things and explaining the way that Babylon had misnamed them. Randy
told people never to say God -- God was dog spelled backward. They called God
Yahweh. And Jesus was Yahshua. And the sabbath was Thursday through Friday
night. Only the Judas churches had their sabbath on Sunday.

When friends would listen Vicki and Randy told them of the civil war that was
coming. Kevin Harris, a 15-year-old from Washington with family trouble, moved
in with them, and Randy ran for sheriff of Boundary County to restore power to
the locals. "The Federal income tax is the most cunning act of fraud that has
been perpetrated against Americans since the introduction of paper money and the
credit system," he declared.

And the former executive secretary now typed letters addressed to "the Queen of
Babylon."

At least three times in the late 80's, the Weaver family drove south from their
knob to Richard Butler's campground on Hayden Lake to attend Aryan Nations
congresses. And under the dapply larches and alders and maples their children
played with other children while men wandered about in Nazi regalia talking
politics, and Butler gave out leaflets for "a nigger shoot" and hawked pamphlets
about how the Jews were plotting to enslave the white man. There were always
bikers at the congresses. Randy Weaver met a biker named Gus Magisono, 5 foot
11, 245 pounds, in a Harley T-shirt and black boots.

The apocalypse came to the Weavers' mountain in the shape of a burly biker.

It was the fall of 1989, and Weaver was having a hard time making it off the
grid, cutting wood, doing jobs for farmers. Winter was coming on; Magisono told
Weaver he could make money dealing guns. They discussed the mistakes of Order 1
and Order 2, and Magisono said he needed sawed-off shotguns. Weaver said he
could get him four or five a week. He had never sold a sawed-off shotgun before
in his life, but he pulled his red pickup around next to Magisono's car and got
his Remington pump action from a case and pointed at the barrel.

"About here." Magisono touched the barrel at 13 inches.

A week later Weaver delivered two sawed-off shotguns, one of them the Remington.
He said he hoped they went to street gangs. Magisono gave him $300, with $100
more to come.

The Government came forward. Gus Magisono was actually one Kenneth Fadeley, whom
the Feds had busted for gunrunning; Fadeley was persuaded to mount a sting on
Randy Weaver. The F.B.I. wanted Weaver to do the same thing: go undercover among
white supremacists. Weaver refused. So he was charged with gun peddling.

Randy Weaver didn't show up for his trial. In March 1991 he became a fugitive on
his mountain. Friends brought the Weavers food and gas. There came a fourth
child, Elisheba, and Vicki was convinced that if Randy went down he would be
killed, that they should hold the family together on top of the mountain as long
as they could, come what may. The three older children carried weapons and
learned to shoot them. Sam, the only boy, would shoot off his rifle in the air
when strangers approached, Sam who had been home-schooled and could quote
history verbatim, from the Roman era on up to the present. All the Presidents,
and the Constitution too.

On Aug. 21, 1992, Sam's dog ran barking after something in the woods and Sam and
Randy and Kevin Harris went after him, guns drawn. Down through the thick
forest, young tamarack and larch, cartridge casings and slash. At a trail
crossing the dog came on three Federal marshals with twigs stuck in their bucket
helmets and camouflage submachine guns in their hands.

"Freeze, Randy----"

Weaver cursed and ran, then the shooting began. Marshals later testified that
Sam had started shooting, but another Government witness contradicted that
claim. The dog was shot dead, then Sam was shot in the arm and the back. And
Kevin Harris killed Deputy Marshal William Degan.

That night Harris and Weaver found Sam's body. Sam, who was not five feet tall.
They carried him to the menstrual shed, took his clothes off, washed him.

Vicki was killed the next day. F.B.I. sharpshooters had gathered in the trees
100 yards from the cabin. Overnight, their orders had been changed. Flying out
from Washington, D.C., Richard Rogers, commander of the hostage-rescue unit of
the F.B.I., had ruled that any armed adult coming out of the Weavers' cabin
could be shot dead. The standard rules of engagement allowed lethal force only
when the target represented a threat to another person. When Randy Weaver and
Kevin Harris came out to see Sam's body, an agent named Lon T. Horiuchi shot
Weaver in the upper arm. Weaver and Harris rushed back to the cabin, and
Horiuchi aimed again, at Harris. This round pierced a window in the cabin's open
door and hit Vicki in the head as she stood holding 10-month-old Elisheba.

Is this how the tribulation begins? A plywood cabin with three terrified girls,
their mother lying dead in the kitchen, a bloody body covered with blankets.

The next day a Government robot crawled on to the crude porch. It held a
loudspeaker and microphone in one claw and a shotgun in the other. Weaver
refused to acknowledge it. Not till a week later did Bo Gritz talk his way in,
accompanied by Vicki's friend Jackie Brown. Weaver gave her a letter signed by
the family, because he thought the whole family would die. The letter
acknowledged that Kevin Harris had killed William Degan, but it said the Feds
had fired first.

We had run smack into a ZOG/ NEW WORLD ORDER ambush. . . .  Samuel Hanson Weaver
and Vicki Jean Weaver are Martyrs for Yah-Yahshua and the White Race.

Randy surrendered the following day with Gritz at his side. In the spring of
1993 at the Federal courthouse in Boise, the Government tried Weaver and Harris
on charges of conspiring to kill William Degan. But for six weeks the Government
was more on trial than the defendants. Lon Horiuchi said he had missed his
target on both shots. The Government admitted staging photographic evidence of
bullets found on Weaver's knob and was fined $10,000 by the judge for
misconduct. The defense argued simply that Randall Weaver's beliefs were his own
business. The jury remained out for 20 days, then acquitted Harris of everything
and Weaver of everything but failing to show up for trial. Even on the gun
charge, the jury concluded that the Government had set Weaver up.

Later, Janet Reno ordered an investigation of the Justice Department's conduct
with regard to the Weavers, top to bottom. The department has had a report in
hand for some time, but has not released it. Last month, news reports based on
leaks of the 542-page document say it is highly critical of Federal officials'
strategy leading up to the shootings. Specifically, the report charges that the
F.B.I.'s change in rules of engagement was imprecise and violated Vicki Weaver's
constitutional rights.

Randall Weaver has moved back to Iowa. Last fall he and his three daughters sued
the Government for $52 million.

IN IDAHO SURVIVALISTS TALK ABOUT WEAVER'S daughter Sara, what a good homemaker
she was, what a good student. She has graduated from public high school in Grand
Junction, Iowa, with honors, which, they say, demonstrates conclusively that
home schooling works. Randy Weaver's supporters send Sara money, and Sara sends
back a letter written on a word processor.

"May our Creator bless you."

What liberals there are in Idaho also talk about the Weaver children. That was
the real abuse in the case, they say: the Weavers oppressed their kids, made
them hostage to a feverish and paranoid ideology. Took them to an isolated
mountain, made them walk around a cold knob holstered and belted with ammo. The
liberals are wary of the powers of the family. To them, home schooling instills
sexism -- girls do traditional homemaking activities, baking bread, making dolls
from corn husks, taking care of the children. Failure to regulate home schooling
has made Idaho a haven for kooks and bigots, says one big panhandle paper, The
Lewiston Tribune. The Government must step in; the Government can protect
children from their families.

But what happens when the terrors of a paranoid, racist, anti-Semitic father are
outdone by the violent abuses of a Government? What happens when the state
shoots and kills a mother before her children? The liberal imagination fails,
the liberal simply cannot conceive it.

"The Randy Weaver incident itself was not as important as the fact that people
with extremist intentions were using it to make inroads into the community," a
woman in the town of Bonner's Ferry, not far from the Canadian border, tells
you.

"It was an aberration," Tony Stewart, the liberal activist, tells you. "He had
defied a Federal court order. No one knew how the case was going to unfold. It
almost had a force of its own."

Stewart gives you a videotape of Bo Gritz's last news conference up at Ruby
Ridge, one he held after Randy Weaver's surrender. You play it, and watch Gritz
offer a stiff-armed, slant-armed salute to the skinheads at the back. "By the
way, he told me to give you guys a salute," Gritz says, referring to Weaver. "He
said you knew what that is."

The skinheads heil him back.

"THAT WAS NOT A SALUTE, THAT WAS A WAVE," Gritz is telling you. "I raised my
hand like" -- he gives a little wave -- "it was a wave to them, I said, 'Hey
guys,' and I got their attention, 'I really wanted to thank you.' "

Late at night. A room at the Lewis Clark motel. Gritz sits in a chair wearing a
leather bomber jacket. His wife, Claudia, is stretched across one of two beds.

Gritz began buying land outside Kamiah early last year. He paid roughly $1,000
an acre for the 600 acres he purchased, and after putting in roads and making
other improvements he offered the lots at $3,000 to $3,500 an acre for 5- to
10-acre parcels. He told followers he was trying to be Noah in the time of Lot,
build an ark before it was needed. He also quoted Second Corinthians, 6:15.
"Come out from them and be separate and touch not the unclean thing, and I will
be your father and you will be my sons and my daughters."

He promoted the venture at weekendlong survivalist workshops he hosted around
the country. Called Spikes (Specially Prepared Individuals for Key Events), the
workshops teach people to deal with social collapse: how to pick locks, tan
hides, give birth at home. Among those who show up is a friend of Gritz's who
sells literature saying the Jews intend to enslave everyone else. Pressed about
this association, Gritz says he is not anti-Semitic. But he tells you that until
a year and a half ago he "really wondered what the truth was" about the
Holocaust -- whether the Jews died by premeditation or "by accident." Then he
read what Hitler himself wrote about Jews in "Mein Kampf" and saw that it was
premeditated.

When Gritz's plans for Almost Heaven became known last February, they caused
murmured concern in and around Kamiah, even among those living off the grid.
"This has been a kind of utopia," Larry Nims says. "I worried that Kamiah will
become synonymous with neo-Nazism, and who will that draw?"

Seeking to allay concerns, Gritz scheduled a public meeting last August at the
Kamiah High School's multipurpose room. Bill Glenn, the editor of The Clearwater
Progress, collected questions ahead of time, and at the meeting Gritz answered
51. But the gathering seemed only to solidify divisions in the community. Gritz
sprinkled his answers with a soldier's language -- "anal orifice," "cesspool"
and "flushing your stool" cropped up in discussions of public schools, and this
kind of talk bothered people. Others were upset by Gritz's comment that he hoped
to work with the local members of the Nez Perce tribe, whose reservation
surrounds Kamiah. The Indians, Gritz said, could teach his people how to make
rope; his people could teach them how to pick locks.

Two months later, reporters from around the world gathered at Almost Heaven for
an impromptu press conference, and Gritz played huckster. He talked about the
occasional "light snow" the hilltop gets during the "temperate" winter. (The
area gets heavy snows and the road out of Kamiah is sometimes impassable,
according to residents.) Gritz asserted that he probably wouldn't make money on
Almost Heaven -- that his prices were well below local prices, which he said
ranged from $4,500 to $10,000 an acre for raw land. This was untrue. Comparable
lots of high, timbered land in the area were listed at roughly $3,200 an acre --
about what Gritz was charging -- and likely to sell for less.

Gritz has his supporters in Kamiah. Bill Glenn, the Progress editor, praised
Gritz in the paper as a constitutionalist and a patriot. "All I have heard him
espouse are a) common sense, b) traditional values, c) fiscal responsibility,
and d) limited government," he wrote.

Glenn advised that people take a wait-and-see attitude, and that's what a lot of
people seem to be doing. It's the way of the Idaho panhandle. A certain
tolerance, a certain trust in those who distrust Government.

And anyway, Bo Gritz had the myth of the Weavers on his side. He had saved Randy
from almost certain self-destruction. Gritz described the scene on the mountain
during the meeting at the high-school multipurpose room. He told about the girls
huddled in the house, and poor Vicki Weaver's body, lying in a "puddle of blood
and body fluids."

THE HIPPIES WHO MOVED TO POKEY CREEK near Santa, Idaho, some time ago realized
that they could never escape the system entirely. They even came to depend on
it. A boy's health threatened by serious disease, girls touched inappropriately
by a friendly man living in a tepee -- their families turned to state clinics
for expensive cures, to the state to put the abuser in prison.

Paul Palmer used to think about shooting marauders on his land on Clear Creek,
but he has changed, too. He has come to believe in a kind of community. If
people flee the cities, he imagines that his barrels of lentils and carrots
stored in sand will be enough to feed them. Palmer's on the grid a little now.
He got electricity from the Government, the Rural Electrification
Administration. "That's socialism, yes," he says. "But you can't be a purist."

Even on the frontier, ideas of community assert themselves. The romance of
self-reliance will always summon Americans, but in the end it is still a
romance. Even off the grid, people find themselves connected. Randy Weaver did
run for sheriff.

Sheryl and Larry Nims used to think the crunch was likely and soon. Then they
got to where they felt they could handle almost any scenario, and they stopped
worrying about it. Their son Asa is married now. He lives in Boise, he works in
computer graphics and they're mighty proud of him.

LOAD-DATE: January 8, 1995

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photos: Hari Heath and his son Ian, outside their tepee. Over the years
the onetime hippie learned a lot from right-wing survivalists and rednecks. (pg.
25); Gritz at Almost Heaven, where he sells apocalypse-proof lots for $3,000 an
acre. (pg. 27); Larry and Sheryl Nims don't like to kill pigs or cows but can
kill goats because they're "stupid." (pg. 28); Greg and Leah Semple and their
children, all of whom were born in their log cabin. (pg. 29); Randy Weaver moved
back to Iowa after his wife and son were killed by Federal marshals. (pg. 30)
The cache removed from Weaver's cabin after an 11-day standoff with Federal
agents in 1992. (pg. 31); Grandpa John Brandt inside his hardware store in
Stites. F.D.R. ruined the country, he says. (pg. 32); At the Aryan Nations
compound outside Coeur d'Alene, it's called a cross "lighting." (pg.
33)(PHOTOGRAPH BY ROBBIE MCCLARAN FOR THE NEW YORK TIMES)

                   Copyright 1995 The New York Times Company

                              18 of 211 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 January 8, 1995, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

FILM VIEW;
At the Cineplex It's Dumb, Dumber, Dumbest

BYLINE: By Caryn James

SECTION: Section 2;  Page 11;  Column 1;  Arts & Leisure Desk

LENGTH: 1372 words


FORGET THE THEORY OF relativity. As the new movie "I.Q." tells you, what really
matters about Albert Einstein (played by Walter Matthau) is that he is a great
little matchmaker, able to see at a glance that his brilliant mathematician
niece, Catherine (Meg Ryan), is secretly pining for a local mechanic named Ed
(Tim Robbins). Ed is not a stupid guy, but he's no rocket scientist. In the
lexicon of current American movies, Ed's lack of erudition is enough to hint
that he's a decent man.

"Forrest Gump" is the most successful film to equate low I.Q. with inner
goodness, but it has a lot of company on screen. In "Nell," which David
Letterman more accurately called "Bride of Gump," Jodie Foster holds the moral
high ground as a backwoods woman deprived of education and ordinary language.
The doctors who study her discover that book learning is bad, primitivism is
good.

"Nell," "I.Q." and "Forrest Gump" are breezy and enjoyable, with vast amounts of
surface charm. But underneath, they are chilling in the way they link virtue
with lack of intelligence. It is a theme that goes far beyond coincidence. Both
"Nell" and "I.Q" were planned long before "Forrest Gump" became a catchword for
holy innocence, so the newer films are not clones. Instead, they suggest a
virulent anti-intellectualism in the air.

These anti-intellectual films are not the same as the goofy movies like the hit
"Dumb and Dumber," a thoroughly uninventive comedy in which Jim Carrey's chipped
front tooth and bowl haircut pass for humor. There have always been silly
comedies about characters so inept they're funny, from "The Three Stooges" to
"Wayne's World" and "Beavis and Butt-head." But films have rarely reveled in
their own idiocy with the bluntness of "Dumb and Dumber," whose very title
suggests that you just can't be stupid enough on screen.

Though there is a difference between thoughtless, goofy movies and more serious
ones, like "Forrest Gump," that think brains are bad, both may flow from similar
sources. As the historian Richard Hofstadter noted in his classic 1963 book,
"Anti-Intellectualism in American Life," suspicion of intellectuals runs deep in
American history, ranging from the evangelical fervor of the colonists to the
public distrust of an "egghead" like Adlai Stevenson in the 1952 Presidential
campaign. That suspicion recurs in cycles and is especially prevalent when
rational thinking seems to fail society.

In movies like "Nell" and "Forrest Gump," with their simple-is-good
conservatism, the uneducated heroes reflect discontent with supposedly smart
political leaders. (How many Rhodes scholars does it take to pass a health care
bill?) They also reflect discomfort with the technological sophistication that
threatens to overwhelm everyday life. People who can't yet navigate the
information superhighway feel great next to Nell, who can't even drive a car.
Viewers are reassured by an Einstein who suggests that physics is piffle next to
love.

No one wants to discount the importance of love, emotion and goodness, of
course. What is insidious about these films is that they do the opposite,
creating a head-heart split that makes intelligence the villain. When people in
the movie industry began to wonder why the critically praised "Quiz Show" was a
box-office disappointment, a frequent guess was that the film was too
intellectual for mainstream audiences.

In fact, honor, not intelligence, was the issue "Quiz Show" explored, and there
were other factors, like marketing, that might have let the film down at the box
office. But Hollywood's quick response was that viewers don't want to think too
hard and won't warm up to characters smarter than they are, whether it's the
college professor Charles Van Doren or the knowledgeable working-class Herb
Stempel.

That was not a problem with "Forrest Gump." The film's allure relies entirely on
Tom Hanks, an actor so appealing he makes stupidity seem an attractive option.
With his low I.Q., Forrest Gump at first appears to be an idiot savant; instead
he is a 20th-century American Candide, an innocent for whom everything turns out
all right. The Gumpism "Stupid is as stupid does" sounds awfully convincing when
it comes from a guy who survives Vietnam, becomes a shrimp tycoon and makes
another bundle of money investing in Apple computers.

As he floats through decades of United States history, Gump embodies the
American dream: he is an uneducated, self-made millionaire. Gump does have a
kind heart. The film's bedrock belief, and most pleasant fantasy, is that simple
virtue brings earthly rewards. As Gump stumbles into successes that wilier
characters could never approach, his success is always tied to his lack of
intellect.

"Forrest Gump" is part of a long tradition of anti-intellectualism in American
movies. The new live-action "Rudyard Kipling's Jungle Book" and the classic,
animated "Jungle Book" are part of that tradition. They are variations on the
Tarzan myth, in which a man raised in isolation from the civilized world is all
the better for it.

And though Jodie Foster is a far cry from Johnny Weissmuller, the theme of
"Nell" is not all that different from that of a Tarzan film; Nell's simple
goodness come from her isolated upbringing, away from corrupt society. Directed
by Michael Apted, "Nell" is much smarter than a jungle movie.

In fact, the film flatters its audience's intelligence with Nell's teasing
private language, which viewers can partly figure out. "Chickabee, chickabee,"
she says, a word that sounds like chickadee and seems to be some term of
endearment. Liam Neeson and Natasha Richardson, as the doctors who observe Nell
in her shack, find that "eviduh" means evildoer and "ga injuh" is guardian
angel. The audience gets to feel as smart as the doctors, only to learn, as they
do, that smart isn't everything.

Nell is kind and trusting and has a grasp of emotions the doctors lack. She
urges them not to fight with each other. She croons "chickabee" when they are
distraught. Eventually, in her private language translated by Dr. Lovell (Mr.
Neeson), Nell pleads before a court for the right to return to her simple life,
which she prefers to the big, civilized world. In the movie's view, society is
full of educated eviduhs, and primitives like Nell are blessed.

There are no primitives in "I.Q." Ed, the mechanic, reads popular-science
magazines, making him unlearned only in relation to Einstein and his genius
pals. In this film, deftly directed by Fred Schepisi, intelligence is not bad
until it interferes with the emotions. Einstein worries about Catherine, who
thinks she should marry a man as intelligent as her uncle -- or at least as
intelligent as herself. "She's too smart here," Einstein says, pointing to his
head. "But not here," he adds, pointing to his heart, and illustrating the great
suspicion of the mind on which all these films rest.

BECAUSE CATHERINE WILL never let herself fall for a lowly mechanic, Einstein
schemes to convince her that Ed has discovered cold fusion in his spare time --
not Einstein's most brilliant idea but not a bad one either. Ed almost pulls it
off. Still, in the way of all romantic comedies, the heroine will come to her
senses. In "I.Q." that means leaving her brains behind as she goes off with Ed.
He is a vast improvement over her cold-blooded, professorial fiance. The film
doesn't provide the best choice of all -- a warmhearted genius, a guy like Uncle
Albert.

And despite the film's apparent respect for intelligence, smartness is the butt
of some hoary absent-minded-scientist jokes. Einstein and his friends -- Godel,
Podolsky and Liebknecht -- trot around Princeton like the cutest of little old
men, to whom science is a sideline and matchmaking the soul of life. "Three of
the greatest minds of the 20th century, and between them they can't change a
light bulb," Einstein says of his friends.

There is an old attitude here as well as an old joke, but it is a powerful idea
on screen, and it's growing stronger. With films called "Dummies," "The Stupids"
and "The Magnificent Idiot" in the works, there's one thing you can count on: no
one will be making a movie called "Smart and Smarter" any time soon.

LOAD-DATE: January 8, 1995

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photos: Jodie Foster, far left, as a backwoods creature in "Nell."
(Andrew Cooper/20th Century Fox); Tom Hanks, left, as a simple conservative in
"Forrest Gump." (Phillip Caruso/Paramount Pictures); In "I.Q.," above, Tim
Robbins, right, as a mechanic who woos the niece (Meg Ryan) of Albert Einstein
(Walter Matthau). (Demmie Todd/Paramount Pictures)

TYPE: Review

                   Copyright 1995 The New York Times Company

                              19 of 211 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 January 8, 1995, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

Assessing Effects of Impending Cuts in Government Services

SECTION: Section 13LI;  Page 1;  Column 1;  Long Island Weekly Desk

LENGTH: 5184 words


Long Island elected officials from four levels of government met recently at the
office of The New York Times in Garden City to discuss the effect of coming
changes on the region.

The participants were Representative Rick Lazio of Brightwaters and Assemblyman
Michael A. L. Balboni of Mineola, both Republicans; Suffolk County Legislator
Nora Bredes of Stony Brook and Supervisor Bruce Nyman of Long Beach, both
Democrats.

In their exchanges the four agreed that substantial cuts in government services
were in the offing this year, but differed over the consequences and where cuts
should be made.

They agreed that holding office in an economically constrained time when cuts,
not new programs, were in order made their jobs harder and less pleasant. But
they credited voters' anger and cynicism for a new outlook about government.

Mr. Nyman, a longtime politician known for incisive and blunt commentary,
likened Long Island to a sinking Titanic because of high living and business
costs. Mr. Lazio, a rising star among House Republicans, gave assurances that
Federal and state aid to the region would continue and spoke of changes in
government and the workplace that would bring prosperity.

Ms. Bredes, a former foe of the Shoreham nuclear power plant who has strong
interests in environmental, health and social issues, said cuts in state taxes
might mean additional costs for local governments and schools that could raise
property taxes. Mr. Balboni, a closely aligned to the Pataki administration,
said changes in property taxes would depend on where budget cuts were made. He
also suggested that schools and local governments could do more with less.

The officials were questioned by Stewart Kampel, editor of the Long Island
Weekly; Peter Marks, Long Island bureau chief, and John Rather, who reports on
the Island for The Times.

Q.  What changes will 1995 and the next several years bring to Long Island?

Lazio: The last Republican budget alternative cut somewhere around $280 billion,
as I recall. It was defeated along party lines. This time around we are going to
have to cut substantially more to achieve the objective.

Q.  What is the objective?

Lazio: To submit a budget resolution that is consistent with a balanced budget
by 2002, which means very serious cuts in discretionary spending because Social
Security is off the table. That doesn't mean that all entitlements are off the
table.

Because entitlements and debt service make up almost two-thirds of federal
spending, most of the cuts have to occur in programs like housing, community
development block grants, Medicare -- frankly, in terms of eligibility
standards, these will all be under review and there will be people, obviously,
who in the end will be getting less reimbursement than they are now. That will
affect every community in the nation.

Q.  Your jobs now seem to be paring down programs rather than creating them. Is
that enjoyable?

Balboni: I have an advantage, because coming from the minority, as George Pataki
does, we've been bomb-throwers for years, saying the system needs to be changed.
There's been an inertia in the former government we had and it just keeps
growing and growing. Whether or not the services are getting better, they are
just being provided. And you have an opportunity now, as Pataki said, we are no
longer in the wilderness.

For us, tearing down the system has been a part of the campaign war cry. This is
what people want to see. They want to see less government, dollars spent more
efficiently.

Now when you start cutting people's services, they say, 'Wait a minute, I want
you to cut my taxes, not my services.'

I think the challenge there is to try to find a defining line where you can
bring home the bacon in terms of cost savings and reductions and yet make the
programs much more efficient. The old cliche, doing more with less.

Bredes: What struck me being in county government for about two and a half years
was how we live the cuts. We live what came down from the Reagan and Bush
administration, we live what comes down from the Cuomo Administration, and it
wasn't all gravy.

I can't say that at any level of government there was respect provided to local
governments that are dealing with people on a day-to-day basis. I get the phone
call from the mother who says 'My child is on SSI. We are about to get kicked
out of our house. There is no more Section 8 housing. Where do I go with this
child?'

It's not just a question of cutting taxes. It's how to make government deal
effectively with problems that need government help. The opportunity now is in
creating new programs, trying to figure out a way, for instance, to get fathers
to make paternity declarations at the birth of their children. How do you boost
the level of support coming from fathers who are non-custodial parents but are
not paying for their children, and so are causing families to end up without
family values in the traditional sense? Without the support they need, they are
falling into the lap of government.

Nyman: To answer the question in a couple of words, it's not fun anymore to be
in politics. I used to be able to go to a community meeting and there was a
grant, or there was no problem with help. Those days are over. We could help
people get jobs years ago if you were on the right side of the patronage table.
But now you just can't. I'm sure there isn't a week that goes by in any of our
offices where a constituent doesn't call because they need a job because they
have been out of work or are going to lose their jobs. And you make a call and
another call and a bureaucrat says to you, "We are letting people go, we are not
hiring anybody."

So we politicians now are learning to say no when we never had to say no before.

Q.  Are your jobs harder than they were two or four years ago?

Balboni: For people at county government and town levels, it's a terrible time
to be in government. A terrible time. You are the closest to the people.

From my perspective, when I don't have money for member items and my community
groups call me and say, 'Where's the money?' I say, 'There is none.'

Q.  What is a member item?

Balboni: A member item is an individual grant by a legislator to a particular
cause within the district. It can range from the soccer stadium in Eisenhower
Park to Little League, museums.

I am firmly convinced that Pataki is doing away with member items, across the
board. And to a certain extent, even though that could be your bread and butter
from a re-election-campaign standpoint, it also gives you the freedom to say to
everybody who calls, "Guess what, there's nothing there."

Last year's budget was estimated to have about $90 million of member items. And
that doesn't include the gubernatorial member items that are out there.

Q.  How is Long Island, where the people are accustomed to all those services,
including Little League fields, going to react?

Nyman: With Ralph Marino there all those years we had a lot of money in member
items.

Bredes: It certainly makes it that much more challenging and it makes you look
past where the money is going to flow from government to how do you support the
local economy so it can support these community efforts.

Q.  How do you explain it to your constituents?

Nyman: You blame it on Pataki.

Bredes: And Lazio blames it on Clinton.

Lazio: It can be a relatively hostile environment, which aggravates your
situation of not having the dollars to go around to help groups out that need
help. People tend to be very cynical. It's very hard economically and there's a
great deal of pessimism about the future.

That manifests itself for me, for example on Nafta, or the assault weapons ban
or on the crime bill, when you take votes like that, when you have people turn
out and vent themselves. Not because they are mad about Nafta, but because Nafta
symbolizes everything that is wrong with their lives.

Nyman: It is clearly more difficult to be in politics today than 5 years ago, 10
years ago. I'd like to be Fran Purcell 20 years ago.

Q.  What does that mean to average Long Islanders? Are they going to see a
diminution of services? Who is going to be blamed for that?

Balboni: I don't get a sense that anyone philosophically sees a move to benefit
either party right now. I don't think this election was about being Republican
or not being Republican. I think what the people have decided is that government
is the target. Government is no longer the friend, government is the enemy. On
the macro level. On the individual level if they need a program or a service,
government is where it's at. When you talk to people on a broad basis you find
there is a distrust of government, they feel that government cannot be all
things to all people, and that it has come time to really shake things up.
That's why certain politicians have been so successful just railing against the
system constantly.

Now people see perhaps an opportunity. There's a great new equalizer out there
and it's called the vote. They can take a politician like Mario Cuomo who is
seen as this amazing statesman in American politics and derail his plan to go on
for another four years. They can do that to a George Bush, a David Dinkins and
to anybody else, including Bill Clinton, Mayor Giuliani or George Pataki.

Bredes: It's true that people are angry at government. But there is also a
disappointment and there's an opening for people who are genuine leaders to come
forward and say, this is what I believe in, this is what I hope for, I need your
help, please join me. People are ready to hear that. That's one of the reasons
for Mayor Giuliani's success.

People don't want to live in a mood of hatred and cynicism. It's very
debilitating.

Lazio: You're right, but it's contingent on whether or not you can deliver a
quality product. One of the strengths of Giuliani has been that people perceive
the quality of the services has been improving.

More people complain, without articulating it precisely, about the quality of
the services and whether they are getting value for their money than about the
amount of money that is being spent. Maybe people support cuts because they
figure a program is hopeless, they aren't getting anything for it, it doesn't
work. That's part of the cynicism.

Nyman: If you look at it from a historical perspective, maybe 200 years ago in
America, people looked to government with a respect and almost a pride. We won
wars, we built highways, and government was the place you went to to solve
problems. And very quickly, within one generation, after the Vietnam War and
maybe a respite with Reagan, beyond that in one generation our people see their
government not as the provider of help but as the enemy, the problem. The
government has gone from solving the problems to being the problem, and that has
caused anger and frustration.

We are seeing a diminution of services already. It's not going to come, we are
seeing it. You see Nassau County parks, we are almost to the point of having
passive parks. And even when Clinton is gone and back in a little apartment in
Whitewater, you are going to see less money. Less money for all of us. And
people are going to have to understand that.

Q.  Is it good that less money will be available?

Nyman: It's not good or bad. It's going to be a fact of life. That's it, I don't
care who is in office.

Bredes: What you see on Long Island is a region that has been hit one of the
worst from all the changes that have happened, the changes in the defense
industry, the overlayering of local government, taxes, utility rates. But what's
important to say to people is that, yes, you may see a diminution of services.
In Suffolk County we already do have passive parks. But there are ways to make
do with the less that we have, and we have to figure out ways to get that done.

Lazio: One of the things we will have to do is take advantage of artificial
intelligence, the type of things that have been used to increase productivity in
the private sector that we haven't used in the public sector to try to make up
some of that gap.

Nyman: Are we willing to do that? Are we willing to take on the unions? Is there
any of us that doesn't think privatization is going to be the way of the world
in the next century?

Lazio: I think it will be easier with some constituencies. The Republican
majority in Congress will feel more comfortable being confrontational.

Bredes: This notion of reinventing government needs to be more flexible than has
been defined recently. For instance, the Lilco situation: I think the way to
bring down the rates most quickly with the best guarantee is a public takeover.
Now that's not privatization, but it is using government in a different way. We
have vast experience with public utilities in this country. They have generally
run very efficiently and generally charge rates that are lower than
investor-owned utilities. If Governor Pataki looks at it seriously, I think he
will see the benefits will come sooner than they would through any of the mixes
now being considered.

Q.  Do you sense that despite Mr. Cuomo's defeat there is a consensus on Long
Island for a takeover of Lilco??

Lazio: I think he hurt the concept by coming out so close to the election with
it.

Bredes: But it is a very good idea. It would be a shame to color the proposal
with Cuomo's political ambitions. It is something that needs to be looked at
independent of all that.

Balboni: The governor did us a favor in terms of focusing the spotlight on the
energy problem on Long Island. If you talk to a major industry, particularly a
manufacturer, electricity is such a major part of their operational costs, it's
a major obstacle to moving here or maintaining the business. So that is a part
of the whole structure we better address quickly.

We are a service-based economy and that's been part of our problem. We need to
get back to manufacturing and better-paying jobs. And we are never going to do
that unless we solve a lot of the problems, including energy.

One of the fastest-growing portions of the state budget is the debt service.
It's the same kind of problem the Federal government is having. I think people
are beginning to realize there is a balance here. The cost of running this
government is not returning in benefits and the kind of services people want to
see.

Bredes: Here's where the Catch-22 is for Long Island. We all agree that services
are going to decline, that we are not going to have the money, that we are going
to have passive parks. For our school districts one of the big concerns about
Governor Pataki's tax-cutting proposals is what happens to them. In some
communities they are the pride of the community, why people settle there.

If we are going to have industries like biotech and software technologies and
other smaller industries, we have to hold on to the services that encourage a
highly skilled work force to live here. And that's where we have this Catch-22
with services declining and people being concerned about the quality of
education and of our parks and of our natural environment.

If we are going to see state and Federal and local services decline, people are
not going to be motivated to stay, they are going to leave.

Balboni: The most amazing thing about Pataki's tax cut plan is that in a survey
of different companies they have looked to the northeast as a cost-cutting or
tax-cutting corridor. The 25 percent tax cut that Pataki has offered would
really make us competitive with New Jersey, Connecticut and Massachusetts. If
you want to see the revival or an economic interest here in New York, you are
going to have to do that just to be competitive.

Bredes: Speaking not as a legislator, but as a parent of two kids in a public
school, in a district we consciously chose because of what it offered, what I've
heard about New Jersey is that the cost has simply shifted down to the school
districts. I don't want to see a cut in income taxes that simply shifts the
burden to property tax payers that can ill afford it already.

Nyman: Our property taxes are far more important to us than the state income
tax. A cut of 10 or 15 or 25 percent on state income tax is irrelevant to our
lives as compared to a doubling of our property taxes. And since our school
taxes represent more than 50, 60 percent of a tax bill, if you double school
taxes, for some of our seniors on fixed income, it's the end.

Balboni: The only problem with that is that there is an assumption that the
costs associated with school districts are fixed. Frankly, and this is a
politically incorrect statement, what we have to get away from is the accusation
that if you come out and talk about redefining the cost structure of a school
district you are somehow against education. That's baloney.

Q.  How can school districts cut back when teachers' salaries are mandated by
five-year contracts?

Bredes: If the state is sincere about not wanting to shift costs downward, there
should be efforts through the state to make school districts work together on
things like procurement and administrative functions that can be joined. School
districts may do it on their own anyway, because they will be forced to. But I
think there should be an understanding that there is going to be a ripple
effect.

Balboni: We need to change the educational formula. What we have been unable to
do in this state, even though Ralph Marino was really able to be a great
defender of the school system on Long Island, what we are unable to do is get
cost factors that recognize the high cost of delivering services for our school
districts.

Lazio: It's a frustrating sale though, I'll tell you. People don't have that
much patience with New York. New York has a different cost structure, different
rules. It's got to change.

Q.  Is Long Island being cut adrift?

Lazio: I don't see that at all in terms of the Congressional delegation. First
of all, the only person who served on a committee that may have been tied to a
particular industry that we don't have serving on the same committee now is
George J. Hochbrueckner. So that clearly will have to be picked up in the
aggregate.

We don't have somebody on Ways and Means, unfortunately, but we have someone on
Budget. We have somebody who is a chairman of a subcommittee overseeing H.U.D.,
among other things. Pete King is on Foreign Affairs. Gary Ackerman is on Foreign
Affairs. You have three members who are on Banking. We are on Appropriations.
It's not bad.

Nyman: And you have a Republican majority.

Bredes: I hear a vacuum when it comes to what decisions are being made at the
state level. For example, Pataki appointed Bernadette Castro to oversee the
parks. She's a Suffolk County resident, but as far as I know she has shown no
interest, no concern, no love for either our county or our state park system.
That doesn't mean she can't learn and maybe she will be a good manager. Maybe
she will be. But the sense I get is that there are people being listened to,
there are those who were involved with the campaign. But people with an interest
in the parks and the environment I don't think were heard in her appointment.

Balboni: But it's a feeling, though, that the pendulum may have swung too far
over. The environment is incredibly important for the Island, that's true. But
having somebody who is so caught up in the environmental challenges right now,
and just the love of parks, I think could be a detriment in this climate.

Bredes:What you want to do is create effective management of the parks in a way
that doesn't have laborers clearing leaves for $60,000 a year, but at the same
time maintain the parks so we hold on to the high-level work force we need to
drive this economy. We need the parks or people will say, 'Why stay here when I
can't take my family to Jones Beach without running into a ton of crud on the
beach and the pool being closed?'

Balboni: Those are efficiencies. That has nothing to do with the environment.

Bredes: No, it has a lot to do with the environment. It has to do with
preserving these public investments we've made in Long Island's environment in a
way that makes it possible for people to feel that living here still has
benefits.

Nyman: We shouldn't waste our time talking about Bernadette Castro. It's a
political appointment. The Democrats do it, the Republicans do it, forget about
it.

I am willing as a Democrat and as someone who has been on Long Island all my
life to give these Republicans a chance. We had our chance and we blew it.

We need radical changes in government at all levels in order for government to
survive. We are on the Titanic. We are all going to talk about how great Long
Island is, but if you look at what is going on we are just declining daily, on a
daily basis.

Q.  What do you mean?

Nyman: Mention any facet of our life and we are declining. We are losing jobs on
a daily basis. We now pay the highest utility rates in the world, the second
highest commercial rates in the world, we pay some of the highest taxes in the
country, we pay the first or second highest sales tax, we are inexorably linked
to New York City, which itself is teetering on the brink. I don't know where
they are going.

Lazio: But there is job growth there now, job growth in New York City for the
first time in years. We have huge structural impediments to growth here on Long
Island and yet there are still companies that are growing.

Nyman: O.K., some of us know computer companies are growing, a lot of the
high-tech stuff. I am not saying tomorrow we ought to move to North Carolina.
What I am saying is we need to take radical action within the next 5 to 10 years
or we may not survive. So let's see what Pataki does, let's see what the
Republicans do. We cannot continue business as usual on Long Island.

Q.  What is going to change in Nassau and Suffolk Counties over the next two to
four years?

Bredes: In Suffolk County we struggled through very hard times in 1992. We had a
$30 million deficit and we were attriting people and cutting where we could. I
think what remains to be seen and I guess where people are anxious is how the
cuts are going to be made. Is it just going to be the state's shifting down
costs so the local governments pick them up? Or will there be an effort, say in
the preschool and handicapped program, to give the county more power to run the
programs effectively and efficiently? Is that how we are going to handle
Medicaid and Medicare?

We have workfare in Suffolk County. We've had it for about a year and a half for
home relief. I know that Westchester claims they cut the rolls by 40 percent.
What happened to those 40 percent? Did they go someplace else? Have they been
picked up by New York City? What happens to people who are addicted to drugs and
alcohol? What happens to the single mother who goes out on her work shift on a
workfare program, because that has been proposed in Suffolk County, and finally
gets a McDonald's job, but new technology comes in and she gets kicked out and
she's back on the rolls again?

Are we looking for long-term solutions or are we looking for short-term fixes?
And I think that's the unproven, the unknown about the Pataki administration
that makes me nervous as a Suffolk County legislator.

Balboni: The fundamental philosophic difference that has been articulated, I
guess, is that I am not looking to government to provide the jobs in the future.
I am looking to private business.

Lazio: Suffolk County has got to be competitive. But so does New York State. And
both are trying to squeeze down to be competitive with the region to keep jobs
and expand what we have. And the only way of getting there is by having clear
priorities about what we have to do, not what we want to do, and then try to
boost productivity, so we can do more with less.

Nyman: We need, on a national level, to stop having babies. And what has
disturbed me most about this, and I see it in my own community, are all of the
monies that pour in here for the teen-age-pregnancy programs. You are picked up.
You are driven to school.  You are driven to a part-time job that we pay for.
You go to a seminar group. They have a newsletter in Nassau County for pregnant
women and teen-age mothers.

We ought to just stop having the babies, and not only from a moral and human
perspective but from an economic perspective, and then you don't have to worry
about the jobs programs and the transportation programs.

Bredes: You look at any of the countries that have reduced their birthrates, and
I think the lessons are transferable. It's those countries that have provided
education for young women, have provided something outside of home life,
provided a transcendence outside of pregnancy, that have been able to reduce
birthrates. That's what we need to do among the most impoverished in our
communities.

Some girls are going to have babies anyway, and they need some kind of support
system. And it's mostly not-for-profit contract agencies that provide that. But
I don't think that's the future we want to hold out for anybody.

Lazio: One of the frustrating things about unwed pregnancies is that when women
go out, young women go out, and men are too often off the hook on this. You have
women who have children and go off to get their own apartment, because they
qualify for it, and they cannot teach the children the skills that they need to
compete in the world. They don't know how to open a checking account, how to
build a resume.

We expect people to be able to do that and to go out and get a job. And that is
something that some on the right need to be sensitive to.  And I think on the
other side you need to provide some incentive for people to stay in a situation
where they can learn new skills.

Q.  Do you sense more mean-spiritedness or more compassion from the Republicans
in Washington?

Lazio:There are a group of Republicans that have been out of power for a long
time, and they really don't want to be slowed down. The fear is that if they
slow down they will fail. They look at the Clinton model. He slowed down, he
failed, he didn't seize the moment, he didn't have a sense of timing. So I think
there are people who want to move quickly with a particular policy, and there
are some very difficult social and economic problems. You have moderates in both
the Senate and the House that I think will have input that may provide a dose of
reality to the policy. You have the filibuster potential in the Senate and the
White House ability to veto. So a lot of moderating influences that will help
shape ultimately the final product. So I think the policies will be far more
caring than some analysts have talked about so far.

Nyman: If we can get back to Nassau County, I think the first thing is that if
we don't lower property taxes we cannot compete. The commercial-property taxes
are what's really causing us more of a problem, because if you want to open up a
business, besides our many strengths and our proximity to New York and our
highly educated workforce and all the other things we have going for us, most
young businesses are not going to open up on Long Island. They are going to go
down South, where property taxes are lower, and they are also going to be lured
by Southern states.

North Carolina and Louisiana have active offices open in New York City
soliciting business. They will offer you infrastructure and tax incentives. What
can we do? What are we doing about that? We are not at all competing with the
rest of this country to lure business here to Long Island.

We need to go into a partnership with business. We are going to have to take on
some of the sacred cows we have here on Long Island. We are going to have to
realize that we need to balance environmental concerns, but we also need to
understand that we may have a wonderful, pristine environment 50 years from now
because no one will be living here anymore.

Q.  How is Long Island going to take care of minority groups and serious health
problems like AIDS and the breast cancer?

Lazio: What's going to have to happen is substantial cutbacks in Medicaid. There
are proposals to eliminate Aid to Families With Dependent Children for
noncitizens. You can't reduce the amount of money without affecting eligibility
standards. So you have to make choices about who you expect to cover.

It will be most difficult for people on the bottom, particularly if the economy
continues to sag. It's like the Titanic. People who died were on the bottom. As
with the Titanic, those are the people who usually don't make it.

Balboni: The fairest thing to give someone is not a handout, but a job. To the
extent that we see any program driven to try to have job-economic development,
to try to have a fairer tax structure, so that businesses can come to provide
that structure for people. That's the best thing you can do for people. That's
the best thing you can do to take people who are on the edge now and bring them
into the mainstream.

State government has gotten away from that. New York State government cannot be
the employer for everyone. And neither can we expect to provide all the possible
services that people might need. What we can do responsibly in this climate,
because we work in a political dynamic, and this is what the voters are telling
us to do, is to try to fashion a system where there is a network of, as it were,
the safety net, and to try to maintain services to the extent that we can.

The ultimate goal is to provide Long Island with a better economic base so we
can have the jobs.

Bredes: Certainly we need the jobs, and we need the environment that invites
diverse kind of industries to settle here. We have seen too much development in
the commercial sector, like the big malls and shopping centers that are a feeder
economy, not an anchor economy. We need to somehow find the anchor economy that
can -- the analogy isn't correct -- lift the whole boat.

If the cuts, as they did in the Reagan and Bush years, continue to be hardest
felt by the people at the bottom and the people who serve them, if we cut
services then question is can we provide jobs quickly enough so that we don't
see real devastation at the lowest level.

Nyman: We have much too much government on Long Island, which includes our
school districts. We are perceived now in a lot of the business areas as a place
to come to, either because we are antibusiness or the cost of doing business is
too high. A lot of us realize we are on the Titanic, and what we see the
government doing is changing the deck chairs instead of taking a more
fundamental, radical approach.

We've got places in Nassau County where you get 17 different tax bills on your
property taxes -- 17 taxing districts. We need to do away with all of that. We
need cooperative purchasing. We need to look at privatization on all levels of
government. We need to do those things. If we don't we are going to continue our
decline and lose what we have had for 50 years.

LOAD-DATE: January 8, 1995

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photos: Nora Bredes; Michael Balboni; Bruce Nyman; Rick Lazio
(Photographs by Maxine Hicks for The New York Times (Bredes and Lazio);
Photographs by Steve Berman for The New York Times (Balboni and Nyman).) (pg.
1); Senator Ralph J. Marino of Oyster Bay, former leader in the Senate. (The New
York Times); Bernadette Castro of Huntington, new State Parks Commissioner. (The
New York Times) (pg. 11)

TYPE: Interview

                   Copyright 1995 The New York Times Company

                              20 of 211 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 January 8, 1995, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

Clinton Invites Retired Brass To Give Views

BYLINE: By ERIC SCHMITT,   Special to The New York Times

SECTION: Section 1;  Page 14;  Column 6;  National Desk

LENGTH: 461 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, Jan. 7


With Republicans taking aim at many of the Administration's national security
policies, President Clinton has invited more than 20 retired admirals and
generals to the White House on Thursday to seek their advice on military
matters.

Many of the former military leaders publicly endorsed Mr. Clinton in the 1992
Presidential campaign, offering a counterattack to President George Bush's
criticism that Mr. Clinton avoided the draft during the Vietnam War.

White House officials say Mr. Clinton is following up on a promise he made to
the group of retired officers during the campaign to have them back to the White
House for a day of informal briefings and discussion.

But some military analysts say the Administration is merely courting the retired
officers to keep them from bolting the Clinton camp.

"He'll have an opportunity to get advice from outside the Pentagon," said Andrew
F. Krepinevich, a former Army officer who heads the Defense Budget Project, a
research group in Washington, "but frankly look at what the political damage
could be if those people who supported him in 1992 objected to what he's doing
now or sided with a Republican candidate in 1996."

A senior Administration official said that in July Mr. Clinton approved the idea
for the briefings and that the date was chosen in late October, before the Nov.
8 elections that put Republicans in control of Congress. Those attending will
pay for their own travel and accommodations.

Among those expected to attend are Adm. Stansfield Turner, former director of
Central Intelligence, who said in a telephone interview today that the meeting
offered an opportunity for the retired officers to share their insights with Mr.
Clinton.

But another senior officer who has been invited, and who insisted on anonymity,
was skeptical: "I'm at a loss what it's about. We're not going to have any
substantive talk with a mob like that."

Others expected are Gen. John A. Wickham, former Army Chief of Staff; Vice Adm.
Richard H. Truly, former head of NASA, and Rear Adm. Thomas A. Brooks, former
head of Naval Intelligence.

Politically sensitive issues like homosexuals in the armed forces and cutting
the Pentagon's budget have dogged Mr. Clinton since his first days in office. He
has tried with mixed success to demonstrate his interest in the military through
a series of orchestrated events.

Administration experts will brief the retired officers on combat readiness and
efforts to reduce redundancies in the armed services, as well as on budget and
security issues. Mr. Clinton will join the group at noon for lunch, White House
aides said.

White House aides say the meeting with retired military officers is consistent
with Mr. Clinton's seminar approach to government.

LOAD-DATE: January 8, 1995

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1995 The New York Times Company

                              21 of 211 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 January 9, 1995, Monday, Late Edition - Final

NEWS SUMMARY

SECTION: Section A; Page 2; Column 5; Metropolitan Desk

LENGTH: 758 words



International A2-9

BLOODY FIGHTING IN RUSSIA

Russian forces pressed their attack on the separatist region of Chechnya,
spraying mortar and rocket fire on the rebel capital of Grozny. The intensity of
the fighting seemed to underscore Moscow's determination to take control.  A1


A CHECHEN FAMILY'S STORY

The story of the Magomadov family reflects the tragedy of the proud and fiery
Chechen people who, in the words of the family's eldest son, Mogamed, "always
seem to be in Moscow's way." A8

Russia, criticized by the West, puts off NATO maneuvers.  A9

HANOI CRACKS DOWN ON BUDDHISTS

Vietnam arrested two prominent dissident monks after one went on a hunger strike
last month to protest persecution, rights groups say. The arrests mark a
sharpening of Hanoi's campaign to crush the Unified Buddhist Church.  A3

MEXICO'S TROUBLED EX-PRESIDENT

As Mexico's new President scrambles to overcome the peso crisis, its former
President is working hard to salvage his own reputation.  A5

FACING SCARS OF BOSNIAN WAR

Doctors say post-traumatic stress is a serious problem in the former Yugoslavia.
They say that people there will face extraordinary rates of divorce, alcoholism,
drug abuse, suicide and violence.  A6

Ireland's premier names a new adviser on Northern Ireland.  A3

Beijing Journal: The popularity of rock-and-roll is fleeting.  A4

National A10-12, 16, B8

U.S. ART FINANCING UNDER FIRE

The battle over the role of Government in financing art has come into focus with
the Republicans' control of the purse strings.A1

END TO CONGRESS'S EXEMPTIONS?

Congress is acting to end its exemption to civil rights and other laws, but will
the Congressional Accountability Act make any difference to the 40,000 workers
on Capitol Hill?  B8

DUEL ON BALANCING A BUDGET

If Congress passes a constitutional amendment mandating a balanced budget, the
Democrats and the Republicans will provide proposals on how to achieve it.
Maybe.  B8

ABORTION FOES DIVIDED

The nation's religious anti-abortion leaders are divided on whether to support
demonstrations outside abortion clinics in the aftermath of the recent clinic
killings.  A1

DEVELOPMENT VS. PRESERVATION

Property rights advocates are arguing that the Government has denied them just
compensation for land development limitations imposed by environmental laws.  A1


U.S. SHOPPERS SPEND ON

With incomes, jobs and confidence increasing, the American consumer is still
going strong, with total consumer spending up about 4 percent in 1994. But
whether the pace can be sustained is debatable.  A1

QUAYLE'S TUMOR IS RARE

The type of benign tumor removed from former Vice President Dan Quayle is rare
and caught his doctors by surprise.  A10

H.I.V.-INFECTED WOMAN STUDIED

Researchers at John Hopkins University hope a woman infected with H.I.V. for 13
years can teach them how the body fights the virus.  A10

Metro Digest B1

 BREAKDOWN OF A BUS SYSTEM

After 20 years of losing riders, the quality of New York City's bus system has
sharply deteriorated because the fleet has aged, buses are wearing out and the
two manufacturers under contract to provide new machines have failed to deliver,
transit officials say.  A1

"MEGAN'S LAW" HITS SNAGS

Logistical and legal problems have slowed the implementation of "Megan's Law,"
the New Jersey Legislature's plan to make towns aware of sexual predators and
prevent attacks like the one last July on 7-year-old Megan Kanka, after whom the
law has come to be known.  A1

Business Digest D1

Arts/Entertainment C11-16

The biggest Mondrian show.  C11

Ron Carter, bassist.  C11

Music: Copland's "Tender Land" C11

James Morris, bass.  C12

Shimmy Disk.  C16

Concerto for Percussion.  C16

Books: "Night," an exploration.  C16

Television: New shows, familiar faces.  C14

Violence and the young.  C14

Sports C1-9 Basketball: Connecticut defeats St. John's.  C2

Obituaries B9 Gary Kalkin, Walt Disney Studios executive

Editorials/Op-Ed A14-15

Editorials

The Yeltsin problem.

Mr. Clinton's welfare waffle.

Danger of executing the innocent.

Letters

William Safire: Yeltsin's Tiananmen.

Anthony Lewis: The new South Africa.

Gertrude Himmelfarb: The Victorians get a bad rap.

Murray Sperber: The eligibility gap.

Neediest Cases B2

Chronicle B10

Bridge C13

Crossword C16

LOAD-DATE: January 9, 1995

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Summary

                   Copyright 1995 The New York Times Company

                              22 of 211 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 January 9, 1995, Monday, Late Edition - Final

Vietnam Said to Arrest 2 Protesting Buddhist Monks

BYLINE: By PHILIP SHENON,    Special to The New York Times

SECTION: Section A;   Page 3;   Column 1;   Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 628 words

DATELINE: BANGKOK, Thailand, Jan. 8


The two most prominent dissident monks in Vietnam have been arrested after one
went on a hunger strike last month to protest Government persecution of
Buddhists, say human rights groups and other Vietnamese dissidents.

The arrests mark a sharpening of the Vietnamese Government's campaign to crush
the Unified Buddhist Church, the dissident Buddhist faction that was once the
predominant religious organization in southern Vietnam.

Human Rights Watch, a New York-based group, said in a statement Saturday that
the 77-year-old supreme patriarch of the church, Thich Huyen Quang, was taken
into custody at his pagoda in the central province of Quang Ngai on Dec. 29, two
days after he was reported to have begun a hunger strike to protest the
detention of several monks arrested in November.

His chief deputy, Thich Quang Do, the 68-year-old secretary general of the
church, was arrested on Wednesday at his pagoda in Ho Chi Minh City, formerly
Saigon, the human rights group said in the statement.

"Both temples have now been surrounded by security police, and it is not known
where the two monks are being held," the group said.

Vietnamese dissident organizations have reported that several other monks
affiliated with the Unified Church have been arrested since November, and that
dozens of monks have been questioned by the police in recent days.

Vietnam's Communist Government banned the Unified Church and other independent
Buddhist groups in the early 1980's and created a single, state-supervised
umbrella organization called the Vietnam Buddhist Church to oversee all Buddhist
worship in the predominately Buddhist country.

The Unified Church refused to disband, however, and it is has since been the
target of what human rights groups call a relentless campaign of intimidation by
the Vietnamese security police.

Thich Huyen Quang has been confined by the authorities to Quang Ngai province
since 1982. Thich Quang Do, a prominent writer and Buddhist scholar, has been
confined to his pagoda in Ho Chi Minh City since he returned there in 1992 after
a decade of government-imposed exile in his native province, Thai Binh.

Vietnamese leaders clearly fear that the monks of the Unified Church, who have a
long history of public protest, could be a threat to the stability of the Hanoi
Government, as they were to the American-backed government of South Vietnam in
the 1960's and 1970's.

In 1963, the Unified Church brought international attention to the South
Vietnam's grim human rights record when a monk of the Unified Church set himself
on fire on a street in central Saigon to protest the Government's treatment of
Buddhists, an image seen around the world.

The Vietnamese Government has not confirmed the arrest of Thich Huyen Quang and
Thich Quang Do. Questioned last week about reports of the arrest of Thich Huyen
Quang, the Foreign Ministry said it had no information to give reporters.

The Government did, however, attack the Vietnam Committee on Human Rights, the
Paris-based dissident group that first reported the detention of the two monks.
In a statement released to reporters, the Foreign Ministry described the
committee as an "anti-Vietnamese political instrument" that "sends out piece
after piece of fabrication to deceive public opinion."

The Committee on Human Rights said in a statement that the arrest of the two
monks was a "turning point in the long-running conflict between the Unified
Buddhist Church of Vietnam and the Communist authorities."

The committee released a copy of a letter that it said had been written in
November by Thich Quang Do, in which he protested "grave offenses committed by
the Vietnamese Communist Party against the Vietnamese people in general and
against Buddhists in particular."

LOAD-DATE: January 9, 1995

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Map of Vietnam showing location of the Quang Ngai province and Ho Chi
Mihn City.

                   Copyright 1995 The New York Times Company

                              23 of 211 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 January 9, 1995, Monday, Late Edition - Final

In Croatia, Minds Scarred by War

BYLINE: By STEPHEN KINZER,    Special to The New York Times

SECTION: Section A;   Page 6;   Column 4;   Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 1017 words

DATELINE: RIJEKA, Croatia, Jan. 4


A few months ago, a former Croatian soldier stormed into a bar in Osijek, opened
fire on the crowd and killed four patrons. Government officials were quick to
assert that the killer was simply a run-of-the-mill psychopath, and that his
murderous outburst had nothing to do with his military service.

"We are faced with far fewer psychiatric problems in our army than we might
expect," asserted Vlado Jukic, the chief army psychiatrist, "because our
soldiers are defending their own soil and fighting for their own freedom."

Despite such denials, other doctors assert that post-traumatic stress is a
serious problem across the former Yugoslavia. They say that long after the war
is over, societies here will be confronting extraordinary rates of divorce,
alcoholism, drug abuse, suicide and domestic and public violence.

At the clinical hospital in Rijeka, 120 miles west of Zagreb, a team of
physicians and therapists has opened what they say is the only program in the
former Yugoslavia dedicated to treating war veterans who suffer from
post-traumatic stress. Most of the patients, veterans of the war with
Serbian-dominated Yugoslavia that erupted after Croatia seceded in 1991, have
committed or witnessed ghastly acts.

"This war is creating a complex of social and psychological problems that we
have never seen before," said Ljiljana Moro, the program director.

Researchers say that post-traumatic stress can afflict anyone who has lived
through a searing physical or emotional experience. Victims suffer sudden
flashbacks and can collapse in tears or explode into violence for what seems to
be little or no reason. Many are overwhelmed by feelings of guilt or loss, and
lash out unpredictably even at those close to them.

Patients in Rijeka attend individual counseling sessions with psychiatrists and
therapists. They recount, often for the first time, what they have seen and
done, and also discussed the problems they have had readjusting to civilian
life.

About 15 patients gather for a group therapy session each weekday. One recent
session elicited a series of long silences and deep draws on cigarettes,
punctuated every few minutes by poignant confessions.

"My head never stops pounding," said one man. "I have pain in every bone in my
body. I can't sleep, and when I sleep I wake up after an hour because the
nightmares are so terrible. I want to stand in front of a mirror and ask why I
had to do all the things I did, but I know there would be no answer. The only
answer will come when I blow my head off."

Several of the patients complained bitterly about what they say is Croatian
society's desire to ignore them. Many have been unable to find work, and say
employers avoid hiring war veterans for fear that they will prove unstable or
dangerous.

"No one even wants to admit that the 'Croatia syndrome' exists," said a
27-year-old man who implied that he had committed war crimes during his military
service. "I burned my uniform because I didn't want to remember the terrible
things I did while I was wearing it. But the memories don't go away. I was
raised as a good Catholic, but now I have no faith in anything. The only thing I
believe in now is suicide. I know that very soon I will be in hell."

Only one of the patients, who said he had spent nine months in a Serbian prison
camp and watched scores of his fellow prisoners tortured and killed, wore his
old Croatian Army uniform. He said he did so because he now earns his living as
a beggar, and people seem more willing to give him coins when they see the
uniform.

"It would have been so much better if I had been killed in battle," the man
lamented. "Then I would have been a hero. Now I'm garbage."

All of the veterans at the therapy session volunteered to fight when the war
erupted in 1991 between Croatia and Serbian-dominated Yugoslavia. Several said
they had grown up on a diet of romantic patriotism and idealized stories of past
wars. All imagined that the conflict would last no more than a few months.

A patient who watched his son die in battle sat next to another who said, "With
what I know now, I would shoot my son rather than let him go to war."

When a man wearing a crew cut and a gold earring complained that neither
Government officials nor ordinary citizens care about the plight of emotionally
disturbed veterans, many of the other patients nodded in agreement.

"They see us," the man said, "but they don't have any idea what's going on
inside us."

The program in Rijeka has treated about 300 veterans in the two years since it
opened. Specialists say that is only a tiny fraction of the number who need
treatment. But helping veterans, especially those who may be guilty of hideous
crimes, is not a priority for most humanitarian organizations. Those that
sponsor mental health programs here concentrate on serving women and children.

The World Health Organization, however, has begun training doctors and mental
health professionals to deal with the post-traumatic stress disorders from which
many Croatian, Bosnian and Serbian soldiers are believed to be suffering. The
organization has sponsored seminars in which doctors from Chile who have treated
torture victims share their experiences with counterparts here.

A Danish-born specialist at the W.H.O. office in Zagreb, Soren Buus Jensen, has
calculated that there may be more than one million people in the former
Yugoslavia who have suffered psychological trauma severe enough to warrant
professional help. He estimates that about one-third of them are former
soldiers.

"Professionals understand that this is a very major problem, but since the war
is still going on there is a feeling that treating these people is a kind of
luxury," Dr. Jensen said. "The priority is on preventing infections and treating
the physically wounded, which is very understandable. But based on what we know
about Vietnam veterans and Holocaust survivors, there is no doubt in my mind
that post-traumatic stress is going to be the most important public health
problem in the former Yugoslavia for a generation and beyond."

LOAD-DATE: January 9, 1995

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo: Post-traumatic stress syndrome linked to war violence is a
serious problem across the former Yugoslavia, doctors say. Patients and family
members waited for treatment last week at a hospital in Rijeka, Croatia. (Debbi
Morello/Black Star, for The New York Times)

                   Copyright 1995 The New York Times Company

                              24 of 211 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 January 9, 1995, Monday, Late Edition - Final

College Freshmen Less Political

BYLINE: AP

SECTION: Section A;   Page 11;   Column 4;   National Desk

LENGTH: 372 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, Jan. 8


This year's college freshmen are less interested and involved in politics than
any entering class in the last 29 years, a survey released today by the Higher
Education Research Institute at the University of California at Los Angeles has
found. The survey covered 333,703 students at 670 two- and four-year colleges
and universities.

Only 31.9 percent of freshmen in the fall of 1994 said that "keeping up with
political affairs" was an important goal in life -- the lowest percentage found
by the survey since it was first taken in 1965. In 1990, 42.4 percent said it
was an important goal, and in 1966, 57.8 percent answered affirmatively.

The percentage of freshmen who said they frequently discussed politics also
reached its lowest point, dropping to 16 percent from 18.8 percent in 1993, and
24.6 percent in 1992. The highest level of freshman political discussion -- 29.9
percent -- was in 1968, a Presidential election year during the Vietnam War and
a time of turmoil on college campuses.

The poll found fewer freshmen saying community activism is a very important goal
in life. In 1994, 24.3 percent said it was important to "participate in programs
to help clean up the environment," while 33.6 percent agreed with that in 1992.
Although the proportion of students who said they had participated in an
organized demonstration in the past year rose to 40.4 percent from 38.6 percent
during the two years, the percentage who said there was a very good chance that
they would do so during college fell to 5.4 percent last year from 6.9 percent
in 1992.

The poll also found that support for legalizing marijuana increased for the
fifth year in a row, to 32.1 percent, compared with 28.2 percent in 1993 and
16.7 percent in 1989, according to the poll.

On the behavioral side, tobacco use rose and drinking declined among freshmen.
The percentage who said they frequently smoke cigarettes rose for the sixth time
in seven years, from 11.6 percent in 1993 to 12.5 percent in 1994.

But the percent who reported drinking beer in the past year reached an all-time
low of 53.2 percent, compared with 54.4 percent in 1993 and 75.2 percent in
1981. The percent who said they drank wine or hard liquor also declined.

LOAD-DATE: January 9, 1995

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1995 The New York Times Company

                              25 of 211 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 January 9, 1995, Monday, Late Edition - Final

Essay;
Yeltsin's Tiananmen

BYLINE: By WILLIAM SAFIRE

SECTION: Section A;   Page 15;   Column 1;   Editorial Desk

LENGTH: 714 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON


Which great power is more unsta ble today China or Russia?

The quick answer, of course, is Russia. The elected leader, Boris Yeltsin, is
besieged in Moscow after his bloody siege of Grozny, capital of the
Connecticut-sized breakaway republic of Chechnya.

Russian television showed vivid pictures of the bombing of that city even as it
showed Yeltsin saying it wasn't so; then the cameras showed Yeltsin upbraiding
his Defense Minister for making him look like a liar.

As Helmut Kohl telephoned to tell him that world opinion frowns on the savage
method his Russia Federation is using to preserve its borders, Bill Clinton
wrote a "Dear Boris" letter reaffirming support of Federation unity but
stressing how "distressed" he is at civilian deaths and suggesting mediation by
an organization of 53 nations.

What's Yeltsin to do? The Chechens are dead serious about secession. If Russia
lets Chechnya go, other Caucasian dominoes will fall and Moscow will be denied
the Caspian oil it needs to rule a hundred nationalities across 11 time zones.

He tried negotiation, which was met by a declaration of independence; he tried
an internal coup, which flopped; now he's trying force, which is bringing world
obloquy on his head because the Chechens are fiercely fighting for their
homeland and the Russian Army has no heart for a lengthy guerrilla battle,
especially after its loss in Afghanistan.

All that -- added to Yeltsin's personal punchiness and isolation -- is why
Russia appears unstable. We tend to equate the future of democracy with the
future of Yeltsin, who is on his last legs.

But consider the political miracle taking place in Moscow today. An unpopular
and unjust war is being denounced in the Parliament, with reformer Grigory
Yavlinsky openly calling for Yeltsin's resignation. The military is publicly
divided between conscience-stricken warriors and hard-line incompetents. Free
speech is spilling out all over.

The newspapers, after centuries of czarist and Communist docility, are
crusading: a picture of Defense Minister Pavel Grachev is captioned "the most
talentless commander in Russia." And the television crews are bringing home the
horror of the war just as American cameramen did in Vietnam, with similar impact
on Russian public opinion.

This is wonderful. The world should be proud of the Russian people, who should
be prouder of themselves for exercising their new-found freedom to debate a
great issue.

Contrast that democratic turmoil to the facade of "stability" in China. With the
death of Deng Xiaoping imminent, the leadership is cracking down on dissidents.

By jailing its leading independent thinkers, the regime in Beijing reveals its
inherent weakness. The new imprisonment of the courageous Wei Jingsheng, China's
Sakharov, was the tip-off that the leadership fears a popular uprising, this
time led by angry workers rather than idealistic students. As Deng sinks, the
number of panicky arrests rises.

This demonstrates again that succession in a Communist state is a ruthless
wrestle for power within an impenetrable clique. It mocks the assurances of
China's Western apologists that a market economy leads to political freedom.

In a litchi nutshell, here's the play:

Yang Shangkun, an old army leader whose powerful family was neutralized by Deng,
is close to Adm. Liu Huaqing, the nation's top military leader. They may
challenge Deng's proteges, party boss Jiang Zemin and Prime Minister Li Peng, by
backing economic chief Zhu Rongji or promoting a next-generation politician, Hu
Jintao, or by backing Qiao Shi, the former national security adviser and now
chairman of the rubber-stamp People's Congress, hereinafter known as "China's
Newt Gingrich."

What do 1.2 billion Chinese have to say about all this? Zilch. (Analysts in
Beijing, aware of the exclusive accuracy of my prediction of Mao's successor in
the 70's, will have to puzzle out "zilch.") And therein lies real instability.

A monolithic, totalitarian state, repressing the spirit of freedom, only seems
secure; we have seen how it can suddenly collapse. A noisy, unruly democratic
state, drawing on the legitimacy of free elections, is more secure -- no matter
how shaky the leadership. That's why Russia is in better political shape than
China.

LOAD-DATE: January 9, 1995

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Op-Ed

                   Copyright 1995 The New York Times Company

                              26 of 211 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 January 9, 1995, Monday, Late Edition - Final

Gary Kalkin, 44, Is Dead; Top Disney Studio Executive

BYLINE: By BERNARD WEINRAUB

SECTION: Section B;   Page 9;   Column 1;   Cultural Desk

LENGTH: 512 words

DATELINE: HOLLYWOOD, Jan. 8


Gary Kalkin, a top marketing executive at the Walt Disney Studios for the last
10 years who guided the campaigns for such blockbusters as "Beauty and the
Beast," "Aladdin" and "The Lion King," died on Friday at his home in Los
Angeles. He was 44.

The cause was AIDS, said his companion, Laurence Mark, a film producer.

As senior vice president of domestic marketing for Buena Vista Pictures
Marketing, Mr. Kalkin supervised promotion, advertising and publicity campaigns
for Touchstone and Hollywood Pictures as well as Disney. Mr. Kalkin also played
a strategic and creative role in promoting Disney's Broadway stage version of
"Beauty and the Beast."

Jeffrey Katzenberg, former chairman of Walt Disney studios, said that Mr. Kalkin
was not only the marketing force behind Disney's animated hits, but that he also
guided the campaigns for such non-animated successes as "Down and Out in Beverly
Hills," "Good Morning, Vietnam" and "Pretty Woman." Despite his illness, Mr.
Kalkin helped supervise the marketing of the Tim Allen comedy "The Santa
Clause," which emerged as one of the most successful films of 1994.

A mentor to younger executives at Disney and other studios, Mr. Kalkin was a
low-keyed, unflamboyant and blunt-spoken executive whose management style was
unusual in Hollywood in that he delegated considerable authority to his juniors
and personally worked on films that were either difficult to market or personal
favorites.

He successfully pressed reluctant Disney executives to release such films as
"The Joy Luck Club" and "Green Card" gradually, in order to build audience
momentum. Until then, Disney had traditionally released its movies nationally on
a single day.

For "Beauty and the Beast," Mr. Kalkin's strategy was to show incomplete scenes
from the film to moviegoers and critics and to show the incomplete film at the
New York Film Festival, a risky move that proved successful because it created
intense interest from an audience that had traditionally ignored animation. He
also shaped the highly successful campaign for "Who Framed Roger Rabbit," a
difficult film to market because of its blend of animation and live action.

Mr. Kalkin was born in Brooklyn, and was graduated from Brooklyn College. He
earned a master's degree in cinema studies at New York University.

His first job in the movie business, in the 1970's, was as a press agent in the
New York offices of United Artists. He then went into business on his own,
handling "Saturday Night Fever" and other movies. Mr. Kalkin moved to Los
Angeles in 1978 to handle the publicity for "Grease," one of the
highest-grossing films of the 70's, and he worked on such films as "American
Gigolo," "Staying Alive" and "Nine to Five."

Before joining the Disney studios in 1985 as vice president of publicity, Mr.
Kalkin was the vice president in charge of West Coast operations for M/S
Billings Publicity, handling such clients as John Travolta, Robert DeNiro and
Martin Scorsese.

He is survived by his sister, Marlene Bernstein of Coral Springs, Fla., and Mr.
Mark.

NAME: Gary Kalkin

LOAD-DATE: January 9, 1995

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo: Gary Kalkin (Laurence Mark, 1994)

TYPE: Obituary (Obit); Biography

                   Copyright 1995 The New York Times Company

                              27 of 211 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               January 11, 1995, Wednesday, Late Edition - Final

Pope Starts Tour Today To Australia And Asia

BYLINE: By ALAN COWELL,   Special to The New York Times

SECTION: Section A;  Page 8;  Column 1;  Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 781 words

DATELINE: ROME, Jan. 10


Defying signs of physical weakness and ill health, Pope John Paul II plans to
embark on Wednesday on his longest trip in three years, an 11-day, 20,800-mile
visit to Asia and Australia that seems more than ever to raise the question:
What drives him to such grueling odysseys?

The journey to the Philippines, Papua New Guinea, Australia and Sri Lanka will
be the 63d foreign tour John Paul has undertaken since he assumed the papacy in
1978. It will also be the most arduous since a 10-day tour of Brazil in 1991 and
the first since mounting signs of infirmity -- including two bouts of surgery --
forced him to cancel a visit to the United States last October.

The Pope is to give 30 speeches, many in the open air, and he will arrive in
Sydney, Australia, at the brutal height of summer after long flights through
many time zones.

While Vatican officials say routinely that the Pope, who is 74 years old, is
recovering well from his latest surgery to mend a leg broken in a fall last
April, his schedule for the forthcoming trip includes frequent rest periods.

For months, John Paul has been using a cane to support himself. In recent
appearances in Italy, special altars were constructed with elevators so he would
not have to climb steps. During his last major, public appearance on New Year's
Eve at St. Peter's Basilica, the Pope walked down the aisle unassisted, but
slowly and limping noticeably.

The Pope will use his trip to underscore his belief that, more than ever, the
church's role is not simply to offer spiritual leadership to the world's 980
million Catholics but also to inject moral values into the way the world
conducts its business.

"What is at stake is the transcendent dimension of man," the Pope told diplomats
here in his annual New Year's message on Monday. "This can never be made subject
to the whims of statesmen or ideologies."

The Vatican's "place in the midst of the community of nations," he said, is "to
be the voice which the human conscience is waiting for."

For a man his age, who survived an assassination attempt in 1981 and since July
1992 has also undergone surgery to remove a large intestinal tumor, a trip
halfway around the world might seem overly ambitious.

But, increasingly, the Pope seems driven by an urge to make the most of what
many Vatican commentators see as not only the twilight of Christianity's second
millennium but also the twilight of his papacy.

Last year he published a best-selling book of his thoughts -- "Crossing the
Threshold of Hope" -- and recorded a chart-busting compact disk and cassette of
himself at prayer, reciting the rosary.

That was in addition to overseeing the publication of the New Catechism of the
Catholic Church and conducting, among many other activities, his most ferocious
diplomatic campaign since the fall of Communism to oppose the legitimization of
abortion at a United Nations conference on population in Cairo.

With his forthcoming trip, the Pope will be revisiting several countries in a
region where, except for strongly Catholic Philippines, the Vatican is not a
powerful force.

Indeed, in Sri Lanka he is likely to encounter protest among Buddhists who form
some 70 percent of the 17.6 million population. Buddhist monks have demanded
that the Pope personally apologize for passages in his book that they regard as
insulting for equating their faith with atheism.

Likewise, fewer than one in three inhabitants in Australia and Papua New Guinea
are Catholics. But by beatifying local people there, as well as in Sri Lanka,
the Pope will try to strengthen the faithful by offering them examples of moral
living.

In the Philippines, the Pope will preside over the church's World Youth Day
celebrations in Manila as he did in Denver, Colo., in 1993 -- an occasion that
clearly heightened his spirits and reinforced his belief that many young people
are seeking a spiritual dimension to their lives.

"Anywhere the Pope goes, he seeks out the young and the young seek him out," he
said in his book. "Actually, in truth, it is not the Pope who is being sought
out at all. The one being sought out is Christ."

And his journey will have the broader dimension of sending a signal to Asian
countries, notably China and Vietnam, that the Vatican wants a dialogue with
them to make it easier for Catholics there to pursue their faith, Vatican
officials said.

But beyond that, as at the Cairo conference, there is a sense that the Pope
feels a steely resolve to live by the standards to which he regularly exhorts
his followers, including a commitment to evangelize and promote his particularly
conservative doctrine in an era which he regards as beset by immorality.


LOAD-DATE: January 11, 1995

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH



GRAPHIC:  Pope John Paul II will visit Asia and Austrailia for 11 days beginning
today, the 63rd foreign trip since he assumed the papacy in 1978. The map charts
his scedule.
Map: "ITINERARY: The Traveling Pope Is Traveling Again"

                   Copyright 1995 The New York Times Company

                              28 of 211 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               January 11, 1995, Wednesday, Late Edition - Final

Souphanouvong Is Dead at 82; Laos Prince Helped Fight U.S.

BYLINE: Reuters

SECTION: Section B;  Page 8;  Column 1;  Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 483 words

DATELINE: BANGKOK, Thailand, Jan. 10


Prince Souphanouvong, the "Red Prince" of Laos who fought with the Vietcong and
Pathet Lao guerrillas against the United States in Indochina and later became
his country's president, died on Monday, the Laotian radio reported. He was 82.

The radio, monitored in Bangkok, said that the Prince had suffered from heart
disease and called his death a severe blow to the governing Lao People's
Revolutionary Party and the nation as a whole.

The Laotian Government decreed five days of mourning, the radio said.

Prince Souphanouvong, a dashing, square-faced and mustachioed man who was known
as a charming and intelligent conversationalist, was named President of the
Laotian People's Democratic Republic after the Communist victory in Indochina in
1975. He stepped down from the largely ceremonial post in 1986 because of
failing health, turning the position over to Kaysone Phomvihane.

The Prince represented his country's last link with the 700-year monarchy it
abolished in 1975.

Prince Souphanouvong, the only leftist in a family of conservative neutrals,
became known as the Red Prince after leading the Communist Pathet Lao through
more than two decades of guerrilla warfare against the rightist Government led
by his half-brother, Prince Souvanna Phouma.

The struggle between the two Princes for control of the landlocked kingdom
dominated the history of Laos from its independence from France in 1953 until
the Communist victory in December 1975.

A cousin of former King Savang Vatthana, the Prince became interested in Marxism
while studying civil engineering in France in the 1930's. Although he never
called himself a Communist, he said he learned about Communism working for a
year on the docks in Le Havre, France, after finishing college.

He returned home to join the "Free Laos" movement against French colonial rule
in the 1940's and was wounded in 1946 in a battle against French forces.

In 1950, the Prince forged an alliance with Communist forces in neighboring
Vietnam, led by Ho Chi Minh, to fight French colonial rule in Indochina.

After the Geneva Conference of 1954 gave Laos full independence, the Prince and
his brother tried to work together in a coalition Government in Vientiane with
Prince Souvanna Phouma as Prime Minister. But fighting broke out between the
Government and Pathet Lao forces in 1959 after a right-wing Government took
power.

After being arrested, Prince Souphanouvong reportedly converted his jailers to
his cause and escaped with them in a thunderstorm, walking 300 miles to the
Pathet Lao mountain retreat.

After the United States began supporting the Government in South Vietnam in
1963, Prince Souphanouvong fled Laos and helped lead the Pathet Lao struggle
from abroad or underground until the Communist victory in 1975.

He married a Vietnamese woman who was a Communist Party member, and they
reportedly had 11 children.

NAME: Prince Souphanouvong

LOAD-DATE: January 11, 1995

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo: Prince Souphanouvong (Camera Press, 1976)

TYPE: Obituary (Obit); Biography

                   Copyright 1995 The New York Times Company

                              29 of 211 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               January 11, 1995, Wednesday, Late Edition - Final

Transit Police Chief Says He Will Retire

SECTION: Section B;  Page 3;  Column 6;  Metropolitan Desk

LENGTH: 145 words


Chief Michael O'Connor of the transit police, an ardent opponent of the Giuliani
administration's plan to merge New York City's three police forces, said
yesterday that he would retire later this month.

Chief O'Connor, a 29-year veteran of the transit police, said the expected
merger of the transit and housing police with the New York City Police
Department did not push him to retire. Rather, he said he was leaving to take a
new job as head of security for the Alliance for Downtown New York, a newly
formed business improvement district in lower Manhattan.

Deputy Chief John S. Pritchard 3d was named interim chief and is considered a
leading candidate for the $116,000-a-year post.

Chief O'Connor, 51, joined the transit police on Dec. 1, 1965. After a stint
with the Army in Vietnam, he returned to the force and rose steadily through the
ranks.

LOAD-DATE: January 11, 1995

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1995 The New York Times Company

                              30 of 211 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                January 12, 1995, Thursday, Late Edition - Final

NEWS SUMMARY

SECTION: Section A; Page 2; Column 5; Metropolitan Desk

LENGTH: 956 words



International A3-10

CHECHEN SEEKS PEACE
The president of secessionist Chechnya, Dzhokhar M. Dudayev, conceded today that
it could not win its war with Russia and urged talks with Russian leaders.  A1



YELTSIN MAY TIGHTEN CONTROL
President Boris N. Yeltsin was reported today to be considering taking over
direct control of Russia's armed forces. A6

ISRAEL CHANGING GUARD
In Israel, political power is shifting from the generation of nation-builders to
one reared, after the Jewish state was founded in 1948. A1

RESIGNATION REQUEST AT STATE
In a meeting last month, Secretary of State Warren Christopher told President
Clinton he wanted to resign, people familiar with the conversation say. A3

U.S.-JAPAN TRADE GAP
President Clinton expressed confidence today that his Administration's accords
with Tokyo would soon end the United States' $60 billion trade deficit with
Japan. A3

CROATIA PLANS TO OUST U.N.
The Croatian President, angry at the continued Serbian occuption of parts of his
country, has decided to end the mandate of United Nations forces in Croatia on
March 31. A4

Vietnam will accept refugees in exchange for economic aid. A5

Scores are feared dead in a Colombian plane crash. A8

The Algerian opposition said it is close to accord on peace. A9

Sofia Journal: Rogue 'wrestlers' have an armlock on Bulgaria.  A4

National A12-22, B9

THE STORM OF THE CENTURY?
Californians were reeling from a Pacific storm that will cost the state millions
of dollars.  A1

NEW FINDING ON VIRUS'S BEHAVIOR
When people are infected with HIV, the virus and the immune system engage in
pitched battle from the very start of infection.  A1

A QUESTION OF LIMITS
Should Congressional terms be limited to 6 or 12 years? New members of the 104th
Congress are at odds with longtime members.  A1

A FULL DAY FOR CONGRESS
The House nudged a balanced-budget amendment a step closer to enactment, and the
Senate passed a measure subjecting Congress to the same labor laws that apply to
private employers.  A20

WELFARE DIVIDES THE REPUBLICANS
Negotiations about welfare programs have turned up deep philosophical
disagreements between Republican governors and Republican members of Congress.
A20

MISGIVINGS ABOUT SENATOR DODD
Some state party leaders complain that President Clinton's choice to head the
Democratic National Committee is too liberal.  A21

THE DEMOCRATS' DEMOCRAT
Cambridge Journal: A year after Tip O'Neill's death, friends of the Democratic
Speaker of the House reunite and remember.  A21

LONG ABUSE BY SIMPSON SEEN
In court documents, prosecutors asserted that O. J. Simpson abused his wife over
17 years.  A12

COMMUTER PLANE BAN LIFTED
The Federal Aviation Administration lifted a ban on flying in icy conditions
that it had imposed on ATR commercial planes.  A14

HOW THE COURT MEASURES SUCCESS
The Supreme Court heard arguments on whether Missouri had ended the legacy of
segregation in Kansas City's school system.  A18

FRESH DOESN'T MEAN FROZEN
The Department of Agriculture proposed that thawed frozen poultry be labeled
"previously frozen." A19

The unemployment rate for blacks dropped below 10 percent.  A12

A giant concentrated mass has been detected in a distant galaxy.  B9

A study links high levels of magnetic radiation to brain cancer.  B9

A blood screening test that excluded a million donors may end.  B9

Metro Digest B1

KILLER SENT TO OKLAHOMA
Thomas J. Grasso, the double murderer who has demanded to be executed and whose
case became an issue in George E. Pataki's gubernatorial campaign, was
transferred from New York to Oklahoma to await execution.  A1

Business Digest D1

Arts/Entertainment C13-26

Shaw prepares a chorus.  C13

Tharp discovers old virtues.  C13

Music: The Pop Life C13

Dance: Pastoral interlude.  C24

Books: Pete Dexter novel.  C24

TV: Reporter's Notebook.  C18

Blame for the cold war.  C24

Brother Cadfael, sleuth.  C26

The Home Section C1-11

Houses by Bill Gates, virtual and real.  C1

House that's so . . . Mary.  C1

At home with Larry Kramer.  C1

Sports B12-19

LABOR ACCORD FOR HOCKEY
National Hockey League owners and players reached a tentative agreement to end a
lockout that has lasted three and a half months. Play may begin late next week.
A1

Basketball: Knicks are bonding and winning games.  B18

Nets want more scoring from their star players.  B18

Columns: Anderson on the end of the hockey lockout.  B13

Hockey: Rangers give Messier an ultimatum in negotiations.  B13

Analysis: The lockout is over, but the smiles are few.  B13

Unlike baseball, owners stop short of demanding cap.  B15

Football: Steelers' Kevin Greene sacks military analogies.  B13

Cowboys' Charles Haley does his talking on the field.  B19

Skiing: conditions.  B17

SportsPeople B12

Obituaries B11

Michael A. Castaldi, a former New York City special prosecutor.

Roderick Stephens Jr., sailor and innovator in yacht design.

Valerie Cossart, actress.

Editorials/Op-Ed A24-25

Editorials

A warmer tone from the Mayor.

Pataki's mediocre appointments.

The future of U.N. peacekeeping.

Useful, if tame, labor reforms.

Letters

Frank Rich: Separated at birth.

William Safire: Most sacred cow.

Sam Quinones: Broken pesos, broken promises.

David J. Steinberg: Best deal in town.

Neediest Cases B2

Chronicle D20

Bridge C16

Crossword C24

LOAD-DATE: January 12, 1995

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Summary

                   Copyright 1995 The New York Times Company

                              31 of 211 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                January 12, 1995, Thursday, Late Edition - Final

Hanoi to Accept Refugees Now in Germany in Exchange for Aid

BYLINE: By CRAIG R. WHITNEY,    Special to The New York Times

SECTION: Section A;   Page 5;   Column 1;   Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 565 words

DATELINE: BONN, Jan. 11


Germany said today that it would soon begin forcibly repatriating some of the
40,000 Vietnamese immigrants here illegally, and that Hanoi agreed to accept
them by 2000 in exchange for increased trade and economic aid.

About 60,000 other Vietnamese whose status as refugees or immigrants has been
recognized would not be affected, officials said.

The accord will eliminate a legacy of the cold war and enable Germany to compete
more effectively with the United States and Japan in the emerging market economy
in Vietnam, but official rejected criticism that the agreement sacrificed human
rights for business aims.

"There are about 20,000 Vietnamese whose applications for asylum have been
rejected, and these would be the first to be considered for repatriation," said
Bernd Schmidbauer, who helped negotiate the agreement. "We assume there will be
some Vietnamese citizens who will want to go back voluntarily, but we do not
know exactly how many there will be."

Phan Huy Oanh, a Vietnamese refugee who has lived in Europe for 20 years, said,
"Only a small percentage want to go back voluntarily."

Long delayed by Vietnam's refusal to guarantee that the returnees would be
welcome, the agreement commits Germany to provide $130 million in aid over the
next two years, part of it to help the refugees get a new start in Vietnam.

Bonn will also make available $65 million next year to underwrite risk insurance
for German investment projects and exports to Vietnam. Daimler-Benz A.G., the
automotive giant, said today that it was planning to build a $70 million bus
factory in Ho Chi Minh City (formerly Saigon).

West Germany offered political asylum to thousands of Vietnamese during and
after the Vietnam War, which ended with a Communist victory in 1975. Others were
Vietnamese workers and their families brought in as laborers and students by
Communist East Germany in the 1980's.

There were about 62,000 Vietnamese in East Germany when Communism collapsed in
1989, and about 12,000 stayed after unification in 1990 despite a Government
offer of a plane ticket and $2,000 cash for every one who agreed to return home.

In 1993 Germany eliminated a constitutional guarantee of an asylum hearing for
anyone who could get into the country and apply.

                             --------------------


<rr>Old Glory in Hanoi

BANGKOK, Thailand, Jan. 11 (Special to The New York Times) -- United States
diplomats say they are within days of raising an American flag over a modern
nine-story office building in Hanoi, the Vietnamese capital, to mark
establishment of limited diplomatic ties 20 years after the last American
diplomats were forced to flee Vietnam.

The building is expected to be opened this month after the signing of an
agreement on American and Vietnamese properties seized at the end of the Vietnam
War.

"We've already got the flag here, and it's ready to go up," said an American
diplomat in Hanoi, speaking on condition that he not be named.

The building is expected to be converted into an embassy when the two countries
establish full diplomatic relations, although that move is thought by some
diplomats to be months away, if not years. The United States has said that it
will withhold full diplomatic relations until there is further progress in
determining the fate of more than 1,600 Americans still listed as missing in
action in Vietnam.


LOAD-DATE: January 12, 1995

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1995 The New York Times Company

                              32 of 211 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                January 12, 1995, Thursday, Late Edition - Final

TELEVISION REVIEW;
Blame for the Cold War Falls on the Soviet Side

BYLINE: By WALTER GOODMAN

SECTION: Section C;   Page 24;   Column 5;   Cultural Desk

LENGTH: 632 words


Those on the political right who have been inveighing against the leftish
tendencies of PBS documentaries can find solace in "Messengers From Moscow," an
account of the cold war that echoes decades of messages from Washington that
Soviet ambitions were behind the long East-West confrontation.

Relying on recently opened Soviet archives and testimony from former high Soviet
officials and apparatchiks, the four-hour retrospective centers on Kremlin
machinations in the pursuit of power. The first program, tomorrow night, deals
with postwar Europe, particularly Germany, which Stalin saw as the key to a
Soviet takeover of the Continent.

Reminiscences of Vyachelsav M. Molotov, Stalin's Foreign Minister, who died in
1986, set forth his boss's goal "to expand the limits of our motherland as far
as possible." And Wolfgang Leonhard, a German refugee from Hitler, tells of
being sent back to his devastated country in 1945 as part of a team of
commissars to make sure that control remained in Moscow's hands. The main
tactic, in Germany as elsewhere in Europe, says this messenger from Moscow, was
to beat down or co-opt the Social Democrats, the Communists' main opponents on
the ascendant left.

A former high-ranking French Communist, Auguste Lecoeur, defines the real
meaning of the benign sounding "united front" that seemed so appealing to many
on the left, even in the United States: "In a united front there'd be just one
party, controlled of course by the Communist Party. It was a way of getting rid
of the Socialist Party completely." This aged stalwart remembers Stalin as "a
terrific guy," "a wonderful fellow with a nice sense of humor."

For no good reason, the program goes in for peculiarly lighted scenes of a movie
projector showing pictures of Molotov in his last days, and E. G. Marshall's
heavy narration seems to have been influenced by old radio shows about the
F.B.I. But newsreels of the time are reminders of the ruined Germany into which
the Soviet Army moved (the red flags hung out in welcome had been made from
pieces of Nazi flags) and of the staged rallies that masked political takeovers
in much of Central and Eastern Europe.

By this account, the United States was compelled to move from a desire for
cooperation to economic and military confrontation as Soviet intentions became
clear. The narrator credits the Marshall Plan (named for George C., not E. G.)
with blocking Soviet intentions in West Germany. Stalin, says E. G., created "a
world of enemies."

Next week, "Messengers From Moscow" turns to Asia and the complicated relations
between Mao Zedong and Soviet leaders that figured in Soviet involvement in the
Korean War. Moscow's role in the Cuban missile crisis and the Vietnam War is
covered later, and the series ends with the collapse of the Soviet economy and
the Communist ideology.

This steadily interesting, emphatically nonrevisionist history, written,
produced and directed by Daniel Wolf, a former BBC man, was paid for in part by
conservative groups like the Lynde and Harry Bradley Foundation and the John M.
Olin Foundation. Doubtless some historians will find it overly kind to the
United States. Fine. Let them have a hearing, too. As long as PBS keeps opening
up debate on a reasonably serious level, it is earning its keep.

MESSENGERS FROM MOSCOW

PBS, tomorrow
(In the New York area, Channel 13 at 9 P.M.)

Produced, written and directed by Daniel Wolf; Teresa Cherfas, associate
producer; Eugene B. Shirley Jr.; producer; Herbert J. Ellison, chief consultant;
Eugene B. Shirley Jr., Mr. Ellison, Mr. Wolf, Arnold Labaton and Harry Chancey
Jr., executive producers. A co-production of WNET/New York, Barraclough Carey
Productions Ltd. and Pacem Productions Inc. in association with BBC Bristol.

LOAD-DATE: January 12, 1995

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Review

                   Copyright 1995 The New York Times Company

                              33 of 211 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                January 12, 1995, Thursday, Late Edition - Final

Journal;
Separated at Birth

BYLINE: By FRANK RICH

SECTION: Section A;   Page 25;   Column 5;   Editorial Desk

LENGTH: 718 words


Was it last week's photo of those huge heads side by side at the White House,
each gleaming with the identical Doublemint smile? Or was it the new Speaker's
compassionate opening address to the House in which he felt poor people's pain?
Or was it the television debut of Kathleen Gingrich, colorfully strong-willed
Middle American Mom, who is as unapologetic about her cigarette addiction as the
late, great Virginia Kelley was about her two-dollar bets?

Whatever clue you find most compelling, the evidence keeps mounting that Bill
Clinton and Newt Gingrich were separated at birth -- never mind the three-year
age difference. And now that we've had two weeks of Newt in ascendancy, the
similarities between the two men seem less superficial than predictive: the
Speaker's behavior increasingly seems to follow the President's as Vermont once
did Maine.

Some of the biographical parallels are trivial. It's not terribly telling that
both men are Baptists, overeat, own '67 Mustangs, participated in student
protests and once worked for candidates (McGovern, Rockefeller) more liberal
than they are. Nor is it a surprise that these two ambitious boomers both smoked
dope and ducked Vietnam.

But the more we learn about Mr. Gingrich, the more his twinship with the
President becomes too idiosyncratic to dismiss. Both men are self-invented
American archetypes, presenting a persona more at odds with their origins than
Mark Twain was from Samuel Clemens. As Bill Clinton, the man from Hope, was
actually born William Blythe and mostly raised in unidyllic Hot Springs, so Newt
Gingrich, son of the resurgent G.O.P. South, was born Newton McPherson and, in
his mother's words, raised as "a Yankee" -- originally in Harrisburg, Pa., and
later at Army bases all over the map.

Dig deeper, and you find that both the President and the Speaker were favored
eldest children, brought up by tough mothers who survived spouse abuse. As boys,
neither knew his biological father and both had difficult relationships with
their adoptive fathers. As adults, both had marital troubles of their own.

Strong and doting mothers, broken homes, tenuous roots -- how do these traits
play out in men who finally realize their largest ambitions for power? If Mr.
Gingrich's Speakership to date is any indication, nurture overrides even
ideology. Though he's been king of the Hill only since New Year's, the Speaker
is already looking Clintonesque.

His maiden speech, with its magnanimous bows to Democrats and its empathy for
the victims of racial and economic injustice, could have been written by Clinton
the compulsive conciliator. Since then, Mr. Gingrich has talked far too much on
his and the equally narcissistic President's preferred medium of television,
risking Mr. Clinton's level of overexposure. The Speaker's once-rigid backbone
is also suspect; this week one of his most fervent journalistic supporters, The
Washington Times, used the verb "waffles" in a headline to describe his
flip-flop on a "Contract With America" plank denying welfare to legal aliens.

And let us not forget the not-really-aborted book deal, so reminiscent of
Clinton-family investment windfalls back in Arkansas, or Historygate, the
Gingrich replay of Travelgate. The question raised by this affair is not so much
whether the Speaker's short-lived choice for House historian, Christina Jeffrey,
has crackpot views about teaching the Holocaust, but why Mr. Gingrich gave jobs
to so obviously ill qualified a Georgia crony and her husband
(Bloodworth-Jeffrey?) in the first place -- and in secret. Is Kennesaw State
College now a talent pool for the House as the Rose Law Firm was for the White
House?

The Speaker and the President do differ on occasion. While Mr. Clinton plays the
sax on TV, Mr. Gingrich would rather blow his own horn. The President is an
Elvis idolater while the Speaker is said to impersonate Red Skelton. And though
Mr. Clinton tends to moralize in psychobabble, Mr. Gingrich's verbal soporific
of choice is cyberbabble.

So identical twins they're not, no matter how lookalike their negative poll
numbers or how much they battle like siblings. Indeed, their reconciliatory
impulses may yet lead them to converge in the political center for compromises
that each is certain to sell us as "change."

LOAD-DATE: January 12, 1995

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Op-Ed

                   Copyright 1995 The New York Times Company

                              34 of 211 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 January 13, 1995, Friday, Late Edition - Final

John Paul Presses On In Manila

BYLINE: By ALAN COWELL,   Special to The New York Times

SECTION: Section A;  Page 12;  Column 1;  Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 832 words

DATELINE: MANILA, Jan. 12


He joked today about the cane that supports him when he walks. He ruffled his
security detail by plunging unscheduled into a sea of dancers who pressed close
around him. He signaled the stirrings of a new campaign to nurture religious
freedom in China.

All in all, on the first day of his first extended foray in 16 months, Pope John
Paul II was a man determined to let it be known that his 74 years and two
surgical operations and a dislocated shoulder over the last two years offered no
reason to shirk the way he sees his duties as the pastor for the world.

Under sultry tropical skies, the Pope landed in Manila today after a 12-hour
overnight flight from Rome on the first stage of an 11-day tour that will take
him on to Papua New Guinea, Australia and Sri Lanka. While he has undertaken 62
previous voyages outside Italy since he was elected in 1978, this journey was
special -- an attempt to redress a difficult year when security problems forced
him to cancel visits to Beirut and Sarajevo and ill health obliged him to put
off trips to Belgium and the United States.

The Pope was at pains to deny suggestions that his papacy is in decline; indeed,
he sought to send the message that he was not planning to make a habit of
canceled visits or intimations of infirmity.

Speaking to reporters aboard his plane, he appeared rosy-cheeked, robust and
spry -- more so, at least, than he has for months -- fielding questions in
English, Italian, German, Spanish and French.

"As you see, I'm carrying a cane, and the cane is used to give some people a
jab, maybe to some journalists, too," he said, making a pun in Italian on the
common root of the words for cane and jab.

The Pope began using the cane when his hip was replaced after a fall in April in
which he broke his right thigh. "The leg is not sufficiently strong, and that's
why I carry a cane," he sadi. "This is the realistic situation."

Did that mean, someone asked, that he would dispute those who speculated about
more serious health problems?

After the coming trip, he said, "whoever is still alive will see." And he went
on to lay out plans for visits to Belgium and Slovakia and Africa and Austria
and maybe Berlin and America. He did not say exactly when these trips would take
place but indicated that it would be in the next year or two.

When his plane landed in Manila, the Pope walked slowly but unaided down the
steps. He did not kneel to kiss the ground, a practice he reserves for first
time visits. He last came to the Philippines, Asia's archipelago of Catholicism,
in 1981.

Awaiting him, hundreds of girls and young women in traditional costumes danced
as he made the usual gestures of protocol toward President Fidel Ramos and other
assembled dignitaries. Then, before clambering in a halting manner aboard his
glass-sided, bullet-proofed "Popemobile," he walked among the dancers, who broke
ranks to mill about him -- much to the consternation of the Pope's security
staff.

The main purpose of his visit here is to attend the church's World Youth Day.
The last such celebration in Denver in 1993, the Pope said, "surprised many
people, including the bishops," with the fervor of hundreds of thousands of
youths.

The same enthusiasm is expected here. Even today hundreds of thousands of people
clogged the streets to welcome the Pope.

But the visit has many other undertones. The Pope's powerful representative
here, Jaime Cardinal Sin, is at loggerheads with the Government over its support
for birth control among the Philippines' 65 million people, four-fifths of whom
are baptized Catholics.

On a regional level, the Pope will press for a relaxation of the restrictions on
Catholic worship, particularly in China and Vietnam. He is to broadcast directly
to China on the church's Radio Veritas on Saturday.

Joaquin Navarro-Valls, the Pope's spokesman, told reporters today that 24
delegates from China's Patriotic Association of Churches -- which is run by the
Chinese authorities -- had arrived in Manila and sought to join the Pope at the
altar in saying Mass.

The official Chinese church does not permit its Catholic worshipers to
acknowledge the Pope, and the Chinese authorities deny the Vatican's right to
appoint bishops. In return, the Vatican supports a clandestine church in China
-- where priests have been arrested -- and Dr. Navarro-Valls said two groups of
underground church figures from China would be in Manila this week.

The Vatican spokesman said the Vatican had told the representatives of the
Patriotic Association's church that they would be permitted to join the Pope at
Mass only if they made a "profession of faith" -- a routine declaration for
priests that includes acknowledgement of the Pope's supremacy.

It was not immediately known how the official Chinese delegates would respond.
But Dr. Navarro-Valls said it would be a significant move if the Patriotic
Association formally acknowledged the Pope, as Communist China has never done.


LOAD-DATE: January 13, 1995

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo: President Fidel Ramos of the Philippines saluted the honor guard
yesterday as he walked with Pope John Paul II in Manila. The Pope was greeted by
thousands at the start of his four-day visit to the country. (Agence
France-Presse)

                   Copyright 1995 The New York Times Company

                              35 of 211 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 January 15, 1995, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

PAPERBACK BEST SELLERS: January 15, 1995

SECTION: Section 7; Page 28; Column 2; Book Review Desk

LENGTH: 851 words



     Weeks
This    On
Week  List Fiction

 1    18   DISCLOSURE, by Michael Crichton. (Ballantine, $6.99.) An
           executive who rejected his boss is accused by her of sexual
           harassment.

 2    35   INTERVIEW WITH THE VAMPIRE, by Anne Rice. (Ballantine,
           $6.99.) The 1976 novel that began "The Vampire Chronicles."

 3     8   A DANGEROUS FORTUNE, by Ken Follett. (Island/Dell, $6.99.)
           A young student's mysterious drowning in Victorian England.

 4    31   THE SHIPPING NEWS, by E. Annie Proulx. (Touchstone/S&S,
           $12.) A man mourns his adulterous wife in Newfoundland.

 5    16   THE VAMPIRE LESTAT, by Anne Rice. (Ballantine, $6.99.)
           Eerie carryings-on in a tale ranging from ancient Egypt to
           the 20th century.

 6     7   SLOW WALTZ IN CEDAR BEND, by Robert James Waller. (Warner,
           $4.99.) The romance of a professor and a colleague's wife.

 7*   11   MR. MURDER, by Dean Koontz. (Berkley, $6.99.) A mystery
           writer's happy family life -- and the madman determined to
           take his place.

 8    20   SMILLA'S SENSE OF SNOW, by Peter Hoeg. (Dell, $6.50.) In
           Copenhagen and Greenland, a woman investigates a child's
           death.

 9     3   NATURAL CAUSES, by Michael Palmer. (Bantam, $5.99.) A
           physician is accused of being responsible for the deaths of
           pregnant women.

 10   13   THE QUEEN OF THE DAMNED, by Anne Rice. (Ballantine, $6.99.)
           Continuing the author's chronicle of 6,000 years of
           vampirism.

 11    1   LORD HARRY, by Catherine Coulter. (Topaz, $5.99.) A
           19th-century woman disguises herself as a male to stalk the
           man who she believes is responsible for her brother's
           death.

 12*   3   THE CHRISTMAS BOX, by Richard Paul Evans. (Steinway,
           $4.95.) A young family moves in with an elderly widow.

 13   28   WITHOUT REMORSE, by Tom Clancy. (Berkley, $6.99.) John
           Kelly tries to rescue prisoners held in North Vietnam.

 14    7   BAD LOVE, by Jonathan Kellerman. (Bantam, $6.50.) Tracking
           a series of violent deaths.

 15    1   ELOQUENT SILENCE, by Sandra Brown. (Warner, $6.50.) A man,
           a woman and his deaf daughter look for solace in New
           Mexico.

     Weeks
This    On
Week  List NonFiction

 1    17   EMBRACED BY THE LIGHT, by Betty J. Eadie with Curtis
           Taylor. (Bantam, $5.99.) A woman's near-death experience.

 2     4   SEINLANGUAGE, by Jerry Seinfeld. (Bantam, $5.99.)
           Observations on life's pleasures and ordeals by the star of
           "Seinfeld."

 3    53   CARE OF THE SOUL, by Thomas Moore. (Harper Perennial, $12.)
           Everyday spirituality.

 4    16   HAVING OUR SAY, by Sarah L. Delany and A. Elizabeth Delany
           with Amy Hill Hearth. (Dell, $5.99.) Two black sisters
           reflect on their lives.

 5     5   SOUL MATES, by Thomas Moore. (Harper Perennial, $13.) A
           psychotherapist discusses love and relationships.

 6    20   A HISTORY OF GOD, by Karen Armstrong. (Ballantine, $14.)
           The development of monotheism over the past 4,000 years.

 7    12   WOULDN'T TAKE NOTHING FOR MY JOURNEY NOW, by Maya Angelou.
           (Bantam, $5.50.) Essays on life and death, good and evil.

 8    584  THE ROAD LESS TRAVELED, by M. Scott Peck. (Touchstone/S&S,
           $10.95.) Inspiration.

 9     1   CONTRACT WITH AMERICA, by Newt Gingrich, Dick Armey, et al.
           (Times Books/Random House, $10.) A Republican program for
           reshaping the Government.

 10   51   WHERE ANGELS WALK, by Joan Wester Anderson. (Ballantine,
           $10.) Stories about angelic intervention in human affairs.

 11   35   MAMA MAKES UP HER MIND, by Bailey White. (Vintage, $10.)
           Life in a Georgia town.

 12   10   FURTHER ALONG THE ROAD LESS TRAVELED, by M. Scott Peck.
           (Touchstone/S&S, $12.) A discussion of spiritual growth.

 13   98   I KNOW WHY THE CAGED BIRD SINGS, by Maya Angelou. (Bantam,
           $4.99.) The poet's depiction of her childhood and
           adolescence.

 14   26   REENGINEERING THE CORPORATION, by Michael Hammer and James
           Champy. (Harper Business, $13.) Innovation in business.

 15*  10   ARMORED CAV, by Tom Clancy. (Berkley, $15.) A tour of an
           armored cavalry regiment.

 16*  14   DAKOTA, by Kathleen Norris. (Houghton Mifflin, $9.95.) A
           celebration of the Great Plains.

     Weeks
This    On
Week  List Advice, How-To and Miscellaneous

 1    16   CHICKEN SOUP FOR THE SOUL, compiled by Jack Canfield and
           Mark Victor Hansen. (Health Communications, $12.) Stories
           meant to "open the heart and rekindle the spirit."

 2    15   HOMICIDAL PSYCHO JUNGLE CAT, by Bill Watterson. (Andrews &
           McMeel, $12.95.) A collection of "Calvin and Hobbes"
           cartoons.

 3     2   THE WORLD ALMANAC AND BOOK OF FACTS 1995. (World
           Almanac/Funk & Wagnalls, $8.95.) The latest edition of the
           reference work.

 4     7   THE CURSE OF MADAME "C," by Gary Larson. (Andrews & McMeel,
           $8.95.) A collection of "Far Side" cartoons.


Rankings reflect sales figures, for the week ending Dec. 31, at 3,050 bookstores
plus wholesalers serving 38,000 other retailers, statistically weighted to
represent sales in all such outlets nationwide. An asterisk indicates that a
book's sales are barely distinguishable from those of the book above.

LOAD-DATE: January 15, 1995

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: LIST

                   Copyright 1995 The New York Times Company

                              36 of 211 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 January 15, 1995, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

BEST SELLERS: January 15, 1995

SECTION: Section 7; Page 26; Column 2; Book Review Desk

LENGTH: 1481 words



          Weeks
This Last    On
Week Week  List Fiction

 1      1  30   POLITICALLY CORRECT BEDTIME STORIES, by James Finn Garner.
                (Macmillan, $8.95.) Classic tales respun to avoid offending
                current sensibilities.

 2      2  46   THE CELESTINE PROPHECY, by James Redfield. (Warner, $17.95.) An
                ancient manuscript, found in Peru, provides insights into
                achieving a fulfilling life.

 3      3  20   DEBT OF HONOR, by Tom Clancy. (Putnam, $25.95.) Jack Ryan and
                C.I.A. agents vs. a Japanese plot to strike America's territory
                and economy.

 4      4  13   INSOMNIA, by Stephen King. (Viking, $27.95.) A widower and a
                widow, victims of sleeplessness, behold sinister forces at work
                in their small Maine town.

 5      5   7   WINGS, by Danielle Steel. (Delacorte, $23.95.) A woman pursues
                her ambition to become a record-setting aviator in pre-World
                War II America.

 6      7  127  THE BRIDGES OF MADISON COUNTY, by Robert James Waller. (Warner,
                $16.95.) A photographer and a farmer's lonely wife in Iowa.

 7      8  10   THE LOTTERY WINNER, by Mary Higgins Clark. (Simon & Schuster,
                $22.) Stories about a couple who win a lottery and devote
                themselves to solving crimes.

 8      9   8   DARK RIVERS OF THE HEART, by Dean Koontz. (Knopf, $24.) A man
                and a woman, who meet by chance, must flee a powerful
                Government agency.

 9     11  15   TALTOS, by Anne Rice. (Knopf, $25.) The survivor of a species
                of witches copes with his heritage; a sequel to "The Witching
                Hour" and "Lasher."

 10     6  27   THE CHAMBER, by John Grisham. (Doubleday, $24.95.) A lawyer
                represents a racist who is on death row for his part in a 1967
                bombing in Mississippi.

 11    10  25   THE GIFT, by Danielle Steel. (Delacorte, $15.) A woman's visit
                to a small town changes many lives.

 12    14  15   MUTANT MESSAGE DOWN UNDER, by Marlo Morgan. (HarperCollins,
                $18.) In Australia's outback, an American woman learns about
                aboriginal philosophy.

 13    12  17   NOTHING LASTS FOREVER, by Sidney Sheldon. (Morrow, $23.) Three
                women doctors in San Francisco contend with lovers, betrayers
                and killers.

 14         1   SELF-DEFENSE, by Jonathan Kellerman. (Bantam, $22.95.) The
                psychologist-detective Alex Delaware undertakes to discover
                whether a woman's fear that she is being stalked by a killer is
                imagined or real.

 15    15   6   A CUP OF CHRISTMAS TEA, by Tom Hegg. (Waldman House, $10.95.) A
                book of verses, illustrated by Warren Hanson.

          Weeks
This Last    On
Week Week  List Nonfiction

 1      1  11   CROSSING THE THRESHOLD OF HOPE, by John Paul II. Edited by
                Vittorio Messori. (Knopf, $20.) The Pope discusses matters of
                belief, suffering and hope.

 2      2  15   DON'T STAND TOO CLOSE TO A NAKED MAN, by Tim Allen. (Hyperion,
                $19.95.) Anecdotes and meditations on life by the star of "Home
                Improvement."

 3      3  19   COUPLEHOOD, by Paul Reiser. (Bantam, $19.95.) Essays on the ups
                and downs of marriage by the television star and stand-up
                comedian.

 4      4  56   THE BOOK OF VIRTUES, by William J. Bennett. (Simon & Schuster,
                $30.) Moral stories adapted from the Greeks, the Bible,
                folklore and elsewhere.

 5      7  14   THE HOT ZONE, by Richard Preston. (Random House, $23.) The
                discovery of a lethal virus, more infectious than H.I.V., and
                the efforts to keep it from spreading.

 6      5  16   JAMES HERRIOT'S CAT STORIES, by James Herriot. (St. Martin's,
                $16.95.) A collection of tales by the Yorkshire veterinarian.

 7     10   7   THE WARREN BUFFETT WAY, by Robert G. Hagstrom Jr. (Wiley,
                $24.95.) An account of the career of the man said to be the
                world's most successful investor.

 8      9  11   THE BELL CURVE, by Richard J. Herrnstein and Charles Murray.
                (Free Press, $30.) Ways in which differences in intelligence
                affect American life.

 9      6  18   BARBARA BUSH: A Memoir, by Barbara Bush. (Drew/Scribners, $25.)
                The former First Lady recalls her life, from childhood to the
                present.

 10     8  14   DOLLY, by Dolly Parton. (HarperCollins, $25.) The autobiography
                of the country singer.

 11    12  45   MIDNIGHT IN THE GARDEN OF GOOD AND EVIL, by John Berendt.
                (Random House, $23.) The mysterious death of a young man in
                Savannah, Ga.

 12    15  13   NO ORDINARY TIME, by Doris Kearns Goodwin. (Simon & Schuster,
                $30.) The roles of Franklin and Eleanor Roosevelt during World
                War II.

 13         3   SISTERS, by Carol Saline. Photographs by Sharon J. Wohlmuth.
                (Running Press, $27.50.) The relationships of 36 sets of
                sisters of varied callings and backgrounds, reported in words
                and pictures.

 14    14  10   ALL THE TROUBLE IN THE WORLD, by P.J. O'Rourke. (Atlantic
                Monthly, $22.) A humorist considers problems like
                overpopulation, famine and plague.

 15    13   5   IT WASN'T ALWAYS EASY, BUT I SURE HAD FUN, by Lewis Grizzard.
                (Villard, $20.) A collection of essays by the late Southern
                humorist.

          Weeks
This Last    On
Week Week  List Advice, How-to and Miscellaneous

 1      1  38   IN THE KITCHEN WITH ROSIE, by Rosie Daley. (Knopf, $14.95.)
                Recipes by Oprah Winfrey's cook.

 2      2  86   MEN ARE FROM MARS, WOMEN ARE FROM VENUS, by John Gray.
                (HarperCollins, $23.) Ways to improve communication and
                relationships between the sexes.

 3      3   3   ILLUMINATA, by Marianne Williamson. (Random House, $20.) A
                celebration of the power of prayers, with examples of those
                fitting a variety of situations.

 4      4  16   MAGIC EYE III, by N.E. Thing Enterprises. (Andrews & McMeel,
                $12.95.) Oscillating designs in color.


Rankings reflect sales figures, for the week ending Dec. 31, at 3,050 bookstores
plus wholesalers serving 28,000 other retailers (gift shops, department stores,
newsstands, supermarkets), statistically weighted to represent sales in all such
outlets nationwide. An asterisk indicates that a book's sales are barely
distinguishable from those of the book above.
And Bear in Mind
(Editor's Choices of other recent books of particular interest)

THE ART AND ARCHITECTURE OF ISLAM, 1250-1800, by Sheila S. Blair and Jonathan M.
Bloom. (Yale University, $65.) A bold, competent and fresh attempt to rewrite
the history of later Islamic art from scratch, with plenty of splendid color
illustrations and other useful graphics.

BOREDOM: The Literary History of a State of Mind, by Patricia Meyer Spacks.
(University of Chicago, $24.95.) A persuasive account of a concept invented in
the 18th century; its roots include a growing concentration on "inner
experience" as the locus of personal reality.

FELICIA'S JOURNEY, by William Trevor. (Viking, $21.95.) Mr. Trevor's latest
novel concerns an unmarried, pregnant, vulnerable Irish girl, wandering
England's industrial Midlands until she encounters an awesomely predatory
Englishman whose monstrosity is all the scarier for remaining long undefined.

THE HOLLOW YEARS: France in the 1930s, by Eugen Weber. (Norton, $25.) The
author, a historian devoted to France, rises from immersion in the documents,
bearing this scintillating, entertaining account of an unworthy but fascinating
period in French life.

THE INFERNO OF DANTE: A New Verse Translation, by Robert Pinsky. (Farrar, Straus
& Giroux, $35.) A gripping and near-symphonic rendition of the tour through hell
attains a truly Dantean velocity without missing a jot or a tittle.

IN PHARAOH'S ARMY: Memories of the Lost War, by Tobias Wolff. (Knopf, $23.) The
follow-up volume to Mr. Wolff's memoir "This Boy's Life" is a series of small,
elegant, personal sketches of his year in Vietnam.

LONG WALK TO FREEDOM: The Autobiography of Nelson Mandela, by Nelson Mandela.
(Little, Brown, $24.95.) The President of South Africa comes across not as
moralist or messiah but as a pragmatic politician who chose what might work over
what was ideologically agreeable.

THE MASTER OF PETERSBURG, by J.M. Coetzee. (Viking, $21.95.) The hero of Mr.
Coetzee's grimmest novel yet is Dostoyevsky himself, trapped in generational and
political clashes, trying to scrape meaning from the death of a son.

NELSON: A Personal History, by Christopher Hibbert. (Addison-Wesley, $30.) A
biography that visits many familiar scenes but brings clarity, reliability,
convincing judgments and enthusiasm to Horatio Nelson, a unique British hero
whose personal defects could never tarnish his glory.

ROBERT LOUIS STEVENSON: A Biography, by Frank McLynn. (Random House, $30.) A
thoroughly detailed life, taking the most recent scholarship into account, of
the great Scottish writer of English prose who died at 44 in 1894.

THE ROCKET AND THE REICH: Peenemunde and the Coming of the Ballistic Missile
Era, by Michael J. Neufeld. (Free Press, $25.) A chronicle of the Nazis' brutal
V-2 rocket program and the German scientists who became the American space
technologists of 1945 and after.

LOAD-DATE: January 15, 1995

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: List

                   Copyright 1995 The New York Times Company

                              37 of 211 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 January 15, 1995, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

In Scabs There Is Strength

BYLINE: By Michael Kazin;   Michael Kazin, who teaches history at American
University, is the author of "The Populist Persuasion: An American History."

SECTION: Section 7;  Page 11;  Column 2;  Book Review Desk

LENGTH: 1355 words



COPPER CRUCIBLE
How the Arizona Miners' Strike of 1983
Recast Labor-Management Relations in America.
By Jonathan D. Rosenblum.
256 pp. Ithaca, N.Y.:
ILR Press. Cloth, $38. Paper, $16.95.

WHY have American unions shriveled in size and power over the last two decades?
The usual explanations taste of inevitability: a flood of low-wage competitors
abroad, the decline of the unionized manufacturing sector, the loss of political
support in a conservative era and the rise of "lean and mean" employers who
demand stiff concessions from workers as the price of retaining their jobs.
Buffeted by such forces, organized labor seems a supine dinosaur unable to
resist its slow demise.

In "Copper Crucible," Jonathan D. Rosenblum, a labor lawyer who was formerly a
newspaper and magazine journalist, reveals how much fight still resides in union
hearts, but also why militancy is often not enough. He thus brings down to earth
the glib judgments about labor's woes issued by many journalists and scholars.
He has written an intelligent narrative, complex but crisp, about a major labor
battle of the 1980's, one almost unknown outside Arizona or known only to those
with a professional interest in workplace conflict.

The antagonists were the top executives of Phelps Dodge, one of the world's
largest copper producers, and the union workers, most of them Mexican-American,
whom the company employed in and around the massive open-pit facilities that dot
the mineral-rich terrain of southeastern Arizona. In 1983, managers at Phelps
Dodge, faced with a worldwide slump in copper prices that had lasted several
years and caused annual losses for the company, resolved to smash the
centerpiece of what organized labor had achieved in the industry: the
cost-of-living allowance that enabled the company's union employees to earn a
wage of $12 an hour. The tough stand was unique among American copper
manufacturers, most of whom were content to maintain the fairly amicable pattern
of collective bargaining set in the prosperous 1960's.

Phelps Dodge workers, most of whom were represented by the United Steelworkers
of America or several smaller unions, were confident they could turn back this
threat to their incomes and organizational prowess. After all, copper unionism
was, as Mr. Rosenblum shows, a communitywide affair. Many families in Arizona
mining towns like Morenci, Ajo and Clifton could recite stories of earlier
conflicts with Phelps Dodge that had gradually gained Mexican-American laborers
respect and skilled employment -- along with the rudiments of a middle-class
life style. Unionists worshiped together (mostly at Roman Catholic churches);
many had gone off together to fight in Vietnam. In 1983, when negotiations
failed, they began, within the caldron of an Arizona summer, what their leaders
predicted would be a short strike -- followed by a return to the mutually
beneficial status quo.

But Phelps Dodge was determined to change the rules of the game. Following the
advice of anti-union specialists at the University of Pennsylvania's Wharton
School of business, Mr. Rosenblum writes, the company immediately hired
replacement workers not just to bust the strike but to fill the jobs of strikers
permanently. Phelps Dodge's president, Richard Moolick, later acknowledged, "I
had decided to break the unions." Angry crowds forced the strikebreakers, most
of whom came from outside the copper towns, to spend several nights inside a
mine, and someone (whose identity remains unknown) fired a gun into a
strikebreaker's house, seriously injuring his 3-year-old daughter.

MANAGEMENT refused to make any concessions that might have ended the battle,
and, predictably, the state intervened. Belying his liberal reputation, Gov.
Bruce Babbitt sent in the National Guard to protect the holdings and the
nonunion workers of Phelps Dodge. Swarms of state police, Arizona's copper star
emblem on their shoulders, soon followed. After several months, as Mr. Rosenblum
recounts, jagged rifts opened up in formerly pro-union communities, as a sizable
minority of residents forsook the picket lines and went back to work. Two
brothers got into a bloody brawl, and the resulting feud tore up a large
extended Chicano family. A pro-union couple disowned their daughter for breaking
the strike.

The copper unions did not go quietly or quickly. A team of strikers toured the
nation to publicize their demands; Bruce Springsteen donated $10,000 worth of
concert proceeds to the cause. But a year after the conflict began, the company,
adhering to its grim strategy, arranged a vote by its new employees, who
"decertified" the unions.

Mr. Rosenblum asserts that the one-two punch of an unyielding stance on wages
backed up by permanent replacements became a model for other companies seeking
to break, or at least humble, their own unions. "We created a new approach to
labor," Richard Moolick boasted in an interview with the author. "Suddenly
people realized, hell, you can beat a union. Time was, big unions were
considered invincible. We demonstrated that nobody was invincible."

IT is not clear that the Arizona miners' strike was so pivotal an event.
President Ronald Reagan's victory over the unionized air traffic controllers
preceded the copper war by more than two years and drew far more publicity. And
Mr. Rosenblum provides no evidence that other large companies that replaced
their own workers during subsequent strikes, like Eastern Airlines and The Daily
News in New York, were taking inspiration from Phelps Dodge.

The author himself suggests it was a series of rulings by the Supreme Court and
the National Labor Relations Board, both dominated by probusiness conservatives
in the 80's, that gave employers the confidence to get mean. Organized labor, in
the copper towns and elsewhere, was simply unable to withstand stern opposition
from both major corporations and the Federal Government.

What's impressive about "Copper Crucible" has little to do with any claim for
the historical significance of the Arizona strike. Mr. Rosenblum writes with the
verve of a good journalist and the empirical precision of a fine scholar. He is
as deft at sketching brief portraits of key executives, union officials and
rank-and-file strikers as he is at untangling the legal skein in which the
miners got fatally ensnared. There is no respite in sight for the ordeal of
American unionism. But this splendid tale at least charts one of the hard roads
traveled.



'IN THE NAME OF LORD GOD'

Bobby Andazola . . . had walked out onto the highway fully dressed, intending to
ask the state troopers a question: Why were they entering his family's town?
After all, this was Clifton, Ariz., the union town. The only disturbance here
was a crowd of strikers leading a shift-change picket line. The troopers had
been stationed in the company town of Morenci, four miles up the highway. In
Morenci, these [Department of Public Safety] foot soldiers had been assigned to
protect replacement workers at the mine gate, epicenter of the statewide strike
against Fortune 500 copper mining giant Phelps Dodge Corporation. Now, marching
military-style into Clifton, the troopers clearly hadn't come to answer
questions. So former copper miner Bobby Andazola stood on the scorching blacktop
in the center of U.S. Highway 666, his arms outstretched like a martyr on the
cross. He yelled furiously at the troopers, wishing the whole world to hear: "In
the name of Lord God, Lord Jehovah, would you do this to your own brothers and
sisters?" . . .

No one in the crowd of strikers and picnickers knew then that the troopers had
been ordered to break up the picket line after an unmarked D.P.S. car had
received a slap on the trunk from a striker. But when a bottle flew out of the
crowd, the troopers quickly revealed the full scope of their mission. They
surged forward and began to launch gas canisters at the crowd.

Bobby angrily threw things back at the troopers. First his shoes. Then his
shirt. . . . Then he heaved his pants. Then there was nothing more to throw.
From "Copper Crucible."

LOAD-DATE: January 15, 1995

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo: Arizona Department of Public Safety officers firing tear gas at
rioting copper strikers, June 30, 1984. (TOM STORY/THE ARIZONA REPUBLIC)

TYPE: Review

                   Copyright 1995 The New York Times Company

                              38 of 211 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 January 15, 1995, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

ON WASHINGTON;
America's Front Lawn

BYLINE: By MAUREEN DOWD

SECTION: Section 6;  Page 18;  Column 1;  Magazine Desk

LENGTH: 1120 words


AS IT BEGAN TO SLEET ON New Year's Eve, I was sitting on a bench across from the
White House dreaming of Carole Lombard.

Watching the homeless who live in Lafayette Park drift around, I was reminded of
"My Man Godfrey," the 1936 romp in which Lombard, as a madcap New York society
girl, looks for a "forgotten man" in a scavenger hunt. Finding one (a
down-at-the-heels William Powell) in a city dump on the East River, she offers
him a job, asking blithely, "Can you butle?"

There are no screwball angels in Lafayette Park. Only a few well-dressed
Washingtonians hurrying along the red brick paths. But the forgotten men and
women camped near the statue of Andrew Jackson are a little less forgotten this
winter. In the past few months, this quiet, pretty square has turned ominous and
jittery. Like the scene in Disney's "Fantasia" scored to Mussorgsky's "Night on
Bald Mountain," the park seems suddenly alive with macabre spirits, rising up
and swirling around an unlucky White House.

"It has been a weird series of things, one after the other," says Bill Pugh, a
64-year-old Marine veteran from California who has made a bench in the southwest
corner his home for a year and a half. "I'm beginning to get a little queasy
about being here. We have a little rhyme that we put together: 'Now I lay me
down in my bed, With the sounds of gunshots going off in my head.' "

Pugh presents himself as the Samuel Pepys of the park, witness to the eerie,
violent goings-on. He recalls that he was sleeping on the ground one night in
September when he was awakened by a "crunching, slamming" noise as a small plane
crashed onto the South Lawn.

"About three minutes after that, this place was covered with every policeman you
could think of: D.C. Government, Park Police, the Executive Protection Service,
the Secret Service," he said, adding, with the savvy that comes from his milieu:
"Actually, it was an F.A.A. slip-up."

Pugh says he was on his bench on Oct. 29 when he saw Francisco Duran stroll down
Pennsylvania Avenue, pull a semiautomatic rifle from under his coat and fire
through the north gate.

"Real tragic," he says, lighting a cigarette. "It's bad enough on the streets of
New York or Los Angeles, but here in front of the White House, that's absolutely
obscene."

In December, an unidentified gunman sprayed shots through the window of the
State Dining Room. One man was arrested after making up a story about having a
bomb in his car; another for trying to climb the north fence of the White House.
And, in the most disturbing incident for those who live in the park, the Park
Police shot and killed Marcelino Corniel, a homeless man who rushed across
Pennsylvania Avenue waving a knife.

"It was a real shock, because he was the last guy we expected would do something
like that," Mr. Pugh said. "He used to sit all day and sketch real-life scenes
-- trees, birds, pigeons. He seldom spoke to anyone. But something snapped. The
officers kept telling him to 'Drop the knife! Drop it!' But he wouldn't. It was
just 'Bam! Bam!' "

Mr. Pugh, a compact man with ruddy skin and a yellowy white mustache, is wearing
a maroon knit cap, and jeans and gloves with holes. Jazz squeaks from the Sony
Walkman hanging around his neck. "My favorite was Stan Getz before he died," he
says, waving off some young men offering peanut-butter-and-jelly sandwiches and
Christian pamphlets. "Well, everybody loves Stan Getz."

Pugh says he is a retired master gunnery sergeant who served in World War II and
the Korean War. He came here from his home in Marina del Rey, Calif., to have a
knee operation at the Veterans Administration hospital, then lingered, watching
the passing scene. He says he gets a Government stipend, but prefers to stay in
the park so he can save money and go to restaurants.

The park has an anthropology every bit as complex as that of the executive
mansion across the way. Bill Pugh gets along pretty well with the various
cliques, except for one trio of paranoid brothers who accuse him of being a
C.I.A. operative sent by William Colby. He tries to steer clear of "the front
line" of less stable park residents who gather along Pennsylvania Avenue to
receive messages from Mars coming through pots on their heads and to protest
various causes, vendettas and conspiracies. (One conspiracy involves the C.I.A.
building robotic sleds under the sea.)

Dwight Baird, 44, lying amid his sleeping bag, economic books and cardboard
marked with swastikas, announces grandly: "They hate me because I'm white. And I
hate them." And, at another point: "My family are fascists. In fact, I've sued
them."

The park, which was the front lawn of the White House until Thomas Jefferson
turned it over to the public, has long been a symbolic slice of reality in the
unreal Federal city. Administration officials and media big shots who never
venture into the murderous parts of the city walk through Lafayette Park on
their way to lunch at the posh Bombay Club; they glance at the tame sprinkling
of homeless people and feel that they've experienced the gritty side of
Washington.

An extreme manifestation of this attitude came in 1989, when Government agents
lured a drug dealer to the park so they could buy crack for President Bush to
use as a prop in a televised speech on drugs. Speech writers wanted the
President to be able to claim that drugs were being sold right outside the Oval
Office.

Sometimes, as Presidents have grown isolated in crises, they have looked out the
window and seen, in the park, the specter of their demise. During the Vietnam
era, protesters shouted "Hey, hey, L. B. J., how many kids did you kill today?"
as the anguished President stared back, asking advisers, "Why are they doing
this to me?"

Not everyone appreciates the park's reputation for free speech. When protesters
beat a drum round the clock to protest the Persian Gulf war, President Bush
grumped to Republicans, "Those damned drums are keeping me up all night."

But now the mood has grown spooky. Frank J. Fahrenkopf, a former G.O.P.
chairman, has demanded that the park be cleaned out so that Americans can "bring
their kids to see the people's house without having bums abuse them or yell or
scream or see people lying in their own filth."

Bill Pugh says he won't be around to see what happens. He was going to celebrate
New Year's Eve at Mr. Egan's restaurant, a few blocks away.  "I'll have the hot
roast beef sandwich and a couple of drinks -- V.O.," he mused. "By midnight,
everybody in the park will be pretty well drunk and will go to sleep.

"In a couple of days, I'm going back to California," he said. "It's been an
educational experience. But now I'm getting the heck out of this place."

LOAD-DATE: January 15, 1995

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1995 The New York Times Company

                              39 of 211 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 January 15, 1995, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

SUNDAY, JANUARY 15, 1995;
Apocalypse Then

SECTION: Section 6;  Page 15;  Column 3;  Magazine Desk

LENGTH: 147 words


It's the resting place of napalm -- the Fallbrook Naval Weapons Station in the
California countryside between Los Angeles and San Diego (at left). Since the
Vietnam war the last 23 million pounds of napalm, a mixture of gasoline, benzene
and polystyrene, have been held here. Now the Navy is figuring out how to
dispose of it. There is no danger of conflagration in California. The canisters
don't have detonators. But over the years they have begun to leak, and
California environmental officials want the station to get rid of the napalm
because it could contaminate ground water. Some 1,774 canisters developed leaks
in 1994. They were repaired, removed or incinerated. Nobody seems interested in
buying the napalm for recycling and incineration is expensive, so it seems the
Navy will have to hire a private company to take the napalm away. Estimated cost
-- $20 million.

LOAD-DATE: January 15, 1995

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1995 The New York Times Company

                              40 of 211 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 January 15, 1995, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

For Priestly Archbishop, His Day of Resignation

BYLINE: By FRANCIS X. CLINES

SECTION: Section 1;   Page 1;   Column 1;   Metropolitan Desk

LENGTH: 1656 words


Sometime today, on his 75th birthday and in his 50th year as a priest, John
Cardinal O'Connor plans to dispatch from his private residence the simple,
single-paragraph letter of resignation required of him by the Vatican as he
heads toward the end of his tenure as Archbishop of New York.

"I cannot imagine that I have had this opportunity and haven't made a lot more
of it than I have," Cardinal O'Connor declared with measured regret in an
interview as he surveyed his 11-year record in the most prominent church post in
America and prepared to hear what Pope John Paul II intends next for him.

"If I had it to do over again, I would probably schedule myself to be on the
road almost constantly, visiting the parishes, visiting the priests," he said,
deploring the bureaucratic burdens and playing down the powerful pulpit presence
that has marked his tenure.

"That is where the bread and butter is, not in an office," he said, openly
yearning for the simpler duties of the priesthood in his archdiocese of 1.8
million Catholics and 700 priests scattered across 10 counties, where faith can
range from immigrant devotion to suburbanite doubt. However long the Cardinal
stays on -- another year is thought likely -- the resignation letter, mandatory
on his 75th birthday, will begin the process of determining a successor.

A man of quiet, sometimes poetic routine in the shadowy backstage of St.
Patrick's Cathedral, Cardinal O'Connor is less likely to exult in his birthday
than to descend to one of his favorite haunts, the cathedral crypt where his
predecessors are buried, and ponder the uninscribed marble spot that waits for
him.

"I do the daily work of a priest and that's my joy," the quite robust Cardinal
said. "If there's ever going to be anything on my tombstone, if they just put
the word 'priest' -- 'John J. O'Connor, Priest' -- I would be happy for that."

Critics as well as admirers are conceding that accomplishment to the Cardinal
now that retirement from the archbishopric looms. They salute a forceful but
still priestly man who has bolstered the New York pulpit with a natural gift for
mass communication and no shyness in his dogmatic outspokenness.

They note, for example, that as much as he is known for his publicized run-ins
as Archbishop with homosexual groups, he is too little known for his private
ministrations as a priest, putting in unofficial hours at bathing and comforting
AIDS sufferers on their deathbeds.

"He's an admiral who has walked many a deck," said former Gov. Hugh L. Carey of
the articulate, flinty prelate, speaking not only metaphorically: Cardinal
O'Connor was toughened for the New York job in his 27 years as a Navy man who
rose to rear admiral as the chief of chaplains.

The Cardinal was "clearly chosen by the Pope because of his aggressive
activism," Mr. Carey said.

"That's why he's here," the former Governor continued, "as the American bishop
closest to the Holy Father."

It is in this, his unofficial role, that much speculation about the Archbishop's
successor is already rooted. No clearly favored names have yet surfaced, but the
overarching question is whether the Pope will once again fill the cynosure
pulpit of the church's restless, debate-riven American wing with a doctrinaire
communicator close to his heart, as Cardinal O'Connor is widely considered to
be.

"He has had a fairly short time in New York, but he has certainly made the most
of it as a very modern bishop," said the Rev. Thomas J. Reese, a Jesuit scholar
who writes of the difficulties of church governance. "If St. Paul were around
today, he'd be using TV and newspapers and radio to communicate his message, the
way the Cardinal does."

As Cardinal O'Connor nears the end of the job, friends emphasize that a humbler
retreat will only cheer this churchman, who characteristically declined to
submit to the splendors of custom tailoring upon ascension and instead used the
cathedral robes left behind by his predecessor, Terence Cardinal Cooke.

"I was raised in the Depression," Cardinal O'Connor said, "and I just can't
imagine deserving that and going out and spending the amount of money that robes
cost."

Church authorities say the Philadelphia-born Cardinal might continue in New York
as Archbishop for a year or so while his successor is chosen by the Pope through
a multi step process of vetting and consultation. Significantly, this will
involve Cardinal O'Connor himself in both his official role and his implicit one
as the Pope's New World agent.

Whatever his future as Archbishop of New York, he remains in the College of
Cardinals for life, with five more years of voting powers ahead and with an
acknowledged reputation as an international-minded ecumenist likely to stay in
good stead with the Pontiff. His influence is measurable in the Vatican's
opening diplomatic relations with Israel and in his involvement in the fiscal
changes within the Vatican itself.

"I envy my successor," declared the Cardinal, envisioning an immediate future of
government-driven austerity and doctrine-rooted controversy and opportunity that
will galvanize religion anew.

"It's going to get tougher because of the very severe cuts projected on the
national, state, county, and city budgets," the Cardinal said. He specifically
warned that the city must not shirk its obligations for such things as soup
kitchens, but he generally views his task as intensifying church charities more
than fighting "the politics of a budget."

"There really isn't a lot of point, I think, in blaming a government that is
trying to do what apparently the people want done to reduce taxes and the
deficit," he said.

In a larger context, he foresees the church remaining in its traditional
"countercultural" role of defending moral doctrines that increasingly upset
secular and state interests. "I think the future is bright," he stressed, even
as he predicted more denunciations of Vatican doctrine as the world suffers
poverty and population problems.

"I think we're going to go through a period of being bitterly blamed for this,
excoriated for our moral positions," the Archbishop said.

The Cardinal's impassioned defenses of church doctrine against abortion,
contraception and homosexual acts have caused the expected amount of controversy
and then some in a world ever reeling between faith and despair nearly 2,000
years after Christ. But the Cardinal has not been above apologizing, too, at
times for using a "bungler's" rhetoric, though he has been proved prophetic in
reaching out as "a spiritual Semite" to both Jews and Palestinians in his Holy
Land visits. He even came to apologize for a book he wrote while a chaplain that
defended the Vietnam War.

But there is no apology for the underlying sense of consistency that comforts
him in his opposition to abortion, which confounds some liberals, and his
opposition to capital punishment, which disturbs conservatives no less. For this
and more, Nat Hentoff, the civil libertarian writer and atheist, pronounces the
Cardinal far more of a "mensch" than a curmudgeon.

"I hope his resignation is not accepted," said Mr. Hentoff, who wrote a
biography of the Cardinal as a man who evolved personally into far more than
Rome's man in Gotham. "It's hard to imagine someone else with his kind of
vividness and honesty running New York: he humanizes his part of the
institution."

The Cardinal is respected by his priests for working to stay close; he devotes
every Wednesday to any priests who need individual consultations about personal
or parish problems. An insomniac, he gets a lot of work done while the city
sleeps, then might escape into the Civil War writings of his favorite author,
Shelby Foote.

"He's waiting for the boss to tell him what to do," said his niece, Eileen M.
Ward, summarizing the Cardinal's fealty to the Pope. "I see him more relaxed
now. He's comfortable with New York, whereas before I think it took him time to
get used to it. He's maybe gentler, feeling as though he's a New Yorker now and
not an outsider."

Cardinal O'Connor beams at this. "Oh yeah, I'm a New Yorker," he exulted. "And
if I live to retire, if I'm retired in the next few months, I won't go anywhere
but New York." The job has entailed "lots of down days, rough, tough days and
pressure," he said. "Largely the problems of suffering people and, you know,
that's my job as a priest."

In the interview Friday, the Archbishop smilingly stressed that he is haunted by
a sense of amazement, and even a feeling of fraud, in finding himself in such a
post. "Every day I expect the police to arrive and ask me what I'm doing in this
big house," he said. At this, he grew self-accusing: "Maybe a serious failure is
that I have never recognized myself as the Archbishop of New York and,
therefore, the potential that goes with the job."

Some critics take the opposite perspective.

"As a resident Catholic, I still wonder whether the effort to be Rome's
representative has not dominated his activities, perhaps, to the detriment of
the archdiocese," said Margaret O'Brien Steinfels, editor of Commonweal, a
journal of Catholic opinion. "That's a question. I don't know the answer."

Nor does the Cardinal as he decries "the constant, constant financial
responsibilities" of the post. "We have fought desperately to keep our Catholic
schools open," he said, admitting the price was that "I haven't been able to do
other things I wanted to do."

As the Archbishop awaits the Pope's instructions, his friend, former Mayor
Edward I. Koch, finds him as resolved and outspoken as ever. "I had breakfast
with him a couple of weeks ago, and it was fun," Mr. Koch said. "People think
he's a distant figure, but he's not. He's very warm and compassionate."

Serene is the word the Cardinal is using lately as he waits in the archbishop's
residence for the word from Rome. "The police might finally show up," he said.
"The Pope might send them."


NAME: John Cardinal O'Connor

LOAD-DATE: January 15, 1995

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH



GRAPHIC:  John Cardinal O'Connor is the eighth Archbishop of the Roman Catholic
Archdiocese of New York. He is to hand in his letter of resignation to Pope John
Paul today, and it will be up the the Pontiff to decide whether the Cardinal
stays on as Archbishop. These were his predecessors:

John J. Hughes (1842-64); first Archbiship of New York

John Cardinal McCloskey (1864-85)

Michael A. Corrigan (1884-1902)

John Cardinal Farley (1902-18)

Patrick Cardinal Hayes (1919-38)

Francis Cardinal Spellman (1939-67)

Terence Cardinal Cooke (1968-83) (pg. B30)
Photo/Chart: "LEGACY: New York's Archbishops"






TYPE: Biography

                   Copyright 1995 The New York Times Company

                              41 of 211 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 January 15, 1995, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

Martin Luther King: New York Images

SECTION: Section 1;  Page 29;  Column 1;  Metropolitan Desk

LOAD-DATE: January 15, 1995

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photos: The Rev. Dr. Martin Luther King Jr., who would have been 66
today, is more often associated with Montgomery, Atlanta or Washington, but his
dream also took him to New York. On April 15, 1967, he addressed a Vietnam War
protest at the United Nations; SEPT. 20, 1958 Dr. King was tended to after he
was stabbed while signing books in Harlem. The weapon, a letter opener, narrowly
missed his heart. (Photographs by The Asssociated Press); APRIL 4, 1967 At
Riverside Church in Manhattan, left, Dr. King warned that war overseas
threatened the civil rights struggle at home. "The Great Society has been shot
down on the battlefields of Vietnam," he declared. (John C. Goodwin)

TYPE: Caption

                   Copyright 1995 The New York Times Company

                              42 of 211 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 January 15, 1995, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

Foreign Affairs;
Ha Noi Or Ha Loi

BYLINE: By THOMAS L. FRIEDMAN

SECTION: Section 4;   Page 17;   Column 1;   Editorial Desk

LENGTH: 739 words

DATELINE: HANOI


Every morning in Hanoi I walk around the pagodas on Hoan Kiem Lake, and every
morning I stop by this little Vietnamese woman crouched on the sidewalk with her
bathroom scale, and every morning I give her a dollar and weigh myself. That
woman and her scale, probably her only possession in life, pretty well sum up
Asia today: Everyone is in business, and whatever you've got, no matter how big
or small -- sell it, trade it, barter it, leverage it, rent it, but do something
with it to turn a profit.

It is micro-entrepreneurs like my weight-watcher who are the foundation stones
of what is called the "Asian economic miracle." The gains they have made here
are astounding. But there is another side to this Asian economic miracle. It is
the story of what is being lost amidst the gains.

While in Hong Kong I took a tour across the border to the Chinese boom town of
Shenzhen. Shenzhen was a village 15 years ago; today it houses 2.5 million
people. What I remember most about the tour were two buildings -- one that I
could barely see and one that I could see all too well. The one I could barely
see was the tallest building in Shenzhen. The air there is so polluted that from
a distance all I could make out of this high-rise was a silhouette. The building
I could see perfectly well was the Eiffel Tower. The Chinese have built a
good-size replica of it at a Shenzhen theme park.

The Shenzhen Eiffel Tower typifies the rootlessness of the Asian boom towns,
where the ancient past has been bulldozed, the immediate past -- Communism --
has been discredited and the present doesn't seem to have any tradition holding
it together.

Throughout the tour our young Chinese guide stressed only two points. One was
that people in northern China believed in education, but people in the south
"only wanted to make money." The other was, "We may not have time to see the
Panda because of the traffic jams." At every tour stop, he ordered us to rush,
rush, rush, or we would get stuck in the day-long Shenzhen gridlock and miss
that panda. The whole tour left me hankering for a good dose from Mao's little
red book -- anything that suggested a belief system was still alive, beyond
pandas and profits.

Even some Asian armies have abandoned Clausewitz for Coopers & Lybrand. China's
army now gets half its budget from its vast empire of corporations. Corruption
is so widespread that the army newspaper recently warned troops against the
"worship of money and disregard for military matters."

Vietnam, a latecomer to this free market, is struggling with how to catch up
with the other Asians, without having its traditions, national solidarity and
environment swept away. It looks like a losing battle. Because of a lack of
funds, every Vietnamese ministry has been ordered to start businesses to support
itself.

The Vietnamese Foreign Ministry press officer, who arranged all my appointments
with officials, was so helpful. And when we were finished she said: "That will
be $25. Sorry, you know, market economy." The Ministry of Health here sponsors
ballroom dancing on Friday nights to raise cash. The Hanoi golf and country club
is built on land leased from the Vietnamese Army. If the Ho Chi Minh Trail
existed today, it would be a toll road.

But I fear this shortcut to capitalism will haunt the Vietnamese. When
ministries become the biggest entrepreneurs, it means there is no civil service
upholding the public interest. That is why bridges collapse in Seoul and why
12-year-old girls are trapped in factory fires in China. It was Asian capitalist
talent -- harnessed by a professional civil service -- that made Japan,
Singapore and Hong Kong rich and stable.

Hanoi is the most charming big city left in Asia; people still play badminton on
the sidewalks here every morning. But for how long? Hanoi is below sea level and
the rampant unlicensed building now taking place here is destroying the dikes
and filling in the lakes needed to keep Hanoi afloat. When it rains, the city
now floods terribly.

"Many years ago people said development means killing ourselves, but no one
believed them," said N. T. Hieu, a young Vietnamese development expert. "In some
ways, we believe it now. Ha Noi means the city between the rivers. But some
people who come here from the countryside pronounce the N as L, and call it 'Ha
Loi.' Ha Loi means 'flooded.' I hope in a few years Ha Noi will not be known as
Ha Loi."

LOAD-DATE: January 15, 1995

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Op-Ed

                   Copyright 1995 The New York Times Company

                              43 of 211 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 January 16, 1995, Monday, Late Edition - Final

BOOKS OF THE TIMES;
Lost by U.S.: The Sense of a Right to Triumph

BYLINE: By CHRISTOPHER LEHMANN-HAUPT

SECTION: Section C;  Page 16;  Column 3;  Cultural Desk

LENGTH: 1021 words


THE END OF VICTORY CULTURE
Cold War America and the Disillusioning of a Generation
By Tom Engelhardt
351 pages. Basic Books/HarperCollins. $25.

In broadest outline, what Tom Engelhardt argues in "The End of Victory Culture"
is neither startling nor particularly original. He writes that in the two
decades between the end of World War II and America's entry into Vietnam in
force, this country lost its culture of victory, which he defines as the sense
of a right to triumph over American Indians, Japanese, Indochinese or any other
supposedly lesser people.

His explanation for this loss can be boiled down to the creation of nuclear
weapons, the war with the Soviet Union that stayed cold because of them and the
outbreak of lesser conflicts in which their use would have been unacceptably
disproportionate. To sum up his case in a tiny nutshell: the Japanese sneak
attack on Pearl Harbor fit into our national fantasy of having settled the
American continent in the face of the ambush warfare of Indians. But with the
massacre at My Lai, we became the Indians and the Vietnamese the settlers.

As oversimplified as this outline may sound, Mr. Engelhardt is absorbing and
provocative when he traces how these changes in attitudes were reflected in
American popular culture, particularly in movies and comic books and in the way
children play war games. Of the last he writes: "Crucial as it was to boys'
lives, war play was so little in the thoughts or concerns of adults that, except
as it is hinted at in memoirs of childhood (especially those of Vietnam
veterans), remarkably little has been written about it."

In the dazzling weave of his thesis, the thread that stands out is one that
begins with the middle-class exodus to suburbia in the 1950's, when, as the
author writes, "the economy was churning out the most peaceable and the most
warlike of big-ticket items," and the "country was reimagining itself as a magic
kingdom, a cornucopic mechanism for turning out the world's play toys and
pleasure environments."

Yet threatening this idyll, in his view, was what he terms the Great Fear and
the Little Fear. The former was the McCarthyite overreaction to the menace of
Communist subversion. The latter, as he defines it, was anxiety over the freedom
of the "commercial media -- record and comic book companies, radio stations, the
movies and television -- to concretize both the fantasies of the young and the
nightmarish fears of grown-ups into potent products." Two examples of such
potent products are rock-and-roll, which at first was watered down by white
musicians, and the comic-book tales of horror created by William Gaines and
Harvey Kurtzman, which, thanks to the protests of Dr. Frederick Wertham, the
psychiatrist, were diluted into Mad magazine.

What Mr. Engelhardt's narrative argues is that the Great Fear, hysteria over
Communism, led to Vietnam. And the Little Fear, anxiety about youth culture, was
realized in the protests over Vietnam. As he writes: "Countless demonstrators
sallied forth to a new sort of battle garbed in cast-off 'good war'
paraphernalia -- secondhand Army jackets, bombardier coats, bush hats. Initially
without significant access to the media, the young reconceived the images of
their childhood on themselves. They became distinctly modernist endeavors,
living critiques or parodies of the familiar, their own Mad magazines."

Now a lot of what Mr. Engelhardt writes here is debatable, even where he shades
in the needed nuances. Some readers will doubt his contention that on the home
front during World War II "the greatest fear of the American public, according
to pollsters, was not defeat abroad but the possibility that peace might bring
another economic collapse." Others may dispute his assumption that dropping
nuclear weapons on Japan was an atrocity equal to the Nazis' treatment of
European Jews.

No one will easily follow his contrived attempt to align the careers of two
people who called themselves X: George F. Kennan, who made the case for
containing the Soviet Union in a Foreign Affairs magazine article signed X, and
Malcolm Little, part of whose strategy to escape containment by white America
involved replacing his surname with X. And not a few readers will protest the
impressions he somehow creates that American Indians were not that great a
threat to European settlers, that there was little ground for concern about
Communist subversion during the cold war and that nothing more than irrational
rage lay at the root of the My Lai massacre.

In short, Mr. Engelhardt, a freelance writer and media critic whose previous
book was "Beyond Our Control: America in the Mid-70's," neglects to emphasize
the most obvious change that occurred during the era he writes about, namely the
transition from territorial to guerrilla warfare. As he implies by his comments
on George Lucas's film "Star Wars" and on the allies' execution of the war in
the Persian Gulf, if a certain kind of enemy came along and posed a particular
sort of challenge, the United States would re-embrace victory culture in the
snap of a cap gun.

Of course, Mr. Engelhardt's book, with its subtitle "Cold War America and the
Disillusioning of a Generation," is at heart an analysis of the author's own
growing up. And since, as he reports, his childhood was marked by his father's
failure to find a satisfying profession after experiencing success as an officer
in World War II, the reader can at least understand the basis of his emotions.

Moreover, his thesis touches upon many curious things in American culture: the
decline of the film western about the time of the Vietnam War, the rise of
children as consumers, the invoking of Nazi war crimes instead of Japanese
atrocities when America began to doubt its conduct in Vietnam and the refusal to
demonize Ho Chi Minh the way Japan's World War II leaders were caricatured. Mr.
Engelhardt's views are, of course, a particular way of seeing the world. But
they offer the satisfactions of coherence. Despite his sometimes questionable
premises, everything he writes is of a satisfyingly congruent piece.

LOAD-DATE: January 16, 1995

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo of Tom Engelhardt (Laura Dwight/Basic Books)

TYPE: Review

                   Copyright 1995 The New York Times Company

                              44 of 211 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 January 16, 1995, Monday, Late Edition - Final

TELEVISION REVIEW;
A 5-Part Eulogy to the War on Poverty

BYLINE: By WALTER GOODMAN

SECTION: Section B;  Page 6;  Column 4;  Cultural Desk

LENGTH: 710 words


"America's War on Poverty," a five-hour series produced by Henry Hampton that
begins tonight on PBS, is a eulogy to the nation's effort in the 1960's to raise
up the down-and-out, particularly by giving poor people a voice in the way money
from Washington was used. As seen in the glow of the memories of Government
planners and community organizers, it is a story of idealistic innovators
running up against the tough realities of politics in America.

The scene-setting opening hour, "In This Affluent Society," focuses on areas
like Appalachia that remained untouched by America's postwar prosperity. Demand
for coal, the area's main resource, was down, and automation was eliminating
jobs in the mines. Miners tell of finding themselves suddenly without work or
usable skills.

In the 1950's, 1.5 million Appalachians and 1 million blacks from the Deep South
moved north. The program gives faces to the statistics. Some found new
opportunities in cities like Chicago; others found just an urban version of
poverty, discrimination and a desperation that was brought to national attention
by Michael Harrington's influential book "The Other America: Poverty in the
United States."

Mr. Hampton, best known for his documentary on the civil-rights movement, "Eyes
on the Prize," again uses strong photographs and newsreels, personal experiences
and evocative music. Now he shows how hard times sent the civil-rights forces
into battle against economic as well as political barriers. In Appalachia there
were violent confrontations between miners and mine operators; in big cities of
the North there were demonstrations.

The first hour ends with the start of Lyndon B. Johnson's Presidency and the
appointment of R. Sargent Shriver, much heard from here, to head what the
President called an "unconditional war on poverty in America." But August 1964,
when Johnson signed the Economic Opportunity Act, also brought the Tonkin Gulf
Resolution, which was used as a basis for increasing America's military
involvement in Vietnam. The coincidence, as the narrator suggests, would prove a
dire one for Johnson's vision of the Great Society.

The strength of this melancholy retrospective is its front-line view of the
domestic war; it brings us close to the action on the ground. Tonight's second
hour turns to Mississippi, which one veteran of the civil-rights campaigns
recalls as a third-world country. Campaigners tell how the Head Start program,
which would change the course of antipoverty efforts, ran into the state's
segregationist establishment, led by Senator John C. Stennis.

Tomorrow the focus is on Newark and the clash between Washington planners and
their local allies on the one hand and the city's political machine on the
other. Similar conflicts developed wherever money and power were at stake,
notably in California, where Cesar Chavez began to organize migrant workers

Although critical voices are heard, "America's War on Poverty," which was paid
for in large part by liberal foundations, is a tribute to the idea of "maximum
feasible participation" by the poor in programs created for their benefit. Long
after the considerable achievements and resounding defeats recounted here, the
way that principle was applied in practice remains a matter of contention, along
with much else about the commotions of the 1960's.

Today the war on poverty has become a war on welfare. You may be persuaded by
Mr. Hampton that the idealists were done in by the vested interests, or you may
skeptical of the pretensions of the Washington planners and the intentions of
some power-to-the-people advocates, or you may simply find the social upheavals
of the last 40 years beyond anyone's control. Whatever your reaction, the
progression from the dream of opening up opportunities for the poor to the
demand for cracking down makes this a troubling history of our times.

AMERICA'S WAR ON POVERTY
PBS, tonight
(In the New York area, Channels 13 and 49 at 9)

First two parts of a five-program series produced by Blackside Inc. and
presented on PBS by WGBH/Boston. Susan Bellows and Dante J. James, program
producers; Alison Bassett, supervising producer; Terry Kay Rockefeller, series
producer, and Henry Hampton, executive producer.

LOAD-DATE: January 16, 1995

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Review

                   Copyright 1995 The New York Times Company

                              45 of 211 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                January 17, 1995, Tuesday, Late Edition - Final

Preachers and Plain Folk Honor King

BYLINE: By JANNY SCOTT

SECTION: Section B;   Page 4;   Column 4;   Metropolitan Desk

LENGTH: 547 words


Politicians made speeches, preachers delivered sermons and ordinary people in
and around New York used a day off yesterday to march, rally and celebrate the
birthday of the Rev. Dr. Martin Luther King Jr.

Some used the opportunity to inveigh against budget cuts. Others chose to
reflect on how Dr. King might have responded to efforts to reinstate the death
penalty, increase the military budget and cut aid to the poor.

"Today, the King dream is under threat," the Rev. Jesse Jackson said at a Harlem
church where more than 1,000 people had gathered, jamming the aisles and
spilling out the doors onto the rain-slicked sidewalk.

In his talk, broadcast live on a gospel radio station, Mr. Jackson urged people
to honor the legacy of Dr. King not simply with anthems and eloquence but with
protests and action, like boycotts and marches.

Mr. Jackson recalled how Mr. King had spent his last birthday before his
assassination in 1968: at work, organizing a "poor people's campaign," then
arguing against the Vietnam War.

"He spent his own birthday in his work clothes, at church, with his family,
bringing down cultural and racial barriers," Mr. Jackson said.  In Brooklyn,
Mayor Rudolph W. Giuliani was greeted politely at a celebration at the Brooklyn
Academy of Music, in stark contrast to the reception he received at the same
event last year, when he was heckled and booed.

"New York City has the world's most diverse population," he said. "It's
imperative here more than any place else that we be able to live together and
understand what was really at the heart of what Dr. King preached.

"So I ask you: The next time you buy a newspaper or hail a cab or ask a police
officer for directions, or go to the doctor, or ask a driver for a transfer, or
tell a stranger what time is it, look beyond and don't think of them as Hispanic
or Asian, Arabic or black, white, Catholic or Protestant or Jewish. Think of
them as children of the same God."

In Albany, Gov. George E. Pataki met over breakfast at the Executive Mansion
with black ministers led by the Rev. Al Sharpton, then joined a Martin Luther
King Jr. Day march up State Street.

Both Mr. Pataki and Mr. Sharpton called the discussion frank; Mr. Sharpton went
so far as to call it blunt. He said the topics ranged from welfare reform to the
death penalty, jobs and police brutality.

"I give him credit for taking criticism," said Mr. Sharpton.

Mr. Sharpton also appeared with Mr. Jackson at the memorial service in Harlem,
at the Convent Avenue Baptist Church, which was organized by the Baptist
Ministers Conference of Greater New York and Vicinity. Dozens of ministers,
politicians and other public figures turned out for the service, which lasted
much of the day, with speeches from officials and music by visiting choirs.

In his sermon, Mr. Jackson said he had grown increasingly anxious that the
memory of Dr. King was becoming "emasculated," that he was being remembered more
for his eloquence than for his radical vision and willingness to confront the
powerful.

"Dr. King was not killed for being an eloquent, nonthreatening dreamer but
rather for being a challenging drum major for justice," Mr. Jackson said. "He
led us toward public-policy change. He was a different kind of preacher."

LOAD-DATE: January 17, 1995

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo: At a memorial service yesterday for the Rev. Dr. Martin Luther
King Jr., the Rev. Jesse Jackson drew a laugh and a show of hands from several
politicians when he asked how many people had registered to vote. (Don Hogan
Charles/The New York Times)

                   Copyright 1995 The New York Times Company

                              46 of 211 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                January 17, 1995, Tuesday, Late Edition - Final

TRACK & FIELD;
Extra Goal for Holman and O'Sullivan

BYLINE: By ROBERT McG. THOMAS Jr.

SECTION: Section B;   Page 15;   Column 3;   Sports Desk

LENGTH: 611 words


Steve Holman of the United States sees American honor at stake. Marcus
O'Sullivan of Ireland has an all-Irish score to settle. As the two top milers
entered in the 88th Wanamaker Mile, both hope to accomplish their goals on Feb.
3 at the Chemical Bank Millrose Games at Madison Square Garden.

"I'd love to win for a sixth time," said O'Sullivan, the 33-year-old three-time
world indoor champion, whose five Wanamaker victories, following the record
seven by Eammon Coghlan, have contributed to a virtual Irish hegemony over the
venerable race.

A victory this year would be especially sweet, O'Sullivan told a New York track
writers lunch yesterday, because of his disappointing second-place finish last
year. O'Sullivan, who has not finished lower than second in nine races, led the
1994 race almost to the wire. But after being pushed at the three-quarter mark,
he lost his stride and was passed at the finish by his young countryman, Niall
(Bubba) Bruton, a student at the University of Arkansas.

And who pushed O'Sullivan?

"It was my boy Niall," he said.

Bruton, who is also also entered in the race, spoke to the group in a phone
hookup from Dublin, but did not discuss the incident.

Holman, the top-rated American miler, hardly needed to be reminded of recent
Irish domination of the race.

"I think I should be the underdog because I'm not Irish," he said, recalling
that three weeks after running "a so-so race" in 3 minutes 58 seconds and
finishing behind O'Sullivan in the 1993 Wanamaker, he had turned in a blistering
3:55.

"I think there is some kind of Irish conspiracy," he said. "I'd love to break
through that and win one for the United States."

If he does, Holman could hardly pick a better year to shine at the Garden.

For the first time, the Millrose, which has been limited to local cable coverage
in recent years, will be carried to a nationwide television audience, albeit on
tape delay and squeezed into an hour-long highlight format. It is the first of
five meets on the Mobil Indoor Grand Prix circuit that will be broadcast on
successive Saturdays by NBC.

Holman, who sees this as his first full season in peak health, is not satisfied
with his No. 5 world ranking. He said he is convinced that he will some day beat
Noureddine Morceli of Algeria, the 24-year-old world record holder who has
reigned supreme for four years and has shown no sign of slowing up.

What makes Holman think that? "Because he's human," he said.

Maybe so, but O'Sullivan, at least, has his doubts. "I've never seen his human
side," he said.

                             --------------------


A GOOD-WILL RUN

HANOI, Vietnam, Jan. 15 (AP) -- The winner was not the big story, an also-ran
was, even though Phillip Keiyo, a corn farmer from the mountains of Kenya,
sprinted past the veteran British runner Hugh Jones 200 meters from the finish
today to win the San Miguel Vietnam Marathon.

In a sign of continuing improvement in United States-Vietnam relations, the
field included David Lambertson, the United States ambassador to Thailand. The
United States and Vietnam don't yet have diplomatic relations, although a
liaison office is due to open shortly.

Lambertson, 54, said he entered because he thought he was ready to try his first
marathon. "Pretty good for an old guy," he said of his 3:25.09 time. "But I'm
glad to be done with it."

Keiyo finished in 2:22.22, 11 seconds better than Jones before thousands of
cheering spectqators straining at police lines.

"The crowd was great," said Lucy Ramwell of Hong Kong, the leading woman
finisher at 2:53.04.

"I'm not tired. Here it's cool, just like Kenya," said the 28-year-old Keiyo.

LOAD-DATE: January 17, 1995

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1995 The New York Times Company

                              47 of 211 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               January 18, 1995, Wednesday, Late Edition - Final

NEWS SUMMARY

SECTION: Section A; Page 2; Column 5; Metropolitan Desk

LENGTH: 851 words



International A2-15

CATASTROPHIC QUAKE
In Japan's sixth largest city, rescure teams struggled to contain fires and
combed through rubble in the wake of an earthquake that killed more than 2,000
people. A1

VICTIMS TRYING TO COPE
The earthquake in Japan has left the victims stunned, and people began trying to
cope with the destruction that left many homes and businesses in ruins. A1


CONFIDENCE UNDERMINED
The collapse of a highway and other damage from the earthquake has undermined
Japan's confidence that it knows how to prepare technologically for disaster.
A14

The quake paralyzed one of Japan's commercial hubs. A13

Geologists said the quake had both ordinary and unusual aspects. A15

Stock markets were calm, reflecting international diversity.  D1

American engineers were surprised at the extent of the damage. A14

Japanese insurers will bear little burden of the disaster. A14

MEXICAN POLITICAL PACT
The Mexican Government and the main opposition parties reached agreement for
talks to try to complete a transition to democracy and defuse local tensions. A1


Congress was warned on the impact of cutting Mexico aid. A3

CEASE-FIRE FOR RUSSIA
Russia and a secessionist region announced a cease-fire for Wednesday night as
fighting continued, and officials were not hopeful that it would end the
fighting. A10

Russia assured America of its commitment to democracy. A10

Italy's new leader appointed a largely nonpartisan Cabinet. A8

Bosnia pressed the United Nations to allow an airfield to open. A8

Singapore found an American newspaper guilty of contempt. A6

A report that Poland rescued American spies from Iraq. A4

Pedro Juan Caballero Journal: Slipping across the border. A4

National A16-19, D19-20

FIRST BILL FOR 104TH CONGRESS
The House unanimously approved a bill that would end Congress' exemptions from
anti-discrimination and workplace laws and from employees' lawsuits.  A1

CAPITAL PUNISHMENT CAPITAL
In Huntsville, Tex., the ritual of execution that ended the life of Mario
Marquez has become a polite, efficient, businesslike routine.  A16

NEW DISCLOSURES ON SIMPSON
The judge in the O. J. Simpson case released documents showing that on at least
one occasion Mr. Simpson's first wife reported that he had beaten her.

NORTHRIDGE, A YEAR LATER
A year after awakening to a deadly quake, Los Angeles residents gathered near
ground zero to pray for the dead and themselves.  A16

THE WAGES OF WAR
The Pentagon and White House budget office clashed over how to pay for military
operations in Rwanda, Haiti and Kuwait.  A19

OLD REFORMERS GET REFORMED
When Newt Gingrich first went to Congress he spurned its pension system as
lavish. Then he quietly joined it. Now upstart reformers are threatening his
nest egg.  D19

NEW AGENDA FOR CHRISTIAN RIGHT
The Christian Coalition will mount its most ambitious lobbying drive ever for
passage of the Republican legislative agenda.  D19

AFFIRMATIVE ACTION HEARING
The Supreme Court heard arguments in a white contractor's challenge of a program
that encourages special treatment for "disadvantaged business enterprises.' D20

Texas inaugurated a son of George Bush as its governor.  A18

Louis Farrakhan criticized the arrest of Malcolm X's daughter.  A18

The bright side of the deluge: heavy snow in the Sierras.  A16

An anti-heroin drug is being offered as help for alcoholics.  A18

Education B7

SCHOOL TAXES
People move to suburbs for their schools, but in some districts where teacher
salaries average $70,000, residents are protesting.  A1

. . . And in the aftermath of Michigan's tax revolt, further complaints.

Metro Digest B1

Business Digest D1

Arts/Entertainment C9-16

Jimmy Carter is a poet, too. C9
Bolcom defies categories.  C14
Theater: "Carmen." C9
Film: "Mamma Roma." C16.
Dance: New Tharp works.  C9
Books: John O'Hara reissues.  C15
Book Notes.  C16
Television: "Dateline." C16

The Living Section C1-7

Personalized beers.  C1

Health Page C8

Personal Health: Dysthymia, a chronic low-level sadness.

Sports B8-14

Baseball: Teams' season-ticket sellers forced to be creative.  B9
Basketball: Moten scores 21 as Syracuse holds off St. John's.  B9
Seton Hall improves to 12-4 by beating Boston College.  B11
Columns: Rhoden on St. John's Coach Brian Mahoney B9
Football: The mostly silent John Taylor of the 49ers talks.  B9

Obituaries D21

Paul Delouvrier, ex-French official in Paris and Algiers.

Editorials/Op-Ed A20-21

Editorials

What's the rush on mandates?
Albany toys with court cameras.
Don't snub Congress on Haiti.

Letters

Thomas L. Friedman: Good morning, Vietnam.
Roy Denman: This sceptered, smug, shortsighted isle.
Tom Blanton and Steve Aftergood: The wall of secrecy cracks (a little).

Neediest Cases B2

Chronicle B6

Crossword C15

LOAD-DATE: January 18, 1995

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Summary

                   Copyright 1995 The New York Times Company

                              48 of 211 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               January 18, 1995, Wednesday, Late Edition - Final

Foreign Affairs;
Good Morning, Vietnam

BYLINE: By THOMAS L. FRIEDMAN

SECTION: Section A;  Page 21;  Column 5;  Editorial Desk

LENGTH: 729 words

DATELINE: HANOI, Vietnam


In 1966, at the height of the Vietnam War, Senator George Aiken became famous
for suggesting that we simply declare victory and bring American troops home.
That victory was phony, but 29 years later we truly have one in Vietnam, if
winning is measured by a Vietnam that is economically, politically and
strategically pro-Western. Yet despite that victory, Washington is reluctant to
open full diplomatic relations with Hanoi and consolidate its tentative move
into America's orbit. It's time. It's time we started relating to Vietnam as a
country, not a conflict. It's time that we declare victory and go back to
Vietnam to reap it.

President Bush should have been the one to open relations. He knew it was the
right thing to do, and he had the credibility with veterans' groups to do it.
But he didn't. (Wouldn't be prudent.) President Clinton, despite his problems
with Vietnam vets, has inched closer to Hanoi, by lifting economic sanctions
last year and agreeing to a low-level liaison office this year. For months the
State Department has been quietly recommending full normalization, but after the
midterm Republican rout the White House said "Forget it." (Wouldn't be prudent.)
That is America's loss.

Vietnam's 72 million industrious, literate people are building a market economy
from the ground up. Because U.S. diplomats and businesses are not here in force
as the foundation stones are laid and the legal system is reformed, this means
U.S. standards, regulations and laws are not being wired in. Australia already
dominates the phone system, British Petroleum has the oil sector and Singapore
advises on the legal code.

I was riding in a taxi here the other day and the driver was studying English
from BBC tapes. For 30 minutes I had to listen to a repetition of: "I like
football. I like Manchester United," the prominent British soccer team. When
they think football here they don't think Dallas Cowboys, and when they think
telephones they don't think AT&T.

Strategically, the big issue in Asia will be the containment of China, whose
military might, and appetite, will grow as China grows. There is no more
powerful counterweight to Beijing than Hanoi, whose tiny army bludgeoned China's
in their 1979 border war. China is Vietnam's historical enemy. Most of Hanoi's
boulevards are named for heroes of the wars against China. The biggest display
in the Hanoi Army Museum is not of Vietnam's victory over the U.S. in 1975, but
its victory over the Mongols from the north in 1288. A U.S.-Vietnam entente
would get China's attention -- and keep it.

As for our M.I.A.'s, every U.S. official dealing with this issue says Vietnamese
cooperation has improved (not diminished, as opponents of relations predicted)
since we lifted the economic embargo. The reason is not anything the Hanoi
Government is doing, but because the Vietnamese people, villagers and veterans,
are now coming forward with information about graves and bones that they were
holding back as long as America was embargoing them economically. U.S. M.I.A.
officials say normal relations and more Americans traveling here would only
elicit more grass-roots cooperation, which is the only way the 1,621 remaining
M.I.A. cases will be resolved.

It is pathetic that a small, vindictive cult of M.I.A. activists in America --
who broadcast U.F.O. sightings of P.O.W.'s roaming the Vietnamese countryside
and demand we withhold normalization to punish Hanoi for a war we never should
have fought -- have intimidated Washington into a Vietnam policy that is bad for
M.I.A.'s and bad for America.

The Vietnamese, who have 300,000 M.I.A.'s, have let the future bury the past. As
Deputy Foreign Minister Le Mai told me: "If we nursed all of our grudges with
all the powers that we have fought against, we wouldn't have relations with
anyone. The war divided your society; recognizing Vietnam would put this behind
you. It would heal your own wounds."

He's right. It's time we too buried the past. Hue today is a cuisine, not a
battle; Tet is a New Year's celebration, not an offensive; Haiphong is a harbor,
not something to be bombed at Christmas; and Highway 1 is where they run the
Hanoi Marathon, not the military artery of an enemy nation. President Clinton
didn't start this war, and he didn't fight this war, but with a little bit of
courage, he could finally end this war.

LOAD-DATE: January 18, 1995

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Op-Ed

                   Copyright 1995 The New York Times Company

                              49 of 211 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                January 19, 1995, Thursday, Late Edition - Final

Woman in the News: Elizabeth Peterken McCaughey;
Taking On a Challenge

BYLINE: By IAN FISHER

SECTION: Section B;  Page 6;  Column 5;  Metropolitan Desk

LENGTH: 1079 words


When she wanted to sidestep a question during the campaign, Betsy McCaughey
would often smile and say, "I'm an expert in policy, not politics."

Now, as New York's Lieutenant Governor, Ms. McCaughey, a constitutional scholar
with no previous experience in government, has taken on her first test as a
policy maker with one of the state's knottiest and most expensive problems:
revamping the $19 billion Medicaid system, which provides health care for the
poor, disabled and elderly.

In turning to Ms. McCaughey (pronounced muh-COY) to succeed where others have
failed, Gov. George E. Pataki chose a person who rose to prominence, and earned
her spot on his ticket, because of articles she wrote just a year ago
meticulously criticizing President Clinton's health care plan.

Yesterday, she released a Medicaid cost-cutting proposal that subjects her to
the same sort of detailed scrutiny as she strives to change to one of the
nation's largest government-run health care programs -- a system protected by
litigious patient groups as well as powerful special interests like the
hospitals and nursing homes that donate generously to Republicans, including Mr.
Pataki.

By seeking more than half of the $1.2 billion she wants to cut from those very
hospitals and nursing homes, Ms. McCaughey has already shifted course from her
initial intention to spare them -- suggesting a grasp of political and economic
reality and a willingness to bend when it became clear the administration wanted
to spread the pain evenly between patients and providers.

The real power behind her role remains in question: her work may well be ignored
as the Legislature and the Governor hammer out a deal. But at the very least,
Mr. Pataki has brought greater prominence to his Lieutenant Governor than many
of her predecessors have had. (Ms. McCaughey herself was kept to the sidelines
in the campaign.)

For Ms. McCaughey, 46, the role represents her first chance to create the better
health care system she has written about for the last year -- in articles for
The New Republic and The Wall Street Journal that were praised for their
earnestness and persuasive use of detail, and criticized for what some called
shoddy scholarship and a conservative bent.

By proposing to force nursing homes and hospitals to share the cost-cutting
burden, she underlined what she has already said: that she does not want to
balance the Medicaid budget on the backs of the poor. Though she now lives on
Park Avenue in Manhattan and sends her three daughters to private schools, she
said that commitment to the poor stretches back to childhood.

"I did not grow up as a wealthy person," she said in an interview late last
year. "My dad was a factory worker. And my brother was a serious asthmatic as a
child. I remember my parents sitting at the kitchen table wondering if they
could afford to take my brother to the hospital. So I'm firmly committed to
Medicaid as part of the social safety net."

Elizabeth Peterken McCaughey, who prefers to be called Betsy, was born with her
twin brother William in Pittsburgh on Oct. 10, 1948. Her father, Albert
Peterken, a maintenance man in a fingernail-clipper factory, moved his wife,
Ramona, and their children around the Northeast before settling in Westport,
Conn., when Elizabeth was 6.

In 11th grade, she won a scholarship to Mary Burnham School for Girls in
Northampton, Mass., and then another scholarship to Vassar College. There, she
said, she largely ignored Vietnam War protests, spending her time reading in the
library. She was the first member of her family to graduate from college.

She received a master's degree from Vassar in 1972, then moved to New York City
with her husband, Thomas K. McCaughey, a Yale student she met at college.
Separated since 1992, they were divorced early last year. They have three
daughters -- Amanda, 15, Caroline, 13, and Diana, 10 -- who live with their
mother. Last month, she announced her engagement to Wilbur L. Ross Jr., an
investment banker who was a fund-raiser for Gov. Mario M. Cuomo.

In 1976, she was awarded a doctorate in constitutional history by Columbia
University, and she has taught there and at Vassar. Until a few years ago, she
was registered to vote as an independent. "I always assumed her to be a
middle-of-the road Democrat," said Henry Graff, the Presidential studies expert
who taught her at Columbia.

Ms. McCaughey began to be noticed in political circles last February after her
articles on the Clinton health care plan struck a chord, provoking a White House
response.

A few weeks before the Republican State Convention in May, Mr. Pataki, who had
read her articles, met with her for the first time, but she says he did not
recruit her as a running mate until the night before her designation by the
convention.

She attacked her task of Medicaid cost-cutting with what has become a familiar
pattern: collecting and digesting scores of documents from which she spits out
factoids at random. This was how she tackled the Clinton health care plan. This
was also the way, as she tells the story, that she rose from her working-class
roots. Study, she once said, "was my one big chance in life."

However, some critics of her health care articles, which argued that the Clinton
health care bill would limit choices for medical care, say she deftly dissected
the bill's language but showed little understanding of how that language would
translate into real programs.

"It was the kind of reasoning, if you could find a loophole you wrote half a
page about it and ignored the context," said John Rother, the legislative
director for the American Association of Retired People, which supported health
care reform but did not endorse the Clinton plan.

But John R. Zagame, executive director of the New York Association of Counties,
which has lobbied to lighten Medicaid costs on localities, said she has to her
advantage that "she has not been tainted by the cynicism and sense of
helplessness people in Albany have about Medicaid -- that you cannot change it."

Ms. McCaughey's urgency about Medicaid flows over every detail-laden sentence
she speaks. "It is the most interesting intellectual problem," she said. "It is
the intersection of economics, ethics, science, medicine, public policy and
politics."

Already, she has begun the transition from scholar to politician. "Academics are
soloists," she said during the campaign, "and successful candidates are team
players."


NAME: Elizabeth Peterken McCaughey

LOAD-DATE: January 19, 1995

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo: Lieut. Gov. Betsy McCaughey detailing a report yesterday on
changes in Medicaid at a news conference. Gov. George E. Pataki turned to Ms.
McCaughey to take on the challenge of revamping the $19 billion Medicaid system,
a task at which others have previously failed. (Andrea Mohin/The New York Times)

TYPE: Biography

                   Copyright 1995 The New York Times Company

                              50 of 211 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                January 19, 1995, Thursday, Late Edition - Final

Clinton Won't Break Faith With Veterans

SECTION: Section A;  Page 22;  Column 5;  Editorial Desk

LENGTH: 348 words


To the Editor:

The Clinton Administration disagrees with William Safire's proposal (column,
Jan. 12) that the Department of Veterans Affairs be eliminated and that the
veterans health care system be turned over to private insurance companies.

Mr. Safire's approach would essentially treat America's veterans as welfare
recipients, ignoring the contributions they have made to our nation. This
country has a sacred trust with those it sends to defend our national interests.
As a democratic society, we have thankfully given special status to our veterans
to honor their sacrifices. President Clinton believes deeply that we must
maintain that status -- and we will.

Is there room for improvement in our veterans' health care system? Absolutely.
The President is committed to making those improvements so that our veterans are
not left behind as the country's health care system undergoes the
transformations that are being experienced by all Americans.

This Administration has been steadfast in seeking to eliminate unnecessary
spending in every area of government, and veterans' programs are not exempt.
Veterans programs were among the areas of spending that were cut in the
President's $500 billion deficit reduction plan adopted by Congress in 1993.

This does not alter the fundamental need for the health and other programs that
serve our veterans, and for the Department of Veterans Affairs to administer
them and to insure veterans are well cared for.

Finally, Mr. Safire suggests that Jesse Brown, a combat-wounded Marine Vietnam
veteran, whose life's work has been devoted to serving veterans, is somehow the
wrong person to head this department. It seems to me, and to the President, that
Jesse Brown is exactly the right kind of person to be in this job.

The American people will always honor those who served our country in time of
war. I do not believe that they would ever accept the destruction of this system
of support for veterans. Certainly, President Clinton will not.

LEON E. PANETTA
Chief of Staff, The White House
Washington, Jan. 17, 1995

LOAD-DATE: January 19, 1995

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Letter

                   Copyright 1995 The New York Times Company

                              51 of 211 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 January 20, 1995, Friday, Late Edition - Final

For '96, Clinton Looks to Ickes, Another Survivor

BYLINE: By TODD S. PURDUM,   Special to The New York Times

SECTION: Section A;  Page 1;  Column 3;  National Desk

LENGTH: 1251 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, Jan. 19


Harold M. Ickes has survived some of the bitterest Democratic Party wars of the
last quarter-century, but he recently passed a new sort of milestone. With 54
weeks of service, he is now the longest serving deputy chief of staff in the
Clinton White House, which has had five of them.

Not that he has had an easy time of it. The three main tasks of his tenure --
legislative stewardship of the President's health care plan, damage control on
the Whitewater inquiry and strategy for the midterm elections -- all came
unglued, if through no particular fault of his own.

But as President Clinton gears up for what is sure to be a difficult re-election
campaign, no one is more central than Mr. Ickes (pronounced ICK-eez), the canny
and controversial New York labor lawyer who helped him get elected in the first
place. He led Mr. Clinton's New York primary campaign, was floor manager of the
Democratic Convention and became deputy director of his transition team and now
seems all but certain to play a crucial role in 1996, whoever winds up as formal
chairman of the re-election campaign.

Mr. Ickes is literally a son of the New Deal -- his father, Harold L. Ickes,
"the Old Curmudgeon," was Franklin Delano Roosevelt's Interior Secretary -- and
his past mastery of party rules, platform procedure and ballot-access arcana is
seen as strong insurance against any threat to Mr. Clinton's renomination.

But those same liberal credentials also make Mr. Ickes a lightning rod for
Democratic critics who accuse him of leading Mr. Clinton astray just when the
President must win back centrists. And Mr. Ickes' reputation for sharp dealing
has led others, especially Republicans, to accuse him of eliding the niceties of
etiquette. He dismisses both notions with characteristic plain-spokenness.

"There are people who have political axes to grind, with either me or the
President, so they will find any twig they can to hang something on," he said
the other day. "If you check around, I think you will find very few people in
the White House who think I'm prosecuting a liberal agenda. My job is to give
Bill Clinton my judgment of what is best for him and the country."

In a shifting cast of Clinton advisers, Mr. Ickes remains a constant, a longtime
friend of both the President and his wife, Hillary, trusted to a rare degree
equally by both. Two decades ago, before his marriage to Laura Handman, a fellow
lawyer, he lived with Mrs. Clinton's old friend Susan Thomases, the Clinton
campaign scheduler. Ms. Thomases says the first couple relies on him because "he
has an incredible capacity for work and a wonderful capacity to segregate
anything he might want to do from what the President wants and needs to do."

His influence has been clear in a range of recent Presidential actions, from the
selection of Senator Christopher J. Dodd as general chairman of the Democratic
Party and Don Fowler, a veteran South Carolina party leader as day-to-day
chairman, to Mr. Clinton's proposal for a "Middle Class Bill of Rights" of tax
breaks. An insomniac, Mr. Ickes is often up by 4:30 A.M., arriving in his
cramped office in the West Wing before most anyone else and often leaving at 10
P.M.

Together with Erskine Bowles, the other deputy chief of staff, who handles
operations, Mr. Ickes is at the center of the efforts of the President's chief
of staff, Leon E. Panetta, to impose greater discipline -- and shorter and
smaller meetings -- in the face of the inevitable chaos of White House life.

"He's a real lawyer," said George Stephanopoulos, the senior Presidential
adviser. "He's meticulous in terms of following through, of pressing points
until you've reached consensus or the point of disagreement."

In one sign of the passions Mr. Ickes can provoke, Representative Robert G.
Torricelli of New Jersey, a contender for the Democratic committee chairmanship
who lost out to Mr. Dodd, called a reporter to offer unsolicited criticism.

"Harold is a person of rather decided views, who feels passionately about things
and pursues them aggressively," said Mr. Torricelli, who tangled bitterly with
Mr. Ickes in 1980, when as head of the Democratic Convention's rules committee
he supported Jimmy Carter and Mr. Ickes worked for Senator Edward M. Kennedy.
"There are people who are best suited to give you private advice, and others
best suited to represent you in public, and Harold is definitely the former.

"No matter what Harold's ideology might be, or whatever vendettas he feels from
previous campaigns," Mr. Torricelli added, "his principal agenda should be to
broaden the reach of the Clinton White House, and that remains to be done."

Mr. Ickes says that is what he is trying to do. He notes that despite his deep
opposition to the death penalty, for example, he never tried to alter Mr.
Clinton's support for the Federal crime bill that imposed it for about five
dozen new offenses last year. "In a lifetime of politics, you build up a few
enemies, if you've done anything of consequence," he said.

In fact, Mr. Ickes took his White House job a year later than originally planned
because of a Federal inquiry into whether his law firm acted improperly in
representing a mob-connected restaurant workers' union; the inquiry ended with
no finding of wrongdoing.

Last year, Mr. Ickes raised eyebrows by joining other senior White House aides
in talking to a top Treasury official about the status of a Federal
investigation into the failed Arkansas savings and loan at the heart of the
Whitewater inquiry. Republicans on the Senate Banking Committee have asked the
Whitewater special prosecutor, Kenneth W. Starr, to review Mr. Ickes's testimony
to Congress on the subject last summer for possible inconsistencies.

Before joining Mr. Clinton, a friend from their days protesting the Vietnam War,
Mr. Ickes was a fox terrier in the service of losing liberal Presidential
contenders, from Eugene J. McCarthy to the Rev. Jesse Jackson. It was almost
solely on his say-so that some liberal New York politicians, who otherwise
looked askance at a pro-death penalty governor from a small state like Arkansas,
agreed to back Mr. Clinton in 1992.

But his friends say caricatures of him as a wild-eyed ideologue are vastly
overdrawn.

"He's a very practical guy," said Representative Thomas J. Manton of Queens, a
moderate Democrat who is also the party's county leader there. "In the primary,
he was able to put together an interesting amalgam of left-of-center Democrats
with those of us who consider ourselves more mainstream. I think that's his
strength."

Mr. Clinton's challenge is to win back the swing voters who helped elect him,
without so demoralizing what is left of the Democratic base vote of liberals,
labor and minorities that they fail to turn out -- a task Mr. Ickes acknowledges
is "very tough" for any Democrat these days, much less a wounded incumbent.

"I've always considered him neither right nor left, but a progressive who wants
to do the right thing for the country," Mr. Ickes said of the President. "Now I
think his focus on the economy is absolutely crucial, because without a strong
economy, liberalism -- or progressivism, or however you define it -- is very
hard to sustain."

Asked why he had stayed on in the face of so many vicissitudes, Mr. Ickes said:
"Probably my insanity. And presumably, they have confidence in me. They know,
and I have always told them, that the minute they cease to have confidence in
me, they should tell me, and I'll go."


NAME: Harold M. Ickes

LOAD-DATE: January 20, 1995

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo: Harold M. Ickes, the canny deputy chief of staff who has
survived many bitter political battles, seems certain to play a major role in
Bill Clinton's own survival hopes as the President looks ahead at a race for
re-election. (David Scull/The New York Times) (pg. A22)

TYPE: Biography

                   Copyright 1995 The New York Times Company

                              52 of 211 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 January 20, 1995, Friday, Late Edition - Final

Home Video

BYLINE: By Peter M. Nichols

SECTION: Section D;  Page 18;  Column 1;  Weekend Desk

LENGTH: 1286 words


With shifting market trends to the left of them and potential technical
breakthroughs to the right, video purveyors these days can only let developments
fall where they may. For instance, take the familiar question of selling
cassettes to customers versus putting them out for rent.

Now that sales have become the fastest-growing part of the business, some video
analysts express worries that people may tire of buying big titles by late this
year or in 1996. That could throw the emphasis back to rental. Figures for the
last quarter of 1994 indicate that rental activity is down, but some prophecies
call for a rebound later this year.

For studios with big video releases to position, the forecasts muddy the
outlook. At Columbia Tri-Star Home Video, for example, the question is which way
to go with "Little Women," a critically acclaimed movie now in the middle of a
successful theater run.

Benjamin Feingold, Columbia Tri-Star's president, said that no decision has been
made about sales or rental. A popular family film like this one, especially with
its classical connections, might make a sales title, but Mr. Feingold said he
had no reservations about rental. That side of the market is solid, he said,
because larger video stores have become more professionally run and broadly
stocked operations.

"They've become destinations for people in search of entertainment," he said,
"not unlike movie theater complexes in many respects."

One possible course for "Little Women," he said, is to rent the film in late
spring, then lower the price and offer it for sale, with the book included, in
the fall.

In the future, he added, titles may be released on digital video disk, or DVD,
the five-inch CD format under development, which is regarded as a possible
replacement for the videocassette. In that case, prices might be about $20 and
all movies would be sales titles. But DVD isn't here yet, and with hardware
companies and movie studios battling over standards for the format, it may not
be for some time to come.

While that breakthrough is awaited, movie buffs and retailers have an
opportunity to recontemplate the 12-inch laser disk, whose standards of picture
quality the new five-inch disk is trying to surpass.

Stirring around in its niche (about 1.5 million players are in use), laser disk
has put on something of a growth spurt, with sales of titles jumping by 15
percent in the third quarter of 1994. Judy Anderson of the Laser Disk
Association credits a half-dozen strong titles ("Jurassic Park" among them) and
the spread of wide-screen television.

Part of the surge, Ms. Anderson said, is generated by expectations of what's
ahead. "People hear about the new technology, and when they go into the store
looking for it, the thing they find is laser disk," she said.

She added that while enthusiasm is strong, loyalty may be perishable. "This
group are the adopters," she said. "They are always up for the next great thing.
So if DVD comes along and it's better, they'll desert in droves."

NEW VIDEO RELEASES

Natural Born Killers
1994. Warner. $97.51. Laser disk, $39.98. 110 minutes. Closed captioned. R.
Release date: Tuesday.

In a high frenzy, Oliver Stone's film follows the thrill killers Mickey (Woody
Harrelson) and Mallory (Juliette Lewis) on a cross-country rampage that piles
bodies high before the movie itself detonates in a lurid blast of overkill. Mr.
Stone's purpose supposedly is to satirize violence in America, and few film
makers use the medium with such visual and emotionally manipulative brilliance.
But beneath the fevered surface, nothing, Janet Maslin wrote in The New York
Times, "digs deep enough to touch the madness of such events, or even to send
them up in any surprising way."

The Mask
1994. New Line. $19.98. Laser disk, $39.99. 100 minutes. Closed captioned.
PG-13.

Without the elasticized Jim Carrey and ravishing special effects provided by
Industrial Light and Magic, little would be left of Charles Russell's film.
Revived periodically by Mr. Carrey's electrifying turns as a masked dervish who
takes over the body and mind of a wimpish bank clerk, the rest of the story
stays stuck in a standard gangster-moll routine. Without much else happening,
these wild outbursts by the multicolored intruder carry a film that is content
to "overshadow quainter ideas about plot and character with flashy,
up-to-the-minute gimmickry" (Maslin).

Killing Zoe
1994. LIVE. $92.98. Laser disk, $34.98. 96 minutes. Closed captioned. R.

Roger Avary wrote "Pulp Fiction" with Quentin Tarantino, and in his first
feature film he aspires to Mr. Tarantino's scope as a director. At least he has
the violence down pat. In Paris, a disturbed young drifter (Eric Stoltz) has a
rendezvous with a childhood friend, now a crazed hood (Jean-Hughes Anglade).
After a night of debauchery to rev themselves up, the pair and some equally
cracked partners rob a bank. Hostages are taken and people slaughtered, but
beyond acting suitably disaffected, no one seems to have a thought in his head.
In Mr. Tarantino's hands, the movie might be expected to take on some moral
dimension. Here, though, what remains is nothing more than an "orgiastically
violent exercise in hand-me-down nihilism, much more rooted in cinematic
posturing than in real pain" (Maslin).

. . . and God Spoke
1994. LIVE. $92.98. Laser disk, $34.98. 83 minutes. R.

Clive and Marvin, the director and producer portrayed in this mock documentary,
would like Marlon Brando to play God in the biblical epic they're making, but
with the film makers' spotty track record they have to settle for an unknown.
With the rest of the scriptural roster filled out by Soupy Sales as Moses, Lou
Ferrigno as Cain and Fred Kaz as Noah, the goals remain modest for a film "whose
best scenes approach the demented irreverence this material calls for" (Caryn
James).

FROM YEARS PAST

The Passions, Political
And Otherwise, of Oliver Stone

Noted for their technical competence and skill at engaging the emotions, Oliver
Stone's films can generally be described as partisan statements not concerned
with subtlety. Here are some on tape.

PLATOON. In the first of Mr. Stone's Vietnam films (drawn from his own
experience), the grunts (Charlie Sheen, Willem Dafoe, Forest Whitaker, Francesco
Quinn, John C. McGinley) slug it out with the enemy and themselves. 1986.
Vestron. $14.98. 120 minutes. Closed captioned. R.

SALVADOR. James Woods and James Belushi star in Mr. Stone's film about the
United States involvement in the Central American conflict. 1986. Vestron.
$14.98. 123 minutes. Closed captioned. R.

WALL STREET. Insider trading anyone? Too ambitious by half, a young broker
(Charlie Sheen) is set up by an unscrupulous financier (Michael Douglas). 1987.
Fox. $14.98. 124 minutes. Closed captioned. R.

TALK RADIO. And talk about a hot topic before its time. The abrasive style of a
Dallas talk-show host (Eric Bogosian) earns him a reputation and gets some
people hurt. 1988. MCA/Universal. $19.98. 110 minutes. R.

BORN ON THE FOURTH OF JULY. Tom Cruise is the paraplegic Vietman veteran turned
writer Ron Kovic. 1989. MCA/Universal. $19.98. 144 minutes. R.

THE DOORS. In a relentless depiction of abuse and addiction, Val Kilmer is the
rock star Jim Morrison. 1991. LIVE. $14.98. 138 minutes. R.

J. F. K. The conspiracy theory according to Mr. Stone in the director's most
debated film. 1991. Warner. $89.99. 189 minutes. R.

HEAVEN AND EARTH. After working as a prostitute for American soldiers, a young
Vietnamese woman (Hiep Thi Le) marries one (Tommy Lee Jones), who then dumps her
in an alien American world. 1993. Warner. $89.99. 142 minutes. R.

LOAD-DATE: January 20, 1995

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photos: Marketing plans are still being discussed for the tape version
of the latest "Little Women," starring, clockwise from left, Winona Ryder, Trini
Alvarado, Susan Sarandon, Claire Danes and Kirsten Dunst. (Joseph
Lederer/Columbia Pictures); Tommy Lee Jones in "Natural Born Killers," now on
video. (Warner Brothers)

                   Copyright 1995 The New York Times Company

                              53 of 211 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                January 21, 1995, Saturday, Late Edition - Final

Salisbury Papers Donated

SECTION: Section 1;   Page 16;   Column 4;   Cultural Desk

LENGTH: 111 words


The Rare Book and Manuscript Library at Columbia University has received the
papers of Harrison E. Salisbury, the Pultizer Prize-winning former foreign
correspondent and assistant managing editor of The New York Times, the
university announced yesterday. Mr. Salisbury, who also wrote 29 books, died at
the age of 84 in 1993. The library is processing the papers, which were left to
Columbia in Mr. Salisbury's will. Eventually, the papers will be available to
scholars and researchers. The papers include manuscripts, notes, correspondence
and photographs from Mr. Salisbury's assignments over decades in such places as
the former Soviet Union, China and Vietnam.

LOAD-DATE: January 21, 1995

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1995 The New York Times Company

                              54 of 211 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 January 22, 1995, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

BEST SELLERS: January 22, 1995

SECTION: Section 7; Page 26; Column 2; Book Review Desk

LENGTH: 1477 words



          Weeks
This Last    On
Week Week  List Fiction

 1      2  47   THE CELESTINE PROPHECY, by James Redfield. (Warner, $17.95.) An
                ancient manuscript, found in Peru, provides insights into
                achieving a fulfilling life.

 2      1  31   POLITICALLY CORRECT BEDTIME STORIES, by James Finn Garner.
                (Macmillan, $8.95.) Classic tales respun to avoid offending
                current sensibilities.

 3          1   KISS THE GIRLS, by James Patterson. (Little, Brown, $22.95.)
                The police detective Alex Cross pursues a serial killer and the
                kidnapper of his niece.

 4     14   2   SELF-DEFENSE, by Jonathan Kellerman. (Bantam, $22.95.) The
                psychologist-detective Alex Delaware undertakes to discover
                whether a woman's fear that she is being stalked by a killer is
                imagined or real.

 5      5   8   WINGS, by Danielle Steel. (Delacorte, $23.95.) A woman pursues
                her ambition to become a record-setting aviator in pre-World
                War II America.

 6      6  128  THE BRIDGES OF MADISON COUNTY, by Robert James Waller. (Warner,
                $16.95.) A photographer and a farmer's lonely wife in Iowa.

 7      3  21   DEBT OF HONOR, by Tom Clancy. (Putnam, $25.95.) Jack Ryan and
                C.I.A. agents vs. a Japanese plot to strike America's territory
                and economy.

 8          1   EYES OF A CHILD, by Richard North Patterson. (Knopf, $24.) The
                apparent suicide of a San Francisco man leads to courtroom
                encounters.

 9      4  14   INSOMNIA, by Stephen King. (Viking, $27.95.) A widower and a
                widow, victims of sleeplessness, behold sinister forces at work
                in their small Maine town.

 10*    7  11   THE LOTTERY WINNER, by Mary Higgins Clark. (Simon & Schuster,
                $22.) Stories about a couple who win a lottery and devote
                themselves to solving crimes.

 11    12  16   MUTANT MESSAGE DOWN UNDER, by Marlo Morgan. (HarperCollins,
                $18.) In Australia's outback, an American woman learns about
                aboriginal philosophy.

 12     8   9   DARK RIVERS OF THE HEART, by Dean Koontz. (Knopf, $24.) A man
                and a woman, who meet by chance, must flee a powerful
                Government agency.

 13    11  26   THE GIFT, by Danielle Steel. (Delacorte, $15.) A woman's visit
                to a small town changes many lives.

 14     9  16   TALTOS, by Anne Rice. (Knopf, $25.) The survivor of a species
                of witches copes with his heritage; a sequel to "The Witching
                Hour" and "Lasher."

 15    13  18   NOTHING LASTS FOREVER, by Sidney Sheldon. (Morrow, $23.) Three
                women doctors in San Francisco contend with lovers, betrayers
                and killers.

          Weeks
This Last    On
Week Week  List Nonfiction

 1      1  12   CROSSING THE THRESHOLD OF HOPE, by John Paul II. Edited by
                Vittorio Messori. (Knopf, $20.) The Pope discusses matters of
                belief, suffering and hope.

 2      5  15   THE HOT ZONE, by Richard Preston. (Random House, $23.) The
                discovery of a lethal virus, more infectious than H.I.V., and
                the efforts to keep it from spreading.

 3      2  16   DON'T STAND TOO CLOSE TO A NAKED MAN, by Tim Allen. (Hyperion,
                $19.95.) Anecdotes and meditations on life by the star of "Home
                Improvement."

 4      3  20   COUPLEHOOD, by Paul Reiser. (Bantam, $19.95.) Essays on the ups
                and downs of marriage by the television star and stand-up
                comedian.

 5      4  57   THE BOOK OF VIRTUES, by William J. Bennett. (Simon & Schuster,
                $30.) Moral stories adapted from the Greeks, the Bible,
                folklore and elsewhere.

 6      7   8   THE WARREN BUFFETT WAY, by Robert G. Hagstrom Jr. (Wiley,
                $24.95.) An account of the career of the man said to be the
                world's most successful investor.

 7      6  17   JAMES HERRIOT'S CAT STORIES, by James Herriot. (St. Martin's,
                $16.95.) A collection of tales by the Yorkshire veterinarian.

 8*     8  12   THE BELL CURVE, by Richard J. Herrnstein and Charles Murray.
                (Free Press, $30.) Ways in which differences in intelligence
                affect American life.

 9     11  46   MIDNIGHT IN THE GARDEN OF GOOD AND EVIL, by John Berendt.
                (Random House, $23.) The mysterious death of a young man in
                Savannah, Ga.

 10    13   4   SISTERS, by Carol Saline. Photographs by Sharon J. Wohlmuth.
                (Running Press, $27.50.) The relationships of 36 sets of
                sisters of varied callings and backgrounds, reported in words
                and pictures.

 11    12  14   NO ORDINARY TIME, by Doris Kearns Goodwin. (Simon & Schuster,
                $30.) The roles of Franklin and Eleanor Roosevelt during World
                War II.

 12    10  15   DOLLY, by Dolly Parton. (HarperCollins, $25.) The autobiography
                of the country singer.

 13         2   PALE BLUE DOT, by Carl Sagan. (Random House, $35.) The
                astronomer's vision of the future role of human beings in the
                universe.

 14     9  19   BARBARA BUSH: A Memoir, by Barbara Bush. (Drew/Scribners, $25.)
                The former First Lady recalls her life, from childhood to the
                present.

 15         1   LONG WALK TO FREEDOM, by Nelson Mandela. (Little, Brown,
                $24.95.) The autobiography of the first freely elected
                President of South Africa.

          Weeks
This Last    On
Week Week  List Advice, How-to and Miscellaneous

 1      1  39   IN THE KITCHEN WITH ROSIE, by Rosie Daley. (Knopf, $14.95.)
                Recipes by Oprah Winfrey's cook.

 2      2  87   MEN ARE FROM MARS, WOMEN ARE FROM VENUS, by John Gray.
                (HarperCollins, $23.) Ways to improve communication and
                relationships between the sexes.

 3      3   4   ILLUMINATA, by Marianne Williamson. (Random House, $20.) A
                celebration of the power of prayers, with examples of those
                fitting a variety of situations.

 4          1   FOOD, by Susan Powter. (Simon & Schuster, $24.) Information
                about recipes, nutrition and diets.


Rankings reflect sales figures, for the week ending Jan. 7, at 3,050 bookstores
plus wholesalers serving 28,000 other retailers (gift shops, department stores,
newsstands, supermarkets), statistically weighted to represent sales in all such
outlets nationwide. An asterisk indicates that a book's sales are barely
distinguishable from those of the book above.
And Bear in Mind
(Editor's Choices of other recent books of particular interest)

ALLAH O AKBAR: A Journey Through Militant Islam, by Abbas. (Phaidon/Chronicle,
$60.) A broad and gloomy photographic examination of 29 countries by an
Iranian-born photojournalist whose subjects seem rarely to take any time out
from the utmost rigors of the faith.

EAST, WEST: Stories, by Salman Rushdie. (Pantheon, $21.) Nine stories by the
fugitive author of "The Satanic Verses," some boisterous, some provocative, all
taking some advantage of Mr. Rushdie's difficult dual heritage.

FELICIA'S JOURNEY, by William Trevor. (Viking, $21.95.) Mr. Trevor's latest
novel concerns an unmarried, pregnant, vulnerable Irish girl, wandering
England's industrial Midlands until she encounters an awesomely predatory
Englishman whose monstrosity is all the scarier for remaining long undefined.

THE HOLLOW YEARS: France in the 1930s, by Eugen Weber. (Norton, $25.) The
author, a historian devoted to France, rises from immersion in the documents,
bearing this scintillating, entertaining account of an unworthy but fascinating
period in French life.

IN PHARAOH'S ARMY: Memories of the Lost War, by Tobias Wolff. (Knopf, $23.) The
follow-up volume to Mr. Wolff's memoir "This Boy's Life" is a series of small,
elegant, personal sketches of his year in Vietnam.

AN INTIMATE HISTORY OF HUMANITY, by Theodore Zeldin. (HarperCollins, $25.) Not
history so much as informed rumination by an Oxford social historian who talks
to many people (mostly Frenchwomen) about the fundamentals of human experience
-- hope, despair, love, etc. -- and thinks that hope still has a chance.

THE MASTER OF PETERSBURG, by J.M. Coetzee. (Viking, $21.95.) The hero of Mr.
Coetzee's grimmest novel yet is Dostoyevsky himself, trapped in generational and
political clashes, trying to scrape meaning from the death of a son.

NELSON: A Personal History, by Christopher Hibbert. (Addison-Wesley, $30.) A
biography that visits many familiar scenes but brings clarity, reliability,
convincing judgments and enthusiasm to Horatio Nelson, a unique British hero
whose defects could never tarnish his glory.

NIGHT: Night Life, Night Language, Sleep, and Dreams, by A. Alvarez. (Norton,
$23.) Personal and literary explorations of the less visible (and therefore more
conjectural) half of life by a gifted critic and acutely intuitive memoirist.

ROBERT LOUIS STEVENSON: A Biography, by Frank McLynn. (Random House, $30.) A
thoroughly detailed life, taking the most recent scholarship into account, of
the great Scottish writer of English prose who died at 44 in 1894.

SHAKER BUILT: The Form and Function of Shaker Architecture, by Paul Rocheleau
and June Sprigg, edited and designed by David Larkin. (David Larkin/Monacelli
Press/Penguin, $50.) Sumptuous color photographs of Shaker buildings, taken with
care and devotion.

LOAD-DATE: January 22, 1995

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: List

                   Copyright 1995 The New York Times Company

                              55 of 211 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 January 22, 1995, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

Wanted: A Kinder, Gentler Cop

BYLINE: By Richard Rayner;   Richard Rayner, author of "Los Angeles Without a
Map," reported on the Los Angeles riots for Granta.

SECTION: Section 6;  Page 26;  Column 1;  Magazine Desk

LENGTH: 8605 words


IN MACARTHUR PARK, AT THE edge of downtown Los Angeles, it's 8:15 on a Friday
night and a man is dying. Middle-aged, black, wearing white sneakers and a white
T-shirt, he lies beneath a eucalyptus tree that stinks as though a hundred
horses urinated against it. He has been shot in the arm and left eye. His right
eye is open, and there's very little blood.

"Melon shot," says Officer Kessler, meaning the bullet entered the skull and
didn't leave. "This guy pulled a knife. Two guys dumped him." Like most
shootings, it was over in seconds.

Patrol cars roll up, one after the other, silent now, sirens off but lights
still flashing. Officers push back the crowd and seal off an area within a
circle of festive yellow "Police Caution" tape. Two paramedics duck beneath the
tape and try to revive the body, thumping it on the chest -- too late. A pair of
tiny red cowboy boots lies a few feet from the dead man's face, left behind as a
mother grabbed her child in the panic.

By now there are maybe 20 officers on the scene. Two of them actually saw the
murder as it went down, sitting in a darkened patrol car 50 yards away trying to
scope out a drug deal. They were powerless to prevent the shooting, but close
enough to give chase and make an arrest. The John Doe victim is dead, the
suspects have been caught and now there's nothing to do but keep the crowd at
bay and shoot the breeze until the paramedics get the body stashed away and the
homicide dicks show up; that may be as long as an hour, since detectives knock
off at 3 in the afternoon and they'll have to be called from Simi Valley, or
somewhere else out in the peaceful suburbs.

This is police work at its simplest: a dead body and suspects, not just caught
but identified in the commission of the crime by the officers themselves. For
Rivas and Graham, the two young officers who'd seen the murder and made the
arrests, this has been a break; they're almost dazed by the luck of it. For the
Los Angeles Police Department, in these, its days of unbuttoned uncertainty,
life is rarely so straightforward.

MY FIRST ENCOUNTER WITH THE L.A.P.D. CAME back in the early 1980's: Century
City, about 10 at night on the Avenue of the Stars. I'd just come out of a movie
theater. Suddenly, I was aware of a great procession: limousines, motorcycles, a
helicopter overhead, patrol officers on the otherwise deserted sidewalk -- a
little eerie. Some very big cheese was making his or her exit from the Century
Plaza Hotel. An immaculately groomed patrolman came up and, as his glance took
me in, planted a meaty paw in the center of my chest. "Get off the street," he
said, and shoved me back. It was the casual nature of both words and gesture,
the arrogance of it, I suppose, as well as the hostility, that took the breath
away. This was an announcement: I'm in control, I can do with you what I will.

I learned not to be surprised. The hope, even among the white middle class, was
that you could deal with the L.A.P.D. by not having to deal with them. They
themselves were pretty much oblivious to public sentiment. They followed their
chief, the larger-than-life Daryl Gates, and lived and died by arrests; it was a
numbers game -- bust this guy, harass that one. They'd kick anybody's butt,
especially if you were black or Hispanic, and if you weren't, they might just
kick yours anyway.

The L.A.P.D. was regarded as No. 1, not just in America, but perhaps the world
-- a paradigm of pro-active paramilitary policing. It made more arrests, over a
wider area, 465 square miles, with a force of about 8,000 officers -- fewer per
capita than any other major city force. (The New York Police Department had 89
officers per square mile, the L.A.P.D. only 15.) It was the least corrupt. It
had pioneered the use of the radio patrol car, owned its own fleet of fancy
French Aerospatiale helicopters and seemed pretty much invincible. This myth,
bolstered by numerous TV shows and movies, from Jack Webb in "Dragnet" to Mel
Gibson and Danny Glover in "Lethal Weapon," was pervasive. You were supposed to
be a little frightened, or maybe even more than a little; it was the general
idea, it was why the L.A.P.D. worked so well.

Then everything changed. First, in the early morning of March 3, 1991, there was
the videotaped beating of Rodney King. Next came the Independent Commission,
headed by Warren Christopher, now President Clinton's Secretary of State, then a
prominent Los Angeles lawyer. The commission concluded that the L.A.P.D. was
racist, sexist, hostile to the communities it served and almost gleefully
willing to use excessive force. Christopher also stated that, indeed, the
department was corruption-free; and that was it as far as the good news.

Then, on April 29, 1992, came the not-guilty verdicts in the trial of the four
officers accused over King, and the Los Angeles riots began. In those early
minutes, when Reginald Denny, a truck driver, was being beaten at Florence and
Normandie, there was a paralysis of leadership -- so catastrophic that even
Gates later acknowledged it. At that critical moment in the city's history, its
vaunted police department was perceived to have failed, to have been not just
beaten but humiliated.

A new chief, a new black chief, Willie Williams, took over in June 1992.
Williams was an appointee from outside the department, quite unthinkable in
pre-riot L.A. Williams, previously chief in Philadelphia, was a believer in both
community policing and affirmative action, and in the history of the L.A.P.D. a
line was drawn, decisive as the Santa Monica Freeway that cuts the city in two:
pre- and post-Rodney King.

Gates's style and leadership couldn't have been more attuned to the pulse of
Ronald Reagan's America or more blind to the way the city was going. By the
1990's the city had evolved beyond anyone's expectation into a vast polygot
community, 40 percent Hispanic, or rather into a welter of different
communities, segregated geographically by the freeways, and also by an economic
and racial apartheid. Los Angeles was the Ellis Island of the late century, and
sections of it had more in common with Charles Dickens's teeming London than the
laid-back L.A. of 1960's East Coast imagination.

Like some gas-guzzler, a forceful and unforgiving boat of a Buick, Daryl Gates
represented a Los Angeles that had long been overtaken by its own development.
He was touchy, egotistical and fond of would-be witticisms that didn't look too
clever in print: "The casual drug user ought to be taken out and shot." Or, when
speaking to The Los Angeles Times about the deaths of suspects taken into
custody with the now-barred carotid artery hold, "We may be finding that in some
blacks when it is applied, the veins or arteries do not open up as fast as they
do in normal people."

For most of L.A. the greatest thing about Willie Williams during his first 18
months in office was, precisely, that he wasn't his predecessor. No one could
quite believe it. Williams was black, important and he didn't stuff his foot in
his mouth every time he spoke. The city fell in love with him, even if police
officers couldn't quite understand where he was coming from. He was given a
clear agenda: to re-establish a bridge between management and the rank and file;
to regain the eroded confidence of the community; to rebuild political and
economic support in the city; to modernize and computerize a technologically
backward department; and to find money to solve a deadlocked pay dispute and
thaw out a frozen promotional structure; and, most important, to institute
community policing.

"Quite an agenda," says Willie Williams at Parker Center, L.A.P.D. headquarters,
named after Bill Parker, chief from 1950-1966, the man who created the myth of
the L.A.P.D. as, until recently, we knew it. Now Williams is the city-appointed
and self-declared agent of change. "And the process of change is scary, whoever
you are," he says, which is to acknowledge that the L.A.P.D. has not danced
willingly into the arms of his ideas. He was called in to fix a department in
which, when he arrived, he knew not one person.

Where Gates always strutted about in uniform, Williams favors double-breasted
suits and polka-dotted silk ties. He looks like an executive and talks about
police work like a business. He's wary, articulate, a politician so adept he
doesn't quite let you know he is one. "Police work is doing what the people in
the city want done," he says. "In Los Angeles that means a safer environment --
criminals off the streets -- and in Los Angeles that means reducing the fear of
crime. But policing is also responding to all the other calls -- 85 percent of
which aren't to do with crime. That's a struggle for some of our officers. But
that's what people want. It's a shift, and it's not just L.A. That's what people
across the country are asking for."

Williams is halfway through his first term of five years, renewable for another
five at the discretion of the Police Commission, the Mayor-appointed civilian
board to whom -- in effect, for the first time -- the chief is answerable.
There's also a new Mayor, the multimillionaire businessman Richard Riordan,
elected in 1993 not least because thousands of Los Angelenos are terrified by
the thought of teen-agers running loose with semiautomatic weapons.

So there is a right-wing, pro-police Mayor and a liberal police chief, the
precise opposite of the dynamic that existed for years between Gates and
ex-Mayor Tom Bradley. Riordan and his commission are pushing for swifter and
more effective change. At least he and Williams talk every couple of weeks, as
opposed to every couple of years, as was the case with Gates and Bradley. And,
three years after the fact, the proposals of the Christopher Commission are
still alive and kicking. Because Christopher provided such a detailed blueprint,
and because Williams inevitably got off to a slow start, the pressure is on.

"It's no longer enough that Willie Williams has broad shoulders and speaks
well," says Rabbi Gary Greenebaum, first Police Commission president under the
Riordan regime. "We have to see results."

Many officers still think of themselves as the Blue Knights of the pre-riot
L.A.P.D., yet in some cases they go to work in squad cars that break down, and
in precinct houses so infested with rats that showers and lockers have to be
located in trailers outside. Fax machines are more or less unheard of. The
entire department still boasts only 700 to 750 computers, and late in the day
finds itself wilting under an attack of political correctness. Smoking is barred
in precinct houses, though old detectives sneak out in pairs for a natter and a
guilty puff.

Complaints of sexual harassment and discrimination have become so frequent that
the Police Commission lobbied successfully for an independent investigative
unit. Under Gates this would have been unthinkable; and Williams himself argued
that it sent a chilling message to the 10,000 department employees -- namely
that none of them could be trusted to conduct an investigation. Meanwhile, white
male officers moan that affirmative action has shifted the balance so far in
favor of women and minorities that it's harder and harder for them to advance in
the ranks -- as they say, to "promote."

Then there's the O. J. Simpson trial, which has planted the idea that it's
perfectly feasible that homicide detectives fabricated evidence -- aren't they,
after all, members of the most racist police force in the world? For decades the
L.A.P.D. sunned itself in the media; now it's roasting.

Some ask if Williams is in over his head. Currently, he faces a vote of no
confidence from his senior officers, the Command Officers Association. All
along, they've kicked against the idea of an outsider and have fought Williams's
attempts to appoint his own team. Yet, they're frustrated by the absence of a
clear decision-making process -- what they are told on Monday turns out not to
be true on Wednesday, they argue. Even those sympathetic towards Williams feel
he hasn't taken control.

A success at community meetings, he's mistrusted and even disliked in the
precinct houses, where officers have no clear sense of what is expected of them
by him, or the Mayor, or indeed the city itself. What Los Angeles seems to call
for now is a nifty combination of "Robocop" and "Dixon of Dock Green," the
paradigm of the friendly British bobby who knew everybody on his beat and always
dropped in for a cup of tea. But how do you provide something as unwieldy,
disparate and complicated as an entire police department with a new motivation,
another soul? Asked if he can pull it off, Williams answers, "Not by myself."

Given the history of the L.A.P.D., the beating of Rodney King was a disaster
waiting to happen. Similar incidents had occurred in the past. A plumbing-supply
salesman named George Holliday just happened to catch this one on his Camcorder.
Joanne Belknap, professor of criminal justice at the University of Cincinnati,
says that it crystallized sentiment and provoked a re-examination of the
principles of police work, not just in Los Angeles, but nationwide. It isn't
just about fighting crime but working with all and sundry to prevent it. "The
idea of community policing had been around since the 1970's, and even before
that," she says, "but there's a stronger commitment this time, in part just
because it was such a long, slow boil to get it going." And even so, the police,
especially in the urban areas, had tended to become so isolated within their own
cultures, so structured upon institutionalized systems and prejudice that to
effect any change is a mighty task; it's as if, she says, they've evolved
completely off to the side of those they serve. Throughout the country, big-city
departments are looking to L.A. to see how things will play out.

At the moment there's turmoil. The L.A.P.D. is divided into 18 divisions or
precincts. To some extent, each functions as a discrete organism; each is a
different culture. Only the entrance lobbies resemble each other, with their
soda machines, scratched benches, bulletin boards and framed portraits of
officers killed in the line of duty. Over a period of months I spent time at
three.

ON THE EDGE OF DOWNTOWN, RAMPART division encompasses only eight square miles
and is the most densely populated of any in L.A. Estimates of that population
vary between 350,000 and 750,000. This is the city's clearinghouse for
immigrants, legal and not. There are Salvadorans, Guatemalans, Mexicans,
Koreans, Cubans, tourists, thousands of homeless. On a hot night the area teems,
and at Sixth and Alvarado it boasts perhaps the busiest crime block in America.

Rampart is the old L.A.P.D., or what's left of it. Coppers here still carry
themselves with panache and swagger. They sport close-cropped Marine haircuts.
They spend lots of time in the gym. At the desk, bull-necked Officer Vargas
stares you down with eyes that bulge and brood. He leans back, sucks a soda,
jams a black-currant lollipop in the side of his mouth and announces, in tones
of utter boredom, "Nexterooni." He conveys the sincere doubt that your tale will
merit addition to his own personal "Thousand and One Nights." He has heard them
all.

The canteen is called, with knowing humor, Cafe Rampart. Trophies won by the
baseball, football and weight-lifting teams gather cobwebs on top of a coffee
machine. R-A-M-P-A-R-T is spelled out on the wall in neon. A guy with brown
eyes, one of those Marine haircuts that's growing out a little, and bushy
Michael Dukakis eyebrows doesn't bother to give me a look. "Here comes another
member of the liberal press," he says.

At 44, Clint Dona is an 18-year L.A.P.D. veteran. He has spent all of those
years in patrol, on the street, and 12 of them here, where younger officers
watch him with reverence shading into awe. A former marine, a Vietnam veteran,
Dona has won every award the L.A.P.D. has to give, including its highest honor,
the Medal of Valor. He has killed two people and been the subject of more
"beefs" -- complaints from the public -- than he cares to remember. "There was a
time when Internal Affairs knew me by my first name," he says.

Another central finding of the Christopher Commission was that such public
complaints, also known as 1.81's, were ineffectively handled. Of the 2,152
allegations of excessive force from 1986 through 1990, only 42 were sustained.
That has changed. In 1992 -- the year of the riots -- the city attorney's office
paid out about $20 million in awards and settlements for claims brought against
the L.A.P.D., and that excluded traffic accidents. It was like a lottery. "These
days, the department will take a complaint from Charlie Manson," Dona says, and
as a result officers are more reluctant to go out and make arrests. In case
there's a beef, it goes into the their personnel file, the "package," and counts
against them for promotion. "A lot of guys aren't doing anything. They don't
want to get too close."

This argument, not necessarily supported by arrest records, is common at patrol
level; there's an almost paranoid sense that management, meaning lieutenant and
above, won't back them the way it once did, that the brass is pandering to the
liberals, playing politics. That may be all well and good, but it's a game with
little or no relevance to the dangerous world the patrol officer inhabits -- the
street, where it used to be hooking and booking, and now it's driving and
waving.

Not at Rampart, not for Dona. Being out there on patrol in a black and white,
listening to the radio, dealing with the public, trying to catch the bad guys --
is the L.A.P.D.'s basic function, its essential function. Yet it's seen by many
as a career dead end. To a few, it becomes a mission. "Patrol isn't just cops
and robbers," Dona says. "Patrol is helping a woman fix her flat tire. It's
holding a guy's hand when he's been shot. This is routine. Rodney King is not
routine."

Dona was born poor, in Nicaragua, one of 11 children. His father came to L.A. in
1951 and worked as a dishwasher, then a steelworker. Now he's a minister with
his own church up in San Jose.

"I was raised to have as my goal in life to serve others," says Dona. "The
example that the Bible gives us. That Jesus gives us. I really believe in the
motto of this department" -- to protect and to serve.

He has three children, two girls and a boy. His wife took them with her when she
left him six years ago and moved back to Mississippi. The two of them met there
while at college. Dona's major was philosophy. "The bottom line was that she
caught me screwing around," he says. "I don't blame her. She said, 'You did
wrong and I'm gone.' "

Riding to a shooting in progress one Saturday when bodies are dropping left and
right, Dona pumps his hand in the air as if he were an engine driver pulling on
the whistle of his locomotive. "Yeeeah! This is like the old Rampart. Let's go
get some bad guys. Let's go shoot somebody!"

Later he doesn't shoot anybody, but does get a bad guy, pulling a 9-millimeter
handgun from beneath the seat of a drug dealer's car and finding $3,000 in the
trunk. On another night, after dinner, there's a call to an apartment building
off Bonnie Brae, a bad neighborhood. The incident report says that a son, Ruben,
is threatening his own mother with a kitchen knife. Ruben comes sauntering down
the steps in baggy jeans and a black T-shirt, very casual, ignoring Dona's
instruction to put his hands above his head, and, when Dona says it again,
louder, 'Get your hands above your head,' he still comes forward.

It is over before it has begun. Ruben moves his right hand toward the waistband
of his jeans, whereupon Dona doesn't say anything, doesn't reach for his pepper
spray or gun, but springs forward, plants his hands on Ruben's chest and puts
him on his back with one swift shove. A moment later Ruben is cuffed and the
knife, a vicious-looking six-inch blade, is in Dona's hand.

They say it takes at least 5, maybe 10 years before a cop gets any good, because
the street is so utterly different from what they're taught at the academy.
Situations are messier, swifter to change, so judgments must be at once decisive
and subtle. L.A.P.D. officers have shot and killed in situations where the
threat was far less immediate than the one Ruben just posed.

There are 100-plus incidents a year in which an officer fires a gun. Officer
Involved Shooting is the unit that has historically investigated all of them,
and Williams is under pressure to speed up such investigations and, if
necessary, make officers easier to prosecute. Opponents of the present system
say Officer Involved Shooting has tended to whitewash cases. And there's a
broader issue: who controls the L.A.P.D., not who makes the shots but who calls
them -- the Chief or the Police Commission, the Mayor and the District Attorney?

It's the old Gates-Bradley dance, but with changed partners now, and a very
different rhythm. This is the kind of thing the L.A.P.D. never used to allow
itself to be second-guessed about. Now officer-involved shootings are something
else in the melting pot, the difference between a pat on the head and a
potential prosecution for manslaughter.

Ruben, meanwhile, is spitting at Dona, spitting at me, spitting at the
photographer, spitting even at his own mother. Another patrol car has arrived
and one of its occupants, Jim Edwards -- six feet four inches, a surfer who
might just have stepped from his board, blond and blue-eyed, altogether like
Daryl Gates's dream of what a cop ought to be -- takes the knife from Dona's
hand, inspects it, and says with a smile: "This is the weapon that was used to
kill Nicole Simpson."

Back at the station Ruben slams himself against the wall, then against the thick
wire mesh of the holding cell until his forehead is red and dimpled, and keeps
on spitting so copiously that Jim Edwards tapes paper over the mesh. "You don't
understand," says Ruben, disappearing behind the paper. "I'm gonna kill your
family."

"Yeah, well, I'll go out in a hail of bullets," says Edwards. "Give me a kiss,
Ruben. Maybe it'll help me promote. Hey, I'm a white guy."

The next day Ruben files an unjustified 1.81, alleging that Jim Edwards used
excessive force during his arrest.

AT RAMPART, SHOOTINGS ARE REGARDED AS AN inevitable part of the job; they're
discussed with an enthusiasm that might just be bravura or might even be relish.
Rampart is the place if you want to be involved. The police dramatize
themselves, and yet they do live in a strange, edgy world. Every cop will say he
or she is putting his or her life on the line with every traffic stop; there's
no such thing as routine, because you never know. Every cop will talk about the
tragedy of attending another cop's funeral, with the riderless horse and the
boots in the stirrups backward.

The truth is they do risk their lives, every day. But it's also true that police
work isn't all that dangerous. Statistically, it's not as bad as driving a cab
in New York City. It's not all cops and robbers, pursuits and blazing guns. Most
of the job, Clint Dona says, should involve talking. The true danger is
emotional: the long hours, the drinking that can become a problem, the marriages
that go down. Dona tells the story of a rookie -- or "boot" -- he trained, a kid
who always seemed to be bubbling with energy and life, whose marriage got into
trouble, whose package was perhaps not looking quite as promising as it had, who
earlier this year climbed over a wall into an abandoned Hollywood Hills estate
and "ate the gun." More L.A. cops commit suicide each year than are killed in
the line of duty.

ON A SLOW NIGHT, I'M RIDING WITH DONA AND Jim Edwards. It's common practice to
rotate officers, not letting partners stay together too long. This follows a
scandal in 1981 when two long-partnered officers in Hollywood became known as
the Hollywood burglars, staging a series of break-ins at video stores. For
months afterward Johnny Carson made jokes like: "My brother-in-law's got a new
job. He's a burglar with the L.A.P.D."

The first thing Dona and Edwards do on leaving the station is unhook a fancy
little TV camera perched up by the driver's mirror. This, linked to a sealed box
in the trunk containing a 12-hour videotape, is part of a new experiment. "So
they can beef us," says Edwards. The second thing is to examine the M.D.T., the
Mobile Digital Terminal, located on the dashboard, for calls that have been sent
their way.

Excluding George Holliday's videotape of the Rodney King incident, nothing made
the L.A.P.D. look so bad as the Christopher Commission's release of the
transcripts of M.D.T. messages between patrol cars and the station, and between
the cars themselves. Dona himself was in trouble when, after the death of two
gang members, he tapped in: "No great loss to society."

He ended up going all the way to the top, to Gates himself, arguing that the
chief of all people should know what it was like to be quoted out of context.
Gates, as so often, backed his man. These days officers are more cautious, less
likely to write "Well . . . I'm back over here in the projects, [expletive] off
the natives," than "Bye, bye. . . . We're going to Starbucks."

Dona and Edwards were together in a car with two other officers for 23
consecutive 12-hour shifts during and after the riots. They bonded, I say, which
makes them laugh a little uneasily. "Yeah, we're like faggots," says Edwards.
"Except without the sex." They go and watch Pauly Shore movies together, so they
must be close. Edwards thinks of Dona as a brother. "I'd take a bullet for that
old man," he says; he's serious.

Dona chats with a group of kids, third graders.

"What kind of gun do you have?"

"A water pistol."

"How did you become a cop?"

"There was this line. I thought they were giving away free cheese."

"Hey, why do they call you pigs?"

"Because they're ignorant."

"Why are you here?"

"Domestic violence. Another domestic violence situation."

"Yeah," says one of the kids, quicker than the rest. "You guys go in. Beat the
dad."

At last there's something, three beeps on the radio, a robbery in progress down
on Olympic, three suspects and the magic words, armed with a gun. It's a Code 3
call, meaning lights and sirens, and several cars at once speed from different
directions. Dona gets up to 60, 70, while at cross streets Edwards hits oncoming
traffic with a searchlight.

Now the night has meaning, but then it's the voice of the radio traffic operator
again, downgrading the call -- no gun. The car slows, the lights, the sirens go
off, and when we get to the strip mall at Olympic and Alvarado, two of the
suspects have vanished. Eight officers, all male, have spilled out of four cars
and surrounded two men: the remaining suspect, who is cuffed, and the victim,
with bleached-blond hair, diamante studs in his ears and blue makeup smeared
around tearful eyes.

"What's your name?" says Officer Stout, a real Marine Corps type whose neck is
wider than the top of his head.

"My name's Julien, officer," he says.

"He looks like Billy Idol," says one of the other officers.

"Yeah, but he acts like Boy George," says Stout.

Julien is 19.

The suspect has no gun, no stolen property, no evidence. And since the other
suspects have vanished, they're going to have to let him go as well; with just
Julien's story against his there's no arrest.

In a disbelieving voice, Julien asks why. He doesn't get it. He has just been
robbed.

"Whaddya want?" asks Stout.

"I want my stuff back, I want you to arrest this guy."

Stout explains that the suspect didn't have Julien's stuff, and so couldn't be
arrested. He asks again. "Whaddya want?"

"I wanna be like you guys," Julien says. "I wanna be able to do just what I
like."

It's enough. In this encounter with power, Julien has been whiny and, now,
tactless. He has demonstrated lack of respect, and so it begins.

"Hey, you can't," says Stout, standing back, hands on hips. "There's eight studs
here and I'm looking at you and I don't see no stud." As Julien turns his head
to and fro, Stout gets going in earnest. "Did I say you could move? Stand still
you [expletive] faggot. You're a faggot aren't you? You look like a faggot. . .
. Hey, you got AIDS?"

This isn't even street justice. Julien is the victim here, the guy who was
robbed and thought that calling the L.A.P.D. might actually be a good idea. He
got more than he bargained for, because he presumed not to disguise that he was
gay and ran up against some cops pumping too much testosterone on a slow night.
Suddenly he sinks to his knees, spreads his arms and starts to wail: he has been
robbed of all the money he had, $56, as well as his driver's license and his
passport; his mother has died, he has nothing to live for, no home to go to.
"This is an insane person," Julien says. "I'm a sissy. Let me go. I want to kill
myself. I wanna kill myself because of people like you. I've never had any luck
going to the cops."

Dona is taken by surprise, not so much by Stout's behavior as by this sudden and
awkward revelation of frailty, of another's humanity. Julien repeats that he's
going to try to kill himself; easy to believe, he's so desperate and sad. Dona
asks where he's from, if he has anywhere to stay. "Is there something we can
do?"

"Yeah, kill me," says Julien, and stumbles across the street, toting his one
remaining possession, a six-pack of Coke.

Afterward, Dona sags, the fizz all gone out of him. He squeezes his forehead
between thumb and forefinger. "That wasn't right," he says.

DARYL GATES had ruled like a despot, with a despot's whim, and in this he was
heir to history. James Davis, the L.A.P.D. chief through the 1920's and 1930's,
honestly believed that the country would be better off if constitutional rights
were forgotten and everything was left to the police. Davis invented the
"dragnet," the stopping and looking-over of citizens just to see if they might
be suspicious, and was thus the forefather of strong-arm, pro-active policing.
He presided over a department that not only sold promotions to sergeant for $500
but was on the take from organized crime. But that was a different era, when
movie stars rubbed shoulders with gangsters, who in those days dressed in
pin-stripe suits and wore fedoras -- Raymond Chandler's Los Angeles, in other
words, not the L.A. of "Boyz N the Hood."

Davis was eventually booted out when some of his officers tried to blow up,
quite literally, a private investigator. Bill Parker, a declared visionary, took
over in 1950, so stiff and unbending, that Gene Roddenberry, the creator of
"Star Trek" and a former L.A.P.D. sergeant, is said to have based the character
of Mr. Spock on him. Parker's mission was to create a police force free from
graft, which he did, a "thin blue line" modeled on the Marine Corps. He crusaded
against integration. He was an alcoholic and in 1959 told the United States
Commission on Civil Rights that Hispanic newcomers to L.A.  "aren't far removed
from the wild tribes of Mexico."

Next came Tom Reddin and then another Davis, Ed Davis, better known as "Crazy
Ed," who was homophobic, pulled women off the beat and reassigned them to desk
jobs and once asked for funds to buy a submarine for the war on drugs.

Gates, Parker's onetime driver and most devoted disciple, took over in 1978.
Officers called him a jerk, but he was a colorful jerk, their colorful jerk.
After the infamous carotid artery remark some took to calling their patrol cars
"black and normals." And now, one officer says: "It's night and day. When Gates
went we went from walking on water to wading in [expletive]."

Many say morale is at its lowest ever. Earlier this year there was an
acrimonious struggle for a pay raise, the first in two years. Qualified officers
are leaving at the rate of at least 10 a month -- and probably more -- many to
take jobs in Simi Valley, Santa Ana and Huntington Beach, neighboring
communities that are safer and offer better pay and facilities. "We're like the
Bank of America," one officer says. "Training everybody so they can look
elsewhere."

There's a sense of a widening separation between command and the working stiffs.
Williams protests that he keeps an open-door policy and they say it's a door
they'd rather not pass through. They complain that the only time they see him is
on TV. One day he might surprise their socks off -- standing up for them as he
did over officer-involved shootings -- but the next day, they see him selling
out the guys involved in a sexual harassment case.

Being a cop, it's just a job now, they say, it's 9 to 5, not a career. Many have
other jobs on the side, running their own security firms or working as
bodyguards to movie stars. They say: Guys used to come into the department out
of the services. Ask them back then where they'd wanna be in 10 years time and
they'd say, "In a black-and-white chasing bad guys." Cops are maybe a little
more educated these days, but ask them the same question and likely they'll say,
"I wanna be chief of police." The whole game is much more political. It's snakes
and ladders. The L.A.P.D. has come down to this: Corporate America versus
Patrol.

"THE DIFFERENCE IN THE L.A.P.D. post-Rodney King?" asks Cedric Wilder, arms
clasped behind his head, sitting at his desk in the detectives' squad room of
the Pacific precinct, where shadings of the "new" L.A.P.D. are coming into view.
"I'm here. A black in charge of the homicide section. That's a change." Behind
him is a wall of wooden cabinets holding the "murder books," case histories of
every homicide in the precinct in the last three years, row after row of
three-inch blue plastic binders. On his waistband is a badge, a beeper and a
9-millimeter Beretta, on the butt of which one of his daughters has stuck the
plastic label "GUN."

Wilder, who decided to become a homicide cop after his own father was robbed and
murdered, has six detectives under his command. Affirmative action may have been
a deciding factor in his getting the job, but he's anxious to point out that
he's very good at it. At Pacific, the clearance rate for homicide, the
percentage of cases solved, is more than 80 percent, compared with around 20
percent for all other investigated crime. "If you get mugged or robbed, well I'm
afraid that's rough," he says. "But if you get killed, you can pretty much rest
assured we're gonna catch the guy." He earns about $81,000 a year, including
overtime.

Pacific homicide cops dress and carry themselves with a theatrical panache. The
suits are Italian, the silk ties like explosions in a paint factory, the
dialogue top-notch Hollywood. This is police work at a different level, where
crime, celebrity and cops all get mixed up. Marcia Clark, the chief prosecutor
in the Simpson case, drops by for a chat about another case. "Down in South
L.A.," Wilder says, "I had to look for my own clippings in the paper. Here
people send them to us."

In terms of crime, Pacific is pretty much average, average to slow: 26 murders
last year, 75 rapes, 1,154 robberies, 1,347 aggravated assaults. But it can be
the weirdest place in the world, says Wilder, because it's so various, and big,
covering 28 square miles. There are the Culver City projects, the airport and
Venice Beach, where as many as 150,000 might turn out on a busy summer Sunday.
There's Oakwood, where movie stars' homes butt up against a small and embattled
black and Hispanic community.

Pacific, a microcosm of the city, is mixed; it really does feel worlds away from
Rampart. Unlike Rampart, it's not just the hard charge. Pacific has female
officers who refer to themselves as "PMS on patrol"; a black patrol officer who
was among those who looked on while Rodney King was being beaten; a Cuban
ex-ballplayer, and a detective adjutant named Kevin Coffey, given to crying
"Outstanding, outstanding," and "Network. Gotta Network." Three years ago he was
shot accidentally by another officer. The bullet entered above one hip, traveled
across his body and burst into fragments across the other. He almost died.

"As a corporation we're inefficient," says Coffey, who keeps a copy of "A
Passion for Excellence" on his desk. "Imagine if officers were paid per arrest."
Scary thought.

Officers bustle in an out of the report room, answering calls from their
beepers, writing, erasing, rewriting reports in longhand. One entire wall is
filled with racks of forms. Forms for use of force, forms for use of firearms,
forms for evidence, forms for everything. It can take as long as five hours to
process an arrest, a situation Willie Williams agrees is absurd; it keeps
officers off the street. The L.A.P.D. exists in a technological dark age. The
main computer in the detective's room at Pacific has a 10-megabyte hard disk.

A burly, mustachioed Hispanic officer, Alvaro Ramos, leans up against a desk. He
once had a bit part in a movie, "Blind Doll," in which he played -- of course --
a mustachioed Hispanic cop. Ramos is puzzled about life in the L.A.P.D. these
days. He says: "Take two officers, came on at the same time, done pretty much
the same work. Maybe they're even partners. Their careers can sure go in a
different direction."

He looks on, stroking his mustache with nervous fingers, while a female officer
schmoozes with a lieutenant at another station. The issue is promotion, and as
she stretches out her legs, leaning in close to the phone, she banters: "Will I
fly to Hawaii with you? Sure. There's no one I'd rather do it with. Santa
Barbara's closer. Dinner might be even more practical."

I ride out with Holly Daniel, one of the Pacific's Senior Lead Officers. The
S.L.O.'s job is to organize Neighborhood Watch groups and crime-prevention
meetings, to know whatever's going on in her assigned neighborhood, the Palms,
near the intersection of the San Diego and Santa Monica Freeways, an area with
an increasing problem. Gangsters, pushed out of Oakwood, have been moving in.

"I get one day a week to stay here, try and take care of that, and that's good,
but I'd like to have more. That's where this comes in." She gives the Mobile
Digital Terminal a not-so friendly slap. "Most of the time we're chasing calls.
You want a good response time and you want the same officers in the same car in
the same area? The answer's simple. More officers, more money. Of course there
has to be the philosophy as well, the commitment to it, but. . . ." She rubs her
fingers together. "Lollipops."

Daniel was born in Richmond, has a bachelor's degree and has been with the
L.A.P.D. since 1985. She has worked in narcotics and in SPU -- the Special
Problems Unit -- and comes to work each morning toting her own laptop computer.
In the strip mall she greets the local drunks by their first names and chats
about their families before moving them on. She knows all the transients by
name, and many of the kids. She has her own stop-by office, on Motor Avenue next
to a liquor store, paid for by the community. The property owner lowered the
rent and picked up the utilities, and another private donor is paying the phone
bill for a year. "I don't want to sound like a jerk about this, but they did it
because they liked me. They thought, 'Hey, Holly's bustin' her butt, let's help
her bust it a bit less.' This way I feel better, they feel better and I got a
lot of info about suspects on my voice mail. Messages to the station tend to
drop into a black hole."

There are Neighborhood Watch meetings once a month at the local middle school.
"Fifty to a hundred people show up. It's not that great. People tend to want to
be involved when they've become a victim. The day they're robbed at gunpoint,
boom, they're in there.

"If the public had a clue about what really goes on, they wouldn't moan the way
they do. It's like what Jack Nicholson says in 'A Few Good Men.' They public
wants things taken care of. They don't want to be robbed or burgled or beaten
up. They want it to be done gently and they don't want us to be seen doing it."

Nicholson is the city's best-loved star, not least because he does things every
Angeleno can appreciate, like taking a nine-iron to the car of a driver who cut
him off, and this is maybe the 9th or 10th time I've heard an officer at Pacific
invoke this particular speech from this particular movie. It's almost a mantra,
a cry that cops are misunderstood, that they can't do this alone anymore.

ONE MORNING THERE'S A 5:30 A.M. roll call, and 40 officers gather prior to the
serving of warrants to murder suspects living in the Marionwood projects. Ramos
is there, and his partner, Officer Cordobes, and Holly Daniel, and on a desk in
the squad room there's an old copper's dream, an enormous box filled with every
variety of doughnut. But this is California, the L.A.P.D. of the New Age, and
the doughnuts go untouched.

An hour later, just after first light, in the projects, the detectives and
officer go in, and it's all over in a minute or two, without any hindrance or
fuss. "Smooth, smooth, smooth," says Wilder, strolling with a clipboard behind
his back, looking for all the world like a well-turned-out school inspector,
ticking off items on his checklist. "Three out of six. Not perfect, not bad. A
.500 average. If I were a ballplayer I'd be earning much more than I do now," he
says.

Wilder drives back to the station with Otis Dobine, the lieutenant in charge of
detectives and head of ABLE, the Association of Black Law Enforcement
Executives. While Wilder is among those weighing whether to stay on in the
department, it's clear that Dobine hopes to go much further. He points out that
each previous head of ABLE has gone on to make the rank of captain at least.

"The L.A.P.D.'s still healing," he says. "Lotta wounds. Still ain't got scabs on
'em. This is a challenging time for people who can take changes. Maybe a little
too challenging for some."

He remembers, as a probationer in South Central, chasing a suspect. The suspect
escaped, but the pursuit flushed out an old black who'd been asleep. A white
officer whipped the man across the face with his flashlight, while Dobine
watched, horrified, knowing this was the kind of thing you kept very quiet about
if you were a black probationer and you wanted to keep your job.

In the past, and to a considerable extent even now, prejudice operated to keep
minorities out of prestigious posts: narcotics, internal affairs, Officer
Involved Shooting (Wilder is the only black ever to work that detail), and
Metro, the elite patrol division that includes SWAT. There was a Catch-22: such
plum appointments came only if the package was varied and impressive, but the
package was only impressive so long as it had some plums in it; minorities found
it harder to get that first plum.

Dobine knows there were times when he was passed over because of his race. He's
all for affirmative action, and Willie Williams. "The people who want to keep
the system the way it is have no idea what it feels like to be discriminated
against," he says. "This is the first time ever that there was a black in
charge. It's a little different feeling. Now I can laugh. Back then, even in
some areas now, they tried to give you the idea that there are mystical talents
about doing these specialist jobs. That's a bunch of bull. There are no
hotshots."

IN SOUTH CENTRAL LOS Angeles, at 8:15 on a Friday night, the main thoroughfares
-- Slauson, Crenshaw, Normandie and Vermont -- are busy with traffic. The sound
of gospel singing rises from the neighborhood's many churches. Lights are
stacked up in the sky as jets make their approach to LAX. An L.A.P.D. chopper
circles loud and low under their path. This is the Los Angeles where there are
two gang funerals a week at the mortuary on Crenshaw Boulevard, where the
A-frame houses that stand back from the quiet side streets are protected like
fortresses with black steel screen doors and black steel window grilles. This is
the Los Angeles where, at the end of a weekend, homicide detectives say they
sometimes can't even remember which corpse was which.

The 77th division covers 14 square miles, and the murder count for 1994 reached
138. When President Clinton announced the invasion of Haiti, community leaders
stood up and asked why the Marines couldn't come here instead; they were
serious. Unemployment and poverty, gangs and crack cocaine have mutated a way of
life. Many people here don't just hate the police; they hold them in contempt.
"The attitude since the riots is, 'Screw you,' " says Sgt. Paul Hernandez. "Now
you've gotta sit back and let these guys jack their jaws. They stand there on
the streets bulldogging you. Huffing up their chests and staring you down. Used
to be just the ex-cons did that. Now it's everybody. Probably it's in the back
of their minds. 'You ain't worth [expletive]. We showed you what we could do. We
beat the hell out of you guys.' "

Last Monday it was quiet until the Los Angeles Raiders game was over on "Monday
Night Football." The Raiders lost, and then "Boom," says Hernandez, "two within
five minutes." On Wednesday there was a triple, when a member of a relatively
small gang, the 6-Deuce Brims, emptied his 9-millimeter into three members of
the Rollin 60's, major leaguers, as their car pulled up at a curb. Members of
the Rollin 60's have been calling 77th, announcing that there is going to be
payback, big-time. The 6-Deuce Brims will be exterminated. Since then the
atmosphere has been a little tense.

Together with Rampart, 77th is known as the varsity of patrol. What might take
two or more years in Pacific they learn here in six months, then move on.
Coppers tend to be of two types. Few blacks, no surprise, but young guys, fresh
out of the academy, full of fire, and the old-timers who can show them the
ropes. Hernandez is in the latter category. A big Texan, born in San Antonio, he
doesn't so much strut as saunter.

In anticipation of the Rollin 60's tit-for-tat, the neighborhood has been
flooded with officers from Metro riding in unmarked cars and extra "Crash" units
trying to get guns off the streets. "Most likely it'll be quiet for a few days,"
Hernandez says. "The 60's are gonna wait until some of this heat goes away."
Crash -- Community Resources Against Street Hoodlums -- was formed to fight
gangs in the mid-1970's. At Rampart I'd seen two Crash officers line up and
search 20 or more 18th Street gangsters who'd been out collecting for a homeboy
murdered in Hollywood that same day. "In 77th this would never happen," Sgt.
Paul Byrnes, head of Rampart Crash had told me. "Two guys against 20 gangsters?
They'd just take off and there'd be a helluva fight if you tried to stop them.
I'd need a lot more guys." In Rampart I'd found myself thinking how well defined
the job was for Crash, difficult, but at least straightforward.

At 54th and Gramercy there's already a crowd in the street, in front of their
houses, wanting to know what's happening, why a helicopter is circling overhead,
why there are seven or eight patrol cars cutting off the ends of the street and
why cops are creeping around in their backyards. The answer is that the Crash
officers are searching for a man seen in the area with a shotgun. Now just about
all the neighborhood has come out to watch, and when a young officer, Clausen,
unwisely touches an old woman wearing a "Don't Squeeze the Juice" T-shirt with
the palm of his hand to suggest she move back a little, she goes off like a
rocket: "Don't you push me around, don't you dare assault me!"

The old woman's daughter pitches in, then her friends, screaming abuse, while
the old woman herself takes Clausen's badge number, saying, "I'm calling your
watch commander, I'm calling Internal Affairs."

"It's every night," says Hernandez. "It's left and right every night."

During the Gates years, black drug dealers were commonly referred to as
Vietcong, and now the citizens in post-riot South Central are no longer prepared
to accept the L.A.P.D. as an occupying force, however much they may fear or
loathe the gangs. The attitude is, show us, prove that you're not the way we
think you are. The breakdown of trust seems almost complete.

Crash officers go to arrest a probationed gangster, Damon, on suspicion of rape,
and the cuffed Damon stands his ground. Surrounded by 20 or more cops, butting
this way and that as he tries to break loose, Damon demands that one of the
officers go back into his house and fetch his blue shoes. "I don't wanna be
wearing these shoes. Bring me my blue shoes!" He wants to go to jail being a
Crip, and there's something both scary and funny in his assumption of just who
exactly is calling the shots.

At the 77th the attitude towards community policing isn't cynical, more if only.
"They've gotta be kidding," says Hernandez. Down here there's a somewhat
different concept of Neighborhood Watch. For fear of gang reprisal, meetings
tend to be arranged like clandestine operations out of John le Carre. Hernandez
lifts his gear and his briefcase from the trunk of his patrol car, leaving
behind roll after roll, perhaps as many as 15 or 20, of that festive yellow
tape. Hernandez lives out in West Covina, in the suburbs beyond East L.A. He's
looking forward to seeing his wife, his son and his little girl, a 12-year-old,
a skater with ambitions to make the Olympics. "Each night when I go home," he
says, "about halfway, it's like a ton of bricks just rolls off my shoulders."

IN APRIL 1994 A FEDERAL jury awarded Rodney King $3.8 million in his civil suit
against the City of Los Angeles. The Taser stun gun, which had been used by Sgt.
Stacey Koon during the botched attempt to subdue him, is now an antique. Spares
are impossible to find.

Much of the L.A.P.D.'s myth was smoke and mirrors: the New Centurions, the Blue
Knights -- these were excellent P.R., fueled by Hollywood, and if they persist
at all it's only in the movies. Its flaws were obvious after the Watts riot of
1965, if anyone cared to look, which Bill Parker, Ed Davis and then Daryl Gates
made sure was never too easy. Equally, many of the department's failings have
come to be exaggerated in the wake of Rodney King.

For years, the L.A.P.D. storm-trooped along and many Angelenos were, if not
happy about the idea, at least tolerant of it, so long as the streets were safe.
Well, that doesn't work anymore. If this most crime-aware of cities requires a
new L.A.P.D., an L.A.P.C., it will have to provide financial and political
support. Understanding the police is an interior journey; to pretend otherwise
is to abandon responsibility, which is of course what we mostly try to do.

Cops are the guys with society's bullets; now they're being asked to learn to
use Band-Aids too, and the rest of us are having to address the problem of
telling them how to apply them. The aim is for a computerized, cost-efficient
and caring L.A.P.D., a force of 10,000 officers, of whom 43.4 percent are women
(versus 15.3 percent now). Some hope. Willie Williams thinks it will take six to
eight years, by which time he hopes the precepts and philosophy of community
policing will have been absorbed everywhere. "There'll be a time when we don't
even have a name for it," he says.

One afternoon, I place a call to the office of the Police Commission. A woman
answers. "They're all out at a meeting in the chief's office," she says.
"They're all with Chief Gates right now."

I say, "Don't you mean Chief Williams?"

"Oh, sure," she says. "That must be what I meant."

LOAD-DATE: January 22, 1995

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photos: Pacific precinct, 2 A.M.: Officer Hoskins holds suspects in a
car theft. They were later identified as gang members. (pg. 26)l Safety starts
in the Rampart locker room. The division is the old L.A.P.D.: officers sport
Marine haircuts and still carry themselves with swagger. (pg. 28); Officers
Dona, left, and Stout, right, surround Julien, a robbery victim. When Julien
complained about the release of one of his assailants, Officer Stout mocked his
homosexuality. Above: Rampart officers comfort a woman whose husband has just
choked to death. (pg. 29); Officer Hoskins of the Pacific precinct checks for
gang tattoos on a car-theft suspect. Right: Friday night, South Central -- a
robbery suspect lies wounded near Officer Clements after being shot by a
burrito-truck owner. Officers McDonald, left, and McCallum, who call themselves
"PMS on Patrol," respond to a domestic dispute. The goal for the new L.A.P.D. is
43 percent women; it's now 15 percent. (pg. 30-31); Rampart officers search an
abandoned motel for a murder suspect. The building is just a few blocks from
Charlie Chaplin's old mansion. Officer Marty Swann wakes up a homeless man while
searching for a murder suspect. He is part of the Crash unit -- Community
Resources Against Street Hoodlums. (pg. 32-33)(PHOTOGRAPHS BY JOSEPH
RODRIGUEZ/BLACK STAR, FOR THE NEW YORK TIMES)

                   Copyright 1995 The New York Times Company

                              56 of 211 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 January 22, 1995, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

WORD & IMAGE;
Journalism 101

BYLINE: By MAX FRANKEL

SECTION: Section 6;  Page 18;  Column 1;  Magazine Desk

LENGTH: 1152 words


THOSE UNUSUAL NOISES IN medialand are the cries of serious journalists
flagellating serious journalists about their loss of "objectivity" and "values."
Adam Gopnik in The New Yorker pines for the good old days when reporters were,
he thinks, rewarded for their access to power instead of aggressions against it
and when they abetted governance by hiding the warts of the mighty instead of
wallowing in their deceptions and blemishes. Harvard's Nieman Reports features
alarms that serious news organizations are embracing "the values of
entertainment -- urgency, brevity, celebrity, action and conflict" and "if
needed for extra spice," making the news "opinionated."

With so many vulgarians dancing on public stages in the garb of journalism,
you'd think that editors and reporters in the truth-seeking minority would hang
together and defend themselves and their honest strivings. But they've been
shaken, I think, by the loss of distinctions, particularly in television, where
the vulgar and the sublime appear in quick rotation inside the same picture
frame. One moment, Tom Brokaw is dutifully presenting the legislative ambitions
of Bob Dole and Newt Gingrich. Next moment, John McLaughlin is shouting about
the politicians' sincerity on a scale of 1 to 10 and Jay Leno is inserting their
names in his sex jokes.

The confusion obviously haunts the public. When pollsters come around to measure
attitudes toward the media, virtually no one ever stops to ask, "Which media?"
And when The New York Times recently cited The National Enquirer as a source for
one piece of information, the critics chortled that all distinctions between a
world-class newspaper and supermarket scandal sheet had now disappeared. Well,
they haven't and I count on anyone reading these pages to be able without
further instruction to measure the seriousness of The Times against that of The
Enquirer.

Equally foolish, but less obvious, is the confusion spread by Gopnik and others
who are nostalgic for journalism's lost objectivity. Recklessly, even
dangerously, they blur the difference between fact and truth and condemn honest,
essential analysis as mere opinion.

Facts and analysis are the bricks and mortar of responsible reporting. To be
sure, they are subject to news fashions: the age or ethnicity or childhood
experiences of a person in the news may or may not be rated as significant at
various times. But however detailed, facts and analysis lead only slowly and
cumulatively to a perception of truth, a perception also colored by individual,
value-laden opinion.

Fact, analysis, opinion: they are neighbors, but well fenced. Any rendering of
the words that President Clinton will utter to Congress in his State of the
Union address next Tuesday will be factual. Why he says what he says will
require analysis. Whether what he says or advocates is good or bad will be
opinion.

PRACTICING JOURNALISTS NO LESS than active news consumers need to preserve a
sense of these distinctions if the channels of public discourse are to remain
reliable. Consider three possible accounts of the President's address as they
might be parsed in Prof. I. M. Knowall's Journalism 101:

(1) President Clinton called on Congress last night to enact his "middle-class
bill of rights," featuring a tax cut of $258 for the average family of four.

Good as it sounds, that approach is best called "objective misrepresentation."
In the trade, it is sometimes called a "wire service" technique, because wire
services need to be first on every editor's desk and are presumed -- often
wrongly -- to have no time to do more than regurgitate the words of a political
speech. Such writing satisfies the superficial desire for "the facts." It
contains no errors yet it obviously tilts toward one side in a partisan
competition for public support. Notice the ritualistic repetition of the White
House propaganda slogan about a new "bill of rights" and of the populist but
uninformative term "middle class." The account offers not even a clue to the
proposal's purpose or scope.

Professor Knowall's moral: Beware of "just the facts." In the 1950's, by
reporting just the fact that Senator Joseph McCarthy claimed to possess lists of
Communists in Government, the media helped him conduct an ugly witch hunt
against loyal civil servants. In the 1960's, just the facts of a Presidential
speech helped to persuade Congress and the public that a minor incident in
Vietnam's Gulf of Tonkin amounted to an unprovoked act of war.

(2) Although President Clinton's tax cut proposal is an obvious political ploy
to pre-empt the Republicans and will enlarge the Federal deficit by about $13
billion, it is the least he can do to satisfy the voters and preserve his
authority for the more important struggles ahead over health care and welfare
reform.

Though this rendering is couched in the language of analysis, and though it
offers some interpretations that belong in a sophisticated news report, it is,
quite simply, an editorial, a piece of partisan opinion. It is opinion because
it declares certain political objectives and battles to be more important than
others; it is partisan because it adopts the President's point of view of the
political scene. Such expressions of opinion about the value and desirability of
the President's program belong on the opinion pages, never in the news columns.

Professor Knowall's moral for the public: beware of unattributed declarations of
importance and speculations about what the voter really wants. His moral for
news practitioners: when asked what's right and wrong or good and bad, don't
tell. As Andrew Rosenthal, The Times's Washington editor, recently remarked in
concluding a highly informative on-line "chat" with computer questioners who
kept asking "What do you think?": "Please forgive me for not offering more of my
own opinions; I feel constrained from doing so as a journalist and
representative of my company."

(3) Trying to pre-empt a Republican campaign pledge to reduce Federal taxes,
President Clinton challenged Congress last night to enact his more modest mix of
tax credits and deductions for all but the richest Americans. He proposed an
average cut of $258 for a family of four, increasing the deficit by about $13
billion, or $10 billion less than the main Republican formula.

That approach strays far from the President's words, but admirably so; it might
be called "disinterested interpretation." It supplies (a) the political context
that provoked his message; (b) a hint of the intended beneficiaries, and (c) an
estimate of the budgetary consequences. By moving quite a distance from the raw
facts to include meaningful analysis, this account actually becomes politically
more neutral, more objective.

The moral, Mr. Gopnik: access to those who can explain the facts and aggressive
interpretation of them are equally essential for accuracy and fairness.

LOAD-DATE: January 22, 1995

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1995 The New York Times Company

                              57 of 211 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 January 22, 1995, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

James Bell, 80, Expert on Plasticity

SECTION: Section 1;  Page 33;  Column 5;  National Desk

LENGTH: 238 words


James Bell, a professor of solid mechanics at Johns Hopkins University who did
extensive research into how materials undergo change, died on Sunday at his home
in Baltimore. He was 80.

The cause was cancer, said his wife of 54 years, Perra Bell.

His scientific investigations included research into how such forces as heat,
stress or cold could be used to alter materials permanently. He developed a
gauge to measure strain on materials and wrote more than 80 papers based on his
research on dynamic plasticity in materials.

During the 1950's and 1960's, he conducted research for the Johns Hopkins
Medical School and worked on the development of a mechanical pump for use during
cardiac surgery and a dialysis apparatus.

A student of music since childhood, he played the oboe with the Hopkins Symphony
Orchestra and continued his study at the Peabody Institute. He conducted
research on acoustics and wrote on the history of the physics of music for the
Grove Dictionary of Music and Musicians in 1980.

Born in Melrose, Mass., he graduated from New York University in 1940 and joined
the engineering faculty at Johns Hopkins in 1945. He became a professor emeritus
in 1979.

In addition to his wife, the former Perra Somers, he is survived by a daughter,
Jane Kiester of Gainesville, Fla.; a sister, Hester Coe of Winter Park, Fla.,
and three grandchildren. His son, Christopher, was killed in Vietnam in 1969.

LOAD-DATE: January 22, 1995

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Obituary (Obit); Biography

                   Copyright 1995 The New York Times Company

                              58 of 211 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 January 22, 1995, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

FILM;
A Journey to Macedonia Takes a Director to Sundance

BYLINE: By ELLEN PALL

SECTION: Section 2;  Page 20;  Column 3;  Arts & Leisure Desk

LENGTH: 1318 words


Milcho Manchevski has been tired lately. Happy, yes. "But so tired it's sort of
wearing off on the happiness," he said wistfully from the apartment in Skopje,
Macedonia, where he grew up. That was a month ago. Last week, sitting in the bar
of the Rihga Royal Hotel in New York, a discreet gold stud in each ear, Mr.
Manchevski was, if anything, more exhausted.

The director, who is 35, had a lot to feel tired about. Not long ago he was
leading a busy but manageable life as a New York-based director of music videos
and commercials. Then he made his first feature film, "Before the Rain."

That film, a story of ethnic conflict set in London and Macedonia, has been
shown at festivals in a half-dozen countries over the last five months. It has
won nearly a score of awards, including the Golden Lion (shared with another
film) at the Venice Film Festival, and it will be shown tonight at the Sundance
Film Festival, in Park City, Utah.

Although the movie doesn't open in theaters in the United States until next
month, it has already made a celebrity of its director in Macedonia, which chose
the picture as its first-ever entry for the Academy Award for best foreign
language film. (The nominees will be announced on Feb. 14.)

"Before the Rain" is not an easy movie to characterize, or even to follow.
Vividly photographed and told in three parts, its narrative structure is almost
circular, ending where it began. Its protagonists include Kiril (Gregoire
Colin), a young Macedonian monk who has taken a vow of silence; Zamira (Labina
Mitevska), a desperate ethnic Albanian girl, and Anne (Katrin Cartlidge), a
well-heeled English photo editor.

At its core, though, it is the story of Aleksandar Kirkov (Rade Serbedzija), a
London-based war photographer who returns to his native Macedonia to find his
village divided into hostile camps, ethnic Macedonian against ethnic Albanian.
In no time, he is forced to take a side.

Mr. Manchevski (his full name is pronounced meel-cho man-CHEVF-ski) stresses
that his film is in no way a documentary. In fact, as he pointed out, Macedonia
-- a landlocked region that is now an independent country -- is the one part of
former Yugoslavia where political change has so far been nonviolent. The film
grew out of a trip he made to his homeland in 1991. (Mr. Manchevski lives in the
East Village in Manhattan, but he has dual citizenship and keeps the Skopje
apartment where he spent his childhood.)

In 1979, when he left Skopje to study film at Southern Illinois University,
Macedonia was still part of Yugoslavia. But in 1991, the region was in
transition, and the director was struck by a heavy, pervasive sense of
expectation -- of what, exactly, was not clear.

"It could be cleansing, the beginning of something new, or tragic and deadly,"
he said. "I wanted to capture this sense of something in the air, like before a
rain when you sense that pressure inside your mouth."

On his return to New York, he wrote an outline. Then he left it in his computer.

"I was convinced I wasn't going to get funding," he explained. "I thought it was
too personal, too esoteric." Though he thought of it daily, the outline sat in
the computer for a year and a half.

Finally, a friend suggested sending it to British Screen, an organization that
nurtures new talent by helping to underwrite films unlikely to attract
sufficient commercial financing. Simon Perry, British Screen's chief executive,
read it, liked its originality and commissioned a script.

"It was a very topical story, but it wasn't a piece of realism," Mr. Perry said.
"It was always a piece of poetry." He considered Mr. Manchevski's video
background a plus. "So many writers come from theater or novels; they're so
word-based. Milcho is image-based. He wants to enrich your eye, give you a feast
in your ear." Mr. Manchevski's completed script was approved within days.

SHOOTING THE FILM, which ultimately cost $2.5 million, with financing from
several co-producers, was arduous. It was hard just to get to the locations,
many of them remote mountain areas inside Macedonia. Occasionally, the crew had
to build its own roads. Mr. Manchevski would sometimes shoot a single scene in
places miles apart, then splice the footage together to create a unified whole.
Kiril's mountaintop monastery, for example, is a composite of four different
monasteries.

There were also the practical problems of coordinating a crew and actors from
more than a half-dozen countries, among them France, South Africa, Bulgaria and
Macedonia. The project was not made easier by Mr. Manchevski's exacting eye.
Before beginning to film, he spent weeks at the Louvre, examining paintings and
contemplating how to achieve the sometimes primitive, sometimes medieval,
sometimes urban looks he wanted for his film.

"Milcho doesn't compromise artistically," said Lenny Grodin, who produced many
of the music videos Mr. Manchevski directed. "He gets wonderful visions, and
then he has the ability to translate them onto film." Mr. Grodin was first drawn
to Mr. Manchevski's video work by his ability to blend the contemporary and
classical. "He has the classic European eye combined with a very young, hip
edge."

Silvan Furlan, the artistic director of the Slovene Cinematheque in Ljubljana,
Slovenia, sees in Mr. Manchevski's work a marriage of Eastern Europe and
Hollywood -- a combination of the European auteur tradition and Hollywood's
ability to make movies that speak to a wider audience. Mr. Furlan was among
those who chose "Before the Rain" to be shown at the Film Art Fest in Ljubljana
this year. Reaction to the movie was positive, he said, despite the fact that
Slovenians, like others in the former Yugoslavia, are daily confronted by images
of ethnic conflict.

"We are full of those pictures, as you were during Vietnam," he said. "We have
enough TV documentaries dealing with the situation in the Balkans." But Mr.
Manchevski's extremely personal vision "opens a new imaginative register," he
added, "even for the public of ex-Yugoslavia, which lives this reality every
day."

The film maker's hybrid sensibility was shaped during a painful youth. His
father was an engineer, his mother a doctor; he was an only child. His mother
died of a sudden illness when the boy was 6. When he was 13, his father also
died, because of a heart condition. Though Mr. Manchevski lived with an aunt, he
considered himself on his own.

He was sustained by books and, naturally, movies -- James Bond films and
spaghetti westerns when he was small, later the works of Akira Kurosawa, Roman
Polanski and Milos Forman. Eager to study film, he won a scholarship from
Southern Illinois University. He returned to Yugoslavia after graduating but
eventually settled in New York, paying the rent by delivering balloons and
acting as a court interpreter while writing scripts.

One script written on spec -- a fictional film about an actress -- contained an
imaginary commercial. As part of an effort to raise money for the movie, he shot
the commercial. That led to work directing real commercials and music videos, a
field in which he thrived. His video of Arrested Development's "Tennessee" won
the 1992 MTV Award for best video/rap.

Today, Mr. Manchevski is hopeful about the future of his homeland. He rejects
the idea that Balkan nations are doomed to repeat a centuries-long cycle of
violence. "Before the Rain" has its share of violence. It also depends heavily
on the image of circles, both metaphoric and literal.Its fractured narrative is
indeed almost circular, but that "almost" is very deliberate.

"Using the circle as an excuse is too easy," Mr. Manchevski said. "It's not so
that if something happened 300 years ago, it has to happen again. For me, the
only thing that matters is your own personal responsibility -- whether you're in
Northern Ireland or Armenia or London or Macedonia."

NAME: Milcho Manchevski

LOAD-DATE: January 22, 1995

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photos: Milcho Manchevski in New York -- Graduating from music videos
to a first feature, "Before the Rain." (Edward Keating/The New York Times); In
"Before the Rain," Rade Serbedzija plays a London-based war photographer who
returns to Macedonia to find his village divided. (Gramercy Pictures)

TYPE: Biography

                   Copyright 1995 The New York Times Company

                              59 of 211 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 January 23, 1995, Monday, Late Edition - Final

THE MEDIA BUSINESS: Press;
The new Speaker may actually be helped more than hurt by his dealings with
journalists.

BYLINE: By William Glaberson

SECTION: Section D;  Page 8;  Column 5;  Business/Financial Desk

LENGTH: 1073 words


IN his first weeks as Speaker of the House, Newt Gingrich has made a point of
declaring his disdain for what he calls "the liberal media elite."

But the realities of the way journalists work may actually have helped him more
than both he and they admit.

For one thing, his stance as a victim of partisan journalists has powerful
advantages. It helps him deflect negative coverage of incidents like the book
deal flap, the House historian flap and the orphanage flap.

Taking the offensive against journalists works, too, as the Connie Chung affair
proved. Mr. Gingrich's counterattack on Ms. Chung resulted in so much debate
about journalistic standards that it virtually obscured what Mrs. Gingrich said
her son had said about the First Lady.

For the moment, too, Mr. Gingrich makes such "good copy" that the news media are
showering attention on him. And even if much of the attention is negative, the
sheer volume of coverage has helped establish him as "King of the Hill," in the
words of Time magazine.

But perhaps most important, since Mr. Gingrich has been covered by reporters for
years, he benefits from what might be called journalistic inoculation, which
shields him from aggressive coverage of some controversies in his past because
journalists have come to regard them as old news.

During his first image-forming weeks at the center of national attention,
reporters and editors have appeared hamstrung by their view that everyone
already knows about several issues that some of Mr. Gingrich's harshest critics
say define him.

During these weeks, the press has covered -- but sometimes seems to have handled
with kid gloves -- subjects that might have hurt Mr. Gingrich much more than his
mother's whispered epithet.

Mr. Gingrich is a family-values politician who fought through a bitter divorce
that some former associates have said raised questions about his character. He
is a military buff who benefited from student and family deferments during the
Vietnam War. And he presented himself as a champion of House ethics, though his
own fund-raising has raised questions and brought complaints.

Alan Murray, the Washington bureau chief of The Wall Street Journal, was asked
recently why news reports about Mr. Gingrich have referred to those issues so
gently. He noted that The Journal and other news organizations had published
just after the election some critical articles reviewing Mr. Gingrich's life.
But, Mr. Murray added, "How many times can you hit a story?"

Ask President Clinton or former Vice President Dan Quayle. When both were in the
critical period of defining themselves to the American public, the press
hammered at hidden corners of their histories.

Mr. Clinton's draft avoidance and his "I didn't inhale" background were among
the biggest stories of the campaign. And that was before Whitewater, Gennifer
Flowers and the Rose law firm were made into household names by the news media.
And Mr. Quayle was surely seen in that old snapshot as a member of the
privileged Indiana National Guard more often than he was pictured as a statesman
in the weeks after he was chosen to be George Bush's running mate.

One explanation may be that Mr. Clinton and Mr. Quayle had received far less
press attention than Mr. Gingrich before each of them materialized as a national
figure. Years of what Mr. Gingrich sometimes called nagging coverage may
actually have protected him when he took center stage.

Mr. Clinton's real estate dealings and other incidents that occurred when he was
governor of a small state without an aggressive news media fit the journalistic
definition of new when they were discovered by national reporters. And as a
little-noted Senator from Indiana, Mr. Quayle and his military-draft history did
not qualify as national news until Mr. Bush pushed him into the national
limelight.

But Mr. Gingrich has been covered since the 1970's. As a rising politician in
the sights of the sophisticated news organizations of Atlanta, Congressman
Gingrich of Georgia received extensive attention from his hometown press.

Then, as Mr. Gingrich climbed the leadership ladder, he became a national figure
and then a would-be Speaker. In the process, his life has been picked over by
the country's biggest news organizations and some serious smaller ones, like
Roll Call, the Capitol Hill newspaper, and Mother Jones, the counterculture
journal.

The effect has been that the kinds of anecdotes that sometimes feed the press
for weeks landed gradually in news reports during the period of more than a
decade before Mr. Gingrich became Mr. Speaker.

Journalists trade in "newness" or the perception thereof. A tough multipart
profile of Mr. Gingrich in The Washington Post described him as possessing "in
some cases a ruthlessness."

But The Post series dealt rather lightly with what some of his critics cite as
the best evidence of this trait: his visit to his first wife's hospital room to
discuss divorce while she recovered from cancer surgery. Mr. Gingrich has denied
the version of those events that his first wife, Jackie Gingrich, gave years ago
in published interviews.

By the time they began working on The Post's profile, said Dale Russakoff, one
of the reporters who wrote the series, the hospital room tale was no longer
fresh. "It had been repeated to the point that it had become a cliche and it
didn't mean anything anymore," she said.

The same can be said of what are now old questions about the financing of a
televised course, Renewing American Civilization, taught by Mr. Gingrich and
about Gopac, his political action committee.

"Gopac, in the Washington reporter's mind, is old news," said Larry J. Sabato, a
professor of government at the University of Virginia who frequently criticizes
the press for what he calls "frenzies" of excessive criticism of public figures.
Mr. Sabato wrote the widely cited book, "Feeding Frenzy: How Attack Journalism
Has Transformed American Politics" (Free Press, 1991).

But sometimes, Mr. Sabato said, the public does not know all the information
that has been gathered by reporters during years of coverage. Journalists' own
definition of what is new -- meaning new to them -- affects the emphasis they
give to information that might be new to readers and viewers.

"When they have known it, and when it has been in the headlines, it becomes less
newsworthy," Mr. Sabato said. "Reporters forget who they are reporting for."

LOAD-DATE: January 23, 1995

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1995 The New York Times Company

                              60 of 211 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 January 23, 1995, Monday, Late Edition - Final

OPERA REVIEW;
'Harvey Milk' Opens in Houston With the Reverence Built In

BYLINE: By EDWARD ROTHSTEIN,   Special to The New York Times

SECTION: Section C;  Page 11;  Column 1;  Cultural Desk

LENGTH: 905 words

DATELINE: HOUSTON, Jan. 22


A giant image of Maria Callas with bright red lips appears several times in
"Harvey Milk," which received its premiere at the Houston Grand Opera on
Saturday night. She looms over an onstage audience of cheering gay men. In their
midst is Harvey Milk, San Francisco's first openly homosexual elected official,
who loved opera and even attended a performance the night before he was
assassinated in 1978.

So how does he fare on the other side of the proscenium, as the subject of a
much-discussed, already debated work that will be shown here through Feb. 5, at
the New York City Opera in the spring and in San Francisco next season? To the
opera's credit, the answer is not simple. With music by Stewart Wallace and
libretto by Michael Korie, the work is a rambunctious combination of banality
and effective drama, posturing, playfulness and polemics. Long stretches of the
score, which is written with a mixture of free atonality, 1980's eclecticism and
ersatz pop, are lyrically awkward and unconvincing, but much of the last act is
pungent and focused. The cast was generally excellent (with one relatively
unknown singer, Gidon Saks, making a strong impression), the conducting by Ward
Holmquist fervent, and the production by Christopher Alden imaginative, but it
was impossible to separate onstage events from offstage history.

Indeed, the cheers of the audience on Saturday were as much for Harvey Milk as
for "Harvey Milk." Milk was a pioneer figure in gay politics, whose life,
meticulously traced by Randy Shilts in "The Mayor of Castro Street," mirrored
the postwar shifts in homosexual culture. Each act, unfolding on a single
triangular set, one side lined with closet doors, portrays a different stage in
Milk's life. The first act alludes to Milk's closeted days as a Wall Street
investor and political conservative. Milk croons like Bing Crosby, three
outrageously campy lovers do a Supremes imitation, and there is much reference
to the Holocaust, which for Milk, a Jew, was a touchstone for his evolving view
of homosexuality in America.

The second act is a celebration of the hippie Milk on Castro Street, where he
opens a camera shop and becomes involved in local politics. Here the music is
often funky, dominated by a sort of Mardi Gras flavor; it is the least
successful in the work. Finally, Milk makes it to City Hall, where in less than
a year as a Supervisor (a district representative on the City Council) he has
enormous impact on legislation affecting homosexuals and helps advance a liberal
political agenda. It is there that Milk locks horns with Dan White, a fellow
Supervisor, whose life is stranger than agitprop fiction. White is an
ex-policeman and ex-fireman, a Vietnam veteran and a fervid anti-homosexual. He
is continually thwarted by Milk and the Mayor, and finally pumps several rounds
of bullets into them.

This plot follows a model that is increasingly common on the opera stage, which
I think of as "Lives of the Saints": chronologically present iconic incidents
from the life of a political or pop-culture figure. This is what Philip Glass
did with Gandhi in "Satyagraha." In recent seasons, Frida Kahlo, Rudolph
Valentino and Marilyn Monroe have also received the treatment. Such dramas often
rely on the hope that the emotional baggage and preconceptions audiences bring
to the work will support what is happening on the stage.

That was, to a large extent, true here. "Milk," which may include the first
homosexual love scenes ever staged in an opera house, is partly a community
event, partly a celebration of homosexuality and partly a political argument
staged for the wider public. This is what has given it its unusual status and
drawn criticism from religious groups in Houston. All this is bound to affect
the work's reception in New York and San Francisco.

Unfortunately, the idea of a reverential history is built into the opera. There
are several major arias in which the principals simply stand and tell the
audience things about Milk. A gay-pride parade and street scene in the second
act is supported with stiltedly festive music. Despite a fine performance by
Robert Orth in the title role, Milk seems a pasteboard character, made more
attractive by eliminating the promiscuity and tantrums Shilts described.

This attitude also led to some kitsch and religious vulgarity. The opera opens
with the Kaddish, the Jewish prayer for the dead, and shows Milk's mother
lighting the Sabbath candles as she warns the child against homosexuals. It
closes with allusions to Milk as a latter-day Moses; led by a white-clad
messenger, he peers into the Promised Land of homosexual equality that he cannot
himself enter. His mother returns, again lighting Sabbath candles as words from
the Kaddish are heard: an absurd juxtaposition.

But surprisingly, in the final act, there is much that works, largely because of
Raymond Very's performance as Dan White. It would have been easy to exaggerate
White's villainy. Instead the composer, librettist and performer go out of their
way to make him believable, and thus all the more disturbing. This is an act
that begins to take drama more seriously, showing shadows, creating
confrontations, engaging the ear as well as the mind with Mr. Wallace's acerbic
lyricism. "Milk" would have profited from more of this; those men on stage
shouting "Brava" at Maria Callas, after all, were not cheering the life of a
saint.

LOAD-DATE: January 23, 1995

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo: Robert Orth, left, playing Harvey Milk, with Chuck Winkler,
Bradley Williams and Randall Wong. (Jim Calowell/Houston Grand Opera)

TYPE: Review

                   Copyright 1995 The New York Times Company

                              61 of 211 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 January 23, 1995, Monday, Late Edition - Final

Vietnam Won the Right to Choose Its Destiny;
Real Foundation Stones

SECTION: Section A;  Page 14;  Column 6;  Editorial Desk

LENGTH: 180 words


To the Editor:

Thomas L. Friedman in "Ha Noi or Ha Loi" (column, Jan. 15) describes an incident
in Hanoi where every morning a Vietnamese woman crouched on the sidewalk with
her bathroom scale, and he gave her a dollar and weighed himself.

In the mid-1970's near the corner of Eighth Avenue and 38th Street, a severely
crippled man accompanied by his dog sat on a dolly with an open handbag filled
with ballpoint pens. People would drop spare change into his handbag.

This man and the Vietnamese woman are not even micro-entrepreneurs; they are
beggars. To our shame and their credit they had found a way to overcome the
reluctance of people to give them money and thus preserved their dignity.

The real "foundation stones" of the Asian economic miracle are the hundreds of
thousands of Asians who work in industry under substandard conditions for
subsistence wages. We in the "developed" countries have yet to learn what the
Vietnamese development expert knew, that unsustainable development is killing us
all.

JAMES T. DETTE
Weehawken, N.J., Jan. 15, 1995

LOAD-DATE: January 23, 1995

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Letter

                   Copyright 1995 The New York Times Company

                              62 of 211 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 January 23, 1995, Monday, Late Edition - Final

Vietnam Won the Right to Choose Its Destiny

SECTION: Section A;  Page 14;  Column 4;  Editorial Desk

LENGTH: 276 words


To the Editor:

Thomas L. Friedman makes a convincing case in "Good Morning, Vietnam" (column,
Jan. 18) for ending our grudges against Vietnam. "It's time that we declare
victory," he announces.

The Vietnamese fought a bloody, prolonged war for the right to choose.
Twenty-nine years later they have chosen the free-market system. If there is
victory to be declared here, it is the Vietnamese people's.

Two years ago I was a delegate at the Naval Academy Foreign Affairs Conference
at Annapolis, Md. One featured speaker declared his joy at seeing Coca-Cola and
Levi jeans attain "most wanted" status in Vietnam. We didn't need to fight the
war, he said, we have won it anyway.

The point I made to the speaker also applies to Mr. Friedman's column: The
Vietnamese people have embraced the free market, their model of socialism having
failed to bring equity and progress.

Today the United States is the dominant global economy. American commodities
fetch a high premium in any crude bartering transaction or sophisticated trade
system. Vietnamese teen-agers are not embracing jeans and soft drinks in some
misty-eyed ideological realignment.

Mr. Friedman also recalls a taxi driver who listened to BBC tapes. If he is
trying to learn English, does it matter what the source is?

If Mr. Friedman is mourning that European businessmen are taking advantage of
the investment vacuum, he has a point. But his desire to see the Dallas Cowboys
replace Manchester United in the minds of the average Vietnamese smacks of
something other than business interest. It seems a call for cultural aggression.


NAEEM MOHAIEMEN
New York, Jan. 18, 1995

LOAD-DATE: January 23, 1995

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Letter

                   Copyright 1995 The New York Times Company

                              63 of 211 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 January 23, 1995, Monday, Late Edition - Final

Vietnam Won the Right to Choose Its Destiny;
What's in the Archives?

SECTION: Section A;  Page 14;  Column 54;  Editorial Desk

LENGTH: 304 words


To the Editor:

It may be wise for the United States to establish full diplomatic relations with
Vietnam, as Thomas L. Friedman advises (column, Jan. 18). But some of his
arguments are based on misconceptions.

The Vietnamese army that repulsed the 1979 Chinese invasion hardly fits Mr.
Friedman's adjective "tiny." The People's Army of Vietnam was then one of the
world's largest: 500,000 men organized in 14 infantry divisions and 33
regiments.

Furthermore, to argue based on that victory that "there is no more powerful
counterweight to Beijing than Hanoi" ignores the huge increase in Chinese power
over the last 15 years. The Chinese economy has quintupled since 1978, thanks to
liberalized economic policies.

Until recently, the Vietnamese economy was shrinking under the old Communist
system. As a result, the ratio of power between Vietnam and China has shifted
markedly in China's favor. If the United States seeks allies to contain China in
Southeast Asia, it might look to Thailand, Malaysia and Indonesia. Vietnam will
likely need decades to match their economic performance.

Mr. Friedman ignores the real missing in action issue. I agree there are no
Vietnam-era prisoners of war left alive. But Oleg Kalugin, the former K.G.B.
agent, and the Harvard researcher Stephen J. Morris have raised questions about
hundreds of Americans who possibly remained in enemy hands after the supposed
full exchange of prisoners in 1973.

Such stories may be false. But there is reason to believe Hanoi has not shown
all its archives contain about possible atrocities. Until this is settled, the
United States should refrain from sending an ambassador to Hanoi.

BRIAN R. SULLIVAN
Senior Research Professor
Institute for National Strategic
Studies, National Defense University
Washington, Jan. 18, 1995

LOAD-DATE: January 23, 1995

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Letter

                   Copyright 1995 The New York Times Company

                              64 of 211 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 January 23, 1995, Monday, Late Edition - Final

But Let Us Remember The Real Dr. King

SECTION: Section A;  Page 14;  Column 6;  Editorial Desk

LENGTH: 205 words


To the Editor:

"Martin Luther King, American" by Anita Haya Goldman (Op-Ed, Jan. 16) and "Dr.
King's Memorial" (editorial, same day) display a tendency to rewrite history to
celebrate an individual or event. Dr. King's work was important, but too many
people overlook the very real failings that plagued his later career.

From Dr. King's Nobel Peace Prize in 1964 (which raised much controversy because
the civil rights movement was an embarrassment to American foreign policy boasts
of being the free world's leader) until his murder in 1968, his public support
waned dramatically.

Many African-Americans gave stronger allegiance to the militant philosophies of
the black power movement, while supporters expressed displeasure with Dr. King's
heated opposition to the Vietnam War. His attempts to repeat his success in
desegregation in the North failed, compared with his moral and political
victories in the South.

In death, Dr. King has become one of the very few post-World War II American
figures to achieve nearly saintly adulation. In his life, opinion of his work
and ideas was both negative and positive. The truth may not be pleasant, but it
should not be ignored.

PHIL HALL
Bronx, Jan. 16, 1995

LOAD-DATE: January 23, 1995

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Letter

                   Copyright 1995 The New York Times Company

                              65 of 211 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                January 24, 1995, Tuesday, Late Edition - Final

Retired U.S. General to Aid Muslim-Croat Federation

BYLINE: By ROGER COHEN,   Special to The New York Times

SECTION: Section A;  Page 3;  Column 1;  Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 804 words

DATELINE: SARAJEVO, Bosnia and Herzego vina, Jan. 23


The United States will soon send a retired general, Frederick M. Franks Jr., to
Bosnia to assist the Muslim-Croat federation here with the integration of its
armed forces, American officials said today.

The dispatch of General Franks, the former commander of VII Corps, which
delivered the knockout blow to the Republican Guard in Iraq during the Persian
Gulf war, will recreate a union with a British general that was of decisive
importance in the gulf.

One of the men serving under General Franks's command during the gulf war was
Lieut. Gen. Rupert Smith, the British officer who will arrive here on Wednesday
to take over as commander of the more than 23,000 United Nations troops in
Bosnia.

During the gulf war, General Smith, 51, was commander of Britain's 1st Armored
Division, which fought as part of General Franks's VII Corps. The two men formed
a deep mutual respect then and have remained in contact as friends since.

But in Bosnia, their roles will be quite distinct and even potentially in
conflict. General Smith will command a peacekeeping force, with the goal of
ending the Bosnian war. General Franks will be trying to bolster a military
alliance that could be called on to battle the Serbs in a prolonged war.

General Smith's predecessor, Lieut. Gen. Sir Michael Rose, left Bosnia today as
Bosnian Government and Bosnian Serb officials reached an outline agreement to
open roads out of Sarajevo on Feb. 1. The roads were supposed to be opened at
the beginning of this month under a four-month cease-fire agreement.

Though some humanitarian aid comes into the Bosnian capital by another road and
through an airlift, reopening other routes will considerably ease hardships for
the remaining 280,000 residents of Sarajevo, under Serb siege for most of the
war.

General Franks, 58, who lost his right leg in combat in Vietnam, recently
retired as head of the army's Training and Doctrine Command in Norfolk, Va. As
military adviser to the Muslim-Croat federation's army, he will come regularly
to Sarajevo but not be permanently posted here, officials said.

Another retired American general, Gen. John Galvin, spent some time assisting
the federation's armed forces last year. But he was unable to overcome the deep
mutual suspicions between Muslims and Croats that have plagued attempts to forge
an integrated command or set common strategic goals.

Muslims and Croats fought a bitter war in central Bosnia during 1993 that ended
early last year with the American-brokered peace that established the
federation. Although the goals of the federation are ambitious, and it is seen
by American officials as a crucial counterweight to the military power of the
Serbs, in reality the arrangement has amounted to little more than a glorified
cease-fire.

Its problems stem essentially from the belief of the Muslim-led Bosnian
Ggovernmnt that the Croatian President, Franjo Tudjman, may still abandon the
Muslims in favor of a deal with the Serbs that would allow him to recover
Serbian-occupied land in Croatia and perhaps take a slice of Bosnia too. The
Croatian Government suspects the Bosnian Government of trying to lure it into a
protracted military campaign to defeat the Serbs.

Lieut. Col. Gary Coward, a military spokesman for the United Nations forces
here, said a protracted crisis at Tuzla airport in northwestern Bosnia that had
led to the blockade of several hundred United Nations troops by Bosnian
Government forces had been resolved.

A Serbian liaison officer, whose arrival more than a week ago had incensed the
Bosnian Army, was removed by helicopter on Saturday and the United Nations
soldiers who had been blockaded were then released, he said.

In Washington, Victor Jackovich, the American Ambassador to Bosnia, said that he
was discussing future assignments. Although he said the normal three-year term
for an Ambassador would run to May 1996, he described the discussions as normal
in that Bosnia is a hardship posting and he has worked on the Yugoslav crisis
since 1991.

Officials suggested on Sunday that Mr. Jackovich, who was recalled to Washington
last Wednesday, was being eased out and had been offered another Ambassadorship.
Mr. Jackovich said he could not comment on whether he had been offered a
specific new post.

Turning to the recent decision of the Clinton administration to have talks with
the Bosnian Serbs, Mr. Jackovich said, "I not only support the policy, I
represent it, whatever internal discussions I may have had."

The officials here said Mr. Jackovich was very unhappy about the policy, felt
that it was unlikely to yield a compromise with the Serbs, and regretted that
threatened military force had never been used despite the fact that the Serbs
rejected an international peace plan last July and continue to find it
unacceptable.

LOAD-DATE: January 24, 1995

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1995 The New York Times Company

                              66 of 211 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               January 25, 1995, Wednesday, Late Edition - Final

Veterans' Memorial on L.I. Vandalized

SECTION: Section B;  Page 5;  Column 2;  Metropolitan Desk

LOAD-DATE: January 25, 1995

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo: A granite memorial to Vietnam veterans was vandalized on Monday
on Route 83 in Farmingville, L.I. A Brookhaven Town official saw two people
painting graffiti at 11 P.M., and his office called the Suffolk County police,
who arrested Sara Cohen, 19, of Centereach, and Robert A. Southard, 16, of Lake
Grove. They were charged with criminal mischief and possession of graffiti
instruments, a marker. (Vic DeLucia/The New York Times)

TYPE: Caption

                   Copyright 1995 The New York Times Company

                              67 of 211 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               January 25, 1995, Wednesday, Late Edition - Final

We Owe Veterans Their Good Medical Care

SECTION: Section A;  Page 20;  Column 4;  Editorial Desk

LENGTH: 223 words


To the Editor:

William Safire calls health care programs for veterans "the most wasteful
special interest spending in Washington" (columns, Jan. 12, 19). We disagree.
These programs fulfill a contract and an obligation to those who served our
country. We support quality care for veterans, while recognizing that it must be
cost effective as well as "health effective."

Veterans sacrificed years when others were entering and advancing in civilian
careers. They risked -- and some lost -- life and limb doing their patriotic
duty. Many suffer illnesses, diseases and disabilities resulting directly from
military service. These physical and psychological conditions require
specialized care, the kind the veterans department was designed to provide.

For years we were quick to point out the department's failures. We note dramatic
improvement in its delivery of quality, cost-effective care. But the
department's budget has decreased since 1980, while the population of ill,
disabled and needy veterans has increased and their conditions worsen over time.

The measure of health care is the degree of productiveness restored to the
patient. The specialized health care the veterans department provides can and
must meet this measure.

JAMES L. BRAZEE JR.
Pres., Vietnam Veterans of America
Washington, Jan. 19, 1995

LOAD-DATE: January 25, 1995

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Letter

                   Copyright 1995 The New York Times Company

                              68 of 211 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                January 26, 1995, Thursday, Late Edition - Final

U.S.-Vietnam TV Plan

BYLINE: Reuters

SECTION: Section D;  Page 16;  Column 6;  Business/Financial Desk

LENGTH: 66 words

DATELINE: HANOI, Vietnam, Jan. 25


A Vietnamese-American joint venture is planning a $92 million project to
broadcast local and international television programs in Vietnam, the official
Vietnam News reported today. At least 25 channels will broadcast domestic and
world news, entertainment programs and foreign-language courses in Hanoi, Ho Chi
Minh City, Danang and Can Tho, subject to Government approval, the newspaper
said.

LOAD-DATE: January 26, 1995

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1995 The New York Times Company

                              69 of 211 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                January 26, 1995, Thursday, Late Edition - Final

THE 104TH CONGRESS: THE REPUBLICANS;
House Disciplines a Republican for Remarks About Clinton

BYLINE: By JERRY GRAY,   Special to The New York Times

SECTION: Section A;  Page 18;  Column 1;  National Desk

LENGTH: 767 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, Jan. 25


Clamping down on one of its own, the House of Representatives today disciplined
Robert K. Dornan and took the rare action of banning the California Republican
from taking part in the floor debate for 24 hours after he made a personal
attack against President Clinton over his State of the Union address.

Before Mr. Dornan set off the commotion today, a succession of his Republican
colleagues had gone to the microphone to comment on Mr. Clinton's speech, many
of them joking that he sounded more like a Republican than a Democrat.

But then Mr. Dornan began accusing the President of sacrilege for using the term
"New Covenant" to describe his pledge to the American people -- and then took it
even further.

"Clinton gave aid and comfort to the enemy" during the Vietnam War, Mr. Dornan
charged, saying that he was angered that the President would have a Medal of
Honor winner seated with his wife during the address.

With that, Democrats jumped to their feet in anger, demanding that Mr. Dornan's
statement be purged -- or "taken down" -- from The Congressional Record, that he
be admonished and that he apologize.

It touched off a partisan firefight that the Republicans moved quickly to end to
avoid a repetition of a situation last week in which a Democrat's comment about
a book deal involving the House Speaker, Newt Gingrich, began a daylong brawl.

In repudiating Mr. Dornan's attack on the President, the Republicans showed that
they will be quick to discipline their own when the need arises. They could have
easily blocked any action against him, but Representative John J. Duncan Jr., a
Tennessee Republican who was presiding over the House at the time, ruled that
his colleague was out of order.

Mr. Duncan ordered that Mr. Dornan's words be stricken and that he be barred
from speaking on the House floor for 24 hours.

Mr. Dornan stalked off the House floor after delivering a parting shot that only
rekindled the debate. "I will not not apologize," he said. "I will not only not
apologize, I believe the President did give aid and comfort to the enemy in
Hanoi."

He vowed to "be back tomorrow with the same one-minute speech taking out the
following words: 'aid and comfort to the enemy.' "

"Those six words are what got them uptight," he said.

At that point, he left the chamber for the Capitol basement, where he gave
back-to-back interviews with four radio talk show hosts, repeating in a booming
baritone voice the statement that had forced him from the House floor.

Mr. Dornan's hatred of Mr. Clinton is extreme and well-known within his party,
and the issues he chose as the brunt of his attack against Mr. Clinton are some
of the same ones that Republicans hope to turn against the President to drive
him from office next year -- the lingering anger over his lack of military
service and the Brady gun law that Mr. Clinton and a Democratic-controlled
Congress enacted last year.

Accusations arose during the 1992 campaign that Mr. Clinton avoided the draft
during the Vietnam War, and he acknowledged that as a Rhodes scholar in England
he had organized antiwar protests.

"Is it a prelude to the 1996 race?" Mr. Dornan told a reporter after he walked
out of the House. "Of course it is."

For the 61-year-old Mr. Dornan, a nine-term Congressman, former Air Force pilot
and former television talk-show host, fiery oratory is hardly new. During a
one-minute speech on the House floor in 1992, in which he described Mr. Clinton
as a "womanizer-adulterer" and "disgraced draft dodger," he so incensed
Representative W. G. Hefner, a Democrat from North Carolina, that the two men
nearly came to blows.

But his words today came only hours after Mr. Clinton had received a cordial,
albeit reserved, welcome from the new Congressional majority when he came to
Capitol Hill on Tuesday night to deliver the State of the Union address and to
seek cooperation from the Republicans.

Mr. Dornan said he had boycotted the Clinton speech in the House, watching it
instead from a television set in his office.

It was the second time in as many weeks that the House struck from The
Congressional Record comments that were made on the floor and deemed to be
outside the rules of the chamber.

In the first case, Representative Carrie P. Meek, a Florida Democrat, was
disciplined for questioning Speaker Newt Gingrich's controversial book deal, but
she was not banned from speaking.

The last time a member of Congress was prohibited from rising to speak on the
floor under the rule invoked today was Aug. 21, 1974, when it was used against
Bella Abzug of New York.


NAME: Robert K. Dornan

LOAD-DATE: January 26, 1995

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo: Representative Robert K. Dornan, a California Republican, was
disciplined by the House of Representatives yesterday for making a personal
attack against President Clinton over his State of the Union address. An
unrepentant Mr. Dornan, banned from taking part in House floor debate for 24
hours, repeated his accusations in a radio interview at the Capitol with Tom
Marr, back to camera, of WCBM of Baltimore. (Stephen Crowley/The New York Times)

TYPE: Biography

                   Copyright 1995 The New York Times Company

                              70 of 211 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                January 28, 1995, Saturday, Late Edition - Final

U.S. AND VIETNAM PLAN TO EXCHANGE LOW-LEVEL ENVOYS

BYLINE: By STEVEN GREENHOUSE,   Special to The New York Times

SECTION: Section 1;  Page 1;  Column 1;  Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 882 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, Jan. 27


Taking a major step toward full diplomatic relations with Vietnam, the United
States announced today that it would open a liaison office in Hanoi on Saturday
and sign an agreement to exchange diplomats.

The agreement will not establish full diplomatic relations. Low-level diplomats
will be exchanged, with the first American diplomats stationed in Vietnam since
April 1975, when the final American troops and officials pulled out as Communist
troops moved to capture Saigon.

[The agreement was signed Saturday in Hanoi by James H. Hall, the diplomat who
will direct the American liaison office, and Nguyen Xuan Phong, director of the
Americas Department at the Foreign Ministry, The Associated Press reported.]

Today's announcement was the latest in a hesitant, yearlong series of steps
toward establishing full relations, which entail opening embassies, appointing
ambassadors and possibly granting preferential trade rights that are given to
friendly countries.

The Administration has been somewhat torn on the topic, between a desire to
allow American businesses to join in the scramble to rebuild Vietnam, and
pressure from veterans' groups and conservatives not to rush the process.

State Department officials said it might take years before the countries
exchange ambassadors. They said the main factor determining the pace of
normalization would be how cooperative Vietnam is in providing information about
2,211 American soldiers still listed as missing from the Vietnam War. A total of
58,135 Americans died in the war.

As State Department officials described it, the United States is holding out
full diplomatic relations as a carrot to insure future Vietnamese cooperation.

Benjamin A. Gilman, a New York Republican who heads the House International
Relations Committee, criticized today's move, saying it was wrong to upgrade
ties with Vietnam just weeks before Secretary of Defense William J. Perry is to
give Congress the latest information on Americans missing in Indochina. "By
moving ahead toward normalcy in this precipitous manner, I believe the President
has broken trust with the American people," he said.

John Sommer, executive director of the American Legion, said, "We certainly
oppose any further moves toward normalization until they effect the fullest
possible accounting, and they haven't done that by a long shot."

The National League of Families of American Prisoners and Missing in Southeast
Asia said it was glad "the fullest possible accounting will remain the highest
priority." But it said it expected that the coming Pentagon report would confirm
that Vietnam was not cooperating fully.

The first big change in American policy came last February when President
Clinton, declaring that Vietnam had cooperated in furnishing information about
M.I.A.'s, lifted the 19-year trade embargo.

A senior State Department official said today that Vietnam had been generally
cooperative since then, especially on joint activities like excavations that are
financed by the United States. The officials said 61 sets of remains have been
turned over since February, although the Pentagon has yet to ascertain whether
they are those of American servicemen.

The official criticized Vietnam for not doing more unilaterally, for example, by
turning over confidential documents long buried in archives or turning over
remains from parts of the country that Pentagon investigators are not allowed to
visit.

"The Vietnamese are doing more in this area, especially in establishing
processes and institutions to pursue unilateral activities, but we haven't seen
much in the way of results," a senior State Department official said. "More has
to be done before we can go to full diplomatic relations."

In May, the United States and Vietnam exchanged letters that pledged to allow
liaison offices once they settled disputes about seized diplomatic property and
outstanding financial claims, something they estimated would take about a month
to negotiate.

It was only last month, however, that the two nations reached an agreement on
financial claims, with Vietnam promising to pay $208.5 million for private and
government claims, 100 percent of what the Administration had sought. According
to the State Department, almost all the claims were made by individuals or
companies, and many are for houses or oil-drilling equipment that had been
expropriated. The United States has agreed to unfreeze $130 million in
Vietnamese assets.

To head the liaison office, the State Department has named James H. Hall, a
longtime Foreign Service officer and a former Army captain in Vietnam. The
office will be in a new nine-story building in downtown Hanoi and will open with
6 Americans diplomats, soon growing to 12.

In Washington the Vietnamese liaison office will be in the old South Vietnamese
Embassy on R Street. Vietnamese officials said today that the office would have
eight employees and would be headed by Le Van Bang, now Vietnam's delegate to
the United Nations.

The liaison office in Hanoi will also be used by the approximately 100 Pentagon
staff members who visit Vietnam every six weeks to search for information about
the missing. Much of its mission will be to provide assistance to American
companies seeking to do business in Vietnam.


LOAD-DATE: January 28, 1995

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1995 The New York Times Company

                              71 of 211 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                January 28, 1995, Saturday, Late Edition - Final

NEWS SUMMARY

SECTION: Section 1; Page 2; Column 5; Metropolitan Desk

LENGTH: 789 words



International   2-5

ANGER IN SARAJEVO
A cease-fire has silenced the guns in the Bosnian capital, but the look of
normalcy veils a deep bitterness and a determination to settle accounts with
Bosnian Serb leaders regarded as war criminals.  1
NEW U.S. TIES WITH VIETNAM
The United States will exchange envoys with Vietnam and open a mission there,
another step toward establishing full relations. Veterans' groups oppose the
move.  1
ISRAEL'S POLICY PUZZLE
The Israeli Government has made contradictory statements about West Bank
settlements and how they figure in peace talks with Palestinians, and this is
taking a toll on Government popularity.  3
AUSCHWITZ REMEMBERED
Dignitaries and survivors went to the Nazi death camp at Auschwitz to mark the
50th anniversary of its liberation, and Poland's President -- after a dispute --
recognized the Jewish suffering at the camp.  5
In Germany, a flood of self-examination over Auschwitz.  5
IN JAPAN, TOO MUCH HELP
Japanese stranded by the Kobe earthquake have seen such an outpouring of gifts
from friends and relatives, and volunteer help, that it is said homeless people
are coming from elsewhere for the aid.  4
The peso bailout plan is in trouble in Congress.  3
Tangshan Journal: In China, bad memories of another quake.  4

National   6-9

PASSAGE OF MANDATE PROPOSAL
The Senate approved legislation making it harder for Congress to impose Federal
requirements on state and local governments without providing financing.  1
NAME CALLING ON CAPITOL HILL
The House Majority Leader, Dick Armey, used an anti-gay slur to refer to
Representative Barney Frank, one of several openly homosexual members of
Congress.  1
BRISK GROWTH IN ECONOMY
The economy accelerated to a 4.5 percent growth rate in the final three months
of 1994 but ended the strongest year in a decade with clear signs of a slowdown.
1
THREAT OF A FILIBUSTER
Senate Democrats hinted that they might not support a balanced-budget amendment
unless the Senate Republicans produce a detailed plan as part of the package.  8

FINAL FLIGHT FOR ENOLA GAY?
The Smithsonian Institution is expected to scale back a disputed World War II
exhibit, Administration officials said.  8
SIMPSON BOOK ARRIVES IN STORES
In his new book, O. J. Simpson repeatedly maintains his innocence, lambasts the
press, and talks about a new spirituality.  6
CELEBRATING OR TRIVIALIZING?
Plans for an interactive museum complex in Philadelphia that celebrates the
Constitution is being criticized as potentially destructive to an American
historical district.  6
SAFETY HEARING COMES TO AN END
After hearings and contradictory theories about what caused USAir Flight 427 to
crash, the National Transportation Safety Board said it would crack the case.  6

BIPARTISAN WELFARE PROPOSAL
Leaders of the National Governors' Association devised a proposal to give states
the option of devising their own welfare programs.  7
CONGRESSIONAL INQUIRY DELAYED
The Republican leading the House investigation into the financial dealings of
Commerce Secretary Ronald Brown said he would not hold hearings until late
spring.  7

Beliefs: Class warfare and the decline of American values.  9

Metro Digest   21
POLICE MERGER IS CLOSER
The last major obstacles to the merger of the transit police and the city police
were removed when the Metropolitan Transportation Authority approved it and the
transit union dropped its opposition to the plan.  1
CRAMMING FOR S.A.T.'S
Long a tradition in Asia, where competition to get into a top university borders
on the fanatic, cram schools have begun to appear in this country too, from
Queens to New Jersey to Los Angeles.  1

Business Digest 33
Your Money 31-32

Arts/Entertainment 11-17
Sundance Film Festival.  11
Theater: "Arsenic and Old Lace." 11
Film: "Highlander: The Final Dimension." 16
Music: Cleveland Orchestra.  12

Sports 25-30 Baseball: Back to the bargaining table.  30
Basketball: Knicks' beaten.  25
Columns: Rhoden on Chargers.  25
Football: N.F.L. prospers.  25
Racing: Holy Bull is Horse of Year.  29
Tennis: Pierce wins first Grand Slam title.  25

Obituaries 10
George P. Baker, former dean of Harvard Business School.

Editorials/Op-Ed 18-19
Editorials
Police merger, public fears.
Extend the nuclear firewall.
A gift-free Congress?
Escalating war on legal abortion.
Letters
Russell Baker: Joy in Burgville.
Steven Rattner: Ivy and red tape.
Richard S. Aronson: "I will die over here without someone to help."
Adam Davidson and Brian A. Brown: India's valley of death.

Neediest Cases 22
Chronicle 20
Bridge 15
Crossword 16

LOAD-DATE: January 28, 1995

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Summary

                   Copyright 1995 The New York Times Company

                              72 of 211 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                January 28, 1995, Saturday, Late Edition - Final

Maj. Gen. John W. Kaine, 79, Commander in Army Reserve

BYLINE: By WOLFGANG SAXON

SECTION: Section 1;  Page 10;  Column 1;  Metropolitan Desk

LENGTH: 358 words


Maj. Gen. John W. Kaine, who rose from private to become commander of New York's
77th Infantry Division of the Army Reserve, died on Wednesday at Winthrop
University Hospital. He was 79 and lived in Williston Park, L.I.

He had a lengthy illness, complicated by surgery, according to the 77th United
States Army Reserve Command at Fort Totten, Queens, his final command.

General Kaine spent most of his 37 years of military service with the 77th,
known as the Statue of Liberty Division. Much of the time this meant weekend
training or maneuvers in upstate New York, but in World War II, he went on
active duty with the 45th Infantry Division.

He commanded a battalion in the drive across Europe through the Siegfried Line
into Germany. He was wounded and returned to the 77th with a Bronze Star with
Oak Leaf Cluster and V Pendant, the Combat Infantryman's Badge, Legion of Merit
and various campaign ribbons, including the ETO Ribbon with three Battle Stars.
In 1962 the French Government made him a Chevalier of the Legion of Honor.

He served a brief tour of duty in Vietnam visiting mobilized Army Reserve units.
A graduate of several service schools, including the Command and General Staff
College, he was chosen to serve as chairman of the Army Department's Committee
on Army Reserve Policy, and chairman of the department's Joint Committee of the
Army National Guard and Army Reserve Policy Committee. In 1965 he was named
Deputy Chief, Army Reserve, Department of the Army.

Born in New York City, he joined the 77th as a private in 1935. He was
commissioned a second lieutenant in 1937 and rose steadily in rank to major
general and commanding officer in 1958.

The division was deactivated in 1965. But two years later he took over as the
first commander of its successor, 77th Arcom, which now comprises 14,000
reservists in New York and parts of New Jersey. He retired at the end of 1972.

Out of uniform, he was a sales executive in the textile business in New York
until his retirement in 1988.

General Kaine is survived by his wife, Helen; a son, Jay W.; a daughter, Carol
K. Lucas, and eight grandchildren.

NAME: John W. Kaine

LOAD-DATE: January 28, 1995

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Obituary (Obit); Biography

                   Copyright 1995 The New York Times Company

                              73 of 211 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 January 29, 1995, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

POP VIEW;
How a Legend Tapped the Rock Underground

BYLINE: By Fred Goodman;   Fred Goodman, a contributing editor for Rolling Stone
magazine, is writing a history of the rock-and-roll industry.

SECTION: Section 2;  Page 23;  Column 1;  Arts & Leisure Desk

LENGTH: 1586 words


IN 1963, THE STUDIO MOGUL JACK
Warner bought Reprise Records from Frank Sinatra. The deal did not signal an
appreciation of the record business by the studio head: Reprise -- even with Mr.
Sinatra on its roster -- was a loser. Rather, Warner's studio had recently
enjoyed a hit with "Ocean's 11," a Las Vegas caper film featuring the singer and
several of his "rat pack" buddies, and the purchase of the label was part of a
broader deal to tie up Mr. Sinatra as an actor. Even if Reprise continued to
lose money, it was a cheap way of assuring that Mr. Sinatra would make movies
for the studio -- a potential gold mine for Warner Brothers.

The deal did prove a gold mine, but not because of Frank Sinatra. Reprise gave
Warner Brothers the services of a man whose ultimate value to the company over
31 years would dwarf Mr. Sinatra's: Mo Ostin.

At 68, the balding, bespectacled and low-key Mr. Ostin looks more like the
controller he is by training than the monumental cultural visionary and business
tactician he has proved to be. He stepped down as chairman and chief executive
officer of Warner Brothers Records on Dec. 31 after losing an unusually public
corporate power struggle. But long after the dust of his departure has settled,
Mr. Ostin's contribution to the record business will endure. Under his
direction, Warner Brothers was transformed from a small, struggling label into
the world's largest record company and the financial engine that drove Steve
Ross's Warner Communications. Most significant, however, was the way Mr. Ostin
achieved the transformation: by embracing the rock underground of the 60's when
other, more conservative labels were loath to do so.

He built his company by developing careers rather than chasing hit records, a
long-term strategy that empowered the rock underground and enriched Warner
Brothers. But today, when record companies have become major profit centers for
huge multinational entertainment conglomerates, quick hits are the order of the
day. It is unlikely that this new global record industry will produce another
executive of Mr. Ostin's patience and perspective.

"My feeling was always follow the artist, follow the music," he says. "It will
lead you to the money." As a result of that philosophy, Warner Brothers Records
became a creative and financial powerhouse and the label most admired by
artists. George Harrison, Eric Clapton, Miles Davis, Elvis Costello, John
Fogerty, Tom Petty, R.E.M., the Red Hot Chili Peppers and Quincy Jones have been
among the established artists to come to Warner Brothers in the last 15 years.
In contrast to the situation at other labels, money was rarely a deciding
factor.

"We signed with Warner Brothers because of Mo," says Flea, the bassist for the
Red Hot Chili Peppers, which jettisoned a more lucrative deal with Sony Music.
"For me, dealing with most companies and most big record guys like Mo is always
sort of uncomfortable. I feel like there's something going on that I don't
understand. But he looks you in the eye, and you know there's an honest man
talking to you."

Mr. Ostin says embracing rock music was "purely pragmatic business." Indeed, at
the same time that Reprise was signing Jimi Hendrix, its sister label, Warner
Brothers, was releasing Johnny Sea's pro-Vietnam War single, "Day for Decision."
Still, once Mr. Ostin got a taste of the new music culture, he took to it with
real fervor. By the late 60's Warner Brothers had been transformed from a record
company whose roster was typified by Dean Martin and Allan Sherman to the home
of the Grateful Dead, Joni Mitchell, Neil Young, Frank Zappa and the Fugs.

"Mo believed in personal freedom," says Ed Sanders of the Fugs. "The most
important thing was that no matter how chaotic our vision was, he let us pursue
it and lay down our brains on tape as we saw fit. He didn't do everything for
money."

Mr. Ostin's willingness to empower artists grew out of his earliest experiences
in the business. In 1954, when he joined the jazz impresario Norman Granz's Clef
Records as controller, Mr. Ostin saw that Mr. Granz allowed artists -- including
Count Basie, Billie Holiday and Dizzy Gillespie -- the freedom to make their own
records. "Those guys got in the studio and improvised," says Mr. Ostin. "They
had more control over their material than other artists might."

At Reprise, Mr. Ostin extended that control to rockers. When Joe Smith, a Warner
Brothers executive, signed the Grateful Dead in 1967, it proved a turning point
-- not because of their early albums, which didn't sell particularly well -- but
because the Grateful Dead were standard-bearers of the drug culture. They were
notorious -- and, by inference, so now was Warner Brothers. The group proved a
magnet for other rockers who suddenly wanted to be on the label.


TO DEVELOP BOTH THE ART-
ists and the label, Mr. Ostin adopted an approach that Irving Thalberg had used
in the 30's to turn MGM into a leading movie studio: hire the best people and
give them their heads. Mr. Ostin believed that if he put the right recording
artists under contract and paired them with a staff of outstanding producers and
marketing executives, Warner Brothers would make the best records and attract
the most ambitious artists.

At a time when other record companies were getting rid of staff producers,
Warner Brothers was collecting them. Mr. Ostin's protege, Lenny Waronker, was
the key executive on a staff that ranged from such eccentric producers as Van
Dyke Parks and John Cale to mainstream hit makers like Richard Perry and Ted
Templeman.

Mr. Ostin also assembled an irreverent team to handle advertising and marketing.
While other labels stumbled over selling the new culture in the underground
press -- Columbia's faux hippie campaigns like "The Man Can't Bust Our Music,"
for example, were publicly ridiculed -- Warner Brothers soared. The down-home
honesty of Neil Young was promoted with a free bag of dirt from the Los Angles
hippie haven Topanga Canyon; an ad for the Grateful Dead featured a "Pigpen
lookalike contest," playing on the nickname for Ron McKernan, the band's
hard-drinking keyboardist.

Mr. Ostin's approach also attracted other entrepreneurs and executives. "It was
like walking into another world, a whole different planet," says Quincy Jones,
who had spent more than 30 years in the music business before joining Warner
Brothers in the early 80's. He points out that Mr. Ostin waited 10 years before
he delivered his first album. "He'd noodge me and remind me," says Mr. Jones,
"but he knew that when it was time I'd do it." That album, "Back on the Block."
won the Grammy Award for Album of the Year.

Tom Silverman, who sold his hip-hop label Tommy Boy to Warner Brothers in 1989,
views Mr. Ostin as "a natural Taoist."

"He's a guy who goes with the flow without overmanaging it," Mr. Silverman says.
"He let people sink or swim on their own, as opposed to other labels where you
got called on the carpet when you have your first failure. All of the charisma
of Warner Brothers Records is Mo."

In Steve Ross, Mr. Ostin found a boss whose laissez-faire style of management
matched his own. Mr. Ross's faith in Mr. Ostin paid huge dividends as the rock
underground became the mainstream with best-selling artists like Fleetwood Mac,
Prince and Madonna. In 1969, when Ross purchased the label's parent company,
Warner-Seven Arts, the music operation's revenues were less than $200 million.
In 1992, the year Mr. Ross died, those revenues exceeded $3.2 billion. During
Mr. Ostin's tenure, the Warner Records Group -- which acquired Atlantic Records
in 1967 and the Elektra label in 1970 -- added domestic and international
distribution companies and its own manufacturing plant. By the mid-70's, Warner
Brothers Records had come from nowhere to surpass Columbia as the industry
leader.

Even competitors give Mr. Ostin his due, including Walter Yetnikoff, the former
chairman of CBS Records who had vowed to "destroy" his rival. "I came up against
Mo I don't know how many times, and I had very deep pockets," says Mr.
Yetnikoff. "It's hard to knock anything Mo did."

Despite Mr. Ostin's extraordinary contribution to the growth of a company that
has since become a part of the Time Warner conglomerate, Ross's death
precipitated a change in management style that eventually led to Mr. Ostin's
departure. He says only that he is leaving because the corporate culture has
changed and that leaving was his decision, but he was reportedly unhappy at
having a new boss, Bob Morgado, and at having his freedom to run the label
curtailed. Mr. Ostin has said he will continue to work in the record business
and is weighing several offers.

The industry's new economics, where business types have the final say over
creative types, means there will probably be no more Mr. Ostins: executives with
the freedom to shape large labels in their own image and throw their weight
behind unorthodox signings, as Mr. Ostin did in 1968 with Tiny Tim.

"I signed unusual people all the time, whether it was the Fugs or the Sex
Pistols or Captain Beefheart," Mr. Ostin says. "Tim was so unusual, he was so
freaky, it just appealed to that perverse side of me."

Tiny Tim's commercial success was one more small proof of Mr. Ostin's business
savvy. Even more telling, Mr. Ostin remains proud of the music on Tiny Tim's
album. "The Beatles told producer Richard Perry that they loved that album," he
says. "You should listen to it. It's wonderfully made."

LOAD-DATE: January 29, 1995

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photos: Mo Ostin, far right, waved goodbye to fellow employees at the
Warner Brothers offices in Burbank, Calif., last month. (Kim Kulish for The New
York Times); Mr. Ostin, second from left, with members of the "rat pack" (from
left, Dean Martin, Sammy Davis Jr. and Frank Sinatra)--Mr. Ostin was a small
part of a 1963 deal that brought the financially unstable Reprise Records into
the Warner fold.; With Rod Stewart--The British rocker's first album for the
label was released in 1977.; With Miles Davis--The jazz great recorded for
Warner Brothers toward the end of his career.; With George Harrison--One of the
many established artists to come to Warner Brothers in the last 15 years.; With
Count Basie--He was an early influence on Mr. Ostin's thinking. (Photographs
from Warner Brothers)

                   Copyright 1995 The New York Times Company

                              74 of 211 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 January 29, 1995, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

Jan. 22-28;
The Republican Week That Was

BYLINE: By JERRY GRAY

SECTION: Section 4;  Page 2;  Column 4;  Week in Review Desk

LENGTH: 289 words


As the third week of their control of the Congress ended, Republicans found
themselves on the defensive and hastily working on political damage control
after the House Majority Leader, Dick Armey, referred to Representative Barney
Frank, a Massachusetts Democrat and an openly homosexual congressman, as "Barney
fag" in a radio interview.

Mr. Armey quickly apologized, saying he had mispronounced Mr. Frank's last name.
But to the dismay of the six-term conservative from Texas, who is second in
power in the House of Representatives only to Speaker Newt Gingrich, the
incident became fuel to a wildfire of a political controversy. Mr. Armey's
comment came only two days after a fellow Republican, Robert K. Dornan of
California, was banned from speaking on the House floor for 24 hours after he
delivered a speech in which he accused President Clinton of giving "aid and
comfort to the enemy" during the Vietnam War.

The week had opened with a controversy between some of the members of the
Congressional Black Caucus and the chairman of the House Rules Committee, Gerald
B. H. Solomon, a New York Republican. Mr. Solomon had hung a picture in the
committee room of the late Representative Howard Smith, a Virginia Democrat and
former chairman of the Rules Committee who gained an enduring reputation as a a
staunch segregationist and foe of civil rights legislation.

Democrats applied those incidents and the widely publicized flap over Mr.
Gingrich's characterization of First Lady Hilary Rodham Clinton as "a bitch" to
begin painting what is sure to be a campaign theme against the Republicans.

"There has been a climate of meanness and intolerance since the Republicans took
over," Mr. Frank said.   JERRY GRAY

LOAD-DATE: January 29, 1995

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo: Representative Barney Frank. (Associated Press)

                   Copyright 1995 The New York Times Company

                              75 of 211 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 January 29, 1995, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

NEWS SUMMARY

SECTION: Section 1; Page 2; Column 5; Metropolitan Desk

LENGTH: 657 words



International 3-13

MOSCOW, CAPITAL OF RUMORS
Awash in rumors and wild stories, from shipments of poisoned vodka from Chechnya
to a mutation in the gene pool caused by war stress, Russia is a bundle of
nerves.  1

Reporter's notebook: Hitching a ride in a Russian tank.  12


U.S.-CHINA TALKS COLLAPSE
The latest round of trade negotiations over Chinese piracy of computer software,
movies and music broke down, and the United States Trade Representative, Mickey
Kantor, threatened to impose tariffs on Chinese goods if an agreement is not
reached by Saturday.  1

HAITIANS CALL FOR JUDGMENT
Haitians are clamoring for prosecution of the soldiers, police officers and
paramilitary gunmen who killed, robbed and pillaged during three years of
dictatorship.  1

FOREIGN POLICY WAR IN CONGRESS
In dozens of Capitol Hill meeting rooms, the battles over Republican proposals
to change foreign policy are being fought out hearing by hearing, witness by
witness.  10

DEFENDING U.N. RECORD IN BOSNIA
The former commander of United Nations forces in Bosnia said the war-torn Balkan
country is in better shape than when he took over there a year ago.  10

A new book says Hanoi withheld information on war prisoners.  8

The United States has opened a diplomatic mission in Vietnam.  8

National 14-32

OVERHAULING THE WELFARE SYSTEM
After meeting with President Clinton, governors and members of Congress said
they would reshape the nation's welfare system, but foresaw bitter battles
ahead.  1

WELCOME TO BITTERSWEET REALITY
The new Republicans had their first dose of Capitol Hill reality as all but two
of the freshmen bowed to party leadership in supporting a balanced-budget
amendment.  20

REPUBLICANS AT ODDS
Sharp divisions have emerged among the Republicans running Congress on
differences over foreign policy and military issues.  20

CITY OF FOG, CITY OF SUNSHINE
The Northern and Southern California rivalry has come to the fore in the
all-California Super Bowl.  1

Florida hopes the Super Bowl will improve the state's image.  28

A HISTORY OF CORRUPTION
With a new mayor and superintendent promising to reform the New Orleans Police
Department, residents see hope in the future.  14

RULING ON FOSTER PARENTS
Foster children in Nebraska can no longer be placed in the homes of people who
identify themselves as homosexuals, the State Director of Social Services has
announced.  17

SIMPSON TRIAL OFF AND RUNNING
Before 12 jurors and a gallery of kibitzers, three of the lawyers in the
double-murder case delivered their opening statements.  22

Metropolitan 33-39, 48

RED HOOK'S FUTURE
Under a City Charter provision that allows community boards to map their own
futures, residents of Red Hook, Brooklyn, have produced an ambitious urban
renewal plan that aims to all but reinvent their historic but neglected
neighborhood.  1

SHOOTOUT LEAVES RESENTMENT
A shootout nine years ago in Queens, in which a detective died and his partner
was wounded, has left a legacy of distrust and recrimination, with the family of
the dead man believing that he could have survived if the wounded detective had
been a better partner.  33

NEW CONTRACT FOR LEGAL AID
Nearly four months after Mayor Giuliani smothered a strike by lawyers for the
Legal Aid Society, the city has agreed to a contract that will require Legal Aid
to do just as much work for 16.5 percent less money, city and society officials
said.  33

EVOLUTION OF A TAX CUT
Whitman administration officials knew that delivering on the Governor's
tax-cutting promises early would create a sensation in New Jersey. They also
knew it would cement her reputation as a comer in a Republican Party that is
leading an anti-tax revolution.  33

Neediest Cases 34

Obituaries 41

Richard Moore, Nixon aide and former ambassador.

LOAD-DATE: January 29, 1995

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Summary

                   Copyright 1995 The New York Times Company

                              76 of 211 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 January 29, 1995, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

INSIDE

SECTION: Section 1; Page 1; Column 5; Metropolitan Desk

LENGTH: 98 words



Brown Loans Detailed

Commerce Secretary Ronald Brown gained at least $400,000 from the sale of his
stake in a company, and Congressional investigators are focusing on a $78,000
loan forgiven by a former business partner. Page 21.

Hanoi Files Reopened

A new book based on Vietnamese military archives asserts that Hanoi withheld
considerable information on American prisoners of war for decades. Page 8.

New Hope Against AIDS

Even though results are preliminary, a new class of drugs is showing itself
highly effective against AIDS, at least in the short term. Page 24.

LOAD-DATE: January 29, 1995

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Summary

                   Copyright 1995 The New York Times Company

                              77 of 211 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 January 29, 1995, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

Book, Citing Hanoi Files, Finds M.I.A. Data Withheld

BYLINE: By BARBARA CROSSETTE

SECTION: Section 1;  Page 8;  Column 5;  Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 1095 words


A new book based on Vietnamese military archives asserts that Hanoi withheld
considerable information on American prisoners of war for decades, and began
releasing it only after the cold war, when Soviet-bloc support evaporated and
Vietnam urgently sought to end an American-led economic embargo.

"Perhaps hundreds" of Americans who survived crashes and ambushes were killed by
their captors in the 1960's and 1970's, Vietnamese officers are quoted as saying
in the book, "Inside Hanoi's Secret Archives: Solving the M.I.A. Mystery."

The book was written by Malcolm McConnell of Reader's Digest, a former Foreign
Service officer, using material provided by an American researcher, Theodore G.
Schweitzer 3d. It is a summary of the pieces of information that have been put
together so far about those missing at the end of the Vietnam War, and suggests
that the number of Americans killed in captivity was higher than previously
believed.

Mr. Schweitzer, who has often been in the public eye but rarely speaks to the
press, describes himself as a former librarian. He was a field officer in
Thailand for the United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees. After the war he
was involved in private relief efforts to aid the Vietnamese.

Colleagues from his United Nations days remember him as an adventurer, and he
was known around Southeast Asia for his tales of derring-do. He told the
Vietnamese that he was an independent author, although when most of his archival
work was done he was a covert agent of American defense intelligence. Mr.
Schweitzer did the bulk of his research in Hanoi in 1992, armed with a scanner
provided by American agents and a good supply of dollars to reward the
Vietnamese army archivists assigned to help him.

Soon after his project became public, the United States military was able to set
up its own research teams in Vietnam, where work continues.

The author and researcher believe that the Vietnamese understood and accepted
the ruse because Hanoi wanted to use an indirect conduit to Washington to test
American reaction to material it had previously withheld.

Some officials who have been close to the issue say that the fact that the
Vietnamese withheld information in cases where there were serious questions
helped to fuel a militant P.O.W.-M.I.A. movement in the United States.
 "We know the Vietnamese had a lot of information they had not given us," Roger
Shields, a former Pentagon official who was in charge of the prisoner release
when the United States withdrew its troops from Indochina in 1973, said in an
interview this week. "We were not surmising. We absolutely knew, and they knew
we knew."

The book, published on Jan. 25 by Simon and Schuster, quotes a Vietnamese
officer identified as Lieut. Col. Nguyen Van Thi as saying, "Our Government does
not want America to know that our darkest secret is that we killed many American
prisoners in cold blood."

Officials in Hanoi say this is fiction.

Former Pentagon officials say that they have always known of some cases of
murder or death by torture, some of them incidents disclosed by Vietnam during
the war and others described by American prisoners released in 1973.

At the time, however, President Richard M. Nixon, beginning to come under
pressure from the Watergate scandal, overrode Defense Department apprehensions
and declared on March 27, 1973, that "all of our American P.O.W.'s are on the
way home."

Yesterday, Hanoi and Washington signed an agreement to exchange diplomats with
Vietnam for the first time in two decades. The action came just a few weeks
before Defense Secretary William J. Perry is to give Congress the latest
information on Americans missing in Indochina. Officials said that the United
States is holding out full diplomatic relations as an incentive for cooperation
from Vietnam.
 Officials at the Pentagon would not discuss the book, but Beverly Baker, a
spokeswoman for the Prisoner of War-Missing in Action Office at the Defense
Department, said that Mr. Schweitzer's work to confirm that records were
available in Hanoi allowed the Pentagon to establish the research there on an
official footing.

Hanoi, eager to see the embargo lifted before President Bush left office,
quickly complied with the request to permit the research. It was another two
years before the Clinton Administration lifted trade barriers, and since then
dozens of cases of missing Americans have been solved.

The book appears to corroborate the belief that Hanoi did not make a full
accounting of missing Americans, despite its insistence to the contrary.

But the book returns to some cases and demolishes some of the more extreme
claims, that Americans were knowingly left behind in Vietnam and that Washington
has covered up the fact.

The McConnell-Schweitzer account also discounts reports that Americans were
turned over to the Soviet military by the Vietnamese, as prisoners were by
Communist forces in Korea in the 1950's. It was in that context that Colonel
Thiwas reportedly told Mr. Schweitzer that "giving American prisoners to the
Russians was not our darkest secret" and then proceeded to talk about executions
and deaths under torture.

Mr. Schweitzer told the author that Hanoi held files that might shed light on
the deaths. These included the so-called Blue Files, which Senator John F.
Kerry, Democrat of Massachusetts and co-chairman of a now-disbanded Senate
Select Committee on P.O.W-M.I.A. Affairs, tried unsuccessfully to pry loose in
1992.

In the 22 years since United States forces were withdrawn, the debate over those
missing in Indochina has polarized into a confrontation between those who
believed that Vietnam did all it could to account for prisoners, and those who
not only think that Hanoi withheld information but also often believe that some
Americans remain alive in captivity.

In between has been a small, often silent but experienced group of officials and
veterans who have argued that it is inconceivable that American prisoners could
still be alive but it is also certain that Hanoi knew far more than it
acknowledged about many cases.

Today, the United States lists 2,211 Americans still officially missing in
action in Southeast Asia. About half are known to have died, but remains have
not been recovered. Only a few dozen cases are considered genuine puzzles that
the Vietnamese are likely to have the power to solve.

A spokeswoman at the Foreign Ministry in Hanoi dismissed the book as a
"fabrication," adding that the timing of its publication was intended to derail
improved relations.

LOAD-DATE: January 29, 1995

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1995 The New York Times Company

                              78 of 211 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 January 29, 1995, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

Washington And Hanoi Clear a Path To New Ties

BYLINE: Special to The New York Times

SECTION: Section 1;  Page 8;  Column 1;  Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 624 words

DATELINE: HANOI, Vietnam, Jan. 28


With toasts of sweet Russian champagne, American and Vietnamese diplomats marked
the signing today of an agreement that will allow the United States to raise the
flag over the first American diplomatic mission in Vietnam in nearly 20 years.

The agreement signed in Hanoi, the Vietnamese capital, gave the United States
immediate custody of a modern nine-story office building here that will serve as
the base of operations for American diplomats until the two countries are able
to reach agreement on the establishment of full diplomatic relations and the
opening of embassies.

American diplomats, who have been stationed in Hanoi for more than a year, said
that they would begin to move into the building this weekend and expected to
open its doors to the public and raise the American flag next Friday, the day
after the Vietnamese end their celebration of Tet, the lunar new year and
Vietnam's most important holiday.

Their Vietnamese counterparts in Washington are expected to take over within
days the former South Vietnamese Embassy there and use it as their liaison
office. The building was abandoned after the fall of the Saigon Government in
1975. Until today, American diplomats in Hanoi had worked in a compound
maintained by the Defense Department for its investigators who are assigned here
to determine the fate of more than 1,600 American servicemen still listed as
missing in action from the Vietnam War.

It is the issue of the missing Americans that is still holding up full
diplomatic relations between Hanoi and Washington, with the United States
insisting that it will not open an embassy here and send an ambassador until
there is further progress in the investigations.

"I'm pleased and honored to be given the heavy responsibility of achieving the
fullest possible accounting of servicemen missing in action," said James Hall,
the American diplomat who will direct the mission and who signed the agreement.
"This is the top priority of our establishing the liaison office in Hanoi."

Mr. Hall last served in Vietnam in the 1970's, when he was assigned to the
United States Embassy in Saigon, which was renamed Ho Chi Minh City after it
fell to North Vietnamese forces.

American diplomats in Hanoi were told by the State Department to avoid all but
the most innocuous public statements today to reporters, apparently out of fear
that the agreement would anger leading Republicans in Congress. The signing
ceremony in a Vietnamese Government reception hall was notably brief and
subdued.

The chairman of the Senate Foreign Relations Committee, Jesse Helms, a North
Carolina Republican, joined eight other members of Congress in sending a letter
last Tuesday to President Clinton, asking that the opening of the liaison office
in Hanoi be postponed. They said that Vietnam still appeared to be holding back
information about missing Americans. Relations between the United States and
Vietnam have been warming for several years, with the most important step toward
the establishment of full diplomatic relations taken last February, when
President Clinton lifted a 19-year-old American trade embargo.

Under today's agreement, the United States will also take custody of the old
Saigon embassy, although diplomats say that it is unclear whether the crumbling
structure, which until last month was used as offices by the Vietnamese state
oil company, can again be made habitable. The liaison office in Hanoi is the
first American diplomatic mission in this city since December 1955, when an
American consulate here was closed. The United States withdrew its presence from
Hanoi after refusing to recognize the Communist Government, led by Ho Chi Minh,
that had replaced a French colonial regime in 1954.


LOAD-DATE: January 29, 1995

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo: James Hall, the American diplomat who will direct the United
States liaison office in Hanoi, exchanging signed agreements yesterday with
Nguyen Xuan Phong, an official of Vietnam's Ministry of Foreign Affairs.
(Associated Press)

                   Copyright 1995 The New York Times Company

                              79 of 211 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 January 29, 1995, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

Reporter's Notebook;
Touring the Chechen War Zone, by Car and by Tank

BYLINE: By MICHAEL SPECTER,   Special to The New York Times

SECTION: Section 1;  Page 12;  Column 3;  Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 771 words

DATELINE: CHERVLYONNAYA, Russia, Jan. 28


There are essentially two ways to watch the battle for Grozny, which rages on
despite all the Russian claims of pacification and victory.

One can drive into town in a beat-up old car, as almost all Chechen soldiers do,
and hope that nobody stops or shells it. The other way is to hitch a ride in a
Russian tank.

Tanks have their pluses. They don't have to stop at checkpoints. Snipers can't
do much harm, and Russian artillery units rarely attack their own positions.
They are also spacious, and filled with pinups and bad novels badly translated
into Russian, like the sequels to "Gone With the Wind."

Away from their commanders, Russian soldiers are eager to hear news of the world
beyond their perimeters, and they plead with visitors to call their families and
tell them they are alive.

Tank travel in the Chechen capital has its drawbacks, though, with many
residents waiting silently for the opportunity to throw firebombs in the
direction of a Russian tank or armored personnel carrier.

Moving about by car, one can choose a route and change it often, essential in a
city where firefights suddenly break out along blocks that 10 minutes earlier
seemed calm and secure.

Cars have another advantage over tanks. Even in a city without heat or lights,
you can still get gasoline if you have enough money. Tanks and armored carriers
take a special high-octane gas that only the military can provide.

"We don't carry spare gas,' said the driver of one armored personnel carrier.
"We can't afford it. If we run out we radio to the base. If they have enough to
spare, they come and fill us up."

'No' Is the Word

A teen-age soldier at the railway station in Chervlyonnaya was wearing a Russian
Army helmet with the words "In God We Trust" stenciled in blue ink across the
top.

He has no idea what the phrase means. Asked about the inscription, he shakes his
head and repeatedly says, "No," the only English word he understands. Like
scores of other Russian soldiers, he has been working hard at keeping reporters
out of Grozny, a few miles to the south.

The Russian military command at nearby Tolstoy-Yurt recently decided that nobody
could enter the Chechen capital without a pass from the post in Chervlyonnaya.
But the young soldier, after consulting with superiors, insisted that such a
pass could be issued only in Mozdok, at the enormous military headquarters 90
miles from here.

It took seven hours on Friday for reporters to travel to Mozdok. Every 5 or 10
miles, a couple of tired youngsters would point automatic weapons at the car and
order everybody out. They checked documents, marveled at a satellite phone that
could be used even when there was no power, seized the cigarettes that were put
in the glove compartment for that purpose and waved the car on to the next post.

The trip to Mozdok produced no pass. But it did open a window on the back roads
of Chechnya, where tens of thousands of Russians are sitting in tents, waiting
to be rotated to the front.

The most common sight by far was a Russian soldier bent low over a broken
engine. It seemed that almost all of the tanks were traveling in pairs, the one
in front towing the one in the rear.

Horror in Soldiers' Eyes

World War II was a war that American G.I.'s and Russian soldiers could not
measure in increments. They were in it for the duration, however hard it might
be to endure. Vietnam and Afghanistan were wars in which soldiers rarely spent
more than a year in front-line combat units.

The battle for Grozny is measured in days. Nobody says they will be here for
more than a month or two. The eyes of the soldiers who have seen even a week of
the heaviest fighting seem dead.

Most of these teen-age boys make no attempt to conceal the fear, anger or
humiliation that so many who are fighting here are feeling. Even one of the
commanders of Interior Ministry forces in Grozny, Col. Vladimir Mamontov,
described the battle for Grozny this week as a "second Stalingrad," comparing it
with the most ruinous battle in the history of Russia.

Others put it more pointedly. "No one will tell you the truth in there," said a
sentry at the entrance to the main army headquarters in Mozdok, who was with a
tank battalion when the Russians tried for the first time to take the city by
storm on Dec. 31. "There is a horrible war going on. It is worse than
Afghanistan. I was in Grozny for two weeks."

He said he had much more to say but would not go further. He was lucky to draw
duty turning away reporters, mothers desperately searching for sons and refugees
seeking help, and he wasn't about to risk it.


LOAD-DATE: January 29, 1995

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Maps show the location of Chervlyonnaya, Russia.

                   Copyright 1995 The New York Times Company

                              80 of 211 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                January 31, 1995, Tuesday, Late Edition - Final

TELEVISION REVIEW;
Why a Presidency Hasn't Thrived

BYLINE: By WALTER GOODMAN

SECTION: Section C;  Page 16;  Column 2;  Cultural Desk

LENGTH: 533 words


Among the coroners summoned by "Frontline" to do the autopsy for "What Happened
to Bill Clinton?" are reporters like Elizabeth Drew, William Greider and Bob
Woodward, analysts like Kevin Phillips and Garry Wills and a Clinton biographer,
David Maraniss. Their emphases differ, but they reach a fairly clear consensus
about the reasons for the President's political demise between November 1992 and
November 1994.

Mr. Maraniss, who apologetically indulges in some plausible psychological
speculation, reminds us that for most of his early career, Mr. Clinton was a
loser, an experience that strengthened the young politician's resolve to "do
whatever it took never to lose again." As these Clinton watchers see it, the
techniques of accommodation that served well enough in Arkansas proved
disastrous in Washington, where tough players quickly found and exploited his
weaknesses.

The Administration's accomplishments are mentioned in passing, but the hour is
given mostly to its failures or compromises. Mr. Wills comes down particularly
hard on Mr. Clinton's retreat, soon after he took office, from his campaign
pledge to end the ban on homosexuals in the military. A minute later, Mr. Wills
says that Americans question the President's basic religious values. But if Mr.
Clinton had issued an executive order allowing homosexuals to participate openly
in the armed services, as Mr. Wills wishfully recommends, would that really have
improved the President's rating in Middle America?

Mr. Wills is more persuasive when he describes the burden on Mr. Clinton of
personifying the 1960's generation -- the Vietnam or anti-Vietnam generation --
whose doings continue to stir troubled feelings among voters.

Despite the presence of Mr. Phillips, the program is largely a view from the
left. Mr. Greider, for example, blames the President for walking away from
campaign finance reform when senior Democrats in Congress showed no interest in
cutting off their own largess, and Ms. Drew tells how senators from Western
states rolled over him on the use of public lands.

Probably more off-putting to voters, however, was the Administration's decision
to attack the deficit rather than reduce taxes for the middle class. It may have
been the right decision for the country, but as Mr. Woodward notes, "the average
person on the street just can't feel it."

So tonight's post-mortem implicates both Bill Clinton's character and the
character of the American electorate in the November massacre. The hour leaves
open the disturbing possibility that in the next two years this man whose
convictions or principles are apparently less powerful than his desire to be
President (isn't that what they said about George Bush?) will get into a
pandering contest with the opposition for voters' affections, at the expense of
the nation in the long run.

FRONTLINE
What Happened to Bill Clinton?
PBS, tonight at 9.
(Channel 13 in New York)

Produced by Sherry Jones and Elizabeth Sams; directed and edited by Foster
Wiley. A Washington Media Associates Production for "Frontline." For
"Frontline": Michael Sullivan, senior producer; David Fanning, executive
producer. Will Lyman, narrator.

LOAD-DATE: January 31, 1995

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Review

                   Copyright 1995 The New York Times Company

                              81 of 211 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               February 1, 1995, Wednesday, Late Edition - Final

Celebrating the Year of the Pig

SECTION: Section A;  Page 1;  Column 2;  National Desk

LOAD-DATE: February 1, 1995

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo: Firecrackers said it all at the corner of Bayard and Mott
Streets in Manhattan's Chinatown. Across the country, in the largest Vietnamese
community outside Vietnam, the revelry was bittersweet. Page A12. (Edward
Keating/The New York Times)

TYPE: Caption

                   Copyright 1995 The New York Times Company

                              82 of 211 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               February 1, 1995, Wednesday, Late Edition - Final

Little Saigon Journal;
New Year's Revelry on the Other Side of the Curtain of Time

BYLINE: By SETH MYDANS,   Special to The New York Times

SECTION: Section A;  Page 12;  Column 1;  National Desk

LENGTH: 736 words

DATELINE: WESTMINSTER, Calif., Jan. 31


They barked like dogs. They snorted like pigs.  And with the wild beating of
drums and the rattle of tape-recorded fireworks, 500 Vietnamese revelers this
morning greeted the midnight arrival of a new lunar year, their 20th in America
since fleeing the fall of Saigon.

But it was the past that gripped them as they cheered and wept, not the future.
With a giant yellow-and-red South Vietnamese flag covering a wall of the Seafood
World restaurant here in the community known as Little Saigon, they joined in
what amounted to a pledge of allegiance to a nation that no longer exists.

As men in traditional heavy silk robes and round headpieces knelt before the
flag, an elder intoned a prayer for Tet, the New Year: "At this solemn moment, I
ask all of us to think of those who languish in Vietnamese Communist jails. We
pay our respects to those who have died there and on the long and perilous
journey fleeing Vietnam, and we honor the soldiers of the Army of the Republic
of Vietnam who died in the battle for freedom."

It was less than a year ago that the United States, in a major opening to
Vietnam, lifted its trade embargo and touched off a growing flow of commerce
between the two former enemies. And it was less than a week ago that the United
States and Vietnam signed an agreement to open liaison offices in the first
formal exchange of diplomats since the end of the war.

But for many of the older men and women here who ushered out the Year of the Dog
this morning and welcomed in the Year of the Pig, the war was still not over.
For them, their lost youths and broken aspirations were still alive, just across
the curtain of time, waiting only for the collapse of the Communist government
and the return of the past.

"The old landscape is still there, but where are our lost friends?" a weeping
man said, quoting a Vietnamese proverb as balloons and confetti bobbed and
fluttered around him.

The new landscape of their lives is a Southern California dream of Vietnam, a
bustling enclave of modern shops and malls that serves about 200,000 ethnic
Vietnamese in the area. An hour down the freeway south of Los Angeles, it looks
perhaps the way Saigon would look today had America prevailed in the war, or the
way it may look in the future, now that it is embracing American investment.

The area, known as Little Saigon, was busy Monday night with last-minute
shopping as people bought boughs of peach and cherry blossoms for luck, bright
red gift envelopes for prosperity and boxes of sugared fruit and rice cakes to
celebrate the holiday.

Today most shops were closed here, a sunny New Year's Day at the end of January,
but this offered little benefit to the children, who were sent to school anyway.
The local schools did not give them the day off.

Tony Lam, a Westminster City Councilman who is the first Vietnamese refugee to
be elected to public office in the United States, said his success here was no
cure for his homesickness. "This kind of celebration is very sad for me, very
melancholy, because I remember all the lost years," he said.

Although the Vietnam War ended on April 30, 1975, many of the refugees here are
recent arrivals, former political prisoners who continued suffering for years
and who brought their pain and anger with them. Their arrival over the past
three years has helped keep alive the sharp divisions of this emigre community.

"There are 137 different political organizations here, with roughly 137
different political opinions," said Shon Luong, an engineer. But these must
eventually give way, he said, to the passage of time and the changing
generations.

Even as the partygoers at Seafood World ached with nostalgia for their lost
homeland, as many as 20,000 Vietnamese Americans -- of a population of about
800,000 -- were on visits to Vietnam for the holiday.

And as the older partygoers spoke of the graves of their ancestors and the
hardships of their past, there was merriment among the younger ones, who had
grown up here and for whom Little Saigon was as much of Vietnam as they had ever
known.

When midnight arrived and some of their elders rushed home to be the first in
the new year to cross their thresholds, for luck, the younger people danced on.

"A lot of this is superstition," said Trang Nguyen, 23, a founder of Little
Saigon TV and Radio, which broadcast live the restaurant's Tet celebration, "and
I'm not superstitious."


LOAD-DATE: February 1, 1995

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo: City Councilman Tony Lam, right, and fellow
Vietnamese-Americans, cheered in the Year of the Pig yesterday in Westminster,
Calif. The enclave, about an hour's drive south of downtown Los Angeles, is the
largest Vietnamese community outside Vietnam. For some, this 20th year since the
fall of Saigon was a time to pledge allegiance to a lost homeland that exists
only in hearts and history books. (Scott Robinson for The New York Times)

Map shows the location of Westminster, California.

                   Copyright 1995 The New York Times Company

                              83 of 211 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               February 1, 1995, Wednesday, Late Edition - Final

A Hollywood Role for a Capitol Star?

BYLINE: By KATHARINE Q. SEELYE,  Special to The New York Times

SECTION: Section A; Page 18; Column 2; National Desk

LENGTH: 669 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, Jan. 31


Speaker Newt Gingrich likes to talk about renewing civilization, but did he mean
Hollywood, too?

Some in Hollywood think so. The movie moguls want to bring him out. Not to star
in a picture, at least not yet. But to star at a gala dinner to give a lift to
conservatives in Tinsel Town.

"Newt is a huge celebrity," said David Horowitz, an author and former lefty who
turned right in the early 1980's and now promotes conservative views in
Hollywood through his nonprofit Center for the Study of Popular Culture.

Mr. Horowitz dropped in on the Speaker's press secretary the other day. Mr.
Horowitz met Mr. Gingrich a few years ago, after Mr. Horowitz wrote a book
called "Destructive Generation," a critical look at the 1960's. Mr. Gingrich
read the book and invited him and his co-author, Peter Collier, to Washington
for lunch. "In June, I want to bring Newt out to Hollywood," Mr. Horowitz told
the press secretary, Tony Blankley, last Friday.

Mr. Horowitz said he wants Mr. Gingrich, a Georgia Republican, to be the star
attraction at a dinner with Arnold Schwarzenegger, Kevin Costner, Delta Burke,
Cheryl Ladd, Gerald McRainey, other actors and scores of "wheeler-dealers" whom
Mr. Horowitz said he could not identify but nonetheless are eager to celebrate
the Republican revolution on Capitol Hill.

"Sounds fabulous," said Mr. Blankley. "Let's talk."

Mr. Blankley had no trouble adopting the mogul lingo, having grown up in
Hollywood and worked as a child actor in such movies as "The Harder They Fall"
with Humphrey Bogart.

"Hollywood is moving like crazy," Mr. Horowitz went on. "The liberals are all
fed up with Clinton. Clinton is over. It's happening. We'll do Power Rangers.
We'll have Newt. It's a way of saying, 'This is the new establishment, this is
the new world.' "

As it happened, Mr. Schwarzenegger -- in town to promote the Inner City Olympics
for poor youths -- dropped in on the Speaker today. He said he chatted with Mr.
Gingrich, whom he called "our leader," about the program.

During a picture-taking session before the two went behind closed doors, Mr.
Schwarzenegger was asked what fitness advice he might have for the Speaker. He
said he was glad Mr. Gingrich was swimming every day. The Speaker said that if
he did not exercise he would soon be starring in a movie called "The Last Couch
Potato."

"There were two radical movements in the 60's," Mr. Horowitz said in an
interview after leaving Mr. Blankley's office. "One of them nobody ever writes
about, and that's the one Gingrich came out of. Now, all those people are in
charge of the House."

Mr. Horowitz sees the new Speaker as the "breakthrough" personality who can "get
the attention of nonpolitical people."

"It's exactly the reverse of when Jane Fonda committed treason and came back and
won an Academy Award," he said, referring to her visit to Hanoi during the
Vietnam War. "That was a very significant moment in Hollywood. It made it
acceptable to be extreme left. That ushered in the era of the Oliver Stones."

"We want equal time," he continued. The Republican takeover of Congress and the
elevation of Mr. Gingrich to the Speakership, he said, "is the breakthrough for
a persecuted group of people who've been driven underground."

Mr. Horowitz was accompanied by Representative Dana Rohrabacher, a California
Republican and one of two members of the House who are surfers, and later had
lunch with Representative Christopher Cox, another California Republican.

Hollywood's interest in the Speaker comes at a time when the Speaker is
demonstrating a strong interest in California, as does anyone with an eye on
electoral politics. Mr. Gingrich has appointed a special California task force
made up of Republican members of Congress from California.

"Politically, culturally and economically, California is pivotal to influencing
the direction of the country as a whole," said Mr. Rohrabacher. "Newt wants to
make sure he's not behind the curve. He's setting up his structure so he has
input."


LOAD-DATE: March 6, 1995

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo: Speaker Newt Gingrich, star of the new Republican majority in
Washington, is being wooed by conservative actors, long a frustrated minority in
Hollywood. Mr. Gingrich joined the film star Arnold Schwarzenegger -- who called
the Speaker "our leader" -- outside the Capitol. (David Scull/The New York
Times)

                   Copyright 1995 The New York Times Company

                              84 of 211 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                February 2, 1995, Thursday, Late Edition - Final

U.S. Office for Vietnam

BYLINE: AP

SECTION: Section A;  Page 3;  Column 1;  Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 119 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, Feb. 1


With little fanfare, Vietnam opened its liaison office here today, a step toward
normalizing relations two decades after the United States abandoned efforts to
defeat the Communist Government in Hanoi.

On Friday, the United States opened a liaison office in Hanoi.

"Our mission here is to continue work on improving relations," said Le Van Bang,
Vietnam's former delegate to the United Nations.

The office, on the fifth floor of a building less than a mile from the State
Department, will be used only until renovations are completed on the Embassy Row
mansion used by the former Government of South Vietnam. That country ceased to
exist in 1975 when Vietnam was reunified under Hanoi's control.


LOAD-DATE: February 2, 1995

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1995 The New York Times Company

                              85 of 211 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 February 3, 1995, Friday, Late Edition - Final

Unocal-Myanmar Gas Deal

BYLINE: By Bloomberg Business News

SECTION: Section D;  Page 17;  Column 3;  Business/Financial Desk

LENGTH: 140 words

DATELINE: LOS ANGELES, Feb. 2


The Unocal Corporation said today that it would begin full-scale development of
a $1 billion project to tap natural gas reserves in Myanmar after the signing of
a gas sales contract earlier this week.

The oil company, based in Los Angeles, plans to begin production in mid-1998
from the Yadana field, in the Gulf of Martaban south of Yangon, the capital of
Myanmar, the former Burma.

The project is expected to cost $1 billion in the next 30 years. Production from
the field is expected to rise to 525 million cubic feet a day in 1999 and could
eventually peak at 650 million cubic feet a day.

Current estimates put the field's potential reserves at 5 trillion cubic feet of
gas.

Unocal is also working in Indonesia, the Philippines and Thailand. It is
pursuing new opportunities in Vietnam, Cambodia and other Asian nations.

LOAD-DATE: February 3, 1995

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1995 The New York Times Company

                              86 of 211 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 February 3, 1995, Friday, Late Edition - Final

Snags Predicted for G.O.P. Agenda

BYLINE: By DAVID E. ROSENBAUM,   Special to The New York Times

SECTION: Section B;  Page 8;  Column 4;  National Desk

LENGTH: 1463 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, Feb. 2


While central elements of the Republicans' Contract With America are sailing
through the House of Representatives, Speaker Newt Gingrich is cautioning that
other items may face a stiffer headwind.

"I'll be quite frank with you," Mr. Gingrich said in a speech to a business
association on Wednesday night. "I think term limits is going to be very hard to
pass, and I think litigation reform is just going to be a brawl."

He also cautioned that the constitutional amendment requiring a balanced Federal
budget, which the House passed last week, was in "serious difficulty" in the
Senate.

Mr. Gingrich has often spoken in this vein since he became Speaker last month,
apparently hoping to rally favorable audiences and prevent them from becoming
overconfident.

The speech on Wednesday night was to the National Association of
Wholesaler-Distributors, an organization of mostly small businesses among which
the Republican platform is quite popular. Mr. Gingrich exhorted his audience to
lobby for the Republican agenda.

Under the items of the G.O.P. contract Mr. Gingrich referred to, the Republicans
would restrict the number of terms that senators and representatives could serve
and would enact a package of measures meant to discourage lawsuits. Both
proposals are now before House committees.

At a news conference this morning, Mr. Gingrich dispelled any sense that he was
really gloomy about the prospects for his legislative program, pointing to the
lopsided 360-to-74 vote on Wednesday by which the House passed legislation to
make it harder for Washington to impose requirements on states and cities
without putting up the Federal money to pay for them, and to the vote of 300 to
132 by which the balanced-budget amendment was approved last week in the House.

"We are exactly on schedule," he said. "Look at the bipartisan size of the
margins."


Today, the House turned to the third item in the Republican contract, which is
meant to change fundamentally the way Government works. This measure would give
the President a line-item veto -- the authority to strike provisions from
spending bills and some tax measures passed by Congress without vetoing the
entire legislation.

The line-item veto was a pet project of President Ronald Reagan, and the House
will not take a final vote on the matter until Monday as a way of honoring Mr.
Reagan on his 84th birthday.

The House seems certain to pass the measure. But as is the case with the
balanced-budget amendment, prospects in the Senate for the line-item veto
measure are less clear.

Since the founding of the Republic, Presidents have had to veto measures in
their entirety or sign a whole bill into law.

Under the measure before the House, a President could delete specific
expenditures and allow the rest of the bill to become law. The President would
also be permitted to strike particular parts of tax bills as long as the
provisions chosen did not affect more than 100 taxpayers.

To reinstate the items that were vetoed, the House and Senate would have to pass
specific legislation. The President could then veto the legislation, and it
would become law only if Congress voted to override the veto by a two-thirds
vote of both houses.

The Republican sponsors maintain that a line-item veto will allow the President
to scrub the budget of pork-barrel spending and tax loopholes. The Democratic
opponents mostly argue that the measure will fundamentally change the balance of
power between the President and Congress.

Representative Robert G. Torricelli, a Democrat from New Jersey, asked his
colleagues to imagine what Lyndon B. Johnson would have done if he had had the
power to strike from bills projects in the districts of representatives who
opposed the war in Vietnam, or how Richard M. Nixon might have used the
line-item veto against those who threatened to impeach him over Watergate
transgressions.

But Representative Peter I. Blute, Republican of Massachusetts, said the measure
was essential because Congress was so undisciplined. "Let's face it," Mr. Blute
declared. "Sometimes we in Congress can't help ourselves."

Disregarding their arguments about relinquishing power to the President,
Democrats tried this afternoon to expand the kinds of tax measures in which the
President could use the line-item veto. The amendment was defeated by a vote of
231 to 196.

In the Senate, debate continued over the balanced-budget amendment. A final vote
is not anticipated for weeks.

A group of liberal Democrats in the Senate rallied around a new poll showing
that by a large margin, Americans want to know where the budgets cuts will be
applied before Congress votes on the amendment.

Republicans argue that it is unreasonable to expect them to provide a catalog of
budget cuts for the next seven years, and that it is sufficient for them to show
the country in general what direction they are headed in.

In the House, the Judiciary Committee tonight approved a plan that would wipe
out President Clinton's pledge to put 100,000 police on the streets. The plan
would give cities and counties an unrestricted $10-billion block grant to
"reduce crime."

The committee approved the block grant by a vote of 21 to 13, with one Democrat,
Representative Rick Boucher of Virginia, voting with the Republican majority.

With its action, the committee concluded its work on overhauling last year's
$30-billion crime bill as part of the Republican contract. The full House is to
consider the new anti-crime package on the floor next week.

"We have adopted a new direction in crime fighting," Representative Henry J.
Hyde, the Illinois Republican who is chairman of the committee, said after the
final vote. He described the new direction as putting "more responsibility and
resources in the hands of local government, which we view as the front line in
the fight against crime."

Apart from the block grant, the new package gives more money for prisons, gives
the police more leeway in seizing evidence, expands the crimes for which illegal
aliens can be deported and makes the death penalty more likely to be enforced.
It essentially eliminates money that the Democrats had set aside for prevention
programs, the best known of which was midnight basketball.

Democrats complained today that the block-grant proposal was so unrestricted
that it could easily be abused, with the money not being spent on true
crime-fighting efforts. This was a major problem with the Law Enforcement
Assistance Administration, they said, which was set up in 1968 to deal with
rising crime by distributing Federal money to the states through block grants.
The agency was killed during the Carter Administration.

Detailing some of the abuses under the agency, Democrats said that a local
sheriff in Louisiana had bought a tank; that Indiana had bought an aircraft that
was meant for police use but instead transported the governor and his family on
personal trips, including one to pick up a moon rock, and that Philadelphia had
spent $265,000 for a project on treatment of drug addiction that produced a
report with only one paragraph on the effect of the project.

Democrats also noted that Republicans had previously opposed block grants for
crime fighting, including in the law enforcement administration. Last summer,
nearly 80 percent of House Republicans voted to oppose another new program that
relied on block grants to fight crime. That was the Local Partnership Act, and
it became part of the crime bill that Democrats eventually pushed through
Congress.

"What I cannot defend," Mr. Gingrich said on the floor at the time, "is sending
a blank check to local politicians across the country for them to decide how to
spend it."

In the new political inversion that has gripped the Capitol, Republicans are now
arguing just the opposite.

Representative F. James Sensenbrenner Jr., Republican of Wisconsin, who had
criticized the administration grant process and now supports the block grant in
the new crime bill, said that the administration was not a pure block grant
because the Federal Government decided which programs to pay for. Under the
Republican proposal, he said, cities and counties could make those decisions
themselves and would be accountable to local voters if they spent the money
foolishly.

To highlight what he said were the abuses of the block-grant process,
Representative Charles E. Schumer, Democrat of Brooklyn, offered an amendment to
the proposal that would prevent cites and counties from using the money for
items like tanks, planes, limousines and yachts.

In much-needed comic relief, Mr.  Hyde, the Illinois Republican who is the
committee's chairman, protested that Mr. Schumer had left out submarines. Mr.
Schumer added them to his list, and the amendment passed.

LOAD-DATE: February 3, 1995

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1995 The New York Times Company

                              87 of 211 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                February 4, 1995, Saturday, Late Edition - Final

John Oswald, 77, University President

SECTION: Section 1;  Page 25;  Column 3;  National Desk

LENGTH: 258 words


John Wieland Oswald, who as president of Pennsylvania State University from 1970
to 1983 was an early advocate for the university's entrance into the Big Ten
Conference, died on Wednesday in his home in Philadelphia. He was 77.

The cause was heart failure, said a daughter, Elizabeth Browne, of Philadelphia.

As the 13th president of the 138-year-old university, Dr. Oswald said Penn State
would benefit academically from an association with like-minded institutions
that dominated the list of major public research universities in the country.
The university joined the Big Ten in 1989.

In 1993, Penn State spent $283 million on research, which put it 13th on the
list of major research universities.

Dr. Oswald's term as president began as campuses across the nation entered the
final stages of unrest over the Vietnam War. He guided the university through
that time and through the financial constraints caused by the economic downturn
of the 1970's.

A native of Minneapolis, he received his undergraduate degree from DePauw
University in 1938 and a doctorate in plant pathology from the University of
California in 1942. He began teaching at the University of California at Davis
in 1946, and by 1962, he was a university vice president. In 1963, he became
president of the University of Kentucky, where he served until his appointment
to Penn State.

In addition to his daughter Elizabeth, he is survived by his wife, Rose; a son,
John Jr., of Minneapolis; a second daughter, Nancy, of San Francisco, and four
grandchildren.

LOAD-DATE: February 4, 1995

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Obituary (Obit); Biography

                   Copyright 1995 The New York Times Company

                              88 of 211 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 February 5, 1995, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

Zing Went the G-String of My Heart

BYLINE: By Robert Plunket;   Robert Plunket is the author of the novels "Love
Junkie" and "My Search for Warren Harding."

SECTION: Section 7;  Page 7;  Column 1;  Book Review Desk

LENGTH: 832 words



BORDER MUSIC
By Robert James Waller.
248 pp. New York:
Warner Books. $17.95.

I MUST say that I didn't "get" Robert James Waller's first novel, "The Bridges
of Madison County." I found it simplistic, sketchy, emotionally phony. Its
enormous success astounded me, even angered me. Then, after staring at it week
after week at the top of the best-seller list, I started thinking: what's his
secret? What's he doing that nobody sees? And how can I adapt it to my own
purposes and make lots of money?

While reading Mr. Waller's third and latest novel, "Border Music," the answer
came to me in a flash: he's invented a whole new category of writing. He's given
us a hitherto undiscovered genre. I call it Old Adult, as opposed to Young
Adult. Young Adult books are, of course, aimed at the anxious adolescent,
feeling alone in the world, who needs some validation and reassurance. Old Adult
books perform exactly the same function for people in middle age, those of us
who feel that life has passed us by, that nobody appreciates us, that we're
trapped by the results of choices we made long ago -- by things like children,
marriage, small towns, Wal-Marts. Not so, says Mr. Waller. You're a good person.
Your suffering isn't depressing -- it's romantic. And to prove it I'm going to
reward you with some really good sex for once in your life.

"The Bridges of Madison County" was the prototype of an Old Adult book, but
"Border Music" takes things even further. Everything is heightened. The tone has
escalated to the point where the pages virtually quiver with longing and regret.
I have never seen such chewing of the literary scenery. It's overblown, over the
top and very silly -- yet oddly effective. The only thing I can compare it to is
Glenn Close in "Sunset Boulevard."

It is the story of an archetypal loser/loner/Vietnam vet named Texas Jack
Carmine. In Chapter 1 he rescues an exotic dancer named Linda Lobo from some
drunk who has ripped off her G-string and they set off in his pickup truck, on
the road again. After stopping at several motels they end up at Jack's ranch in
west Texas and try to make a go of it. Unfortunately, something awful happened
to Jack in Vietnam. Linda, no fool she, sees the handwriting on the wall and
starts to think about taking courses at the local community college. Meanwhile,
paralleling all this is the story of Jack's uncle, Vaughn Rhomer, a
mild-mannered Iowa produce clerk who dreams of adventure and finally ends up
having one. The theme, which I must say is very cleverly articulated, is
crossing borders. The irony is that Jack, the catalyst, the one who inspires the
others, can't cross the border himself. Of course, it's not his fault. It's
because of the awful thing that happened in Vietnam.

Since Old Adult books deal exclusively with emotions rather than action or
thought or moral dilemmas, they can always use a touch of the poet, and here Mr.
Waller proves that he has exactly that. His best sentences sound like lyrics to
country and western songs. The sex scenes are likewise poetic, although rather
hazy, and they manage to attain a perfect balance between women's fantasies and
those of 12-year-old boys.  Here's an example: "For a moment, for the first time
and never before, she'd seen herself as some incredibly female creature who
could alternate between strength and submission. . . . A woman who could dance
naked on desert sand before a thousand soldiers in a firelit circle, hearing the
metallic clap of swords against shields matched to the rhythm of her dancing
feet, and relish their wanting of her, yet giving herself only to the dark
warrior she would select out of all who watched and wanted."

Whew! Where was I? Oh, yes, the book review. Another thing this book has is many
wonderful and loyal dogs, at least one of whom, Bandida, wears one of those
kerchiefs around her neck. Clothes of any sort are important to Mr. Waller. A
little black dress figures in the plot, and one of the women, a high-priced call
girl named Gumbo (whose voice sounds like "the curl of wood smoke on a rainy
night in deep autumn"), is characterized entirely through her clothes. It's
actually a rather bravura piece of writing, and goes on for a full page,
although for a few uneasy moments you get the feeling that Bill Blass has taken
over the narrative.

Of course, a really good Old Adult should make you cry, and here I must confess
that I cried three times. The most embarrassing time was in a bar. "Border
Music" is the perfect book to read in a bar, by the way. I was sitting there,
engrossed in one of the more turgid passages, when the happy hour entertainer
came out. He was a grizzled man in his 40's who had the look of a hard life
about him. He launched into his rendition of "Key Largo," that song that goes,
"We had it all, just like Bogey and Bacall," and I must say that I suddenly
found myself sobbing uncontrollably into a cocktail napkin.

That's "Border Music" for you. Read it and weep.

LOAD-DATE: February 5, 1995

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Drawing

TYPE: Review

                   Copyright 1995 The New York Times Company

                              89 of 211 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 February 5, 1995, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

New & Noteworthy Paperbacks

BYLINE: By MICHAEL MOLYNEUX

SECTION: Section 7;  Page 28;  Column 1;  Book Review Desk

LENGTH: 905 words



LETHAL PASSAGE: The Story of a Gun
By Erik Larson. Vintage, $12.
In 1988, a troubled 16-year-old boy brought a 9-millimeter semiautomatic handgun
into his high school and went on a shooting spree, killing one teacher and
seriously wounding another. The author "provides a readable account" of the case
in "a book that gun control advocates will hail," Clifford Krauss said here last
year.
MERCY OF A RUDE STREAM. Volume 1: A Star Shines Over Mt. Morris Park


By Henry Roth. Picador USA/St. Martin's, $13.
Sixty years after his celebrated first novel, "Call It Sleep," the author made a
reappearance with this volume, the first of what is to be a six-part
autobiographical novel. This section covers the years 1914 though 1920 in the
life of Ira Stigman, a boy whose family has moved from the Lower East Side of
Manhattan to what was then an Irish section of East Harlem. Last year our
reviewer, Robert Alter, said: "Henry Roth has not produced another great novel
after 60 years of silence. But the narrative he has fashioned from his life has
something to offer as both cultural history and personal insight."
ZLATA'S DIARY: A Child's Life in Sarajevo
By Zlata Filipovic. Translated, with notes, by
Christina Pribichevich-Zoric. Penguin, $9.99.
A carefree childhood ended when Sarajevo came under siege, an ordeal described
in this diary, which begins in 1991, when the author is 10, and ends in 1993,
shortly before she and her parents flee to Paris. The diary "offers details that
sharpen our vision of the tragedy in Sarajevo," Francine Prose said here last
year.
DIVINE DAYS
By Leon Forrest. Norton, $18.
In this epic novel of 1,135 pages, the author presents seven days in the life of
Joubert Jones, an aspiring playwright who makes ends meet as a newspaper
reporter and as a bartender in his aunt's Night Light Lounge on the South Side
of Chicago. In 1993, our reviewer, Stanley Crouch, praised the "freshly rendered
black American texture" in this "adventurous masterwork."
DEAN ACHESON: The Cold War Years, 1953-71
By Douglas Brinkley. Yale University, $18.
After serving as Secretary of State under President Harry S. Truman, Dean
Acheson had a busy career as a polemicist, gadfly and elder statesman. This
study of Acheson's later years "offers a fascinating window on the cold war,
seen through the eyes of a giant," Evan Thomas said in these pages in 1992.
HONOR AND DUTY
By Gus Lee. Ivy, $6.99.
A Chinese-American cadet struggles with the traditions of West Point, and a
cheating scandal, in the Vietnam era. Kathleen Norris said here last year that
this novel "can be unwieldy" but the story "of a young man, as he struggles to
honor his Chinese inheritance in an American context, is an important one."
MOVIE-MADE AMERICA: A Cultural History of American Movies
By Robert Sklar. Vintage, $20.
Movies profoundly influenced the nation's manners and morals, the author
contends in this study, to which he has added four new chapters. "The book is
well written and expertly illustrated," Andrew Hacker said here in 1975, and it
is "superb at naming names." The perspective of a director who was also a critic
is found in THE FILMS IN MY LIFE, by Francois Truffaut, translated by Leonard
Mayhew (Da Capo, $14.95). The book "reprints a few examples of the iconoclastic
manner that made his reputation," our reviewer, David Bromwich, said in 1978.
A PLACE WHERE THE SEA REMEMBERS
By Sandra Benitez. Scribner Paperback, $10.
Chayo, a flower seller in a Mexican coastal village, and her husband,
Candelario, a salad maker, find that destiny can hinge on a badly made Caesar
salad. This novel, the author's first, "merits placement beside some of the
mesmerizing new literature with its roots in Latin America," our reviewer, Chris
Bohjalian, said in 1993.
LEAVING BIRMINGHAM: Notes of a Native Son
By Paul Hemphill. Penguin, $12.95.
A Birmingham native, the author tells the story of the city as a focus of the
civil rights movement, and of his own life as an expatriate who moved on to the
"New South" of Atlanta. This memoir "is an honest, sometimes insightful,
confession of a liberal's progress," E. Culpepper Clark said in these pages in
1993. A firsthand account of a pivotal civil rights struggle is WARRIORS DON'T
CRY: A Searing Memoir of the Battle to Integrate Little Rock's Central High, by
Melba Pattillo Beals (Washington Square/Pocket Books, $10). The author, who was
one of nine black teen-agers who integrated Central High in 1957, tells a "vivid
and moving" story, our reviewer, Keith Dixon, said last year.
THE FERMATA
By Nicholson Baker. Vintage Contemporaries, $11.
Arno Strine, a mild-mannered office temp, has the peculiar ability to halt the
universe by snapping his fingers. With this vast power in his hands, a lot of
what he does involves sex. In this novel, the author's fifth book, "Mr. Baker's
wordplay is far superior to his notions of foreplay," Michele Slung said here
last year.
THE FAMILY STALKER
By Jon Katz. Bantam, $5.50.
The New Jersey bedroom community of Rochambeau is no safe haven when someone
sets out to infiltrate and destroy entire families. Kit Deleeuw, the sleuth who
first appeared in "Death by Station Wagon," takes on the case as he juggles his
children's after-school schedule. This "entertaining whodunit" is filled with
"keen anthropological observations," Marilyn Stasio said here last year.
MICHAEL MOLYNEUX

LOAD-DATE: February 5, 1995

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Review

                   Copyright 1995 The New York Times Company

                              90 of 211 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 February 5, 1995, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

TELEVISION;
A Love Story, Not a Courtroom Drama

BYLINE: By DAVID W. DUNLAP

SECTION: Section 2;  Page 32;  Column 1;  Arts & Leisure Desk

LENGTH: 1382 words


SERVING IN SILENCE IS WHAT Col. Margarethe Cammermeyer did for most of her
career, leaving her lesbianism unacknowledged and unspoken as she rose through
Army ranks, winning a Bronze Star in Vietnam and later becoming chief nurse of
the Washington State National Guard.

But neither service nor silent acquiescence is at the heart of "Serving in
Silence: The Margarethe Cammermeyer Story," a 90-minute drama on NBC tomorrow
night at 9, with Glenn Close in the title role. Instead, the script by Alison
Cross highlights the love affair that awakened Colonel Cammermeyer's explicit
awareness of her homosexuality and -- as the movie tells it -- emboldened her to
declare herself a lesbian during a security-clearance interview in 1989, a
declaration that led to her discharge three years later. (She was reinstated
last June by a Federal judge.)

"Without the love story," Ms. Cross said, "I didn't understand why Grethe would
have said anything at all. That became the motivation that held the movie
together." Her companion, Diane Divelbess, is played in the movie by Judy Davis.

Ms. Cross is probably best known as the scriptwriter of "Roe v. Wade," a 1989
NBC movie that chronicled the legalization of abortion through the personal
experience of the plaintiff known as Jane Roe.

"Television tells emotional stories very well," Ms. Cross said. "It doesn't work
well to tell an epic story. That's one reason you naturally push the personal
story forward. The moment you get too many people on screen, you start to lose
your focus."

In "Serving in Silence," Ms. Cross pared vignettes that might have tempted
another writer: Colonel Cammermeyer's childhood in Nazi-occupied Norway, her
Vietnam tour at the 24th Evacuation Hospital in Long Binh, her marriage and
divorce. Even the hearing that led to her discharge takes only 10 minutes on
screen.

Rather, the movie is set in the kitchen and den and backyard, at a bedding shop,
outside a Mormon temple, around the hearth. Familiarity and ordinariness give it
breadth. "It has captured the essence of our lives," said Colonel Cammermeyer,
who is called Grethe (pronounced Greta). It is less about a high-ranking
military officer than it is about a mother who is anchored to her sons and a
daughter who is trying to cultivate her father's respect. More important, it is
about two women trying to fashion a relationship in the midst of upheaval.

As depicted in the movie, theirs is a snug domestic bond, suffused with
tenderness, capable of boiling over into quarrels. Glances between the two women
last just long enough to convey the romance running through their partnership.

"After I met Diane with Grethe," Ms. Cross said, "it was even clearer that this
was an extraordinary couple together. I wanted to explore that. I hadn't seen
that on TV before. And it was the truth of the story."

The subject herself was not so easily persuaded. Colonel Cammermeyer surrendered
her privacy reluctantly. In her 1994 autobiography, "Serving in Silence," she
did not even give her companion's full name.

"When Neil Meron first told me that the script was evolving into what he said
was a 'love story,' I was sort of aghast," Colonel Cammermeyer said, recalling a
conversation with one of the executive producers.

In condensing her 52 years to an hour and a half, the movie "tried to make
salient those aspects of my life that could also reach out to other people," she
said. "Therefore," she added, "it really is adapted from but not reflective of
my life."

Chris Fisher, who collaborated on the autobiography, organized a meeting last
spring between Ms. Cross and the colonel's friends and associates, as well as
lesbian and gay leaders.

One point the group wanted to make was that homosexuals often pay a high price
for falling in love. "This extraordinarily positive expression can be seen to
threaten their jobs, their status in society," Ms. Fisher said. "It isn't easy
to love. And Grethe and Diane are able to do that in a whole way, with more
stress than a straight couple may or may not have."

Some who attended the gathering questioned the choice of Ms. Cross as
scriptwriter. "They felt as a straight woman that I would not be sensitive
enough," Ms. Cross said, "that I'd miss a point or gloss it over, that maybe I'd
sweep the lesbian relationship under the rug and concentrate only on the
military because that would be easier for the mainstream to accept and easier
for the network to accept."

As it happens, Ms. Close and Ms. Davis only kiss once. But that was enough to
prompt a protest from Howard L. Hurwitz, chairman of the Family Defense Council,
a conservative organization based in Queens. He objected to what he described as
the movie's "lesbian kiss" and its "promotion of homosexuality."

At NBC, Rosalyn Weinman, the senior vice president for broadcast standards and
practices, replied that the movie was "an insightful and moving portrayal of one
woman's struggle to save her career and hold her family together" and that the
network "will air the film as delivered." Other than the kiss, there is little
in the way of physical intimacy in the script.

"If we had had a bedroom scene, Grethe would have been horrified," Ms. Cross
said. "This is about an emotional connection, not a physical connection."

The two women first met at a holiday gathering of friends and family, when
Colonel Cammermeyer was asked to drive Ms. Divelbess from the bus station.
"Diane and I met through the rear-view mirror," the colonel recounted in her
autobiography. "We exchanged glances."

On screen, the moment is a bit more electric. As Diane gets in the back seat,
she lowers her sunglasses and glances provocatively over the rim at Grethe, who
is visibly unsettled by the power of that gaze in the rear-view mirror. When she
sees the effect she has had, Diane beams. Soon they are having dinner together.
The conversation hits a rocky patch when it turns to the subject of antiwar
protests.

"Are we going to have an argument on our first date?" Diane asks.

"Is that what this is -- a date?"

"It's up to you, Grethe."

"I don't know what I'm doing."

"Yes, you do. I think you do."

By the next scene, three months have passed and a domestic routine is already
well established. The two are sharing breakfast and badinage.

"You are so bossy," Diane says, when Grethe criticizes the way she cooks eggs.

"That's what you like about me," Grethe replies.

"Well, I sure didn't fall for your uniform."

Colonel Cammermeyer's career veered off track when she sought admission to the
Army War College, which required an upgraded security clearance. In an interview
with an agent of the Defense Investigative Service, she was asked about
homosexuality. "I am a lesbian," she answered. Under Pentagon policy at the
time, the statement alone was grounds for discharge.

In the movie, Diane asks, "Would you have told them anything if we hadn't met?"

"No," Grethe answers. "I probably would have kept on lying to myself."

In life, it was not so cut and dried. "One event could not have taken place
without the other," Colonel Cammermeyer said, "but it was never as explicit as
it was made to appear in the movie."

A number of scenes were entirely invented. Ms. Cross said some dialogue was
based on interviews with those involved. In other cases, she said, the
characters were almost doing their own talking.

"Writing is a very intuitive process," Ms. Cross said. "At the risk of sounding
reasonably psychotic, when it's going well, I don't feel I'm doing it but that
the characters are. If you've spent enough time with people and they're strong
enough and you know what they're going to do, you can pretty much sit back and
let them run with it."

Colonel Cammermeyer said that even when Ms. Cross altered specifics, she had
captured the couple's use of language, innuendo and flippancy. While watching
the movie, hearing herself say things she never said, the colonel says she
wondered more than once, "Whose life is this, anyway?"

As for her life being rendered as a love story, she said that when she thought
of the idea on different levels, it became easier to accept. "It is a love
story," Colonel Cammermeyer said. "A woman who loves her country, who loves her
children and who finds a loving relationship."

LOAD-DATE: February 5, 1995

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photos: Judy Davis, left, and Glenn Close in NBC's "Serving in Silence"
-- A rear-view window meeting, a strong domestic bond. (Joe Lederer/NBC); Alison
Cross, the screenwriter, at home in Los Angeles -- Anlalyzing motivation. (Bart
Bartholomew for The New York Times)

                   Copyright 1995 The New York Times Company

                              91 of 211 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 February 5, 1995, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

Gen. Marshall Saw Dropping of Bomb on Japan as Necessary;
Heroism and Hindsight

SECTION: Section 4;  Page 16;  Column 6;  Editorial Desk

LENGTH: 186 words


To the Editor:

Re "Hiroshima, Rewritten" (Op-Ed, Jan. 31): One of the reasons to do historical
research is to inspect the decisions of the past in order that the bad ones
might be understood before they are made again.

Perhaps there will come a day when veterans' groups and other patriots will stop
confusing strategy with execution, will realize that unsettling hindsight
regarding high-level decisions (the vaporizing of Hiroshima, for example, or the
napalming of Vietnam) does not belittle their efforts on behalf of the country,
does not comment on them at all.

Just as a mark of maturity is the willingness to re-examine difficult decisions
and to wonder if there might have been a better way, so a mark of character is
steadfast resolution in carrying out a decision that has been made. The two are
not mutually exclusive. Perhaps there will come a day when Americans will have
grown up enough to honor the heroism and sacrifice of those who carried out
their orders while cringing at the consequences of those orders and hanging
their heads in shame.

HENRY BLODGET
New York, Jan. 31, 1995

LOAD-DATE: February 5, 1995

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Letter

                   Copyright 1995 The New York Times Company

                              92 of 211 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 February 5, 1995, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

IN SHORT: FICTION

BYLINE: By Bill Kent

SECTION: Section 7;  Page 18;  Column 1;  Book Review Desk

LENGTH: 183 words



CARRY ME HOME
By John M. Del Vecchio.
Bantam, $22.95.

Thick with battlefield jargon, war-weary nightmares, strident sermons and
endless personal tragedies, "Carry Me Home" attempts to be more than a catalogue
of postwar America's in humanity to returning veterans of the war in Vietnam. As
a way of illustrating the harrowing homecomings of Robert Wapinski, a captain in
the Army, and Anthony Pisano, a sergeant in the Marines, to a community in
north-central Pennsylvania, John M. Del Vecchio contrasts popular images of the
war with the recollections of his fictional characters. Mr. Del Vecchio, who
served in Vietnam and is the author of two previous novels, "The 13th Valley"
and "For the Sake of All Living Things," presents a powerful critique within his
portrait of a treacherous American home front. Unabashedly polemical, often
veering off into melodrama, the narrative is redeemed by its passionate
affection for these soldiers who are attempting to build new lives, and for the
timeless mountain landscapes that form the background of their story.
   BILL KENT

LOAD-DATE: February 5, 1995

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Review

                   Copyright 1995 The New York Times Company

                              93 of 211 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 February 6, 1995, Monday, Late Edition - Final

Hanoi and Manila In Refugee Accord

BYLINE: AP

SECTION: Section A;  Page 10;  Column 1;  Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 177 words

DATELINE: MANILA, Feb. 5


Vietnam and the Philippines signed an agreement today for the orderly
repatriation of Vietnamese who fled their homeland but cannot qualify for
political refugee status abroad.

Vietnam's Foreign Minister, Nguyen Manh Cam, and Roberto Romulo, Foreign
Secretary of the Philippines, also signed a mutual cooperation agreement and
called on all countries to keep the peace in the South China Sea.

China, Vietnam and the Philippines all maintain occupation forces in the Spratly
Islands, and Vietnam and China have been at odds over the Paracel Islands, both
island chains in the South China Sea.

The agreement, also signed by the United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees,
covers Vietnamese who sailed to the Philippines but do not qualify for
settlement in other countries.

A joint statement said 2,800 such people are currently housed at a camp in
Palawan, 370 miles southwest of Manila. Signers of the document would not say
how they would deal with those who refused to go. A number of the asylum seekers
have said they would prefer to stay here.

LOAD-DATE: February 6, 1995

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1995 The New York Times Company

                              94 of 211 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 February 6, 1995, Monday, Late Edition - Final

Lingering Shadow -- A special report.;
Rebels Still Torment Cambodia 20 Years After Their Rampage

BYLINE: By PHILIP SHENON,   Special to The New York Times

SECTION: Section A;  Page 1;  Column 1;  Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 2223 words

DATELINE: CHOEUNG EK, Cambodia, Feb. 2


It is said by Cambodians that anyone who doubts the truth of what happened here
in 1975 must make the pilgrimage to this tiny village. Because in what was once
a fertile rice paddy on the outskirts of Phnom Penh, the capital, there is today
a grisly and convincing memorial to the frenzied slaughter that erupted across
Cambodia 20 years ago this spring.

One visitor needed no convincing at all.

"I was a boy during the Pol Pot times, and I still remember how they would line
up people -- 10 people, 100 people -- and tie their hands and shoot them in the
back," said Buntha Krouch, a 25-year-old Cambodian-American whose Cambodian
mother-in-law had insisted that he make the trip to Choeung Ek.

"You don't forget this."

Mr. Krouch, who fled Cambodia in 1979 and is now an engineering student at
Pennsylvania State University, stood transfixed before the Government-built
ossuary here: a giant glass pagoda encasing 8,985 human skulls.

These were the victims of the killing fields of Choeung Ek, one site of the
death camps organized by the Khmer Rouge, the Maoist-inspired guerrillas whose
reign of terror over Cambodia began with the capture of Phnom Penh in April
1975. The skulls were unearthed from deep pits that are still littered with
shards of bone and frayed strips of cloth.

Two decades after they launched their final assault on Phnom Penh and set in
motion a crazed peasant revolution that killed hundreds of thousands and perhaps
more than one million Cambodians, the Khmer Rouge and their notorious leader,
Pol Pot, continue to torment this nation with violence, and with at least the
threat of another savage takeover of Cambodia.

Much has changed here in those 20 years: a 1978 Vietnamese invasion that forced
the Khmer Rouge back into the jungle, a 1991 peace agreement that was supposed
to end the civil war between the Khmer Rouge and the Vietnamese-installed
Government, a 1993 election that established the first freely elected Cambodian
Government. But Cambodians face a threat that is hauntingly reminiscent of that
era.

Then, as now, Pol Pot, the French-educated Cambodian born with the name Saloth
Sar, stalks the dense forests, waiting for his chance to grab power from a
Government perceived by much of the public as corrupt and incompetent. Then, as
now, his most effective weapons are the terror that he can unleash almost at
will in the countryside, and the hypnotic loyalty of a handful of ruthless
disciples. Then, as now, Pol Pot has powerful friends in the outside world who
want him to survive. Today, those friends are in neighboring Thailand.

Some diplomats and certainly many Cambodian officials argue that the Khmer Rouge
are growing weaker and more isolated as thousands of Pol Pot's troops have
defected.

"The Khmer Rouge will definitely disappear," Foreign Minister Ung Huot said. "It
is only a matter of time."

But others find it difficult to be so hopeful, predicting that the guerrillas
will plague Cambodia for years, possibly another generation -- certainly until
Pol Pot is dead.

Attacks
Khmer Rouge Still on Offensive

There are no reliable reports on the whereabouts of Pol Pot, although the
shadowy 66-year-old guerrilla leader is believed by foreign intelligence
agencies to be living in comfort, shuttling among rebel camps in western
Cambodia. Scholars are convinced that Pol Pot remains a dedicated Marxist, and
that he holds to a dream of another violent peasant revolution in Cambodia.

His army today has an estimated strength of 5,000 to 10,000 soldiers, far
smaller than when his forces overran Phnom Penh in 1975, which the Khmer Rouge
named Year Zero because it was supposed to mark a rebirth of Cambodian history.
But while the rebel army is too small today to pose any immediate threat to the
capital or other large cities, it is capable of wreaking havoc on the Government
elected in 1993.

In recent weeks, the Khmer Rouge have attacked dozens of farming villages in
western Cambodia, killing at least 100 people, burning homes and crops and
slaughtering farm animals. Tens of thousands of people have been made refugees
in the area around Battambang, the country's second-largest city, and the
Government is struggling to feed them in the midst of a nationwide drought.

The United Nations-sponsored elections produced a coalition between the party
associated with King Norodom Sihanouk, who has been returned to the throne after
most of two decades in exile, and the party associated with the Cambodian
leaders installed by Vietnam in 1979.

The new Government is trying to revive Cambodia's shattered economy -- living
standards are among the most miserable on earth, with most Cambodian adults
earning less than $1 a day and with widespread malnutrition and disease -- by
enticing foreign investors and tourists here.

"Our policy is to develop the country in order to stop the Khmer Rouge, and the
policy of the Khmer Rouge is to try to stop the development to destroy us,"
Foreign Minister Ung Huot said.

The Khmer Rouge want the foreigners out, hoping that an exodus of investors and
tourists will insure the Government's collapse. The rebels have begun to attack
foreigners, reportedly offering a bounty of $8,000 for every Westerner who is
caught or killed. They have taken responsibility for the killing of an American
tourist last month near the ancient capital of Angkor. While the Government
blames bandits for that killing, there is no doubt that the Khmer Rouge were
responsible for the deaths of several other Westerners last year, including
three backpackers slain in September after rebels attacked a train in rural
southern Cambodia. The three young men -- an Australian, a Briton and Frenchman
-- were killed with blows to the head, long the preferred method of execution by
the Khmer Rogue because it saves bullets.

The People
Rebels Praised As Uncorrupt

It is difficult to overstate the fear that the Khmer Rouge still arouse among
Cambodia's seven million people. It is the rare Cambodian who cannot identify
several family members who died during what is commonly known here as the Pol
Pot time. It is common to find Cambodians who lost everyone. Most of the victims
of the Khmer Rouge died from starvation or disease. Thousands of others were
executed in killing grounds like Choeung Ek, targets of Pol Pot's paranoid fear
that anyone with an education or a special calling -- doctors, teachers,
businessmen, painters, dancers, Buddhist monks -- posed a threat to a revolution
meant to glorify peasants.

One sign of how seriously Cambodia's new Government has failed to inspire
confidence is that some Cambodians are quietly expressing support for some of
the ideals of the Khmer Rouge, sometimes even for the organization itself.

"The Khmer Rouge are not corrupt, and that is why some people still support
them," said a 23-year-old student at the University of Phnom Penh, who like many
of his classmates did not want his full name used for fear of retaliation from
the Government.

"In the Khmer Rouge time, they killed many people, but there was no corruption,"
he said. "And corruption is the most terrible problem that we have now."

He sat with other students around a formica table in the library of an
English-language training program that is being underwritten by the Government
of Australia. Apart from the classrooms renovated by the Australians, the
university is a moldering wreck. The campus buildings were all but dismantled by
the Khmer Rouge as part of their vicious purge of intellectuals. In the minds of
many students, the slaughter of the 1970's is associated with Pol Pot and his
senior henchmen, not with the entire organization. The Khmer Rouge are seen as
savage, but they are also seen as nationalistic and honest.

"The corruption is destroying Cambodia, and I think maybe that is a much bigger
danger than the Khmer Rouge," another student said. "Pol Pot may be bad, but
some of the other Khmer Rogue leaders are not so bad."

Corruption allegations dog most senior officials in the Cambodian Government.
Despite paltry government salaries, many live lives of luxury, disappearing on
short notice for holidays in Hong Kong, Europe and the United States. The number
of expensive European sedans prowling the potholed streets of Phnom Penh defies
any explanation other than corruption.

"Today's Cambodia crawls with greed and corruption at the highest levels,"
warned Julio Jeldres, founder of the Khmer Institute of Democracy, a human
rights group. "Corruption creates resentment and inequality and helps
dissatisfied people to fall under the spell of the Khmer Rouge."

The Khmer Rouge have clearly struck a chord with many Cambodians in their
endless propaganda, heard in rebel radio broadcasts, blaming the nation's
problems on Cambodia's traditional enemy, Vietnam, and on the hundreds of
thousands of ethnic Vietnamese who live here.

"We all think that Pol Pot hates Vietnam very much, and we agree with him on
that," a 19-year-old university student said. "Vietnam will eat up Cambodia if
it can."

Foreign Support
Now Thais Help Khmer Rouge

The Khmer Rouge have outlasted almost every other Communist insurgency in Asia.
It is a measure of Pol Pot's tenacity, and the greediness of some of Cambodia's
neighbors, that the Khmer Rouge still exist. China, the principal foreign patron
of the Khmer Rouge in the 1980's, is applauded by diplomats here for having cut
off assistance to the rebels. But there is unending suspicion about Thailand,
where elements of the Thai military and dozens of logging and gem companies are
reported to continue a lucrative border trade with the rebels.

It does not take much searching along the long dusty stretches of the porous
border to find Thai traders who acknowledge that they have ignored the Thai
Government's demands that they cut off trade with the Khmer Rouge, who control
areas of western Cambodia rich in lumber and gems. The trade through Thailand is
thought to bring the rebels millions of dollars, enough to continue the fighting
indefinitely.

"I think the world lies about the Khmer Rouge -- they are really good people,"
said a Thai gem merchant whose workshop is near the Thai border city of
Aranyaprathet.

Giving his name as Mr. Vichi, he held up a blood-red ruby that he said had been
sold to him by the Khmer Rouge. He admired the gem as it glistened in the harsh
sun.

"Why should I care about the internal problems of Cambodia?" he asked. "That is
not my country."

The Thai Government denies that it knows of any border trade, and diplomats
acknowledge that the Government of Prime Minister Chuan Leekpai has done more
than any of its predecessors to cut off support for the Khmer Rouge. But
diplomats say there is still plenty of evidence showing that the trade
continues, although curtailed. Cambodian officials say 16 Thai gem-mining
companies were digging as recently as last month in rebel-held areas. Some of
the best evidence against the Thais has come from recent Khmer Rouge defectors,
who say Thailand remains the lifeline for Pol Pot.

Chea Sari, a Khmer Rouge major who defected last fall after 23 years with the
rebels, said: "The Thai support the Khmer Rouge 100 percent. They are like an
artery that provides blood to the Khmer Rouge."

Changes
Abuses Laid To Local Chiefs

Whatever the threat, there are foreign investors who remain enthusiastic about
Cambodia. Beyond lumber and gem-mining, tourism is promising. The stone temples
of Angkor, the ancient capital of the Khmer empire, are the greatest
archeological wonder in Southeast Asia, and it is commonly said in the travel
industry that Cambodia's small population could support itself largely from the
hard currency brought here by tourists.

Despite its battlefield struggles with the Khmer Rouge, the army is encouraged
by the recent defection of thousands of rebel soldiers under a amnesty program
begun last year. The defectors have reported that while the central command of
the Khmer Rouge remains loyal to Pol Pot, the once strict chain of command may
be dissolving in parts of the countryside.

"The Khmer Rouge were once a very honest organization," said Mr. Chhum Song, who
lost an eye to shrapnel while fighting in 1975. "Everywhere that Pol Pot
occupied, it was a good place. No brutality, no violence. And we were all
brought together by his principle to stop the Vietnamese, get rid of the
Vietnamese."

But he explained that in the early 1990's, the Khmer Rouge decentralized
authority, allowing local commanders more power to make decisions. Mr. Chhum
Song and other defectors say the result was chaos in many provinces, with Khmer
Rouge commanders turning to corruption and indiscriminate violence.

"In 1990, many people in the Khmer Rouge became corrupt," he said. "The
commanders would begin to tax the villages, tax them for every tree that was cut
down. And even with all this money, there was not enough food for us soldiers."

But none of this, he insisted, is a reflection on Pol Pot -- "Brother Number
One," as he is called in the Khmer Rouge -- and his closest deputies.

"There is no hint of corruption about them," Mr. Chhum Song said.

"At the very top of the Khmer Rouge, I believe, there are honest men. They are
committed to the same revolution, as always. They do not intend to go away."

LOAD-DATE: February 6, 1995

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photos: Among the Cambodian memorials to victims of mass killings under
the Khmer Rouge rebel movement in the 1970's is this one at the village of Tuol
Sleng, where a museum includes a country map that has been constructed of the
victims' skulls. Thousands of guerrillas have defected from the Khmer Rouge
rebel movement since the Cambodian Government began an amnesty program last
year. One waited at a camp near Phnom Penh. (Photographs by David Portnoy for
The New York Times)(pg. A10)

Map of Cambodia showing location of Phnom Penh. (pg. A10)

TYPE: Special Report

                   Copyright 1995 The New York Times Company

                              95 of 211 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 February 6, 1995, Monday, Late Edition - Final

Reminder Of Rogues

BYLINE: By CLIFFORD KRAUSS

SECTION: Section B;  Page 1;  Column 5;  Metropolitan Desk

LENGTH: 1315 words


In an attempt to reassure the public and protect precinct morale, Police
Commissioner William J. Bratton has repeatedly said that nothing nearly as
serious as the drug-related corruption scandal that engulfed the 30th Precinct
in Harlem last year was being investigated in any other precinct.

Mr. Bratton's observation had a soothing affect on a city that became alarmed
about reports that nearly one out of five officers in the Harlem precinct lied
in court, shook down drug dealers, and drove wildly up and down Broadway in
their radio cars. But the revelations of the last two weeks about widespread
abuses in the 109th Precinct in Flushing, Queens and the 48th Precinct in the
East Tremont section of the Bronx suggest now that that corruption is far more
widespread throughout the city, even if in smaller doses, than police officials
have acknowledged.

Last year, the panel led by former Deputy Mayor Milton Mollen exposed the
existence of small groups of officers in a handful of precincts who worked in
teams to commit an assortment of criminal acts in poor, high-crime, black and
Hispanic neighborhoods with highly active drug markets -- places awash in cash
and where the overwhelming white force felt particularly isolated.

But the 109th Precinct in Flushing, where between 20 and 30 officers are being
investigated for taking drugs, stealing petty cash from grocery stores and
taking wallets from shooting and accident victims, does not neatly fit into the
model of the corrupt precinct that the Mollen Commission described. Flushing is
a middle-class, largely white and Korean immigrant neighborhood where extortion
by gangs is more common than drug dealing. And while East Tremont is largely
poor and Hispanic, it is not known as a premier drug market and has far less
crime than surrounding precincts.

Potentially most disturbing of all, prosecutors and police officials say, is the
emergence of similar patterns in civilian complaints of brutality and corruption
filed against police officers in recent years in many distinct corners of the
city, ranging from the Ninth Precinct in the East Village of Manhattan to the
103d Precinct in the largely black neighborhood of South Jamaica in Queens. Such
complaints are often planted by drug dealers against aggressive police officers
who threaten their operations, but a large number could have merit, prosecutors
and police officials said.

Advisers to outgoing Deputy Police Commissioner Walter S. Mack Jr., the
department's top corruption fighter, said the same troubling trend of
allegations of brutality and corruption found in the 30th and 48th Precincts
exist along a wide swath of northern Manhattan and the southern and western
portions of the Bronx including the 34th, 44th and 46th Precincts.

Investigations by the Police Department's Internal Affairs Bureau and various
Federal and local law enforcement agencies are under way in all of those
precincts, but officials would not comment on the extent of the suspected police
wrongdoing.

"Amid the poverty, hopelessness and degradation in upper Manhattan and a lot of
the lower Bronx," said an adviser to Mr. Mack, "you have a lot of cops who are
burned out and see that they don't make a difference. It has created a Vietnam
-like mentality of us versus them that has been going on for a long while."

Acknowledging the problem in those areas, Commissioner Bratton said in an
interview last week, "There's no secret looking at these patterns." Countering
doubts about his commitment to fighting corruption following his abrupt
dismissal of Mr. Mack, Mr. Bratton promised to continue to test the complaint
patterns with a steady stream of sting operations, including luring police
officers to what appear to be drug dens to see how they perform.

"I'm a major real estate investor with all of these apartments," he joked.

Mr. Bratton's quip aside, not everything about the Police Department these days
is somber and dark. Investigators agree that the vast majority of police
officers are honest, dedicated professionals. Morale and enthusiasm for Mr.
Bratton's new assertive crime strategies among neighborhood beat officers has
not wavered in most precincts. And Police Department officials note that
officers are making more arrests than ever of suspects attempting to bribe them.

At the same time, the patterns of civilian complaints -- many made anonymously
or by criminals -- are still just indicators that hint there may be a fire
producing all the smoke. The smoke not only comes in the form of large numbers
of complaints of various forms of malfeasance; they tend to concentrate on
particular officers working on particular shifts in northern Manhattan and
portions of the Bronx.

Mr. Bratton's senior aides are putting the final touches on an anti-corruption
strategy that will use data bases, pin maps and profiles of complaints to better
identify patterns and trends that can lead to the prosecution of rogue officers.
They note that sometimes the most innocent indicators -- such as how often an
officer calls in sick or is disciplined for violations of uniform codes -- can
suggest drug use or the kind of disaffection that seems to go along with
brutality and corruption.

One senior police official said the department was also looking at officers who
showed a high frequency of answering radio calls of drug activity and returning
to the precinct station house without making an arrest or bringing back
sufficient quantities of cash or drugs. Such officers, the official said, are
more likely to be shaking down dealers for drugs, cash and guns.

Mr. Bratton still insists that he knows of no precinct in the city that has as
many rogue officers as the 30th precinct, where 29 officers have already been
arrested and more arrests are considered probable. But even he noted, while
testifying at a little-noticed City Council hearing last spring, that there were
"hundreds" of officers working their beats who have committed criminal acts in
recent years.



CHRONOLOGY: Police Corruption in New York City

Last week, the New York City Police Department said that it was investigating 20
officers suspected of corruption in a Bronx precinct. While the department says
it is making inroads against corruption, others wonder whether it has the
ability and commitment to police itself, and whether an outside monitor should
look into corruption. The Bronx inquiry is one of several conducted since the
Mollen Commission was created in 1992 to investigate police corruption.

May 1992: Michael Dowd and five other officers from the 94th Precinct in
Greenpoint, Brooklyn, are arrested for drug dealing. The Dowd case led to the
creation of the Mollen Commission.

March 1994: Three officers from the 73d Precinct in Brownsville, Brooklyn, are
arrested for trading in stolen guns, making false arrests and shaking down drug
dealers.

March 1994: Sept 1994: Twenty-nine officers from the 30th Precinct in Harlem
were arrested on an array of charges, including dealing narcotics, extortion,
breaking into property, beating up suspects and stealing cash. Investigators
said the arrested officers worked in well-organized rings that preyed primarily
on drug dealers.

January 1995: In a sting operation, an officer from the 109th Precinct in
Flushing, Queens, is arrested for stealing $200 from an abandoned van while on
duty. Officials say that as many as 20 to 30 officers at the precinct may have
been involved in petty thievery, and more arrests are expected.

January 1995: The New York City Police Department says it is investigating 20
officers of the 48th Precinct in East Tremont in the Bronx who are suspected of
beating up suspects and shaking down durg dealers for money, drugs and guns. So
far, two officers who are believed to be corrupt have been put on desk duty, and
more arrests are expected.


LOAD-DATE: February 6, 1995

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo: Officer Thomas Nolan from the 30th Precinct, was arrested in
September 1994. (Arnold Schlissel for The New York Times)(pg. B2)

TYPE: News Analysis; Chronology

                   Copyright 1995 The New York Times Company

                              96 of 211 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                February 7, 1995, Tuesday, Late Edition - Final

HOUSE APPROVES A LINE-ITEM VETO FOR THE PRESIDENT

BYLINE: By DAVID E. ROSENBAUM,   Special to The New York Times

SECTION: Section A;  Page 1;  Column 6;  National Desk

LENGTH: 1273 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, Feb. 6


Continuing to roll untrammeled through the components of the Contract With
America, the Republican House of Representatives voted tonight to give the
Democratic President a line-item veto, the authority to strike specific parts of
spending bills and some tax measures passed by Congress without vetoing the
entire legislation.

Like the constitutional amendment requiring a balanced budget, which the House
approved last month, the line-item veto would fundamentally change the way the
Government works. The veto could radically shift control of the nation's purse
to the President from Congress.

But also like the constitutional amendment, the measure the House passed tonight
could well be stymied in the Senate, which is more jealous than the House of the
powers of Congress. The Senate continued to debate the amendment today with
little prospect for a vote any time soon.

The House approved the line-item veto bill by a vote of 294 to 134. Voting for
the bill were 223 Republicans and 71 Democrats. Four Republicans, 129 Democrats
and 1 independent voted against it.

The Democratic opponents of the measure maintained that it would give too much
power to the President. "The most fundamental threat to the long-term liberty of
this country," Representative David R. Obey of Wisconsin told the House, "lies
in the unchecked use of executive power."

Representative Cardiss Collins of Illinois, who led the Democratic opposition on
the floor, called the measure unconstitutional because "the Constitution does
not give the Congress power to delegate the legislative function to the
President or anyone else."

But the Republicans carried the day. Speaker Newt Gingrich of Georgia called it
"an important step for America" when a Republican House voted to give more power
to a Democratic President because the Republicans thought it was the right
policy.

The line-item veto, Mr. Gingrich asserted, "would allow the President to cut out
some of the worst of the spending, to set some fiscal discipline."

President Clinton supports the idea of a line-item veto, as have all other
recent Presidents. Ronald Reagan was the first to popularize the notion, and the
Republican leadership of the House scheduled the vote for today as a tribute to
him on his 84th birthday.

But, until relatively recently, the prevailing view in Washington has been that
the Constitution requires the President to veto legislation in its entirety or
sign the whole measure into law.

Under this new legislation, the President could blue-pencil individual items
after signing an appropriations bill (or a tax bill, so long as the item did not
affect more than 100 taxpayers), and the money could not be spent without
further Congressional action.

The theory is that the President would go through spending bills with a
fine-toothed comb and excise pork-barrel projects that lawmakers had quietly
inserted. Of course, the President could also veto the money for entire agencies
or cities.

To reinstate the provisions the President had deleted, the House and Senate
would have to pass a new bill specifically doing so. The President could then
veto that bill, and the deleted items would be reinstated only if Congress
overrode the veto by a two-thirds vote of both houses.

Opponents of the measure argued today that a line-item veto would not by itself
lead to a balanced budget. After all, they observed, half of Federal spending
involves what are called entitlements -- programs like Social Security and
Medicare that provide payments to everyone who is eligible and do not require
annual appropriations.

Supporters of the line-item veto bill did not take issue with that argument, but
they said the measure was a symbol and would enforce more discipline over
spending.

"The line-item veto is not going to balance the budget," said Representative
Gerald B. H. Solomon, a Republican from upstate New York. But he added: "You
need the prodding of this legislation."

Until this year, most supporters of a line-item veto believed that their only
option was a constitutional amendment. Article I, Section 7 of the Constitution
provides for bills approved by Congress to be sent to the President, and then it
states, "If he approves he shall sign it, but if not he shall return it." The
section goes on to describe how Congress can override a veto by a two-thirds
vote.

The sponsors of the legislation this year were afraid they could not get the
two-thirds vote of both houses and the approval of the legislatures of
three-quarters of the states necessary for a constitutional amendment. In any
event, they were too impatient to wait for that to happen.

They agreed that the worst case, if a bill were passed, would be that someday
the Supreme Court would find the legislation unconstitutional, and then they
could go the route of a constitutional amendment.

The necessity for Presidents to approve or disapprove bills in their entirety
considerably strengthens the hand of Congress. It means, for example, that if
President Clinton had wanted last year to delete money for the Beluga Whale
Committee, a favorite of Republican lawmakers in Alaska, he would have had to
veto a bill that also contained essential money designated for border patrolling
and for the Federal Bureau of Investigation.

Over the three days of debate -- two days last week and today -- Democrats
offered various proposals that would have allowed the President to single out
spending items he disapproved of. Congress could then have reinstated the
spending by majority vote. But these proposals were rejected handily on
party-line votes as Republicans insisted that the President should get his way
unless Congress voted to overturn him with two-thirds majorities.

The governors of most states have the authority to make line-item vetoes. The
idea of applying the line-item veto in Washington gained currency in the years
when Republicans seemed to have permanent control of the White House and the
Democrats of Congress. Conservatives argued that the President needed the power
to kill the pet projects of Democrats that regularly found their way into
appropriations bills.

Now, of course, the political tables have turned. But having harped on the
matter for so long and having written it into the Contract With America, the
platform for their election last November, Republican representatives had little
choice but to vote for it this year.

In the cloakrooms today, some lawmakers in both parties were whispering about
what they saw as a loophole in the measure under consideration. Because it was
being approved as a statute rather than a constitutional change, all Congress
would have to do to get around it would be to pass another law by majority vote,
not two-thirds.

For instance, a future spending bill could simply state that the line-item veto
provisions would not apply to that particular bill. Or the bill could state that
the line-item authority would not apply to particular items in the bill.

Opponents of the line-item veto said that they assumed many Presidents would use
the veto authority responsibly and veto only genuinely wasteful spending. But
they suggested that Lyndon B. Johnson might have used it for political
punishment and stricken projects in the districts of lawmakers who voted against
him on Vietnam, and that Richard M. Nixon might have done the same for those who
threatened to impeach him for Watergate crimes.

No one knows how President Clinton would use the power. But Republicans this
year are proposing spending for items like the "Star Wars" missile defense
system that Mr. Clinton might be expected to delete.

LOAD-DATE: February 7, 1995

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo: Former President Ronald Reagan celebrated his 84th birthday in
Los Angeles yesterday, the day Congress held its roll-call on the line-item veto
in his honor. (Associated Press) (pg. A20)

                   Copyright 1995 The New York Times Company

                              97 of 211 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               February 8, 1995, Wednesday, Late Edition - Final

CLINTON CHOOSES RETIRED GENERAL TO BE C.I.A. HEAD

BYLINE: By TIM WEINER,   Special to The New York Times

SECTION: Section A;  Page 1;  Column 6;  National Desk

LENGTH: 1187 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, Feb. 7


After a six-week search for someone willing to serve as Director of Central
Intelligence, President Clinton will nominate a retired Air Force general,
Michael P. C. Carns, a military manager with a Harvard business degree but no
espionage experience, the White House said today.

A decorated veteran of 200 combat missions during the Vietnam War, Mr. Carns,
57, was the chief administrative aide to the Joint Chiefs of Staff during the
Persian Gulf war in 1991. His commander, Gen. Colin L. Powell, praised his work
and endorsed his nomination, White House officials said.

After the war, Mr. Carns became the Air Force's vice chief of staff, a job
equivalent to being chief operating officer of a global corporation with a $75
billion budget.

At the Central Intelligence Agency, the most common reaction to Mr. Carns's
impending nomination was: "Who?" But his fellow Air Force officers knew him as a
first-rate management expert and a perfect second-in-command.

"A good wing man -- flies formation well," said Gen. Merrill A. McPeak, retired,
Mr. Carns's boss as Air Force chief of staff from 1991 to 1994. The wing man in
a combat mission covers the lead pilot, and Mr. Carns's work in the military
bureaucracy paralleled his flying skills, General McPeak said.

"Whatever the boss needs done, he gets done," General McPeak said. "Whatever the
President's agenda is, he'll work it."

But Mr. Clinton is not known to have an agenda for the troubled Central
Intelligence Agency and the rest of the nation's spy services. The question of
what to do with the nation's spy apparatus has been delegated to an independent
commission, headed by former Defense Secretary Les Aspin, which will not issue a
report until March 1996.

Members of Congress, including Senator Arlen Specter, the Pennsylvania
Republican who heads the Senate Intelligence Committee, say the C.I.A. needs a
radical overhaul, though many of the agency's top officials fervently disagree.

Clearly, Mr. Carns will require good wing men of his own if he takes the
controls of the agency, a notoriously complex mechanism.

Gen. Michael Dugan, a former Air Force chief of staff, said: "If you'd asked me
last week who the three most unlikely people for the job were, I'd have said,
you, me and Mike Carns.

"But the more I think about it, it makes sense. This guy is an intellectual. The
fact that he has no particularly deep threads in the intelligence community is a
strength. He can see things fresh. He can look at an old problem and come up
with a different paradigm."

A good friend of Mr. Carns, Bob Gaskin, a retired Air Force colonel, said: "The
Air Force used to call him Mr. Fix-It. He can go into a situation that's
hopeless and make it work. He loves to solve problems. Carns is going to take to
that place like a duck to water."

Mr. Carns retired from the Air Force in September, and two weeks ago he joined
the board of the Thiokol Corporation, which makes missiles and spacecraft
engines and built the booster rocket that failed in the 1986 Challenger space
shuttle disaster. He could not be reached today at his home in Pebble Beach,
Calif. Mr. Gaskin said Mr. Carns was at the bedside of his mother, who is
seriously ill.

Mr. Carns's military experience, White House officials said, gave him an
overview of the nation's intelligence abilities, particularly the workings of
spy satellites and their uses in war.

But Senator Specter said that President Clinton's national security adviser,
Anthony Lake, told him today that Mr. Carns's most appealing quality was his
"freshness" and that his lack of espionage experience was less important than
his outsider's perspective.

Having worked at the C.I.A. is not a necessary ingredient for success as
Director of Central Intelligence. One of the most respected directors, John
McCone, who served from 1961 to 1965, was a businessman who had served only
briefly as a military bureaucrat.

Still, the Clinton White House had considered at least two men with hands-on
experience in intelligence affairs: John M. Deutch, the Deputy Defense
Secretary, and Adm. William Crowe, retired, a former Chairman of the Joint
Chiefs of Staff who is the American Ambassador in London. Both men declined the
position.

Mr. Carns would come to the intelligence agency after one of its worst years in
history. After the arrest and conviction of a clandestine service officer,
Aldrich H. Ames, on charges of spying for Moscow, a scathing 450-page internal
report on the case by the agency's inspector general, Frederick Hitz, showed
that the C.I.A. had long ignored glaring signs that the career officer was a
security risk. It said the spy's on-the-job drunkenness, sloth and contempt for
rules did not stand out in the corps of covert operators.

The failure of the former Director, R. James Woolsey, to demote or dismiss
anyone connected with the Ames case undermined his authority at the agency,
diminished his standing with the White House and contributed to his decision to
resign in December.

The C.I.A.'s officers say that morale is miserable among the agency's 19,000
employees and that their sense of mission is adrift in the post-cold-war world.

Several agency employees who had hoped that their inspector general, Mr. Hitz,
might be promoted to director said they had never heard of Mr. Carns and
expressed dismay that an outsider unfamiliar with the agency might be taking
charge, no matter how skilled a manager he might be.

"The C.I.A. is not the Bureau of Yards and Docks," a recently retired director
of covert operations at the agency said. "It is not the Department of Energy. It
is different."

This former official said it would take an outsider at least six months to begin
to understand how the agency worked.

The Director of Central Intelligence serves not only as the chief executive of
the C.I.A. but also as board chairman of 11 other intelligence services. These
include the National Security Agency, which conducts electronic eavesdropping
and is twice the size of the C.I.A.; the Defense Intelligence Agency, which
coordinates military intelligence; and the National Reconnaissance Office, which
builds billion-dollar spy satellites.

Administration officials, who discussed Mr. Carns's selection on the condition
of anonymity, said Mr. Carns had the bureaucratic know-how to deal with the $28
billion-a-year intelligence community. "This is a guy who's spent his career
working in back rooms making big things happening," a prominent White House
official said.

Mr. Carns would be the fourth Director of Central Intelligence in as many years.
The experience of the last military outsider who took the job, Adm. Stansfield
Turner, appointed by President Jimmy Carter in 1977, was not a happy one; his
bearing clashed with the style of the covert operators.

Nonetheless, one former Director, Robert M. Gates, who served from November 1991
to January 1993, said that he had known Mr. Carns for 10 years and that he was
likely to succeed.

"I think it's a first-rate appointment," Mr. Gates said. "While he has not been
in the business, he understands intelligence."


NAME: Michael P. C. Carns

LOAD-DATE: February 9, 1995

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo: Gen. Michael P. C. Carns. (Reuters) (pg. A17)

TYPE: Biography

                   Copyright 1995 The New York Times Company

                              98 of 211 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                February 9, 1995, Thursday, Late Edition - Final

Robert Mier, 52, Dies; Taught Urban Planning

BYLINE: By RONALD SULLIVAN

SECTION: Section B;  Page 9;  Column 1;  National Desk

LENGTH: 369 words


Robert Mier, a professor of urban planning and public administration at the
University of Illinois at Chicago and a leading expert on economic and social
issues facing American cities, died on Sunday at his home. He was 52 and lived
in Chicago.

His family said he died of a form of lymphoma that resulted from his exposure to
the chemical defoliant Agent Orange during the Vietnam War.

Mr. Mier's wife, Joan Fitzgerald, said her husband had applied for disability
connected with his exposure and had received a letter granting his claim two
days before he died.

Mr. Mier was the architect and chief proponent of Chicago's highly regarded 1984
development plan, which he created as the city's director of economic
development. Known as Chicago Works Together, the plan became a national model
for other large cities struggling to retain their industrial and economic base
while making neighborhoods easier to live in.

Some of his major accomplishments included a new $175 million public library, an
export program for small businesses and a community-based general delivery
system. Over all, he led efforts to keep factories open and to help
neighborhoods control their own economic development.

At the University of Chicago, he founded the Center for Urban Economic
Development in 1978. During its 17 years, the center has helped communities help
themselves with technical assistance and research.

Mr. Mier also served as a consultant to cities here and abroad. In the wake of
the 1992 Los Angeles riots, he was asked by the American Planning Association to
conduct seminars for planning directors in Southern California.

Born in St. Louis, he graduated from the University of Notre Dame with a degree
in civil engineering in 1965. He received a doctorate in city and regional
planning at Cornell University in 1974.

He served as a Navy lieutenant in Vietnam, but later resigned his commission
because of opposition to the war.

Besides his wife, Mr. Mier is survived by two sons, Brian and Brendan, both of
Chicago; two daughters, Lian Mier, of Huntsville, Ala., and Shelly Fitzgerald,
of Chicago; a sister, Nell Newton, of Washington; a brother, Fred Boehm, of St.
Louis, and two grandsons.

NAME: Robert Mier

LOAD-DATE: February 9, 1995

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Obituary (Obit); Biography

                   Copyright 1995 The New York Times Company

                              99 of 211 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                February 9, 1995, Thursday, Late Edition - Final

Rayford T. Saucer; Astronaut Trainer, 72

BYLINE: AP

SECTION: Section B;  Page 9;  Column 1;  National Desk

LENGTH: 162 words

DATELINE: RICHMOND, Feb. 8


Dr. Rayford T. Saucer, assistant training officer for NASA's first seven
astronauts and a Veterans Administration psychologist, died on Saturday at his
home here. He was 72.

The cause was a heart aneurysm, family members said.

In 1960, Dr. Saucer joined the National Aeronautics and Space Administration's
Space Task Group at Langley Research Center in Hampton, Va., as an assistant
training officer for Project Mercury. From 1962 to 1971, he was a staff
scientist.

Before joining NASA, he was a research psychologist with the Veterans
Administration in Hampton. In 1971, he rejoined the administration's medical
center, where he served as a staff psychologist until 1980.

He then transferred to the Veterans Medical Center in Augusta, Ga., and helped
develop a treatment program for Vietnam War veterans suffering from
post-traumatic stress disorder.

He is survived by his wife, Jean F. Saucer; a daughter, Moira, and a son,
Patrick, both of Washington.

LOAD-DATE: February 9, 1995

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Obituary (Obit); Biography

                   Copyright 1995 The New York Times Company

                              100 of 211 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                February 10, 1995, Friday, Late Edition - Final

NEWS SUMMARY

SECTION: Section A; Page 2; Column 5; Metropolitan Desk

LENGTH: 993 words



International A3-9

U.N. CONCERNED BY SECURITY BILL
A national security bill that could undermine international peacekeeping
operations and fundamentally change Washington's relations with the U.N. is
arousing concern in the capital and abroad. A9

MEXICO CRACKS DOWN ON REBELS
The President of Mexico ordered the arrest of rebel leaders in southern Mexico
after federal agents uncovered what he called major weapons caches and plans for
widespread violence. A3


MIDEAST TALKS BREAKING DOWN
With Israel insisting that its security comes first and the P.L.O. replying that
its people need work, negotiations on expanding Palestinian self-rule are going
nowhere. A5

WAR HIGHLIGHTS RUSSIA'S WOES
Once again, Moscow has declared premature victory in secessionist Chechnya. But
the war is highlighting Russia's fragile political, military and economic
condition. A8

ALLIES VOICE SUPPORT FOR YELTSIN
President Clinton and Chancellor Helmut Kohl of Germany criticized Russia's
assault on Chechnya but said that it was vital to continue supporting President
Yeltsin.  A8

TENSION RISES IN CROATIA
The Serbs holding close to one-third of Croatia have cut off talks with the
Croatian Government, balked at parts of an economic accord and formally placed
themselves on "war alert." A8

SKEPTICS GROW OVER NATO
While foreign policy elites discuss the expansion of NATO, a skeptical public in
America and Europe has been left out of the dialogue. A6

Would NATO go to war in Uzbekistan? No way, the Pentagon says.A6

The death toll in the Colombia earthquake continues to rise. A3

New Delhi Journal: Election commissioner wins a bully pulpit. A4

National A10-24

G.O.P. PLAN TO OVERHAUL WELFARE
House Republican leaders moved to eliminate the right of poor women and children
to get cash assistance from the Government.  A1

The Republicans' new welfare plan. News analysis.  A16

TACKLING THE DEFICIT
A freshman Senator has offered an array of budget-cutting ideas that includes
something to offend just about everyone.  A16

ABORTION AS A LITMUS TEST
Obstetricians and gynecologists said that performing an abortion should not
disqualify a doctor from becoming Surgeon General.  A1

TOUGH GOING FOR NOMINEE
Opposition to Dr. Henry W. Foster Jr., the nominee for Surgeon General, hardened
among Republicans in the Senate.  A23

A NEW POLICY ON FLIGHT DATA
The Government told the airlines that information they gathered on flight
performance would not be used against them or their pilots, even if rules were
broken.  A1

DEJA VU FOR WILLIAM AGEE?
William Agee and his wife Mary Cunningham Agee, who sought a "normal life" in
Boise, Idaho, after the Bendix Corporation are again in the harsh spotlight of
corporate politics.  A1

A FUTURE FROM THE PAST
With San Francisco's glory days as a working waterfront gone, the area's most
valuable asset is now its past.  A10

AN ABBREVIATED SPACE WALK
Two shuttle astronauts who ventured outside learned that their spacesuits needed
more work.  A10

ENVIRONMENTAL CHANGES
Congressional Republicans began rolling back environmental regulations that
businesses have said are costly and burdensome. A22

FIRST ON THE SCENE
The first officer at Nicole Brown Simpson's condominium testified that he soon
realized that this would be no ordinary murder case.  A24

Scientists may have found a "smart bomb" against leukemia.  A18

Law A25

"Startling" studies document a gap between the sexes at law schools.

The cash value of a firm's good will? In New York, maybe a lot.

Metro Digest B1

MAYOR SEEKS UNION CONCESSIONS
The Giuliani administration plans to ask New York City's labor unions for $600
million in concessions in exchange for a pledge to avert layoffs of municipal
employees, city and union officials said.  A1

HOW A MANHUNT ENDED
In the end, officials said, it was an informer who may have been seeking to
collect a $2 million reward who simply walked into the American Embassy in
Islamabad, Pakistan, and provided information that led to the capture of Ramzi
Ahmed Yousef, the man the authorities consider the main plotter behind the
bombing of the World Trade Center. A1

Business Digest D1

Weekend C1-30

Who's who's for Valentine's Day.  C1
Art-gallery party hopping.  C1
For Children C20
Theater: On Stage, and Off C2
Mamet's "Cryptogram." C3
"The Truth-Teller." C3
Film: "The Quick and the Dead." C8
"Shallow Grave." C17
Dance: Jazzdance by Danny Buraczeski.  C17
Restaurants C22
Architecture: The gorgeous mosaic that was Sarajevo.  C1
Art: Donald Judd, critic and sculptor.  C25
Inside Art C26
Art in Review C27
Nan Goldin's slide show.  C24
Nancy Rubins at the Modern.  C28
French Renaissance prints.  C28
Books: Clinton biography.  C30
Television: TV Weekend D17
Home Video D17

Neediest Cases B3

Sports B7-14

Baseball: Usery' status up in air.  B7
Strawberry pleads guilty.  B7
Basketball: Knicks walk tall at right time.  B9
Columns: Vecsey on the Devils B7
Hockey: Devils top Rangers, 4-1.  B7
Islanders fall to unbeaten Penguins, 5-2.  B8
SportsPeople B13

Obituaries A26-27

A FORMER SENATOR DIES
J. William Fulbright, who helped to rally opposition to the Vietnam War and
created a fellowship program, has died. He was 89.  A1

Editorials/Op-Ed A28-29

Editorials

The tainted Foster nomination.
North Korea's risky bargaining.
A Senator's saving courage.
Intolerance in Albany.

Letters

Anthony Lewis: Out with the bath water.
A. M. Rosenthal: The $20 billion inquiry.
Kevin Baker: Ballplayers are workers, too.
Robert L. Park: "Star Wars": the sequel.
Lawrence Buttenwieser and Raymond Horton: A leaner New York.

Chronicle B6

Crossword C27

LOAD-DATE: February 10, 1995

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Summary

                   Copyright 1995 The New York Times Company

                              101 of 211 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                February 10, 1995, Friday, Late Edition - Final

BOOKS OF THE TIMES;
Retracing a Path That Led to the Presidential Trail

BYLINE: By MICHIKO KAKUTANI

SECTION: Section C;  Page 30;  Column 3;  Weekend Desk

LENGTH: 1104 words



FIRST IN HIS CLASS
A Biography of Bill Clinton
By David Maraniss
Illustrated. 512 pages. Simon & Schuster. $25.

There is a recurrent scene in "First in His Class," a new biography of Bill
Clinton, that gives the reader a vivid glimpse of the President's ambition and
political instincts.

As a young man, David Maraniss reports, Mr. Clinton assembled a cardboard box
filled with alphabetized and annotated index cards listing the names and
telephone numbers of classmates, professors, political organizers and other
acquaintances who might be useful to him in a future political career. While
running (unsuccessfully) for Congress in 1974, Mr. Clinton, Mr. Maraniss writes,
"spent time each night combing through the file, placing telephone calls, and
writing notes to friends who might help his campaign." He would return to the
file many times in the years to come.

By 1980, when Mr. Clinton lost a re-election bid for the Arkansas governorship,
the card file included more than 10,000 names. Each card, Mr. Maraniss observes,
recorded important interchanges Mr. Clinton had had with the individual, and
another row of dates noting "when that person had received a letter from Clinton
or his aides known as a GTMY: for Glad to Meet You." By 1982, the card file had
been computerized, resulting in a sophisticated campaign machine that "ran
around the clock, churning out Glad-to-Meet-You letters, fund-raising
solicitations, special letters for black supporters, for first-time supporters,
for teachers, for the elderly."

"Letters to friends of Bill went out in an endless stream," Mr. Maraniss writes.

Indeed, the portrait of Mr. Clinton that emerges from this biography is not one
of a visionary leader or statesman, but of an indefatigable, instinctual
politician, driven throughout his life to seek the approval of friends and
strangers alike.

By now, of course, none of this is exactly news. Although Mr. Clinton is only
halfway through his first term in office, three other books on him or his
Presidency ("The Agenda," by Bob Woodward, "On the Edge," by Elizabeth Drew, and
"Highwire," by John Brummett) have already appeared. In addition, countless
articles -- including a Pulitzer Prize-winning series written by Mr. Maraniss
for The Washington Post in 1992 -- have chronicled and rechronicled his life and
political career.

Those newspaper articles by Mr. Maraniss provided the basic armature for this
book, though a curious shift in tone seems to have occurred along the way.
Whereas the campaign pieces tended to stress the positive aspects of Mr.
Clinton's political stamina, ambition (or "sense of purpose") and faith in the
principle of reconciliation, "First in His Class" often looks at those same
qualities through a darker lens.

In his first few chapters, Mr. Maraniss seems distinctly uncomfortable writing
in the long-distance form of the book, doggedly describing Mr. Clinton's
feelings and other people's impressions of him without pulling the material
together into a coherent pattern of meaning. The second half of the book is
decidedly less myopic, though its assessments can sometimes verge on the
obvious. For instance, Mr. Maraniss concludes that the part of Mr. Clinton that
"is indefatigable, intelligent, empathetic and self-deprecating" co-exists with
"the part of him that is indecisive, too eager to please and prone to
deception."

Mr. Maraniss's attempts to situate the President within the larger context of
the baby-boom generation are highly simplistic, and his occasional efforts to
wax poetic can result in unfortunate sentences like this one: "Luck and fate
always seem to appear at the edge of the road as Bill Clinton drives along his
highway of ambition, two friendly hitchhikers, thumbs out, ready to be picked up
for stretches here and there when other passengers appear less attractive."

When Mr. Maraniss sticks to straightforward reporting, the results are decidedly
better. He sets down a minutely detailed account of Mr. Clinton's convoluted
dealings with the draft during the Vietnam War, and he agilely demonstrates how
Mr. Clinton's tenure as Governor of Arkansas prefigured many of his problems as
President, including a reputation for overly expedient decisions, a penchant for
blaming others and a tendency to displease everyone by trying to please all.

The overall narrative, which ends with Mr. Clinton's announcement in 1991 that
he is running for President, is fairly comprehensive, though highly selective in
its points of emphasis. While considerable space is devoted to Mr. Clinton's
alleged marital infidelities -- Mr. Maraniss writes that the Clinton aide Betsey
Wright "was convinced that some state troopers were soliciting women for him,
and he for them" -- Whitewater is dealt with only glancingly, and Mr. Clinton's
early friendship with Lani Guinier is shrugged off in a single aside.

Along the way, Mr. Maraniss enlivens his narrative with lots of casual
anecdotes, the sorts of anecdotes that can seem, in retrospect, like epiphanic
gestures: Mr. Clinton hearing that great men require less sleep than ordinary
mortals and deciding then and there to sleep only five hours a night; Mr.
Clinton shocked that a child has beaten him at pinball and staying up till 2 in
the morning in an attempt to reclaim his record; Mr. Clinton driving himself and
a friend to an important political meeting in Arkansas and swerving wildly into
oncoming traffic so intent is he on talking and gesturing.

What emerges most forcefully from "First in His Class" is just how deliberately
Mr. Clinton went about fashioning his political career, just how willfully he
set about fulfilling the great expectations placed on him by his mother and his
early peers. His pursuit of student office in high school and college; his
political apprenticeship in a variety of campaigns; his stints at Oxford and
Yale Law School; his efforts to maintain his "political viability within the
system" throughout the debate over his draft history, and his assiduous
cultivation of a growing network of friends, colleagues and potential supporters
-- all of this flies in the face of the President's perpetuation of the myth, in
Mr. Maraniss's words, "that his life progressed in a series of accidents and
uncalculated events."

Indeed, Mr. Maraniss's suggestion that Mr. Clinton embraced the notion of "the
permanent campaign" (a phrase first used by Sidney Blumenthal in his 1980 book
of the same name) during his second term as Governor of Arkansas might well
provide an alternative title for this book: the permanent campaigner, the
eternal politician.


LOAD-DATE: February 10, 1995

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo: Bill Clinton in 1974, when he ran unsuccessfully for Congress.
(Gary Settle/The New York Times)

TYPE: Review

                   Copyright 1995 The New York Times Company

                              102 of 211 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                February 10, 1995, Friday, Late Edition - Final

A Senator's Saving Courage

SECTION: Section A;  Page 28;  Column 1;  Editorial Desk

LENGTH: 333 words


The youthful anti-war generation that looked to J. William Fulbright for
leadership has passed into middle age, and now the former Arkansas Senator is
gone at age 89. His opposition to the wasteful and unjust war in Vietnam led him
to confront another old lion of the Senate, Lyndon B. Johnson, who had moved
into the White House and seemingly taken leave of his senses. As chairman of the
Foreign Relations Committee, Senator Fulbright defied first Mr. Johnson and
later President Nixon for the mad prosecution of a war that had no importance to
the nation's survival.

Among those who remember those fraught days, Mr. Fulbright will long be
venerated for these acts of unmitigated political courage; they crowned his
career.

There were other moments, too. He was a leader of the movement to censure
Senator Joseph McCarthy. He established the international scholarship program
that has enriched the educational life of 120 nations.

Of course, there were less elegant moments. Like so many Southern senators of
his generation, he lacked the courage to confront segregation on his home
ground. In an imperfect effort to make amends, Mr. Fulbright turned his
attention to international affairs and social-welfare programs that did not
directly challenge the Southern system of racial discrimination.

Senator Fulbright was not above the ignoble grit of Arkansas politics. His name
has been in the news most recently for having pulled strings to help young Bill
Clinton avoid the draft. But most Congressional careers feature the same
sellouts without rising to the heights of a transcendent issue.

Mr. Fulbright challenged powerful enemies and bad ideas at the flood tide of
their power. His televised hearings in 1966 and 1967 exposed the insanity of the
Vietnam War in an irreversible way, convincing a nation that wisdom lay with the
children in the streets rather than the old man in the Executive Mansion.

His courage saved lives. Few politicians can lay claim to that epitaph.

LOAD-DATE: February 10, 1995

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Editorial

                   Copyright 1995 The New York Times Company

                              103 of 211 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                February 10, 1995, Friday, Late Edition - Final

Sounds Around Town

BYLINE: By NEIL STRAUSS

SECTION: Section C;  Page 30;  Column 5;  Weekend Desk

LENGTH: 352 words



Minimalist Quartet

Kronos Quartet, Majestic Theater, 651 Fulton Street, Fort Greene, (718)
636-4100. Strings scrape and beat furiously like the futile struggle of an
animal caught in a trap. So begins the Kronos Quartet's exploration of George
Crumb's "Black Angels," a bleak journey through the Vietnam War, which the
string quartet is to perform tonight along with Quartet No. 5 by Philip Glass
and Quartet No. 2 by Henryk Gorecki. Tomorrow, the quartet will drone through
the New York premiere of "Chronos Kristalla" ("Time Crystals"), a piece composed
for them by the Minimalist pioneer La Monte Young. With just eight pitches,
Kronos finds a world of overtones and sounds. The group will also appear Feb. 17
and 18. All performances are at 8 P.M.; tickets range from $10 to $30.   NEIL
STRAUSS


Many Facets of Punk

New Bomb Turks, Maxwell's, 1039 Washington Street, Hoboken, N.J., (201)
798-4064. It's fast, loud, simple, sloppy and nihilistic. It's punk rock, and
it's back in the malls. But this Ohio quartet takes it back to the garage for a
tune-up, making punk seem not like a trend but a necessity as it tears through
three-chord stompers touched with everything from rockabilly to hardcore.
They'll be performing with Gaunt tonight at 10; admission is $7.   N. S.


The Music of Africa

Francis Bebey, the New School, Tishman Auditorium, 66 West 12th Street, (212)
545-7536 or (212) 229-5690. For decades, Francis Bebey has been on a tireless
quest for knowledge, studying singing, playing and storytelling from different
African and non-African traditions. But he is best known as an ace synthesist,
bringing his research together to form his own modern folk music (he also writes
fiction and nonfiction, and directs films). Tonight at 8, he is to perform
original compositions on guitar, mbira (or thumb piano) and Pygmy flute. The
concert is to be preceded (at 7 P.M.) by a lecture and demonstration about
African music delivered by Mr. Bebey, and is to close with an improvised duet
with Nana Vasconcelos, the Brazillian percussionist. Admission is $16.   N. S.

LOAD-DATE: February 10, 1995

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Review

                   Copyright 1995 The New York Times Company

                              104 of 211 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

           February 10, 1995, Friday, Late Edition - Final Correction
                                    Appended

J. William Fulbright, Senate Giant, Is Dead at 89

BYLINE: By R. W. APPLE Jr.,  Special to The New York Times

SECTION: Section A; Page 1; Column 2; National Desk

LENGTH: 1840 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, Feb. 9


J. William Fulbright, the Arkansas Democrat whose powerful mind and eloquent
voice helped to rally opposition to the Vietnam War, died at 1:15 this morning
at his home here. He was 89.

The cause of death was a stroke that he suffered three weeks ago, said his wife,
Harriet Mayor Fulbright. He had suffered an initial stroke that weakened his
right side in 1988 and another, more severe one in 1993.

A Senator during three decades of cold war and domestic upheaval and chairman of
the Foreign Relations Committee for 15 years, Mr. Fulbright left a lasting
imprint not only on foreign affairs but also on education, as creator of the
Fulbright fellowships for international study. His skepticism about the
statements of his own Government, stemming from the Gulf of Tonkin incident off
Vietnam in 1964, affected a whole generation of Americans.

Bookish and sometimes supercilious, the antithesis of a "good ol' boy," Mr.
Fulbright introduced legislation as a young man that helped pave the way for the
establishment of the United Nations. He criticized Senator Joseph R. McCarthy of
Wisconsin when few dared to speak out against Communist witch hunts, and he
untiringly preached American withdrawal from Vietnam -- in his 1966 book "The
Arrogance of Power" and in vivid televised hearings in 1966 and 1967.

Yet, Mr. Fulbright said in an interview six years ago that he was proudest of
his role as legislative father of the John F. Kennedy Center for the Performing
Arts.

"If it hadn't been for him I don't think I'd be here today," President Clinton
said of Mr. Fulbright. "He made an amazing contribution to the life of our
country and, of course, to our home state. He was a great inspiration to
thousands and thousands of us who were young when he was a Senator and serving."

Mr. Clinton worked on the Senator's Washington staff in 1966 and 1967 and
followed him to Oxford as a Rhodes Scholar. During those years the future
President imbibed the fierce antiwar mood of the Fulbright office, and that no
doubt influenced his own desire to avoid military service in Southeast Asia.

For the young Arkansan, Senator Fulbright was also a role model in a deeper,
more personal sense.

"People dumped on our state and said we were all a bunch of back-country
hayseeds," Mr. Clinton once recalled. "And we had a guy in the Senate who
doubled the I.Q. of any room he entered. It made us feel pretty good, like we
might amount to something."

But the two clashed during Mr. Fulbright's re-election campaign in 1968,
according to David Maraniss's new biography of Mr. Clinton, "First in His Class"
(Simon and Schuster).

"They exasperated each other," Mr. Maraniss wrote. "Fulbright exasperated
Clinton because he could never win an argument with the old man. Clinton
exasperated Fulbright because the young buck would never shut up."

Perhaps no other 20th-century Senator, with the exception of Henry Cabot Lodge
of Massachusetts and Arthur Vandenberg of Michigan, influenced American foreign
policy more than Mr. Fulbright. And his influence lasted.

Like Mr. Clinton, many of the leading figures in the current Administration were
shaped by Mr. Fulbright's fierce critiques of American policies abroad,
including relations with Western Europe and the Soviet Union as well as Vietnam.
Leading journalists and scholars were formed in the same crucible.

"What was most amazing," said the historian Michael Beschloss, "is the degree to
which he was an agitator and critic while standing at the center of the American
power structure. That has seldom happened in our history."

Senator Fulbright had an impact abroad, too. He was one of the few American
politicians of his time, other than Presidents, whose name was known around the
world. Chancellor Helmut Kohl of Germany, visiting Mr. Clinton today, said the
Fulbright fellowships were a welcome signal of reconciliation at the end of
World War II. The Senator's name became synonymous, he said, "with openness,
with friendship and with people striving together."

Mr. Fulbright, who served in the Senate from 1945 to 1974, was dedicated to
peace and wary of power. And he did not shy from opposition to the White House
or to his Senate colleagues.

He pressed for detente with the Soviet Union throughout his career, but not
always with complete consistency. On Oct. 22, 1962, at the height of the Cuban
missile crisis, President John F. Kennedy met with senior officials just before
going on television to announce his decision to "quarantine" Cuba as a way to
stop Soviet ships from reaching the island.

According to recently declassified audio tapes released to historians, Senator
Fulbright berated Kennedy, arguing that the action was too feeble a response and
advocating instead an invasion, accompanied by bombing.

Mr. Fulbright was not without his critics, to put it mildly. President Harry S.
Truman once called him "an over-educated Oxford S.O.B." Senator McCarthy dubbed
him "Senator Halfbright." President Lyndon B. Johnson said he was "unable to
park his bicycle straight." But Senator Frank Church of Idaho said, "When all of
us are dead, the only one they'll remember is Bill Fulbright."

Though internationalist and tolerant in foreign affairs, Mr. Fulbright was a
much more typical Southern conservative on domestic issues, including race. He
voted against the Civil Rights Act of 1964 and the Voting Rights Act of 1965. As
late as 1975, he opposed civil rights legislation, "first, because I doubted its
efficacy; second, because my constituents wouldn't have tolerated it."

James William Fulbright was born on April 9, 1905, in Sumner, Mo., and grew up
on the outskirts of Fayetteville, Ark., the home of the University of Arkansas.
His father, Jay Fulbright, was a farmer and wealthy businessman; his mother, the
former Roberta Waugh, was an outspoken newspaper columnist.

An excellent scholar, the future Senator enrolled at the university when he was
15. He became captain of the tennis team, starred as a halfback on the football
team and was elected president of the student body. A professor suggested that
he apply for a Rhodes Scholarship. He was accepted, and after graduating in 1925
he spent three years studying modern history at Oxford.

"Oh, God, it was wonderful," he said in 1989 of his days at Oxford. "I used the
language in the most primitive manner, as you can imagine; the University of
Arkansas in those days was not that impressive."

Not long after returning to this country, while visiting Washington, Mr.
Fulbright met a Philadelphia socialite, Elizabeth Williams. To remain near her,
he enrolled in the law school at George Washington University. They were married
in 1932, and when Mr. Fulbright received his law degree in 1934 he became an
intern in the antitrust division of the Justice Department.

Mr. Fulbright was only 34 in 1939 when he was named president of the University
of Arkansas. Two years later a new Governor, Homer Adkins, persuaded a new board
of trustees to seek Mr. Fulbright's resignation. He refused to resign -- to keep
his record clear, he said -- and was dismissed on Graduation Day, June 9, 1941.

The next year, when the district's Congressional seat fell vacant, Mr. Fulbright
defeated Mr. Adkins's choice in a campaign that emphasized the need to win World
War II and establish a successor to the League of Nations. When Mr. Adkins
announced his candidacy for the Senate in 1944, Mr. Fulbright decided to run
against him, and easily won a four-way Democratic primary, which at that time
meant automatic election.

In August 1946, President Truman signed the law that created the Fulbright
exchange fellowships. In the years since, the number of Americans sent abroad
and foreigners brought to the United States to study under the plan has reached
almost 250,000, according to Dr. Joseph Duffey, director of the United States
Information Agency, which oversees the exchange program,

In the Senate, Mr. Fulbright viewed the budding cold war between the United
States and the Soviet Union as being "like two big dogs clawing on a bone." As
the conflict deepened, Mr. Fulbright supported the Truman Administration. He
backed United States intervention in Korea in 1950, but by early 1951 he was so
troubled by the prospect of a new world war that he called for the withdrawal of
American forces.

Mr. Fulbright was the only Senator to vote in 1954 against financing the
McCarthy investigation into reported Communist influence in the Government. And
later that year it was Mr. Fulbright who wrote the bill of particulars attached
to the censure motion that, in effect, ended McCarthy's career.

The Senator admired the prudence of President Dwight D. Eisenhower and commended
it to his successor, President Kennedy. When Johnson became President in
November 1963, Mr. Fulbright privately urged him not to escalate the war in
Vietnam but publicly went along with him as chairman of the Foreign Relations
Committee. This led to the episode of which Senator Fulbright was most ashamed.

In August 1964, the White House announced that North Vietnam had attacked two
United States destroyers in the Gulf of Tonkin. At the President's request, Mr.
Fulbright introduced a resolution approving the bombing of North Vietnam in
retaliation -- in effect, giving carte blanche to make war. Only Senators Wayne
Morse of Oregon and Ernest Gruening of Alaska voted against it.

Johnson had insisted that the bombing would end the war. As it dragged on, Mr.
Fulbright came to believe that he had been deceived. "The biggest lesson I
learned from Vietnam," he said later, "is not to trust government statements. I
had no idea until then that you could not rely on government statements."

In March 1974, Dale Bumpers, then the 48-year-old Governor of Arkansas,
announced his candidacy for Mr. Fulbright's seat. Avoiding any criticism of the
69-year-old Senator, to the latter's frustration, Mr. Bumpers ran instead on the
need for new blood in Washington. Mr. Bumpers won the primary by a margin of
about 2 to 1.

Much later, Mr. Fulbright said in an interview: "I rather think the decision of
the voters may have been correct. I got into kind of a rut."

He stayed in Washington, joining the law firm of Hogan & Hartson, where he
became counsel for Japan and the United Arab Emirates. He continued to travel
widely and to accumulate foreign decorations, honorary degrees and the
Presidential Medal of Freedom. He retired from the law firm last October.

Mr. Fulbright's first wife died in 1986. In 1990 he married Harriet Mayor,
director of the Fulbright Association, a nonprofit organization that serves as
an alumni body for the Fulbright scholarships and other exchange programs.

Besides his wife he is survived by two daughters from his first marriage,
Roberta Fulbright Foote of Coral Gables, Fla., and Elizabeth Fulbright Winnacker
of Columbia, Mo.; three stepdaughters, five grandchildren and two
great-grandchildren.

LOAD-DATE: May 19, 1995

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

CORRECTION-DATE: March 18, 1995, Saturday

CORRECTION:
The obituary of former Senator J. William Fulbright of Arkansas on Feb. 10
misidentified the politician who derided him as Senator Halfbright. A reader's
letter, initially misdirected at The Times, points out that it was President
Harry S. Truman, not Senator Joseph R. McCarthy.

GRAPHIC: Photos: J. William Fulbright forcefully shaped American foreign policy.
(George Tames/The New York Times, 1966) (pg. A1); Under a photograph, left, of
Senator J. William Fulbright listening to President Lyndon B. Johnson in 1965,
the President, whose Vietnam policy was opposed by Mr. Fulbright, had scrawled
these words: "I can see I haven't been very persuasive." Twenty-eight years
later, another President, Bill Clinton, above, shared the stage with his mentor
at a Washington dinner in 1993, honoring Mr. Fulbright's 88th birthday.
(Associated Press) (pg. A27)

Chart: "LEGACY: Prominent Fulbright Scholars" provides list of U.S. and
international Fulbright scholars. (Source: Fulbright Association) (pg. A27)

TYPE: Obituary (Obit); Biography

                   Copyright 1995 The New York Times Company

                              105 of 211 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               February 11, 1995, Saturday, Late Edition - Final

Hartford Veterans Agency Nominee Assailed for Remarks

BYLINE: By JONATHAN RABINOVITZ,   Special to The New York Times

SECTION: Section 1;  Page 21;  Column 2;  Metropolitan Desk;  Second Front

LENGTH: 1314 words

DATELINE: HARTFORD, Feb. 10


In his 18 years in the State Legislature, Eugene A. Migliaro, Gov. John G.
Rowland's nominee to head the State Veterans Affairs Department, established a
reputation for blunt language that tested the limits of acceptable speech.

For instance, after referring to homosexuals as "lollipops," Mr. Migliaro, a
Republican, was formally reprimanded by his colleagues in the state House of
Representatives. Seven years later, he still refuses to apologize for his
remarks.

"I will never apologize for it," Mr. Migliaro insisted in an interview today.
"But I don't have a prejudiced bone in my body. It's just the way an old marine
talks."

As early as Wednesday, state senators may decide whether Mr. Migliaro's speech
ought to disqualify him from the job or whether his accomplishments on veterans
issues outweigh what some say is merely a colorful way of talking. Although
Senate leaders expect him to be approved, legislators from both parties say they
are appalled by some of his comments.

"A number of us have expressed our displeasure with what appears to be a
repeated pattern of anti-homosexual remarks," said State Senator William A.
Aniskovich, Republican of Branford, speaking of a recent meeting of the Senate's
Republican leadership.

But Mr. Aniskovich, who plans to support him, added, "On balance, I think
governors are rightfully afforded discretion in appointments, and we're short of
any evidence that would suggest he can't do the job."

A former Marine corporal, Mr. Migliaro, 69, now the Mayor of Wolcott, is known
by many as Mr. Veteran. The walls of his office are decorated with 26 plaques
and awards, and he is credited with accomplishments varying from establishing a
Marine Corps League drill unit for teen-agers in Waterbury to introducing the
legislation that established the State Veterans' Affairs Department in 1988.

Many veterans also say that Mr. Migliaro was responsible for getting the
Legislature to appropriate money for a commission to study the effects of Agent
Orange on Connecticut veterans, enabling them to collect more government
benefits.

Although one group of Vietnam veterans has objected to Mr. Migliaro's
appointment, saying he does not understand the special needs of their era's
veterans, he has been endorsed by the state chapters of the American Legion and
Veterans of Foreign Wars, among other veterans' groups.

But Mr. Migliaro, who retired from the House in 1992, may be best known for his
"shoot from the hip" speaking style. In 1987, he was discussing a study of the
state Veterans Home and Hospital with reporters in the Capitol, and made the
comments that continue to plague him. It was in reference to the head of the
study, State Representative Paul Gionfriddo, a vocal supporter of gay rights who
had clashed with Mr. Migliaro over a variety of issues.

Mr. Gionfriddo "votes against veterans and for gays," Mr. Migliaro had said.
"Well, let's just let them lollipops fight the next war."

Four years later, Mr. Migliaro proposed a budget amendment, and a gay lawmaker
rose to ask a question. "I hope he doesn't blow me a kiss," Mr. Migliaro was
reported to have remarked.

Mr. Migliaro also once suggested that the solution to sexual harassment was for
women to "say 'No.' "

On another occasion, Mr. Migliaro demanded that the state stop buying foreign
cars for its motor pool, adding "especially Japanese." When a legislator warned
that he sounded prejudiced against Japanese, he was heard to respond, "Damn
right, I'm prejudiced."

And over the last month, some advocates for Vietnam veterans have complained
that Mr. Migliaro referred to them as "crybabies" when they were pushing for new
programs. Mr. Migliaro denied making such a comment.

Today, State Senator George Jepsen of Stamford and State Representative Cameron
C. Staples of New Haven, both Democrats, urged Governor Rowland to withdraw the
nomination. "By nominating someone whose record is clear on basic issues of
tolerance, you sent a message to the General Assembly and the public that
homophobia will be tolerated," they wrote.

Governor Rowland has brushed aside such concerns.

"He's very colorful -- as are many other legislators on many other issues -- but
that doesn't automatically disqualify him from ever having a job as a
commissioner," Mr. Rowland said. "Maybe he's not sophisticated and politically
correct, but at the end of the day he's still a champion of veterans."

And it appears that many legislators are not interested in delving into Mr.
Migliaro's attitudes. At a hearing on his appointment on Tuesday, no member of
the Executive and Legislative Nominations Committee asked about his "lollipop"
remark.

Perhaps the toughest question Mr. Migliaro had to field from the committee was
whether homosexuals would get a fair shake in his administration. Mr. Migliaro
promised that they would.

"When I was in real estate, I never discriminated," he said. "I have sold homes
to gays, blacks, Hispanic, Indian, you name it -- even Italians, which I am."

More than 100 veterans were there in support of Mr. Migliaro. No gay-rights
advocates were present.

Joseph S. Grabarz Jr., a former Democratic state representative from Bridgeport
who was the first Connecticut legislator to declare his homosexuality, has been
organizing opposition to Mr. Migliaro. He said opponents did not want to bring
out a crowd.

"Turning this into a gay and lesbian issue was not going to make winning this
any easier," he said. Instead it was decided that legislators and veterans
opposed to Mr. Migliaro should concentrate on whether he was truly qualified to
run the department, he said.

As an example, critics have pointed to a mistake Mr. Migliaro made last month,
when it was learned that he planned to hire his daughter as his secretary, a
violation of the state's nepotism rules. He later said he would not hire her.

More significantly, Mr. Migliaro has been criticized by several leaders of one
Vietnam veterans' group, who say that he favors the needs of older veterans over
Vietnam veterans. They say that Mr. Migliaro opposed expanding drug treatment
programs and providing services for homeless veterans. And they note that Mr.
Migliaro wanted to keep open a bar, the Foxhole, in the state's veterans'
hospital in Rocky Hill, over the objections of some veterans advocates, who said
it endangered patients with substance abuse problems. The bar was closed several
years ago.

Mr. Migliaro and prominent veterans from all wars countered that Mr. Migliaro
had fought hard to increase services for Vietnam veterans. And while only last
month he was talking about reopening the Foxhole, he has since said that he now
understands that it would be a mistake.

Governor Rowland has not budged in his support for Mr. Migliaro. They have known
each other for 20 years, and they are both political fixtures in the area that
Mr. Rowland often calls the "center of the universe," the Naugatuck Valley in
western Connecticut.

Of the two dozen or so appointments Mr. Rowland has made since his election,
this is the only one that suggests political patronage. Still, politicians say
privately that Mr. Migliaro was not influential in Mr. Rowland's campaign and
that if this is a reward, they do not know what it could be for.

The nomination has many lawmakers baffled about why Mr. Rowland would risk a
controversy over a relatively obscure position.

"It's hard to imagine why you would want to go though this sort of fight for an
appointment that you don't have to have any controversy over," said State
Senator Kevin B. Sullivan of West Hartford, a Democrat who expects to oppose the
nomination.

One undecided Republican State Senator, Kevin F. Rennie of South Windsor, a
staunch supporter of Mr. Rowland, said: "I have some doubts about the wisdom of
this appointment, but I'm willing to listen."

NAME: Eugene A. Migliaro

LOAD-DATE: February 11, 1995

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo: Eugene A. Migliaro at his confirmation hearing on Tuesday. He
denies calling hostile Vietnam veterans "crybabies," but publicly called
homosexuals "lollipops." (Steve Miller for The New York Times)

TYPE: Biography

                   Copyright 1995 The New York Times Company

                              106 of 211 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                February 12, 1995, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

The Last Refuge of Everybody

BYLINE: By David Oshinsky;   David Oshinsky, a professor of 20th-century history
at Rutgers University, is the author of "A Conspiracy So Immense: The World of
Joe McCarthy" and a forthcoming book on race and punishment in the South.

SECTION: Section 7;  Page 14;  Column 2;  Book Review Desk

LENGTH: 1724 words



THE POPULIST PERSUASION
An American History.
By Michael Kazin.
Illustrated. 381 pp. New York:
Basic Books. $24.

IN the 1990's, it is hard to find a political candidate, a media star or an
advertiser who does not claim to be a populist. Bill Clinton, Ross Perot, Jesse
Jackson, Pat Robertson, Rush Limbaugh, Bruce Springsteen, Madonna -- all portray
themselves as the voice, the offspring or the champion of ordinary people. How
bad have things become? Hewlett-Packard, Michael Kazin tells us, recently
advertised a Populist printer, "perfect . . . for the masses"; "erstwhile
neo-Nazi David Duke . . . helped start a tiny Populist Party in 1988," and
Banana Republic has introduced a line of men's cotton "POPULIST pants . . . for
the individual in everyman."

There was a time, writes Mr. Kazin in this perceptive and passionately liberal
book, when the language of populism had real meaning to the people who used it.
Throughout the 19th and early 20th centuries, he says, populism implied a noble
assemblage of common folk, employing the power of mass democracy to confront the
forces of privilege and greed. Farmers, factory workers, progressives and
prohibitionists all raised the populist banner to battle "predatory interests."
His own "People's Party" was "the protest of the plundered against the
plunderers," declared Tom Watson, a turn-of-the-century populist leader, "of the
victim against the robbers."

As his title, "The Populist Persuasion," indicates, Mr. Kazin, a professor of
history at American University, is more interested in the rhetoric of populist
movements than the movements themselves. Beginning with the antislavery crusade
of the 1840's, he skillfully surveys more than a century of mass protests, using
imagery and symbolism as his guides. For most of its history, he notes, populism
was associated with the left. Its language praised the toiling masses and linked
political virtue with manual pursuits. But in time, this vision blurred, a relic
of simpler days.

Following World War II, populism changed its political course, moving sharply to
the right. The harsh cold-war climate and the return of prosperity served to
discredit left-wing movements and ideas. In this new age of mass advertising and
material abundance, most workers came to view themselves as consumers and
taxpayers, not as members of an exploited class, and seemed less concerned by
the power of big business, which provided them with good jobs, than by the
growth of big government. For the first time, Mr. Kazin notes, the vocabulary of
populism, of grass-roots protest, became a vehicle "to thwart and reverse social
and cultural change rather than to promote it."

Mr. Kazin is well aware of populism's darker side. Its rhetoric had always
stressed the fight between good and evil, between a virtuous majority and an
unworthy elite. Populist spokesmen tended to portray their opponents as the
enemies of ordinary people -- and thus of democracy itself. To illustrate these
points, Mr. Kazin provides a superb portrait of William Jennings Bryan, who in
the early 1900's preached majority rule on issues ranging from prohibition to
evolution in the public schools; and another of Father Charles E. Coughlin,
whose crusade in the 1930's for "social justice" degenerated into ugly attacks
upon Jews.

In the 1950's, this intolerant strain was coopted by Senator Joseph R. McCarthy
of Wisconsin, a self-proclaimed "country boy" who spoke of a giant internal
conspiracy, directed by the liberal establishment, to advance the Communist
cause. McCarthy didn't last long at the top. The rhetoric of populism is that of
crisis, and his wild charges were muted by the election of President Dwight
Eisenhower in 1952, the death of Stalin in 1953 and the subsequent armistice in
Korea. Still, McCarthy showed that the anxieties and discontents of working
people could be directed against the new liberal elite. This made him, as Mr.
Kazin deftly details, a trailblazer of sorts -- a right-wing messiah of the
masses.

In the 1960's, liberalism faced angry assaults from both ends of the political
spectrum. On the left, radical college students tried -- and failed -- to
convert the nation's growing antiwar sentiment into a political movement with
"revolutionary democratic" goals. Mr. Kazin is sympathetic to these students,
partly, it appears, because he was one of them. Yet his larger point, that their
clumsy use of populist rhetoric offended an overwhelming majority of Americans,
is surely correct. Wasn't a college education the ultimate privilege? What gave
them the right to be angry at all? The black writer Julius Lester expressed an
all-too-common sentiment when he described these students as "perhaps the first
radicals anywhere who have sought to make a revolution in a country which they
hate."

A backlash was inevitable. The chaotic social and political protests of the
1960's further weakened the nation's liberal leadership without producing a
credible alternative. In short order, Mr. Kazin writes, a new populist spokesman
arose to fill the void: George Corley Wallace, a working-class Southern Democrat
with a segregationist history and striking national appeal.

Mr. Kazin sees Mr. Wallace as the godfather of the modern American right. (More
traditional conservatives like Senator Barry Goldwater of Arizona play a minor
role in this account.) The problem, however, is that Mr. Wallace does not fit
neatly into a conventional box. As the Governor of Alabama, Mr. Wallace
supported many New Deal reforms. And as a Presidential candidate in 1968 and
1972, Mr. Kazin notes, he "explicitly favored a Government that aided the common
folk -- as long as it stayed out of their schools, their unions, and their
family lives."

What makes Mr. Wallace and his rhetoric so vital to Mr. Kazin's story is both
his visceral attachment to these common folk and his open sympathy for their
deepest passions and fears. Mr. Wallace, Mr. Kazin says, was the first major
Presidential candidate of this century to identify himself as a working man. His
1968 campaign literature portrayed him as "a former truck driver married to a
dime store clerk." He courted the kind of sneering jabs that appeared in a major
intellectual journal about his "ill-cut suits" and his "graying drip-dry
shirts," Mr. Kazin writes. His constituents were people much like himself, he
boasted: average Americans who worked hard, loved their country, believed in
God, paid their taxes and obeyed the law.

RACE was always central to the Wallace message, as Mr. Kazin makes clear. Yet
Mr. Wallace rarely criticized blacks per se; his targets were the arrogant
liberals who looked down on white working people and meddled endlessly in their
lives. A typical Wallace speech skewered Federal judges who mandated forced
busing and affirmative action programs; "pseudo-intellectuals" who promoted a
permissive culture of crime, sex and drugs; and faceless bureaucrats, living
comfortably in the suburbs, who spent billions of hard-earned tax dollars on
failed programs for ungrateful minorities. "Some of his best applause lines,"
Mr. Kazin tells us, "came at the expense of the anonymous professor who 'knows
how to run the Vietnam War but can't park his bicycle straight.' " When student
hecklers appeared at his campaign rallies, Mr. Wallace brought roars of approval
by shouting: "You young people seem to know a lot of four-letter words. But I
have two . . . you don't know: S-O-A-P and W-O-R-K."

In the weeks before the 1968 Presidential election, public opinion polls showed
Mr. Wallace at a hefty 21 percent, only 7 points behind Vice President Hubert H.
Humphrey, the Democratic nominee. But Mr. Wallace faded badly, the victim, it
appeared, of his own excessive zeal. In October, he chose Gen. Curtis LeMay, the
retired Air Force Chief of Staff and tireless advocate of atomic warfare, as his
running mate on the American Independent ticket. "I don't believe the world
would end if we exploded a nuclear weapon," LeMay told startled reporters.
Indeed, he added, the testing of hydrogen bombs in the Pacific had been an
environmental asset because the rats on Bikini atoll "are bigger, fatter and
healthier than they ever were before."

Governor Wallace received about 10 million votes, or 13.6 percent, evenly split
between North and South. His campaign revealed the first sightings of the Silent
Majority, as well as the obvious limits of his own raw appeal. "In his clever,
snarling way," writes Mr. Kazin, George Wallace "was too authentically populist,
too candid and impolitic an outlet for the rage of his mostly male, mostly
working-class followers to attract other voters who simply wanted the nation's
troubles to end."

According to Mr. Kazin, the Wallace lesson was refined by Republicans like
Presidents Richard Nixon and Ronald Reagan, who learned to exploit the same mass
resentments in a more respectable way. Mr. Reagan, in particular, presented a
gentler vision of the Wallace message -- a vision of what must be protected
rather than who should be beaten down. He emphasized the identical issues, from
defense of family to an economic order based on merit and hard work, in a manner
that attracted mainstream voters. The fact that Mr. Reagan's rhetoric was often
at odds with his Administration's policies did not seem to matter. He had
captured the language of populism, says Mr. Kazin, and that was enough.

Mr. Kazin finished his provocative book before the 1994 Congressional elections,
which may explain his cautious optimism about the future of left-liberal
politics in the United States. He believes that the "populist persuasion" -- the
ideals and rhetoric of mass democracy -- can be refashioned by the left in a
less strident, more meaningful way. But this will not be easy. Few Americans can
recall a time when the common folk had shared interests, the welfare state was
in favor, and the labor movement was strong. And fewer still, I suspect, would
agree that "left" populism speaks to their present needs and humane instincts,
while "right" populism caters to their resentments, hatreds and fears. The
political landscape has changed dramatically in the past five decades, and
casualties abound. For those in power today, the message should be clear:
populism is a deep, enduring impulse with a very fickle past.

LOAD-DATE: February 12, 1995

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Drawing

TYPE: Review

                   Copyright 1995 The New York Times Company

                              107 of 211 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                February 12, 1995, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

FILM;
Hollywood Presents: Government as Villain

BYLINE: By MARIA LAURINO

SECTION: Section 2;  Page 13;  Column 1;  Arts & Leisure Desk

LENGTH: 1780 words


AS AN ARMY OF NEWLY elected Republicans settle into Congress declaring that
they've heard the vox populi, they may want to double-check the pulse of the
country by watching a few movies. The anger against Government that exploded in
November only confirmed what film audiences have known: politicians and
bureaucrats are in big trouble, surpassing gangsters and mobsters as the
villains of choice.

More and more Americans seem to share the sentiment of Col. William Ludlow in
the current hit "Legends of the Fall." Silenced by a stroke, Ludlow (played by
Anthony Hopkins) manages to dredge from the depths of his soul the energy to
yell one vulgar phrase that expresses his irrepressible contempt for his
Government. At best, as films like "Forrest Gump" suggest, Presidents and
politicians are seen as just passing irrelevant figures in the American
landscape. The simpleton Gump meets three Presidents, yet they pale in
significance compared with his family and friends.

Years before Republicans drew up their Contract With America, Hollywood scripted
its own contract, which took weak and corrupt Government as its target. From the
compromises politicians inevitably made in their pursuit of power in "The
Candidate" (1972) and the cynical view of politics in "Nashville" (1975) to
Hollywood's tale about Watergate in "All the President's Men" (1976), film
reflected the shifting mood of a country that was increasingly disillusioned by
the Vietnam War and the Watergate scandal. The Government once capable of
winning World War II and ending the Great Depression seemed cruelly replaced by
feckless leaders who routinely lied to the people.

Today, as people's faith in politicians -- as well as some institutions --
plummets, the seed of anti-Government fervor reflected in the films of the 70's
has grown to an unremitting attack in the 90's. Now anti-Government films go
well beyond the implications of the earlier era to accusations of gross
incompetence, treachery and even murder.

Most recently, in "Bad Company," a former C.I.A. agent lists his job skills as
"blackmail, bribery, subversion and the odd kidnapping," reinforcing the movie's
theme that there's little distinction between an underground criminal
organization and the United States intelligence agency. In "Murder in the
First," a young attorney discovers a Government conspiracy supported by J. Edgar
Hoover, the head of the F.B.I., to stop him from exposing the atrocities of
Alcatraz.

Even comedies seem to reflect deep American anger toward government and the
belief that the phrase public servant is an oxymoron. "Speechless," a recent
film about two speechwriters (reminiscent of James Carville and Mary Matalin)
for opposing candidates for the United States Senate, shows politicians without
convictions whose hands are always open to bribes.

The news from Washington in the past few decades, of course, has provided reams
of script material. The national security adviser who authorized a secret war
against Colombian drug lords in last year's "Clear and Present Danger" may have
taken a cue from his real-life counterpart, Admiral John M. Poindexter, who
authorized using the proceeds from Iran arms sales to finance the Nicaraguan
contras.

The weak and philandering President in the 1993 film "Dave" falls into a coma
after making love to his secretary, bringing to mind gossip about the dalliances
of real-life politicians. In "No Way Out" (1987), the wily counsel to the
Secretary of Defense, who explains, "You have no idea what men of power can do,"
conjures up visions of H. R. Haldeman trying to justify Watergate.

In each of these movies, there's no check on the balance of evil. In "Clear and
Present Danger" the National Security Adviser orders the death of Jack Ryan
(Harrison Ford), the Deputy Director of the C.I.A., because Ryan gets in his
way. In "Dave" the White House Chief of Staff hides the comatose President
(Kevin Kline) and finds a look-alike (Mr. Kline) to serve as the puppet head of
his Government. The counsel in "No Way Out" defines power as the ability to
shoot staff members in cold blood.

Fred Thompson, who played the head of the C.I.A. in "No Way Out," said he now
has second thoughts about Hollywood's portrayal of Government. Mr. Thompson, a
former minority counsel during the Watergate hearings and a Tennessee Republican
who handed in his movie scripts to run for political office, was elected to the
United States Senate in November.

"There have been so many movies with such a consistent theme that I'm afraid
they're also shaping the views of society," Mr. Thompson said. "That's not to
say that government shouldn't be fair game along with everything else. But can
you think of a movie in the last 10 years that has shown the C.I.A. and the
F.B.I. in a positive light?"

Long gone are films like "The F.B.I. Story" (1959), in which heroic agents brave
the odds to defeat Public Enemy No. 1, or "Notorious" (1946), directed by Alfred
Hitchcock, with Cary Grant as a Federal agent willing to risk his life to fight
the Nazis. Occasionally a remake of an earlier story, like the 1987 film "The
Untouchables," starring Kevin Costner, portrays a heroic Federal agent like
Eliot Ness. But even he must fight a corrupt Chicago police department. Today
it's much more common to find an F.B.I. or C.I.A. agent in film who is
responsible for the deaths of innocent children or American soldiers. A good
agent, like Mr. Ford's Jack Ryan, wages a life-and-death battle against the
worst public enemy of all, his own Government.

In "Bad Company" Nelson Crowe (Laurence Fishburne) joins a criminal organization
filled with ex-C.I.A. types like him, whose shady work includes bribing judges
to fix legal decisions on behalf of the organization's clients. As the Byzantine
plot unfolds, the audience learns that the C.I.A. wants to take over this
organization because it competes with the agency's own disreputable work. The
film offers no heroes and implies that anyone who works for the C.I.A. is beyond
redemption.

Years ago, a director who suggested that corruption existed in Government paid a
heavy price. Frank Capra was relentlessly attacked by a Washington press corps
sympathetic to the Government (a quaint notion today) after the 1939 release of
"Mr. Smith Goes to Washington." The portrayal of scheming senators who lined
their own pockets prompted Joseph P. Kennedy, then the United States Ambassador
to Britain, to urge the head of Columbia Pictures, Harry Cohn, to stop the
release of the movie in Europe.

While film makers these days don't share Mr. Capra's censorship worries, they
hear the message of his picture: it's up to the little guy to fight the powers
that be. In "Dave" the acting President, who used to run a temporary-employment
agency, believes that good, hard-working people like him can fix a country that
has been sorely misled. When Dave asks an accountant friend to help him cut the
Federal budget, the friend reduces the complexities of the Federal budget to a
simple question: "Who does these books? I mean, if I ran my business this way,
I'd be out of business."

RONALD BROWNSTEIN, AUTHOR of the 1991 book "The Power and the Glitter: The
Hollywood-Washington Connection," is critical of that scene, on the grounds that
it unduly simplifies the problems of governing. "It symbolizes what's wrong with
all of these movies and so much of our politics as well," he said. "They
perpetuate the idea that the problem in the country is self-centered or
careerist leadership rather than the structural disparity between what we want
and what we are willing to sacrifice for what we want."

Such plots, which pit a well-meaning outsider against a vastly corrupt political
system, have another effect. They let audiences cheer for the hero while
realizing the fleetingness of the victory: if people are told that the root of
government is rotten, then even a good branch can't survive for long.

Some films heighten the evil effects of government by impressing upon audiences
the innocence of its victims. In "Murder in the First," the camera moves from a
City Hall press conference announcing a Governmental clamp-down on attempted
escapes from Alcatraz to the brutal punishment by a prison warden of one of the
escapees (Kevin Bacon). The escapee, whose naked body hangs bruised and bleeding
from the torture, may be seen as a modern-day Jesus Christ sacrificed by a
corrupt system.

The director Sidney Lumet argued that the plot structure in many recent movies
adds to this stereotypical view. "Paddy Chayefsky used to say that what the
studio wants for the hero is a 'pet-the-dog scene' and for the villain a
'kick-the-dog scene,' " said Mr. Lumet. But today, as movies become less complex
and television gains a greater hold on the American imagination, Mr. Lumet said
he sees more and more simplistic scenarios. "Bang. It's the black hat right out
of the westerns. And the President is wearing a black hat, or the Chairman of
the Joint Chiefs of Staff or his assistant."

Only occasionally does a movie offer a ray of hope for the positive power of
government. "City of Hope" (1991), written and directed by John Sayles, takes
place in a poor New Jersey city where prime real estate is a reward for those
who do favors for corrupt officials. The film presents no clear-cut solutions,
but a city councilman who believes that government can help people works within
an imperfect system to try to get services for his community.

"City Hall," a thriller starring Al Pacino that is being filmed in New York, may
also offer a somewhat positive message. The screenplay, written by Bo Goldman,
was adapted from a story by Kenneth Lipper, a deputy mayor during the Koch
administration who also was a producer of the film. The plot involves a
shoot-out in Brooklyn and the subsequent death of a police officer, a drug
dealer and a black child. An idealistic deputy mayor (John Cusack) investigates
the incident and begins to understand the compromises government officials make
each day.

Mr. Goldman said the movie suggests that democracy, as intricate and unwieldy as
it is, can still work. "But it takes a lot, and even the most dedicated people
can go wrong finding their way," he said.

So far, the tide of monstrous politicians and bureaucrats that flows from
Hollywood every year overwhelms the few films that offer hope for the future of
government. Indeed, if the new Republican majority heeds the message that
Americans deeply distrust all politicians, they may want to join with the
Democrats and ask themselves that famous question Robert Redford posed years ago
in "The Candidate": "What do we do now?"

LOAD-DATE: February 12, 1995

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photos: Political Compromise -- Al Pacino, as a populist New York mayor
in the forthcoming film "City Hall"--His administration becomes involved in an
investigation into the killings of a police officer, a drug dealer and a black
child. (Andy Schwartz/Columbia Pictures); No Heroes Here -- Michael Beach, left,
Spalding Gray, lying down, Ellen Barkin and Laurence Fishburne in"Bad
Company"--A former C.I.A. agent turns killer. (Buena Vista Pictures)

                   Copyright 1995 The New York Times Company

                              108 of 211 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                February 12, 1995, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

FILM;
The Enigma of 'Quiz Show': No Crowds

SECTION: Section 2;  Page 19;  Column 1;  Arts & Leisure Desk

LENGTH: 984 words


A FILM IN RELEASE acquires a life of its own. Robert Redford's "Quiz Show" began
as an event in September and ended the year as an enigma -- one that puzzled
even the film makers themselves. When the movie had been in theaters for only a
few months, Hollywood Pictures pulled it.

But the studio is certain that "Quiz Show" will get Oscar nominations on Tuesday
for best picture, best director (Robert Redford) and best adapted screenplay
(Paul Attanasio). Whether the film gets those nominations or not, the next day
"Quiz Show" will return to theaters, complete with a new television campaign and
new print ads. The Walt Disney Company, Hollywood Pictures' parent, would not
reveal the new print ads in advance, but it has been spreading the word that Mr.
Redford has been nominated by the Director's Guild for best director and, in its
television ads, has been describing the film as "much talked about."

The chronicle of Charles Van Doren (Ralph Fiennes), who destroyed a promising
academic career when he cheated on "Twenty-One" in the 1950's, "Quiz Show"
depicts a Faustian bargain in a media age. The film appeared on almost every
critic's 10-best list for 1994. Confronting the issues of morality and
liability, it is precisely the sort of film that everyone complains is not being
made anymore. Yet the disappointing $22 million that the $28 million film took
in at the box office placed it below such nonstarters as "The Shadow," "Richie
Rich" and even the Danny DeVito-in-the-Army film "Renaissance Man." Overall,
"Quiz Show" ranked 57th in earnings for the year, according to Exhibitor
Relations, which monitors ticket sales for the studios.

As a result a small industry has sprung up to explain the movie's inability to
find an audience: Some suggested that the problem was that "Quiz Show" was a
period film with no sex. Or that Ralph Fiennes, despite his considerable charm
and his Oscar nomination for "Schindler's List," was no marquee name. Or that
audiences would rather see any slapstick farce starring Jim Carrey. Or that the
poster Mr. Redford conceived for the film in September, with its close-up of the
back of Mr. Fiennes's head, didn't work.

Whatever the problem, it's unlikely that the film was helped by several articles
accompanying its release claiming that "Quiz Show" took liberties with the
truth, the same transgression the television industry commits in the film.

People close to Mr. Redford said he was distressed by the latter controversy.
Perhaps not by accident there was a panel discussion this year at his Sundance
Film Festival on "Film and History: Reanimating the Past." (Proposed: "When film
recreates the past, the result is clearly an artistic and inventive
production.") The sold-out discussion focused on films like "J.F.K." and
"Matewan" and one panelist made passing reference to "Quiz Show." Mr. Redford
did not attend.

But movies become hits despite charges that they distort history ("J.F.K."),
despite a lack of marquee names ("Four Weddings and a Funeral") and even despite
their advertising campaigns ("The Mask"). Perhaps audiences were put off not by
any of the above but by what was the movie's presumed strength: that it
concerned a loss of innocence, the discovery back in the 50's that everything
seen on television wasn't true.

Loss of innocence is, as Mr. Redford defined it, "an event that leaves us in a
different place than we were before." The assassination of President Kennedy,
Vietnam, Watergate and Iran-Contra were all moments that divided the innocent
before from the cynical after. Such events activate that part of the soul that
prompted the young baseball fan to cry, "Say it ain't so, Joe."

Many films, including "All the President's Men" (which starred Mr. Redford and
was produced by his Wildwood Enterprises), document those shifts in popular
consciousness. But "All the President's Men" gave audiences an inescapable
lesson of evil repudiated (Nixon's White House) and good triumphant. It
corroborated what audiences wanted to believe. Released in 1976, the year voters
ratified their faith in the value of innocence by electing Jimmy Carter, it was
nominated for best picture and lost to "Rocky," a more primitive tale of
innocence rewarded.

The reality in "Quiz Show" is trickier and less palatable. The handsome Charles
Van Doren, the apparent embodiment of E. E. Cummings's line "more brave than me,
more blond than you," is blessed with everything that intellect, luck and
breeding can ascribe -- except the ability to say no when it matters most.

As to why people were not drawn to see "Quiz Show," Mr. Redford said: "Either we
don't want to face our loss of innocence, because it's asking us to admit we've
lost one of our virtues. Or we don't want to face it because we're as shallow as
people accuse us of being, and as spoiled. Or maybe it's too painful, and we
don't have the experience of facing these things. And I don't know which it is."

Mr. Attanasio, the film's screenwriter, said, "What we attempted to do was
criticize the culture, and that's never going to be terribly popular."

But Jeff Greenfield, a correspondent and news analyst for ABC, believes the
problem is none of these things. "The problem may have been," he said, "that it
did not seem like news. At the time it was a shock. But 30 years after Dallas,
25 years after Vietnam, with stories from O. J. to Michael Jackson, it registers
zero on the Richter scale. To tell today's audience that powerful institutions
and people lie is not compelling. It isn't that we fear confronting our loss of
innocence. It's that it bores us."

The film may do better with European audiences. Mr. Redford recently presented
"Quiz Show" in Paris to a wildly enthusiastic foreign press. This initially
puzzled him. Then it made sense. "They have an easier time," he suggested,
"dealing with our loss of innocence than we do."

LOAD-DATE: February 12, 1995

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photos: Robert Redford, left, directed "Quiz Show," above, with Ralph
Fiennes, Christopher McDonald and John Turturro -- Praised. (Photographs by
Barry Wetcher/Hollywood Pictures)

                   Copyright 1995 The New York Times Company

                              109 of 211 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                February 12, 1995, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

Leonard Silk Dies at 76; Times Columnist Helped the Public to Understand
Economics

BYLINE: By LOUIS UCHITELLE

SECTION: Section 1;  Page 48;  Column 1;  Metropolitan Desk

LENGTH: 1753 words


Leonard S. Silk, a columnist and editorial writer for The New York Times and for
Business Week, who set a standard for a generation of journalists as a pioneer
in making complex economic issues understandable to general readers, died Friday
night at his home in Montclair, N.J. He was 76.

The cause of death was liver cancer, members of his family said. The disease
struck last summer, two years after Mr. Silk wrote his last Economic Scene
column for The Times.

But he was too deeply engaged in his work to really retire. He continued to
write, to lecture and to travel. And even in his final weeks, he managed to work
for a while most mornings on a book -- his 15th -- about the future of
capitalism.

Mr. Silk was a rarity in journalism: a reporter with a Ph.D. in economics, who
taught the subject at a college level and worked in government before becoming a
full-time journalist. He started at Business Week in 1954 and moved to The Times
in 1970. Departing from the dense coverage of markets and statistics that
characterized economic reporting in the 1950's, he found ways to describe, in
simple prose, the economic forces shaping his readers' lives.

"He was one of the earliest properly trained scholars who decided to devote
himself to the problems of journalism and public writing about economics," said
Paul A. Samuelson, the Nobel laureate in economic science. "And he had a gift
for making the intricacies of economics understandable."

Mr. Silk did it at times with vivid touches. In a 1955 essay on forecasting, for
example -- an essay illustrated with Charles Addams cartoons -- he explained not
only the role of economic forecasting and its shortcomings, but how readers
could use a forecaster's tools and equations.

Such clear reporting of complex issues is more common now than it was then. In
pioneering the new style, Mr. Silk said his models were the science writers of
the day, particularly William L. Laurence of The Times, who were making nuclear
physics familiar to Americans.

"I did not want to write down to people," Mr. Silk said in a recent interview.
"I wanted to make economics accessible, just as science writers were making
science accessible. I thought any idea could be plainly stated."

His role in American journalism went beyond plain writing. For most of the
1970's, Mr. Silk wrote most of The Times's editorials on economics. He had been
hired in 1970 by John B. Oakes, then the editor of the editorial page, to
provide expertise in economics, and Mr. Silk and Mr. Oakes determined what The
Times would say on most economic issues.

After Mr. Oakes stepped down in 1976, Mr. Silk also left the editorial board, to
become a full-time columnist. For most of the next 16 years, his column appeared
twice weekly in the business pages under the Economic Scene rubric.

His editorials, in The Times in the 1970's and in Business Week in the 1960's,
reflected Mr. Silk's view that his expertise in economics should be used, as a
journalist, to interpret what he saw in the real world, without being
doctrinaire.

Thus, Mr. Silk favored President John F. Kennedy's proposal to cut taxes to
stimulate a flagging economy in the early 1960's. But later, with the economy
booming again, he urged President Lyndon B. Johnson to reverse the cut and raise
taxes, a step Johnson delayed taking. Without a tax increase, Mr. Silk's
editorials argued, there would not be enough revenue to pay for Mr. Johnson's
Great Society programs and the Vietnam War. The budget deficit would shoot up,
he wrote, and so would inflation. They did.

During the Administration of Richard M. Nixon, editorials in The Times by Mr.
Silk endorsed the President's watershed decision, in August 1971, to impose
price and wage controls to restrain inflation, and to suspend the dollar's
convertibility into gold, which had the effect of devaluing the currency to
stimulate the economy.

"We have varying degrees of enthusiasm about the specific approaches Mr. Nixon
plans to employ, but we applaud the scope and daring of his effort to get the
economy off and running," Mr. Silk wrote at the time.

After an initial honeymoon, the Nixon measures failed to achieve their goals,
and Mr. Silk later altered his view. "In retrospect, I saw the merit of the
criticism that was leveled at Nixon, but you don't have that hindsight in the
moment of action, when you have to write," Mr. Silk said in the recent
interview.

As a columnist, Mr. Silk preferred to make his points through analysis and
reporting, rather than outright advocacy. "I felt it should be an analytical
column, but the logic should be so persuasive that you convince the reader this
is the way to go," he said.

In airline deregulation, for example, his initial columns sent readers away with
the conclusion that deregulation was a good idea. But as time passed and the
Carter Administration pressed successfully to implement the idea, Mr. Silk grew
doubtful. He conveyed all of this to his readers.

The Depression drew Mr. Silk into economics, while he was an undergraduate at
the University of Wisconsin in the 1930's. For a generation of economists who
emerged from that era, economics seemed to offer solutions to hardship and
devastating unemployment.

Mr. Silk first heard the name of John Maynard Keynes at Wisconsin, and like many
of his classmates he was taken by the Keynesian thesis that a stimulus from
deficit spending by the government could revive the economy. Keynesian economics
suddenly meshed with political action, becoming a powerful force that endured
into the 1970's.

Mr. Silk eventually shed his enthusiasm for Keynesian theory. He refused to lock
himself into any set of theories or beliefs that became, as Mr. Silk put it,
"more real than reality itself." What survived instead from those heady
Wisconsin days was a view that government must step in from time to time to
supplement or regulate free markets. Capitalism, he reasoned, needed to be saved
at times from its worst tendencies. The goal of this process -- of economics
itself -- should be to improve people's lives, he thought, by combining theory
with human concerns.

These remained Mr. Silk's guiding principles, and he restated them in his
farewell column on May 29, 1992. "I see economics as a branch of philosophy --
moral philosophy as it was called in the days of Adam Smith," Mr. Silk wrote.
"Its mission was and still is to improve the lot of humanity, especially for the
poor."

Leonard Solomon Silk was born on May 15, 1918, in Philadelphia. His father,
Harry, was a department store manager, a calling that took the family to New
York, then to St. Louis, and finally, when Mr. Silk was 7, to Atlantic City.
There, the journalist in him first surfaced. As punishment for misbehavior, his
mother sent him into a large, well-lighted closet, where he was allowed to bring
books and writing material. Soon he was composing stories about boys going to
the West.

Mr. Silk entered Dickinson College in Pennsylvania in 1936 and the following
year transferred to Wisconsin on a scholarship.

There he edited Octopus, a humor magazine, and came under the influence of an
economics department that was moving away from abstract theory, particularly the
classical view that the economy would automatically right itself and restore a
more prosperous equilibrium. Professors like Selig Perlman, a labor expert,
argued that economists must also study specific situations, particularly the
concerns of American workers.

From Wisconsin, Mr. Silk went to Duke University in 1940 for graduate study.
America entered World War II and he enlisted in the Army Air Forces, which sent
him to Alaska as a Morse code operator. But he soon got back into journalism,
writing for Yank and other Army publications. In 1945, he covered the founding
conference of the United Nations in San Francisco.

Back at Duke in 1946, Mr. Silk's mentor, the international economist Calvin
Bryce Hoover, encouraged his student's interest in going abroad. Mr. Silk wanted
to study Swedish housing, which had benefited from Keynesian-style government
spending even before Keynes elaborated his theories.

Mr. Silk's research soon appeared as an article in Fortune magazine. A longer
version became his Ph.D. thesis and then his first book, "Sweden Plans for
Better Housing." That would be the pattern throughout Mr. Silk's career, with
his journalism expanded into books -- three of the best known being "Economics
in Plain English," "Economics in the Real World" and "The American
Establishment," the last one written with a son, Mark, who is now a writer for
The Atlanta Journal and Constitution.

In the postwar years Mr. Silk tried other careers. He taught at the University
of Maine and at Simmons College in Boston. He married Bernice Scher, a concert
pianist. He went to Norway on a Fulbright fellowship to teach at the University
of Oslo. Mr. Silk also worked for the Federal Government, first as a housing
expert in Washington and later in posts overseas, the last one as an economist
for the United States Mission to the North Atlantic Treaty Organization.

And then, while on home leave, he sought out Elliott Bell, the new editor in
chief at Business Week, who hired him to be the mainstay of a new economics
department.

A few years later, with the election of President Kennedy, the Keynesian era hit
a high point. The late Walter Heller, chairman of the President's Council of
Economic Advisers, convinced Mr. Kennedy to push for an $11 billion tax cut, the
largest in American history. The goal was to put more zing in the economy even
though the tax cut would initially increase the deficit. Mr. Silk had become
acquainted with Mr. Heller while the economist was a professor at the University
of Minnesota, and Mr. Silk found himself traveling to Washington to cover the
story. Congress finally passed the tax cut in 1964, after Mr. Kennedy was
assassinated.

Mr. Silk left Business Week in 1969, soon after Mr. Bell's departure. He spent a
year as a fellow at the Brookings Institution in Washington and then joined The
Times. There, he wrote not only editorials and columns, but also frequently, in
later years, major news stories on economics.

Besides his wife and son Mark, Mr. Silk is survived by another son, Dr. Adam
Silk, a psychiatrist in Boston; two sisters, and five grandchildren. A third
son, Andrew, also a writer, died of cancer in 1981.
 Services will be at 10:30 Monday morning at the Jewish Memorial Chapel, 64-70
Howe Avenue, in Passaic, N.J.

NAME: Leonard S. Silk

LOAD-DATE: February 12, 1995

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo: Leonard S. Silk. (New York Times, 1971)

TYPE: Obituary (Obit); Biography

                   Copyright 1995 The New York Times Company

                              110 of 211 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                February 12, 1995, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

NEWS SUMMARY

SECTION: Section 1; Page 2; Column 5; Metropolitan Desk

LENGTH: 700 words



International 3-17

MEXICO ON THE ATTACK
The new President of Mexico has been concerned about the rebellion in the south
since he took office, and officials said they were on their way to dismantling
the movement. 1

BRITAIN REVIEWS GUN POLICY
Scotland Yard and other police across Britain are reassessing policies of
policing without guns in light of growing violence and a changing criminal
culture. 12


MUSLIM FUNDAMENTALIST EDICTS
With militant Islamic fundamentalists gaining strength as a political force, the
use of the fatwa, or religious edict, is gaining ground, and some feel it
damages Islam. 14

BURMESE HEROIN A THREAT
Myanmar, formerly Burma, has become the largest heroin supplier to the United
States, and cooperating with its Government to stem the flow is problematic
because of its human rights violations. 3

ADJUSTING TO VIETNAM TIES
As the United States and Vietnam reestablish ties, the strains of the past and
the hopes for the future sometimes conflict, but businesses are anxious for
relations. 4

India has shifted tactics to ease tension with Bangladesh.  6

Unesco is trying to improve relations with the United States.  8

A swimmer said he crossed the Atlantic because he was in debt.  9

Northern Ireland talks were approaching a crucial point.  12

The Palestinian Authority is controlling the news in Gaza.  15

Ecuador shot down three Peruvian planes in their border war.  16

National 20-36

CLINTON THREATENS TO USE VETO
The President said he would veto an effort to rewrite a part of last year's
crime legislation intended to put an additional 100,000 police officers on the
nation's streets.  1

'BABY BOOM' II?
All over America, a new generation is making itself felt in nearly every aspect
of social, economic and political life, even though its members are not yet 3
feet tall.  1

REPUBLICANS AND HEALTH CARE
As health care costs continue to escalate, it is now the Republicans, not the
Democrats, who are mounting a effort for change.  1

A CAPITAL ORDEAL
The District of Columbia Government is in a shambles, with its cash threatening
to run out by spring and the prospect of a possible takeover by Congress.  1

HEARTS WITH MESSAGES
Cambridge Journal: A visit to the New England Confectionary Company, which makes
eight billion conversation hearts a year. 20

FINANCING A FUTURE SPEAKER
It was in rural Carroll County, Ga., that Newt Gingrich began to learn the
lessons of money and politics, lessons he has since used to create a potent
fund-raising network. 22

VIGILANTE, OR AVENGING ANGEL?
Last week, William Masters shot two young men who he says were trying to rob
him. That has made him notorious to some, a hero to others in Los Angeles. 20

DEREGULATORS HAVE TARGET
 Congressional Republicans and allied advocacy groups are focusing their efforts
on deregulating Government on the Food and Drug Administration. 24

Metropolitan 37-46, 56

A TERRORIST'S TRAIL
Until last month, the authorities say, the man charged with masterminding the
World Trade Center bombing was on the verge of a wave of far more deadly
terrorist attacks across Asia, possibly including the assassination of the Pope.
1

GIULIANI TAKES CONTROL
With a wave of staff dismissals and a showdown with the Police Department, Mayor
Rudolph W. Giuliani has made clear that he wants to consolidate control over his
government. But some staff members say he has sent a chill through the
government.  37

THE GREENING OF NEW YORK
At a time of city budget cuts, Parks Commissioner Henry J. Stern is aggressively
enlarging his emerald empire, even as he admits that his agency cannot
adequately care for the parks it has.  37

AN ARTIST'S STRANGE DEATH
In the weeks since the police fished Ray Johnson's body out of an icy cove near
Sag Harbor, L.I., friends and admirers of the eccentric artist have struggled to
uncover what many of them believe must be the hidden meaning of his death.  37

Neediest Cases 38

Obituaries 47-48

Leonard S. Silk, a columnist for The Times and Business Week.  48

LOAD-DATE: February 12, 1995

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Summary

                   Copyright 1995 The New York Times Company

                              111 of 211 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                February 12, 1995, Sunday, Late Edition - Final
                              Correction Appended

Vietnamese Open Office To Improve U.S. Ties

BYLINE: Special to The New York Times

SECTION: Section 1;  Page 4;  Column 1;  Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 668 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, Feb. 10


When Hanoi opened its first diplomatic office here last week, the chief of
liaison was met with angry shouts from protesters. In the days that followed,
however, the downtown suite of offices has filled up with flowers from American
companies eager to do business with the former foe.

As Vietnam and the United States move gingerly toward full diplomatic ties, the
strains of the past and the hopes for the future overlap awkwardly.

Le Van Bang, the chief of the new, six-person liaison office, describes his role
as helping to tell America of how Vietnam has moved on since the Communists
emerged victorious and unified the country nearly 20 years ago. As he shows a
visitor around the rambling and largely empty downtown suite of offices,
decorated with tapestries of pagodas and the orange and yellow Vietnamese flag,
he stopped to read the cards from some of the floral tributes.

"All these flowers are from American companies," said Mr. Bang. "For instance,
this one is from a company that clears mines from the ground."

As Hanoi's representative to the United Nations for the last three years, Mr.
Bang said that 80 percent of his time was spent trying to smooth relations
between the United States and Vietnam. During those years, he traveled around
the United States, meeting with Vietnamese-Americans, American business people
and veterans' groups to promote the image of a new Vietnam.

"I tell people about the new foreign policy to be friends with everyone," said
Mr. Bang. "Many are surprised when I tell them we are now a free market economy,
that we encourage private ownership."

It is also his job to help resolve the issue of Americans still missing in
Vietnam.

State Department officials say lack of progress on the issue of American
soldiers still listed as missing in action and other Americans unaccounted for
remains the main stumbling block on the road to full diplomatic relations.

On Friday, a State Department official said that while the United States is
heartened by Vietnam's increased cooperation, returning 61 sets of remains of
Americans during the last year, "the remains of 2,100 servicemen are still
missing, and further steps towards diplomatic normalization will not continue
unless there is tangible progress."

Mr. Bang also tries to help Americans caught in Vietnam's red tape. One of the
first phone calls he received in his new post was from a representative of the
Vietnam Veterans of America, who was calling because he was having a problem
securing visas for a delegation to visit Vietnam.

"I intervened, and the next day they got the visas," said Mr. Bang.

Mr. Bang is swift to describe the warm relations he enjoys with groups like the
Vietnam Veterans of America. But Paul Skogland, the group's executive director,
stopped short of calling the increased diplomatic relations a positive
development. "Once something's a done deal," he said, "we try to make the best
of it."

The opening of the Vietnamese liaison office on Wednesday coincided with the
release of the State Department's annual report on human rights around the
world. In the report, the State Department said that "Vietnamese citizens did
not have the right to change their government, or to assemble, associate or
speak freely, and the Government continued to arrest and imprison people
arbitrarily."

Mr. Bang attributes the report's criticism to cultural and economic differences
between the United States and Vietnam. "Here the press criticizes the President
openly," he said. "Traditionally, in Vietnam, that is not acceptable."

As for arbitrary arrests, Mr. Bang said: "We still consider security a very high
priority. If you are going to do something that causes disorder, we have to take
care of that."

Mr. Bang and his staff plan to move into the old South Vietnamese Embassy by
March, as soon as renovations are completed. However, Mr. Bang anticipates that
the move will only mean a change to more spacious quarters, not an increase in
diplomatic stature.


LOAD-DATE: February 12, 1995

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

CORRECTION-DATE: February 14, 1995, Tuesday

CORRECTION:

An article on Sunday about the opening of the Hanoi Government's diplomatic
office in Washington misstated the colors of the Vietnamese flag. They are red
and yellow, not orange and yellow.


                   Copyright 1995 The New York Times Company

                              112 of 211 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                February 12, 1995, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

The Counter Counterculture

BYLINE: By James Atlas;    James Atlas is an editor of the Magazine. He is at
work on a biography of Saul Bellow.

SECTION: Section 6;  Page 32;  Column 3;  Magazine Desk

LENGTH: 5076 words


IT WAS COCKTAIL HOUR ON THE OPENING DAY of the new, Republican-dominated
Congress, and the long, chandelier-lighted parlor of David Brock's town house in
Georgetown was filling up with exuberant young conservatives fresh from events
on the Hill. Brock is a 32-year-old journalist who has taken the 60's
counterculture credo that the personal is political and given it a whole new
meaning -- describing Anita Hill as "a little bit nutty and a little bit slutty"
and interviewing Arkansas state troopers about Bill Clinton's sex life. He'd
invited to his place perhaps two dozen men and women in their 20's and 30's and
early 40's who, like him, made their living trying to tear down the liberal
establishment, or what remains of it.

There were editors from The American Spectator -- the country's most raucous
journal of conservative opinion. It was in The Spectator that Brock published
his savaging of Hill (later expanded into a best-selling book) and his
"troopergate" allegations about the President. To judge by his elegant
French-cuffed shirt, let alone the town house, his association with The
Spectator hadn't hurt him.

In the center of the parlor, radiating the charged aura of the face-famous,
stood P. J. O'Rourke, the Hunter Thompson of the right, drawing on a
lethal-looking cigarillo; his withering dispatches in Rolling Stone, the
biweekly that helped define the 60's counterculture, have made him something of
a 90's frat-house hero. (I'd seen him on "Charlie Rose" the week before, making
fun of starving Africans.) O'Rourke was deep in conversation with Andrew
Ferguson, another conservative funny man. Ferguson had published a "memo" on The
Wall Street Journal's editorial page a week after the election briefing
reporters -- which to his mind means members of the liberal, Beltway-bunkered
opinion elite -- on the curious new species known as "Republicans," who attend
church not for chamber music concerts but for "services" and who drive "old
cars, pickup trucks and vans," not Volvos. The article was called "Those Who
Don't Get It."

Brock pointed out for me some of the others who, to the strains of Smashing
Pumpkins and 10,000 Maniacs, were drinking and laughing and comparing Newt
sightings. It may have been a more sedate affair than the Election Night bash
Brock threw -- "I thought the windows were going to blow out when Rostenkowski
conceded," he said -- but it was anything but staid. I had been prepared to
encounter the kind of conservatives Norman Mailer memorably described as "people
who went to their piano lessons when they were kids," but it wasn't that kind of
crowd. They were bright. They'd had radical and unpopular ideas and had stuck to
them.  And now they were carrying on like winners. America!

I was struck by the number of women on hand. There was Cathy Young, a
32-year-old columnist for The Detroit News who had come armed with brochures
advertising the Women's Freedom Network, a conservative lobbying group formed in
1993 to seek "alternatives to both extremist ideological feminism and
anti-feminist traditionalism." Later on I would meet Danielle Crittenden, the
editor of The Women's Quarterly, a new Washington-based periodical edited for
and by conservative-minded women; she was with her husband, David Frum -- a
former Wall Street Journal editorial writer and the author of "Dead Right,"
which accuses the Reagan and Bush Administrations of not delivering on their
promises to reduce the size of the Federal Government. Eager to get the word out
about her new journal, Crittenden had sent me the first two issues, featuring
articles like "Violence Against Taxpayers: Why the new $ 1.5 billion Violence
Against Women Act won't protect women from violent crime, but will subject them
to an assault of 'abuse experts,'" by Betsy Hart, a columnist for Scripps Howard
News Service who was also at the party.

Another of Brock's guests that night was David Brooks, features editor of The
Journal's editorial page -- the bulletin board of the New Right. A week after
last November's election, Brooks had published on the page a short essay of his
own titled "Meet the New Establishment," in which he heralded the ascent of a
"new generation" of 30- and 40-something conservative opinion-makers:
journalists, columnists, policy intellectuals and assorted other media and
political types. The cultural revolution Brooks described had flickered
alongside the electoral one that put Newt Gingrich in the Speaker's chair.

And who were the members of this New Establishment? Prominent among its ranks is
William Kristol, the Republican strategist whose memo, faxed out to Republicans
on Capitol Hill, launched the assault on President Clinton's health care plan.
Then there is Lisa Schiffren, the former speech writer for Dan Quayle, who
turned a sitcom character, Murphy Brown, into a weapon in the right's attack on
single motherhood. Myron Magnet of New York's influential conservative think
tank, the Manhattan Institute, is a member, too; his 1993 book, "The Dream and
the Nightmare," a detailed critique of the welfare system, earned him a fan
letter from Gingrich and helped make welfare reform a Republican priority. The
notion of political correctness, now a staple of radio talk shows and the news
weeklies, was first defined and ridiculed by the cultural critics Roger Kimball
and Dinesh D'Souza, both of whom are key players of the New Establishment.
D'Souza's next book, on the politics of race, will -- like so many conservative
books these days, including "The Bell Curve" -- be published by Adam Bellow,
editorial director of the Free Press, this establishment's most important house.
Then there are the people who publicize these books and the ideas they promote
-- people like Brooks and Brock and James Golden, a producer of "Rush Limbaugh"
who also has his own nationally syndicated radio show. These young men and women
are, in effect, a new conservative opinion elite, a counter-counterculture.

"There's a parallel universe and it's to every outward appearance exactly the
same as yours," Lisa Schiffren told me recently. (By "yours" she meant
"liberal.") "We went to the same schools, live in the same places, wear the same
clothes. But to the left, it's as if we're from the twilight zone. People don't
see the difference between me and Phyllis Schlafly. They believe that anyone
who's pro-life must be rigid, repressed and neurotic about the sex they're
probably not getting."

John Podhoretz, the son of Norman and the TV critic for The New York Post, made
somewhat the same point. Podhoretz, who wrote for the arch-conservative
Washington Times before a stint at the Bush White House, said: "We speak liberal
as well as our own tongue. Why don't you speak conservative?" It's a common
counter-countercultural theme: You liberals know something is happening, but you
don't know what it is.

What's new about these New Conservatives? What distinguishes them from the
liberal, New York Review of Books-reading intelligentsia they resent with such a
passion? After all, they do look just like the liberal elite. They live mostly
along the Eastern Seaboard, in Washington and New York and Boston. They attended
the right schools. (Dartmouth and Yale predominate on their C.V.'s.) They are
hip to a pop culture many liberals think of as something wholly their own. Yet
they embrace a set of values common among America's wealthiest individuals and
corporations -- lower taxes, less regulation, smaller government -- and a lot of
them have made it financially, at least compared with their left-liberal
brethren. Corporate money flows into their think tanks, and Wall Street welcomes
their speeches with applause and handsome fees. They do not drive old cars and
pickup trucks.

An elite, then -- but one, unlike its liberal counterpart, that claims to be in
accord with the country, the world out there, the Heartland. It's not what
Lionel Trilling called the Adversary Culture; it's the culture that belongs. "My
views of Clinton are the majority view," maintains David Brock, who keeps a
bumper sticker on a table in his front hall: "President Gore -- Don't Pardon
Hillary." The American Spectator, he reminded me, has a circulation of 340,000,
three times that of the usually liberal New Republic. "We're saying what the
American people are thinking."

But there is another youngish conservative faction that wasn't represented at
Brock's place that night -- one that also claims to speak for the majority of
Americans, but not from Manhattan or Georgetown. These other young conservatives
did not attend Ivy League schools, but do worry about school texts that consider
Darwin's theory of evolution scientific. These conservatives are not up on
popular culture; they think it's evil. They wouldn't feel comfortable at a party
like Brock's -- wouldn't like the smoking and drinking, the soundtrack from
"Pulp Fiction." And it is probably fair to say that they would not feel
comfortable in a room with so many professional women, with so many Jews, or
with Brock himself, who is openly gay.

It is surely one of the accomplishments of the younger conservative elite to
have brought together the older, mostly Catholic, William F. Buckley strand of
intellectual conservatism and the relatively newer, mostly Jewish
neo-conservative strand. However, the counter-counterculture doesn't count in
its crowd people like Ralph Reed, the 33-year-old executive director of the
1.5-million-member Christian Coalition, founded by Pat Robertson. Michael Lind,
a onetime member in good standing of the counter-counterculture -- he was a
research assistant for Buckley and later went on to become executive editor of
the neo-con journal The National Interest -- has recently defected, largely
because, he has written, his compatriots have chosen to remain complacently
silent about what he calls "the uncouth fire-and-brimstone Protestant
evangelicals" -- a constituency, he maintains, that has big problems with Jews,
women, homosexuals and most anyone who isn't one of them. The new opinion elite,
Lind argues, is more comfortable continuing to bash liberals and continuing to
enjoy its access to Republican power than it is challenging and criticizing its
evangelical brethren.

Reed, for his part, is not so circumspect. He has declared, "What Christians
have got to do is take back this country, one precinct at a time, one
neighborhood at a time and one state at a time." Reed presumably means
Georgetown too.

AT LUNCH ONE AFTERNOON LAST FALL IN THE top-floor dining room of the American
Enterprise Institute, Washington's largest conservative think tank, William
Kristol was in a convivial mood. He excels at what used to be called table talk.
" 'What do you think of the health care bill, Sir?'" he says in a jocund voice,
imitating Dr. Johnson. " 'An abomination, I say.'"

His father, Irving Kristol, a fellow of the institute, was also having lunch in
the dining room that day. The Kristols, the Podhoretzes: conservatism can seem
like a family affair -- or a nepotistic one, depending on your outlook. (I've
heard the younger ones referred to as mini-cons.) Kristol the elder has elegant
wood-paneled offices at A.E.I., five floors above the more Spartan surroundings
of his son's boutique think tank, the Project for the Republican Future. At one
point during our meal, Kristol the elder came over to our table, dragging on a
cigarette. "What's the name of our Jew from the West Coast?" he asked his son.
(Answer: Dennis Prager, described to me as "a not-so-right-wing Rush Limbaugh"
who has a popular call-in show in Los Angeles.)

Irving Kristol, the founding father of neo-conservatism, is often identified in
the press today simply as the father of William. At 42, Kristol the younger has
become perhaps the most powerful member of the counter-counterculture -- the
fellow who tells the Republicans "what to think up in Washington," to quote
President Clinton. Kristol's square-jawed visage is ubiquitous these days -- you
see it on CNN, "Nightline," "Meet the Press." His blunt, often brutal faxes are
invoked daily by pundits across the land. Terry Eastland, a former top official
in Reagan's Justice Department and now the editor of Forbes Media Critic, claims
he's "the most-quoted non-Congressman there is."

"All serious revolutions are revolutions of ideas," Kristol wrote some years
back, beginning a review of Allan Bloom's "Closing of the American Mind" in The
Wall Street Journal. Certainly Kristol's own ideas have been taken seriously.
"He's had a great impact on the Republican Party, and he's one of the people who
can shape it," says William Bennett.

As if it weren't enough to have Irving Kristol for a father, William also has a
distinguished mother, the historian Gertrude Himmelfarb. ("Great DNA there,"
says Bennett, a family friend.) In the 50's and 60's, the Kristols' Upper West
Side home was a salon for New York intellectuals -- liberal intellectuals,
because liberals, as Lionel Trilling noted at the time, were the only
intellectuals there were. In those days, Trilling himself was welcome at the
Kristols'. At 15, Bill, as he is known, came in to greet the guests at one of
his parents' dinner parties and got into an argument with Trilling himself. (He
can't remember what it was about.)

Kristol arrived at Harvard in 1970, at the height of the protests against the
Vietnam War. His father had turned right by then, and so had he.  Kristol wore a
Spiro T. Agnew sweatshirt to classes and declared himself for Nixon on a campus
where Dick Gregory got more votes in a straw poll. "Already he was giving it to
the left," recalls Harvey Mansfield, Kristol's government professor

"It was always just more fun to be in a minority than in a majority," Kristol
recalls of those years. "I was able to rebel against my generation instead of
against my parents." He wasn't completely an intellectual loner in Cambridge,
but pretty close. "There was a sort of circle of neo-conservative slash
Straussian slash just nonleft, you might say, intellectual types," he told me.
("Straussian," a key term in the New Conservative vocabulary, refers to Leo
Strauss, the legendary celebrator of the ancient Greeks who reigned over the
University of Chicago's department of political science and found a keen
adherent in Allan Bloom.) When I asked Kristol who belonged to this circle (I,
too, was a Harvard undergrad around that time, and never laid eyes on a
conservative), he mentioned Mansfield, Samuel Huntington and James Q. Wilson,
professors all. Later on, when he was doing graduate work at Harvard, he became
friends with Francis Fukuyama, a fellow grad student and anti-leftist who would
go on to write the best-selling eulogy to the cold war, "The End of History."

Kristol got his Ph.D. in political philosophy and wrote scholarly articles with
titles like "The Heavenly City of Post-Constitutional Theory" for the University
of Chicago Law Review and The Public Interest (edited by his father). But there
was something dutiful about Kristol's pursuit of the academic life, as he sees
it now. "It was pretty clear that, for me, a less ethereal life would be more
satisfying," he told me.

After two years at the Kennedy School of Government at Harvard -- a frequent
stepping-stone to Washington -- Kristol teamed up with William Bennett, then
Secretary of Education. How he got there is instructive. In the summer of 1984,
he traveled down to Washington to research an article on how Reaganites were
grappling with the Government bureaucracy that candidate Reagan had vowed to
dismantle. The result was an article in Policy Review, still another
conservative journal, called "Can-Do Government: Three Reagan Appointees Who
Made a Difference." One of the three was Bennett, whose aggressive
budget-trimming as head of the National Endowment for the Humanities in the
first Reagan Administration Kristol lauded as a model of how to limit
government. (That Irving Kristol had recommended Bennett for the N.E.H. post
could have been lost on no one in this network.) Three months later, Bennett
called and offered him a job.

Kristol quickly made a name for himself as a political operative at the
Education Department. "We were proud to be called Fort Reagan," recalls Bennett.
"We were the only place that was keeping the Tablet" -- which for Bennett meant
delivering impassioned campus speeches (with a lot of input from Kristol) in
defense of the core curriculum. "Bill was good at the cultural stuff."

Kristol left the Department of Education in 1988 to manage the campaign of his
Harvard roommate Alan Keyes, who ran unsuccessfully for the Republican Senate
seat in Maryland. A few months later, he got a call "out of the blue" from a
friend of Dan Quayle's: Would he be interested in a job as the Vice President's
domestic adviser? Kristol turned it down. "I couldn't see sitting quietly and
taking notes without having a hand in shaping opinion," he says. It was only
when Quayle himself called and made it clear that he intended to have "an
activist Vice Presidency," and that he wanted Kristol to be part of it, that he
changed his mind. "I thought it would be interesting and a challenge." He
defends Quayle as "a bright man and really a fine person" with "good political
judgment."

Going to work for Quayle wasn't a popular decision among Kristol's friends or
his family. "I must say, I was rather dubious about that," his mother admitted
to me, hastening to add that "it was a clear case of ideas -- Bill thought he
could get his ideas across."

Strategically, it wasn't a bad move; it got Kristol noticed. To the media he
became known as "Dan Quayle's brain" (not in itself a remarkable achievement,
notes George Will, who likens being called the smartest person in the Bush White
House to being called "the tallest building in Topeka"). It was clearly Kristol
who was behind Quayle's assault on the "cultural elite." For Kristol, it was a
war on his own kind. To attack it was to attack what Kristol once described as
"the typical New York-Jewish view of the world, that people who weren't from New
York and Jewish were unfortunate: they ate Wonder Bread and mayonnaise and had
boring existences."

It wasn't just ideas that Kristol purveyed. He'd also become an adept political
practitioner -- a pro at what he likes to call "the baseball side of politics,
the wins and losses, the vote counts." In "All's Fair," Mary Matalin, the Bush
strategist, recounts "a stroke of Kristol Machiavellian genius": after rumors
arose in '92 that Quayle might be dumped from the ticket, Kristol leaked word
that Bush was sticking with the Vice President; when a reporter put the question
directly to Bush, he felt it was bad manners to do anything but affirm his
support. (According to Kristol, who denies Matalin's account, Quayle raised the
issue at a meeting with Bush, and Bush "told him he was O.K.")

The moment it became clear that Bush was going to lose no matter who was on the
ticket, Kristol began to distance himself from the White House. Two months
before the election, he came up with this masterpiece of equivocation: "I'm much
less sure that we deserve to win than that the country doesn't deserve for the
Democrats to win." Now he says, "I thought the underlying dynamics were terrible
for us. I expected us to lose."

Kristol established the Project for the Republican Future after he left the
White House with money from what Kristol described as "Wall Street types,
basically." The budget for last year was $ 1.3 million -- a comfortable but
hardly lavish sum. The project operates with a seat-of-the-pants informality;
its offices at A.E.I. feel more like an Ivy League history department than a
Washington think tank. But there's nothing academic about Kristol's memos, which
he faxes out to politicians and key opinion-makers at the rate of several a
week. Kristol's memos have a distinct edge -- brassy is the word George Will
applies. A little more than a year ago, at a time when Senator Bob Dole was
affirming the notion of a "health care crisis," Kristol was drafting a memo
entitled "Defeating President Clinton's Health Care Proposal." Clinton's plan
was just another step in the direction of big government, Kristol argued; most
Americans were happy with the coverage they had. There was no health care
crisis. In little more than a month, Dole, a careful reader of Kristol's memos,
was saying, "My view is that I think there isn't a health care crisis." It was
the beginning of the end for Clinton's plan.

Kristol hasn't let up on Clinton. Shortly after he helped defeat the health care
bill, he accused Clinton of "posturing" on welfare. And within hours of the
President's State of the Union Message, Kristol issued a sarcastic memo deriding
it as "the most conservative major address ever delivered by a 20th-century
Democratic president." ("You half expected Mr. Clinton to denounce affirmative
action, the Clean Air Act, and radical feminism too... .") He also found time to
turn up on "Charlie Rose" that night to provide instant negative spin.

Kristol, like the rest of the counter-counterculture, is by temperament a
radical -- someone who likes to be against. "I don't apologize for the fact that
most of our work has been in opposition," he told me. "In politics as in life
generally, a lot of what one does is oppose bad ideas." Opposition is
"worthwhile for its own sake, good for the country," he said, sounding just like
a 60's radical.

When asked what he's for, Kristol grows vague. "It's a historic moment when all
kinds of things need to be worked out," he says. "The single thing one could do
now is pull kids out of failing schools and put them in successful schools" --
he's an advocate of school choice.

What about the anti-feminist rhetoric I kept hearing on the right?

"Feminism is a very difficult issue," he replied. "I'm not willing to abandon
all the progress on equal rights for women, and I never said we should. But
where we go from here is a big question. The fact that feminism has had certain
good consequences doesn't absolve one of the responsibility for pointing out
that it's had certain bad consequences. Politically, everyone is happy with
equal treatment under the law, there's no big dispute about that. There's some
dispute around the margins ... women and the military, stuff like that."

But what are his priorities? What's the one big thing to be done?

"Our agenda now is to think about how to revitalize public institutions, how to
strengthen the institutions of civic society -- shaping the culture as opposed
to reforming the politics."

For all his talk of "ideas," Kristol is essentially a strategist, a tactician.
Most of his friends predict he'll end up back in government. "My guess is that
Bill will be the chief of staff for the next Republican President or chairman of
the Republican Party," Terry Eastland says. The real priority for Kristol, those
who know him told me, is deciding whom he'll support in '96. "He's in a pickle
on Quayle," says a friend. "He wants to give him sound advice, but he's afraid
Quayle's gonna get beat up. He's not going to do anything disloyal."

Not disloyal, perhaps, but definitely politic. I happened to be in Kristol's
office on the day he was preparing to fax out a memo responding to the
Republicans' Contract With America, which had been unveiled that afternoon. And
what did Kristol think of the contract? "We're pretending to like it," he'd said
offhandedly as we headed to lunch.

MEMBERS OF THE Counter-Counterculture gathered for dinner one night last month
at Citronelle, a chic bistro in the Latham Hotel in Georgetown. The surroundings
were refined; the talk was rightish Beltway. Daniel Wattenberg, son of the
conservative columnist Ben Wattenberg, revealed that he was working on a "First
100 Days" documentary for PBS, "while it's still there" -- eliciting whoops.
"Get the man an N.E.H. grant," someone shouted down the table. (Public
television and the National Endowment for the Humanities have been among the
first declared targets of the Republicans' cutting frenzy.)

Over Chilean sea bass, those around the table reminisced with evangelical fervor
about their conservative origins, recounting their political conversions or
awakenings. It was Jay Lefkowitz, director of Cabinet affairs in the Bush White
House, who introduced the notion of the "defining moment" -- a moment of nearly
religious intensity when one's conservative affiliation, one's conservative
soul, suddenly stood revealed. He told of being a student at Columbia Law School
in the mid-80's and going to an interview for a summer associate job at a white
shoe law firm. A black classmate of his "who had even better grades than I did"
also interviewed with the firm. Upon comparing notes of their interviews, it
emerged that his classmate had been asked to supply a transcript not only of his
law-school grades but of his undergraduate record. The firm wanted to be sure he
hadn't got to Columbia Law simply because he was black. To Lefkowitz's mind,
here was the true and cruel legacy of affirmative action. "What made this moment
so defining for me," said Lefkowitz, "was that my friend needed to verify
himself, to prove his merit and show that he had the grades, that he hadn't got
in to law school on the basis of race" -- an assumption Lefkowitz considered
"profoundly racist."

David Brock also claims a defining moment: the son of a marketing executive ("a
Pat Buchanan conservative") in the New Jersey suburbs, Brock had gone to
Berkeley "for all the reasons one would go there" -- drugs, sex, rock-and-roll
-- and seen conservative speakers like Caspar Weinberger and Jeane Kirkpatrick
shouted down. It wasn't long before Brock himself got shouted down. As an editor
for The Daily Californian, the Berkeley campus paper, he wrote a signed column
endorsing the Granada invasion, "controversial in Berkeley but not in many other
places" -- apparently his father's Buchananite tendencies had taken hold more
than his son realized. The column created a furor; petitions demanding Brock's
ouster were circulated, editorials written. "I thought it was McCarthyism of the
left," said Brock. "I thought it was extremely intolerant."

After graduation, Brock joined "the minority culture," as young conservatives
like to identify their cohort. He sent his clips to John Podhoretz, who was then
editing Insight, the Sunday magazine of The Washington Times, and Podhoretz gave
him a job. He did a stint at the Heritage Foundation and wrote his piece about
Anita Hill for The Spectator; Erwin Glikes, then president and publisher of the
Free Press, read it and signed him up to do a book. "The Real Anita Hill,"
edited by Glikes's protege, Adam Bellow, was on the best-seller list for 14
weeks.

Those at the Citronelle dinner were young conservatives. But they were old
enough to be concerned about their stodgy image.

"We have to prove to the American people that we're fair, that we believe in
equality, that we're not the elite," Jay Lefkowitz said.

"I grew up in a liberal household and was taught that conservatives were dumber,
not nice," said Jennifer Grossman, communications director of Michael
Huffington's failed Senate campaign in California.

To the counter-counterculture, the divide between liberals and conservatives is
no laughing matter. They talk about "our point of view," "our people" -- except
that for them, the beleaguered and persecuted minority is on the right. "We're
still competing on their terms, sending our kids to Harvard, Yale and
Princeton," Grossman complained. She was also angry that Clinton failed to
bestow any Kennedy Center Honors upon conservatives.

When it came right down to it, what really seemed to irritate Grossman and her
cronies was not the state of the nation but their exclusion from what they call
the loop. Over and over I heard this note of grievance against "the majority
culture," "the condottieri of liberalism," "the compassion crowd." Toward the
end of dinner, John Podhoretz began a long peroration about his father, Norman,
the editor of Commentary and one of the pioneers of neo-conservatism. "My
father, one of the most eminent intellectuals of his time, is retiring,"
Podhoretz, a stout, prematurely balding man, tieless and perspiring, said in a
wounded tone. "Where are the honors due an old general? When the prizes are
given out, when intellectual eminence is conferred, there is only silence. He
has to give his own honorary dinner."

Others around the table were obsessed with reviews. There was a conspiracy to
"silence" conservative books. Look at Brock's book, attacked in The New Yorker
by Jane Mayer and Jill Abramson, whose own book, "Strange Justice," was highly
critical of Clarence Thomas; look at the liberal assault on Richard Bernstein's
recent polemic on multiculturalism, "Dictatorship of Virtue" -- a book by one of
The Times's own reporters! -- Louis Menand in The New York Review of Books, Leon
Wieseltier and Nicholas Lemann in The Times, Sean Wilentz, a Princeton history
professor, in The New Republic: could a more liberal lineup be devised?

"You think we're nuts, don't you?" muttered Laura Ingraham, a former clerk for
Clarence Thomas and now an attorney at the Washington offices of the power firm
of Skadden, Arps. Ingraham, who is also a frequent guest on CNN, had had it with
a particularly long-winded argument over some review in The New Republic. It
could have been worse. They could have been the dweebs and nerds that liberals
imagine young conservatives to be. But no one seemed to be going home from
Citronelle, even though it was after 11; a number of the guests were on their
way to a Capitol Hill party at the home of Grover Norquist, head of Americans
for Tax Reform and an adviser to the new Speaker of the House. I found myself
careering through the streets of downtown Washington with Brock in Ingraham's
military-green Land Rover at 60 miles an hour looking for an open bar while the
music of Buckwheat Zydeco blasted over the stereo.

As we sat in the bar of the Tabard Inn knocking back big glasses of Sambuca
("Should we all sing 'Kumbaya'?" suggested Ingraham), she entertained us with
stories of her adventures in El Salvador during the mid-80's. What was she doing
there? I asked. "Subjugating third-world nations," she said with a dry laugh.

NEWT GINGRICH'S headline-making book deal -- $ 4

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1995 The New York Times Company

                              113 of 211 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                February 13, 1995, Monday, Late Edition - Final

MUSIC REVIEW;
Back to Vietnam With the Kronos

BYLINE: By EDWARD ROTHSTEIN

SECTION: Section C;  Page 11;  Column 4;  Cultural Desk

LENGTH: 633 words


"Thirteen Images from the Dark Land" is the subtitle of George Crumb's theater
piece "Black Angels," which was staged by the Kronos Quartet on Friday night.
The dark land in question in this 1970 work was Vietnam, and the piece sets up
opposition between hostile, shrieking dissonances and otherworldly consonances,
between aggressive sounds of assault and haunting timbres redolent of Asian
instruments. The Western string quartet is juxtaposed with sounds emerging from
Chinese gongs, bowed water glasses and whispered overtones. This unambiguous set
of oppositions inspired by the Vietnam War is accompanied by allusions to
annihilation and redemption.

But on this program at the Majestic Theater, which was the first of four
presented by the Kronos in its residency at the Brooklyn Academy of Music this
season, the piece took on other resonances as well. Written at the height of the
counterculture and invoking many of its themes, it seemed an ancestor to much of
the post-modern repertory that has defined the Kronos Quartet and made it the
most popular contemporary chamber ensemble.

"Black Angels" emphasizes image and theater just as the Kronos does; the quartet
makes mood lighting, hip clothing and stage sets central to its performances.
The piece also takes a political stand, which has defined much of the repertory
commissioned by the quartet, including Scott Johnson's "Cold War Suite," which
will be played on Friday. It recalls non-Western and third world music, which
have been major interests of the Kronos; examples this week include "Zaman
Suite" by the Lebanese composer Ali Jihad Racy, scored for quartet and Arabic
instruments, and Tan Dun's "Ghost Opera" with a part for the Chinese pipa.

Most important, the nostalgic yearning in "Black Angels" for a spiritual past
and a meditative present make it a relative of American minimalism and the
ritualism of contemporary Eastern European composers. These styles are heavily
represented in the Kronos's programming for its current concerts of works by
LaMonte Young, Philip Glass, John Adams and Henryk Gorecki.

It is, in fact, impossible to separate the quartet -- David Harrington and John
Sherba, violinists; Hank Dutt, violist, and Joan Jeanrenaud, cellist -- from a
countercultural esthetic and its committed audience. This is fine for believers,
but on Friday I kept waiting for a statement made with enough imagination to
give it a life independent of the culture creating it.

Even the Crumb piece, for example, with its stunning sonic imagination, became
little more than a series of effects. This is partly a problem in the
composition. The suspense was in seeing just what the players would come up with
next rather than with the substance of what was being presented. Redemption was
as distant as the war in Vietnam.

In Mr. Gorecki's Quartet No. 2, commissioned by the Kronos, the players also
failed to make the most of the half-hour score; there were long stretches when
the composer's attempts to create ritual out of repetition seemed indulgent,
narcissistic. This kind of piece can be saved only by a brilliant performance;
the Kronos was monochromatic, its playing dutiful, lacking mystery.

More successful was Mr. Glass's Quartet No. 5, a modest composition built out of
recurrent syncopations and glancing hints of pop rhythms and bass lines. Yet the
playing lacked the freedom and immediacy that would have made this seem more
than a genre piece.

The audience cheered the Kronos on Friday. Indeed, its following is significant
(the players will return to the academy next season as well). But in the midst
of the quartet's advocacy for an esthetic reaching back to the counterculture,
this listener wanted something more: performances that inspire attention rather
than expect it.

LOAD-DATE: February 13, 1995

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo: The Kronos Quartet, from left, David Harrington, John Sherba,
Hank Dutt and Joan Jeanrenaud, performing "Black Angels," a 1970 work by George
Crumb, at the Brooklyn Academy of Music on Friday night. (Sara Krulwich/The New
York Times)

TYPE: Review

                   Copyright 1995 The New York Times Company

                              114 of 211 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                February 14, 1995, Tuesday, Late Edition - Final

Corrections

SECTION: Section A;  Page 2;  Column 5;  Metropolitan Desk

LENGTH: 32 words


An article on Sunday about the opening of the Hanoi Government's diplomatic
office in Washington misstated the colors of the Vietnamese flag. They are red
and yellow, not orange and yellow.

LOAD-DATE: February 14, 1995

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Correction

                   Copyright 1995 The New York Times Company

                              115 of 211 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                February 17, 1995, Friday, Late Edition - Final

Justice Officials Start Preliminary Inquiry on Commerce Secretary

BYLINE: By KEITH BRADSHER,   Special to The New York Times

SECTION: Section A;  Page 19;  Column 1;  National Desk

LENGTH: 890 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, Feb. 16


The Justice Department announced today that it had opened a preliminary criminal
investigation into Commerce Secretary Ronald H. Brown's business dealings and
personal finances to determine whether an independent counsel should be
appointed in the case.

The decision is the second step along a procedural path dictated by the
independent-counsel law. It follows a 30-day initial review in which the Justice
Department was required to determine whether accusations against Mr. Brown were
both clear-cut and from a credible source.

The decision today, finding that both conditions had been met, is a blow to Mr.
Brown, who will now face a deeper review of his conduct by criminal prosecutors.
But the action does not mean the Government has reached any conclusions about
whether he violated any law.

Fourteen Republican senators asked Attorney General Janet Reno last month to
determine whether Mr. Brown had evaded taxes, avoided financial disclosure
requirements or misled Congress in the course of his highly complicated business
dealings with a Washington business executive, Nolanda Hill. The Federal court
that oversees the independent counsel process said today only that the
preliminary investigation, "concerns allegations that have been widely reported
by the news media."

Mr. Brown's lawyer, Reid Weingarten, played down the announcement and said his
client had not broken any laws. "The independent counsel law left Justice with
no choice but to move to a preliminary investigation," he said.

But Federal law-enforcement officials who have followed the case said that Mr.
Brown's dealings were so convoluted that the inquiry was bound to be prolonged
and difficult as they waded through a welter of serious ethical questions. Chief
among them, they said, is the question of why Mr. Brown was paid about $400,000
for his stake in an apparently worthless company in which he had invested no
money.

The officials said the issues they would be examining included whether Mr. Brown
violated tax or financial disclosure laws and whether he was paid money by
people seeking to influence the Commerce Department.

This is the second Justice Department investigation into Mr. Brown.  He was
cleared last year after a review of accusations that he had accepted bribes from
the Vietnamese Government to work for normalization of relations.

Michael D. McCurry, the White House press secretary, said today before the
Justice Department's announcement that the White House was watching Mr. Brown's
legal issues closely, but that the Commerce Secretary had President Clinton's
full confidence. Mr. McCurry's deputy, Ginny Terzano, said this evening that the
White House position had not changed and that, "the Attorney General took an
action today that was proper under the statute."

Representative William F. Clinger Jr., the Pennsylvania Republican who heads the
House Committee on Government Reform and Oversight and has led the Congressional
investigation of Mr. Brown, praised the Justice Department's decision to
investigate and said he would decide by the middle of next week whether to hold
hearings in Congress.

Mr. Clinger and other Congressional Republicans have raised questions about Mr.
Brown's dealings with Ms. Hill. In 1990, the two formed First International, a
small Washington investment and consulting company. Mr. Brown has said that he
never put any money into the company but that he gave advice to the enterprise
as well as legitimately lending the cachet of his name. He said he regarded the
$400,000 as his appropriate compensation.

First International documents show that in 1992, before Mr. Brown became
Commerce Secretary, he and Ms. Hill were actively discussing efforts to import
oil from Angola and wine from Hungary. Neither venture was successful.

Republicans have challenged Mr. Brown's account of his role, questioning how a
half-stake in a company that produced virtually no revenue could be worth
$400,000.

Mr. Clinger has questioned in particular the way the payments were made and
disclosed. Mr. Brown has said he received the proceeds from the sale in December
1993 sale in three parts: he received three checks totaling $135,000 months
before the sale; Ms. Hill also paid $190,000 of Mr. Brown's personal bank debts
and legal debts last summer, and she forgave a $72,000 debt that Mr. Brown owed
to one of her companies.

The Justice Department's decision to investigate could hurt the White House's
preparations for the 1996 campaign. Until these accusations, Mr. Brown had been
the top choice of White House officials to run President Clinton's 1996
re-election campaign.

It also could serve as an uncomfortable reminder of the two other independent
counsels currently examining Clinton Administration officials. One investigation
headed by Kenneth Starr, a former judge, is examining the Whitewater matter and
another inquiry led by Donald Smaltz, a Los Angeles lawyer, is reviewing ties
between Agriculture Secretary Mike Espy and Tyson Foods Inc., the huge Arkansas
based poultry producer. Justice Department officials are also weighing whether
to ask the judicial panel to appoint an outside prosecutor to investigate Henry
G. Cisneros, the Housing Secretary, based on accusations by a former girlfriend
that he made misleading statements about payments he made to her.


LOAD-DATE: February 17, 1995

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1995 The New York Times Company

                              116 of 211 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                February 17, 1995, Friday, Late Edition - Final

Wiretap Expert Named to Head New York City Office of F.B.I.

BYLINE: By JAMES C. McKINLEY Jr.

SECTION: Section B;  Page 7;  Column 1;  Metropolitan Desk

LENGTH: 287 words


James K. Kallstrom, an electronic eavesdropping expert whose technical prowess
has bedeviled suspected mobsters and terrorists in New York for more than two
decades, was named yesterday to head the Federal Bureau of Investigation's New
York City office, the largest in the country.

A former Marine captain and a Vietnam veteran, Mr. Kallstrom joined the F.B.I.
in 1970 and spent most of his career in New York City, heading the unit
responsible for electronic monitoring of criminals. He is replacing William A.
Gavin, who is retiring in March to be the security director of U.S. Healthcare
Inc.

In Mr. Kallstrom, the F.B.I. Director, Louis J. Freeh, chose one of the bureau's
most respected technical wizards, a man whose surveillance techniques played a
critical role in the arrests of every major organized crime leader and terrorist
in New York in the last 20 years, law-enforcement officials said.

"Jim Kallstrom is superbly engineered to lead the New York office of the
F.B.I.," Mr. Freeh said in a statement yesterday. The New York office covers the
city, Long Island and part of the lower Hudson Valley.

Mr. Kallstrom, 51, once put a bug the size of a quarter in a couch used by John
Gotti, the Gambino crime boss. He coordinated the complex surveillance in the
Pizza Connection case, in which 17 people were convicted in March 1987 of
running an international drug ring using pizzerias as fronts. "If anybody in the
F.B.I. can do the impossible, he's the guy," said James Fox, who headed the New
York office from 1988 through 1993.

As the head of the Special Operations Division in New York from 1976 to 1990,
Mr. Kallstrom oversaw a band of surveillance experts that grew from 15 to more
than 300.

LOAD-DATE: February 17, 1995

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1995 The New York Times Company

                              117 of 211 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               February 18, 1995, Saturday, Late Edition - Final

Clinton, in a Memorial Tribute, Hails Fulbright as an Inspiration

BYLINE: By TIM WEINER,   Special to The New York Times

SECTION: Section 1;  Page 28;  Column 1;  National Desk

LENGTH: 720 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, Feb. 17


President Clinton eulogized former Senator J. William Fulbright today as a
mentor and an inspiration, a man who "stood against the 20th century's most
destructive forces and fought to advance its brightest hopes."

Mr. Fulbright, an Arkansas Democrat, represented the President's home state in
the House and Senate from 1942 to 1974, a Congressional career that began four
years before Mr. Clinton's birth and ended in the year he entered public life.

In those 32 years, "Bill Fulbright changed our country and our world forever and
for the better," the President said in a memorial service at the National
Cathedral. "He lived with passion tempered by reason. He loved politics but
cautioned against the arrogance of power."

Mr. Fulbright, who was 89, died of a stroke on Feb. 9 at his home in Washington.
He was chairman of the Senate Foreign Relations Committee in 1966 when he hired
Mr. Clinton, then a student at Georgetown University. Two years later Mr.
Clinton, following the Senator's footsteps, became a Rhodes scholar.

In a speech that sometimes seemed self-referential, Mr. Clinton recalled how he
had watched Mr. Fulbright struggle -- "trying to learn, trying to understand and
trying to be understood" -- in opposing the Vietnam War. "Often against great
odds and sometimes at great personal cost," Mr. Clinton said, Mr. Fulbright made
that opposition known.

The President cited a letter he said Mr. Fulbright had received from a
constituent during the war that said, in part: "I have never voted for you. I
have never missed a chance to belittle you. But deep inside me there was a
nagging suspicion that I have been wrong. This old world has always nailed its
prophets to trees, so don't be surprised at those who come at you with hammers
and spikes."

Mr. Fulbright, who opposed civil rights legislation throughout his political
career, was praised by the Rev. Elton Smith, a black vicar of the National
Cathedral, who recalled his gratitude, as an enlisted man on the battlefield in
Vietnam, for Mr. Fulbright's opposition to the war.

Mr. Fulbright's political dissent, Mr. Smith said, was "an act of faith in
humanity," a concrete effort toward "the building of human community."

"And in this town," he added, "this was a vision that could be mocked."

Mr. Fulbright was also remembered at today's service with a soaring choral
performance of "Amazing Grace" and fond tributes from his family. His
son-in-law, Edward Foote, recalled Mr. Fulbright's Oxford-polished Arkansas
drawl, his complex mind and his simple tastes, the withering look of deep
skepticism with which he fixed Presidents and other politicians with whom he
disagreed, his wry and kind wit, and his love of rooting through bins at
farmers' markets until he found the perfect piece of fruit.

Mr. Fulbright was born to a well-to-do family on April 9, 1905, in Sumner, Mo.,
and grew up on the outskirts of Fayetteville, Ark. He was only 34 years old when
he was named president of the University of Arkansas in 1939. He was elected to
the House in 1942 and to the Senate in 1944.

Mr. Fulbright's love of education, combined with his interest in foreign policy
and politics, led him in 1945 to conceive the Fulbright scholarships. Under this
exchange program, nearly 250,000 Americans have gone abroad and foreign students
have come to the United States to study, and it is the former Senator's "most
profound legacy," Mr. Clinton said today.

"The Fulbright scholarship program is a perfect example of Bill Fulbright's
faith: different kinds of people learning side by side, building what he called
a capacity for empathy, a distaste for killing other men and an inclination for
peace," the President said. "It includes as its alumni Nobel Prize winners,
members of Congress, leaders for peace and freedom the world over, and many
not-so-famous people who went home to live out the faith of Senator Fulbright.

"No matter what their native tongue, all of them are now known by the same name:
Fulbrights," Mr. Clinton added. "In a way, a lot of us here, especially those of
us from Arkansas and those who worked for him in other ways over the years are
also, in our own way, Fulbrights."

Mr. Fulbright, the President concluded, "was the heir of Jefferson in our time;
he believed in the American idea."

NAME: J. William Fulbright

LOAD-DATE: February 18, 1995

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo: President Clinton and his wife, Hillary, looked on during a
memorial service yesterday for J. William Fulbright at the National Cathedral in
Washington. In his eulogy, Mr. Clinton said the former Senator "changed our
country and our world forever and for the better." (Reuters)

TYPE: Obituary (Obit); Biography

                   Copyright 1995 The New York Times Company

                              118 of 211 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               February 18, 1995, Saturday, Late Edition - Final

In the Middle: New York on $38,000 a Year -- A special report.;
Free From Want, but Just Getting By

BYLINE: By CHARISSE JONES

SECTION: Section 1;  Page 1;  Column 3;  Metropolitan Desk

LENGTH: 2063 words


Brenda, Amancio, Michelle and Amelia Irizarry are a family of four living in the
Bronx, and at first glance, their lives seem to mirror the middle-class ideal.

Brenda heads the parents' association at the local middle school. Her husband,
Amancio, bustles off to work early each morning. Their younger daughter, Amelia,
13, accents her jeans with Nikes and Timberland boots. Their older daughter,
Michelle, 20, attends college and hopes to become a social worker.

But the Irizarrys have no savings. They rent an apartment, because they cannot
afford to buy a home. The family has never taken a vacation trip together, or
owned a new car. They go out to dinner at most once a year.

Sometimes Mrs. Irizarry wonders what would happen if there were an accident or
death, and her family had to survive on even less.

The Irizarrys live on $38,000 a year, an income that places them in the
financial middle of a city where the gap between rich and poor is among the
widest in the nation. The median family income in New York, adjusted for
inflation, is $41,600, based on 1990 census figures. But to be in the middle in
New York City, as the Irizarrys' life attests, is not necessarily to have either
the security or the comforts so often associated with being middle class.

"I think that the median in New York is probably at the low end of what you'd
call the middle class," said Dr. Andrew A. Beveridge, who directs the Program
for Applied Research at Queens College of the City University of New York.

Often it is the extraordinarily wealthy and the destitute who seem to define New
York City. But the Irizarrys of Bainbridge Avenue are more typical, and for them
life is neither glamorous nor miserable. But it does contain a kind of quiet
drama nonetheless, with the modest triumphs and heartbreaks that define so many
families who are on the cusp of hard times and of making it.

Mr. and Mrs. Irizarry have enjoyed a measure of success. They are better off
than their parents were. But they have been unable to improve their fortunes
beyond a modicum of comfort they achieved several years ago. In fact, they began
slipping back after Mr. Irizarry was laid off by a company to which he had
devoted much of his life.

Everyone in the Irizarry family works. Mrs. Irizarry, 41, brings in the most
money, as an assistant teacher at a nearby day care center. Mr. Irizarry, 52,
holds two jobs, stocking goods in a school kitchen by day and cleaning
classrooms in another school by night. Michelle spends her evenings doing
telephone surveys for a company in New Rochelle. And even Amelia sometimes
sweeps floors at her middle school to earn pocket change.

Their household in the northwest Bronx, held together by the industry of the
parents, is buoyed by the youthful dreams of the children. And the only real
suspense for the Irizarrys is whether their daughters will realize their
bittersweet aspirations to rise above their parents' lot.

"I don't want to live like this the rest of my life," Michelle said. "I feel
sorry for my mother. I mean, they have morals and are trying to make it. But
unless they hit the Lotto, this is how it's going to be the rest of their lives.
And that's sad, to think that's it. This is as good as it's going to get."

The Parents
Constant Struggle For a Simple Life

It was Sunday, and at last Amancio Irizarry had a day to rest. He turned on the
TV in the kitchen, and prepared to fry codfish fritters and cook a pot of
vegetable soup.

Mr. Irizarry looks younger than 52, with his burnished bronze skin and shock of
white hair. As his wife, Brenda, headed out the door to the market, he boasted
playfully about the lunch he was preparing and reminded her to pick up some
bread.

They have been married 21 years. And though Mrs. Irizarry's dark brown hair is
flecked with gray, she still has the laugh of a schoolgirl.

Mrs. Irizarry grew up poor, in the Walt Whitman housing project in Brooklyn. As
an adult, she lived in relative comfort for a time when she and her husband made
more than $50,000 a year. And during a two-year period when her husband was
unemployed, she struggled to keep her family afloat.

"I know I'm not low income," Mrs. Irizarry said. "And I guess we have a car and
that puts me ahead of someone who doesn't. But if I consider myself middle class
it would be the lower bracket, because the lifestyle we have is very simple."

Mrs. Irizarry drove the family's 1984 Ford LTD, as every weekend, to Edwards
Super Food Store. She perused the aisles, checking sale stickers and chuckling
softly when she passed the fillet of sole ($9.49 a pound). "Not this week," she
laughed, as she headed toward the chicken.

When she is not teaching at the Mosholu-Montefiore Community Center in the Bronx
and doing volunteer work in her neighborhood, Mrs. Irizarry is often out hunting
for bargains, trying to balance the desires and needs of a household that
includes two young daughters.

She makes $21,000 a year, and her husband makes $17,000.

The family has a tight budget for predictable expenses: $675.85 a month for
rent, $60 for electricity, $100 for the phone, $400 for groceries. They
sometimes rely on their four credit cards, and are unable to save any money at
all. So they have learned to cut corners, turning leftover steak into beef-fried
rice, spending no more than $10 on any one Christmas gift.

Mrs. Irizarry's job provides health insurance. And the family pays only a $300
annual deductible -- giving them one less expense to worry about from month to
month.

But there are always unexpected setbacks -- like Amelia's braces, which cost
$3,400, or the burial of Mr. Irizarry's father, which cost $4,000.

Mrs. Irizarry said she has never had grandiose dreams. But she has had to modify
even modest aspirations. Not so long ago, for instance, she and her husband
considered buying a home. But they decided that a down payment and monthly
mortgage were beyond their means. And Mrs. Irizarry's dream of finishing college
is permanently on hold. They can barely afford to send Michelle to Kingsborough
Community College, where the $2,100 in yearly tuition is low compared with
private schools. Once the City University of New York was free. Now, Michelle
gets $50 in state financial aid, which is little more than "a tease," Mrs.
Irizarry said. Michelle had to take out a loan this school year, and Mrs.
Irizarry once resorted to putting the tuition on her credit card.

"We didn't have a college fund for Michelle," she said. "You see commercials on
television saying to start when the baby is born. But because of the unforeseen
things that happen in life, it's impossible to save money."

The Home
Fewer Luxuries, Smaller Comforts

The Irizarry's five-room apartment is filled with pets and small comforts. There
are two unnamed finches roosting in the kitchen, and two family dogs, Polo and
Champ. A VCR and stereo sit in the simply furnished living room, and Michelle
has her own compact disk player.

Such conveniences have become more affordable and thus ubiquitous in American
homes, but the larger luxuries, like a house and college education, have become
harder to attain, making it difficult for many middle-class families to achieve
the American dream. It often takes two people to make an income comparable to
that brought home by one person a generation ago.

The median price for a home in the New York metropolitan area more than doubled
between 1980 and 1990, to $168,600 from $69,600, according to the National
Association of Realtors. The median family income in New York City rose only 20
percent during the same period.

The Irizarrys are "better off than their immigrant parents," John Mollenkopf,
director of the Center for Urban Research at the CUNY Graduate Center, said.
"They're certainly solid in the middle as far as the numbers tell us, but they
probably are not going to move much higher in the income distribution. And the
question is, do their kids have a shot?"

One night recently, Mrs. Irizarry reflected on the economic ups and downs of her
husband's life. During 15 years with Stewart Sandwiches, he worked his way up
from driver to route supervisor. By the time he was laid off, he was making
$30,000 a year. Now, after two years of searching for work, he has ended up
mopping floors and stocking shelves.

"I think my husband deserved better, especially for a man of his experience and
his capabilities," said Mrs. Irizarry. "But you do what you have to. He's no
longer a supervisor. He's a food helper and a maintenance worker. And I don't
think there's any disgrace in that. He's out there trying to make an honest
living. The only thing I regret is he has to work so hard."

Mr. Irizarry is a proud man. Asked what he pines for, he says he has all that he
ever wanted.

"I got my wife, I got my kids," he said. "I don't need no Porsche, no Lexus. I'm
not into being a millionaire. I'm comfortable where I'm at. But If I can get it,
I'll take it, like anybody else."

Still, when pressed, he admits there are a few pleasures he would not mind. He
is a Vietnam veteran and would love to see Arlington National Cemetery. He'd
like to go back to Puerto Rico and visit his birthplace for the first time in
more than 20 years.

"I'd love to take a vacation and leave everything behind," he said. "I'd love to
have a house."

Perhaps most of all, he wishes that his wife did not have to work outside the
home. "I'd rather have her be at home," he said.

Still, he is doing better than his parents. When his family moved to New York
City from Puerto Rico in 1952, his father found work in a hotel kitchen, and his
mother worked as a seamstress. Together they brought home $58 a week.

"I have much more," he said. "We were dirt-poor and we only thought about
survival day by day. That's why my motto is 'one day at a time.' "

He finds the good in most things. The family's apartment, where they have lived
nearly 13 years, could use new wiring and better plumbing. The neighbors
sometimes get a little rowdy. But he says he will not leave it, or New York
City.

"I'm not moving," he said. "I sleep O.K. here."

The Children
Daughters Share Bittersweet Hopes

When Amelia entered the sixth grade at Middle School 80, other children teased
her because of what she wore, and the memory still stings. "They'll look at your
sneakers, look at your face, and they'll remember your sneakers," said Amelia,
now an eighth grader. "Some people don't tease you, but they make sure they make
you jealous of what they've got. They know they're getting on your nerves. And
they like it."

Amelia has felt her parents' financial struggles sharply. When her father was
unemployed, she said, "every time the family had a conversation, it was always
about money."

Last Christmas, she decided she wanted a part-time job. Now she sometimes earns
$50 a week, helping her father sweep classrooms and doing chores for her
grandfather on Saturdays.

Working is just one of the ways she tries to be a big girl; she also protects
her mother. "I really don't talk to her about things I want," Amelia said. "She
knows she can't get it for me. And I don't want to make her feel bad."

Michelle often thinks about all she does not have when she strolls down Fifth
Avenue.

"Sometimes I'll see a Mercedes," she said. "And I always wonder, how it must
feel to be that person's child."

She is not ashamed to admit that she is materialistic -- and impatient.  "You
want so much, but it takes so long to get it, and you feel like it's never going
to happen."

When Michelle was attending the High School of Fashion Industries in Manhattan,
she said, many of her friends' families were better off than hers. "I was at a
point where I didn't want to bring people to my house," she said. "I go to other
people's houses and see what they have, and it kind of burns me."

But Michelle has ambitions; she is determined to become a social worker and live
in a beautiful apartment in Manhattan.

Her mother also has dreams -- of going back to college and finishing her degree,
or perhaps buying a mobile home when she and her husband retire.

But if none of that happens, she said, reality is not so bad.

"There's an old movie, 'It's a Wonderful Life,' " she said. "I look at my life
like that. The movie makes a point. That sometimes what you do have is a lot
greater than what you don't."

LOAD-DATE: February 18, 1995

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photos: Brenda Irizarry, left, working with her husband, Amancio, in
the kitchen of their Bronx apartment. (Rachel Cobb for The New York Times)(pg.
1); In the Irizarry home, simple furnishings and a number of pets -- two birds
and two dogs -- provide comfort. Brenda Irizarry, right, has lunch with her
daughters Amelia, 13, left, and Michelle, 20. (Rachel Cobb for The New York
Times)

Graph: "DOLLARS AND CENTS: A Monthly Budget" shows a breakdown of the Irizarry
family's budget. (pg. 27)

TYPE: Special Report

                   Copyright 1995 The New York Times Company

                              119 of 211 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               February 18, 1995, Saturday, Late Edition - Final
                              Correction Appended

Army Opens Inquiries Into Ranger Deaths

BYLINE: By DON TERRY

SECTION: Section 1;  Page 6;  Column 4;  National Desk

LENGTH: 958 words


The funerals will be held soon for the four soldiers from the elite Army Ranger
school who died of exposure this week after training for hours in the cold water
of a Florida swamp. But it may take weeks or even months before the military
knows just what went wrong and why the young men -- "the best of the best," in
the words of the Under Secretary of the Army -- perished.

Yesterday, Army officials said there were four investigations under way into
what happened in a swamp along the Yellow River near Eglin Air Force Base in the
Florida Panhandle, investigations that could end in courts-martial.

"Our business is dangerous and accidents can happen anywhere and any time," said
Larry Retta, a spokesman for the Army Safety Center, which is conducting one of
the investigations. "But the Rangers have not had losses like this before. One
death is serious enough, but there were four in this."

Ranger training is some of the most rigorous in the military. Those who complete
the course wear the Ranger shoulder patch like a badge of honor after eight
weeks of training in which they consume little food, get minimal sleep and
conduct exercises in the sunbaked plains of Texas, the mountains of Georgia and
the Florida swamps.

Defense Secretary William J. Perry said yesterday that the training was "very
arduous and difficult." That, he said, "argues that we should have even more
substantial safeguards against this kind of accident."

"You can be sure," Mr. Perry said, "that one of the principal purposes of our
investigation is to determine whether the safeguards and whether the procedures
we use will need to be changed to minimize the chance of something like this
happening again."

Other investigations are being conducted by the Army Inspector General's Office,
the Army Criminal Investigations Division and by Maj. Gen. John W. Hendrix, the
commanding general of Fort Benning, Ga., the headquarters of the Ranger Training
Brigade.

Despite the grueling training, there is always a waiting list to get into the
Ranger school, which many young officers see as a necessary testing ground to
move up in their military careers.

One of the men who died was Second Lieut. Curt G. Sansoucie, a 23-year-old
graduate of West Point, who grew up in Rochester, N.H., and his mother said
yesterday that his "biggest dream since he was 12" had been a career in the
military.

Even as a boy, Theresa Sansoucie said, her son "knew the names of generals --
first names, their last names."

Three of the four soldiers died on Wednesday after being pulled out of the water
when they began showing signs of severely lowered body temperatures, or
hypothermia. The body of the fourth soldier was found Thursday morning in the
swamp after an all-night search.

In addition to Lieutenant Sansoucie, those who died were Capt. Milton Palmer,
27, of Fishers, Ind., Second Lieut. Spencer D. Dodge, 25, of Stanley, N.Y., and
Sgt. Norman Tillman, 28, of Fort Bragg, N.C.

Yesterday, Lieutenant Sansoucie's father, Gary, a Vietnam veteran and the son of
a World War II soldier, said his son "knew what he was getting into from the
start."

Mr. Sansoucie said he spoke to his son by telephone for a few minutes on Feb. 7.
"He sounded pretty tired," Mr. Sansoucie recalled. "But he thought the toughest
part of the training was over. That was the mountain part. He told us to keep
him in our prayers."

The young officer was scheduled to graduate from Ranger school next Friday.
"What I want to know as soon as possible," Mr. Sansoucie said, "is when I can
have my son back for the funeral. My son had a goal. He wanted to be a general,
but he died striving to achieve his goal."

Mr. Retta, the spokesman for the Army Safety Center at Fort Rucker, Ga., said
investigators had many questions to answer, including how long had the soldiers
been training, the behavior of the instructors, and did anyone conduct a risk
assessment, a mandatory measure of the water temperature and depth.

Nathan Palmer, the father of Captain Palmer, said: "I can tell you what
happened. They froze to death.  After that. I have no idea."

Mr. Palmer, who retired from the Army infantry, said his son had been in the
Ranger program previously but had had to withdraw because of frostbite suffered
in the mountains of Georgia.

Under Secretary Joseph Reeder of the Army said on Thursday that Captain Palmer
and others in the Ranger school were "the best of the best."

The water was 52 degrees, just above the 50-degree threshold set in 1977 after
two soldiers died from hypothermia in training. Somebody should have realized
that the water was "going to get even colder" by nightfall and pulled the 34-man
platoon out of the swamp, said Maj. Gen. Kenneth Leuer, retired, a former
commander at Fort Benning.

Lieut. Col. Joseph Spenneberg, the executive officer of the Ranger Training
Brigade at Fort Benning, said yesterday that the first soldiers began showing
signs of breaking down at 5:30 P.M. but the exercise was not called off until 11
P.M. by a battalion commander who had been in radio contact with the troubled
training platoon all day.

"Under the same conditions," he said, "this had not happened before. There was
nothing to indicate it should be stopped."

Before the deaths this week, two soldiers had died in Ranger training since
1990.

In Columbus, Ga., near Fort Benning yesterday, Spec. Jeffrey Tennen, who was
waiting to begin his Ranger training, said the deaths "scare me a little."

"But I'm going anyway," he said. "It's a ticket I need to get punched."

Spec. Greg Thompson, an Airborne unit soldier, said he had "thought about Ranger
school, but it seems like it's too hard."

"Nobody," he said, "should have to die like that, freeze to death."

LOAD-DATE: February 18, 1995

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

CORRECTION-DATE: February 24, 1995, Friday

CORRECTION:

A picture caption on Saturday about four soldiers who died in Army Ranger
training reversed the identities of two soldiers. Second Lieut. Curt G.
Sancoucie was at the bottom left, and Sgt. Norman Tillman at the bottom right.



GRAPHIC: Photo: The Rangers who died this week after training in a swamp,
clockwise from top left: Capt. Milton Palmer of Fishers, Ind., Second Lieut.
Spencer D. Dodge of Stanley, N.Y., Second Lieut. Curt G. Sansoucie of Rochester,
N.H., and Sgt. Norman Tillman of Fort Bragg, N.C. (Photographs by Associated
Press)

                   Copyright 1995 The New York Times Company

                              120 of 211 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                February 19, 1995, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

BEST SELLERS: February 19, 1995

SECTION: Section 7; Page 34; Column 2; Book Review Desk

LENGTH: 1470 words



          Weeks
This Last    On
Week Week  List Fiction

 1      1  51   THE CELESTINE PROPHECY, by James Redfield. (Warner, $17.95.) An
                ancient manuscript, found in Peru, provides insights into
                achieving a fulfilling life.

 2      2  35   POLITICALLY CORRECT BEDTIME STORIES, by James Finn Garner.
                (Macmillan, $8.95.) Classic tales respun to avoid offending
                current sensibilities.

 3      3   5   KISS THE GIRLS, by James Patterson. (Little, Brown, $22.95.)
                The police detective Alex Cross pursues a serial killer and the
                kidnapper of his niece.

 4      7   2   ORIGINAL SIN, by P.D. James. (Knopf, $24.) Adam Dalgliesh
                probes a case involving intrigue, malice and murder in a
                prestigious London publishing house.

 5          1   DAISY-HEAD MAYZIE, by Dr. Seuss. (Random House, $15.) In words
                and pictures, the story of a girl whose head unexpectedly
                sprouts a daisy.

 6      6   4   ACCEPTABLE RISK, by Robin Cook. (Putnam, $23.95.) A medical
                researcher's quest has devastating results.

 7     12   2   HOME SONG, by LaVyrle Spencer. (Putnam, $23.95.) The appearance
                of his unknown biological son threatens the serenity of a man's
                family life.

 8      4   5   EYES OF A CHILD, by Richard North Patterson. (Knopf, $24.) The
                apparent suicide of a San Francisco man leads to courtroom
                encounters.

 9          2   ALWAYS A RECKONING, by Jimmy Carter. (Times Books/Random House,
                $18.) A collection of poems.

 10     9   4   THE MURDERERS, by W.E.B. Griffin. (Putnam, $23.95.) A series of
                murders and "willful deaths" beleaguers the Philadelphia police
                force.

 11     8  132  THE BRIDGES OF MADISON COUNTY, by Robert James Waller. (Warner,
                $16.95.) A photographer and a farmer's lonely wife in Iowa.

 12     5   6   SELF-DEFENSE, by Jonathan Kellerman. (Bantam, $22.95.) The
                psychologist-detective Alex Delaware tries to help a woman who
                says she is being stalked.

 13    11  20   MUTANT MESSAGE DOWN UNDER, by Marlo Morgan. (HarperCollins,
                $18.) In Australia's outback, an American woman learns about
                aboriginal philosophy.

 14         1   THE PAPERBOY, by Pete Dexter. (Random House, $23.) A reporter,
                investigating the murder of a Florida sheriff, is outmaneuvered
                by violent half-wits.

 15    13   4   TRUST ME, by Jayne Ann Krentz. (Pocket, $22.) A canceled
                wedding leads to a curious romance.

 16*   10  25   DEBT OF HONOR, by Tom Clancy. (Putnam, $25.95.) Jack Ryan and
                C.I.A. agents vs. a Japanese plot.

          Weeks
This Last    On
Week Week  List Nonfiction

 1      1   2   I WANT TO TELL YOU, by O.J. Simpson. (Little, Brown, $17.95.)
                The former football star, now on trial for murder, responds to
                letters he has received.

 2      5   2   RAGING HEART, by Sheila Weller. (Pocket, $18.) An account of
                the marriage of O.J. and Nicole Brown Simpson.

 3      2  19   THE HOT ZONE, by Richard Preston. (Random House, $23.) The
                discovery of a lethal virus, more infectious than H.I.V., and
                the efforts to keep it from spreading.

 4      6   4   INSIDE THE WHITE HOUSE, by Ronald Kessler. (Pocket, $23.)
                Anecdotes about events at 1600 Pennsylvania Avenue during the
                past 30 years.

 5      4   8   SISTERS, by Carol Saline. Photographs by Sharon J. Wohlmuth.
                (Running Press, $27.50.) The relationships of 36 sets of
                sisters, reported in words and pictures.

 6      3  16   CROSSING THE THRESHOLD OF HOPE, by John Paul II. Edited by
                Vittorio Messori. (Knopf, $20.) The Pope discusses matters of
                belief, suffering and hope.

 7      7   4   ALL MY CHILDREN, by Gary Warner. (General Publishing, $25.) A
                scrapbook of photographs and mementos about the long-running
                television show.

 8      9  24   COUPLEHOOD, by Paul Reiser. (Bantam, $19.95.) Essays on the ups
                and downs of marriage by the television star and stand-up
                comedian.

 9     12   8   NICOLE BROWN SIMPSON, by Faye D. Resnick with Mike Walker.
                (Dove Books, $14.95.) The former wife of O.J. Simpson as
                remembered by a friend.

 10    13  12   THE WARREN BUFFETT WAY, by Robert G. Hagstrom Jr. (Wiley,
                $24.95.) An account of the career of the man said to be the
                world's most successful investor.

 11    10  50   MIDNIGHT IN THE GARDEN OF GOOD AND EVIL, by John Berendt.
                (Random House, $23.) The mysterious death of a young man in
                Savannah, Ga.

 12         1   THE DEATH OF COMMON SENSE, by Philip K. Howard. (Random House,
                $18.) A lawyer argues that a plethora of governmental rules,
                regulations and bureaucracy is fettering the lives of all
                Americans.

 13    11  61   THE BOOK OF VIRTUES, by William J. Bennett. (Simon & Schuster,
                $30.) Moral stories adapted from the Greeks, the Bible,
                folklore and elsewhere.

 14     8  20   DON'T STAND TOO CLOSE TO A NAKED MAN, by Tim Allen. (Hyperion,
                $19.95.) Anecdotes and meditations on life by the star of "Home
                Improvement."

 15    14  21   JAMES HERRIOT'S CAT STORIES, by James Herriot. (St. Martin's,
                $16.95.) A collection of tales.

          Weeks
This Last    On
Week Week  List Advice, How-to and Miscellaneous

 1      1  91   MEN ARE FROM MARS, WOMEN ARE FROM VENUS, by John Gray.
                (HarperCollins, $23.) Communicating.

 2          1   THE BEARDSTOWN LADIES' COMMON-SENSE INVESTMENT GUIDE.
                (Godin/Hyperion, $19.95.) Tips for successful investing from 16
                Illinois women.

 3      2  43   IN THE KITCHEN WITH ROSIE, by Rosie Daley. (Knopf, $14.95.)
                Recipes by Oprah Winfrey's cook.

 4      3   5   FOOD, by Susan Powter. (Simon & Schuster, $24.) Information
                about recipes, nutritional menus and diets.


Rankings reflect sales figures, for the week ending Feb. 4, at 3,050 bookstores
plus wholesalers serving 28,000 other retailers (gift shops, department stores,
newsstands, supermarkets), statistically weighted to represent sales in all such
outlets nationwide. An asterisk indicates that a book's sales are barely
distinguishable from those of the book above.
And Bear in Mind
(Editor's Choices of other recent books of particular interest)

ADMITTING THE HOLOCAUST: Collected Essays, by Lawrence L. Langer. (Oxford
University, $23.) Mr. Langer, a retired professor of English, illuminates the
literature of the Holocaust -- the chronicles of ghetto and camp, the fiction
and poetry wrought out of the horror, the representations in film and on
television. Mr. Langer is also the editor of ART FROM THE ASHES: A Holocaust
Anthology (Oxford University, $30), a remarkable collection of personal
accounts, both by well-known survivors and by victims otherwise obscure, and of
fiction, poetry and art related to the cataclysm.

ALL THE DAYS AND NIGHTS: The Collected Stories of William Maxwell. (Knopf, $25.)
Stories, balanced, gentle and humane, concerned above all with reconciliation,
from six decades of work by a master writer and editor who is now 86.

THE CUNNING MAN, by Robertson Davies. (Viking, $23.95.) The hero of this wise
and entertaining novel, a chronicle of personal and social change in Toronto, is
a doctor whose superb diagnostic skills rest on shamanism and Platonism as well
as scientific medicine.

DEMOCRACY ON TRIAL, by Jean Bethke Elshtain. (Basic Books, $20.) A professor of
ethics argues that the weakness of democratic institutions in America reflects
the replacement of rights conceived as immunities from government interference
by rights conceived as individual entitlements.

GIVING AWAY SIMONE: A Memoir, by Jan L. Waldron. (Times Books/Random House,
$22.) An absorbing personal history of the author and her family, women who for
five generations failed or declined to keep their children.

HOW LATE IT WAS, HOW LATE, by James Kelman. (Norton, $21.) A novel about a
Glasgow ne'er-do-well that charms, persuades and enlightens, though it is
written not only in salty talk but in the Glaswegian language.

NOVEL WITHOUT A NAME, by Duong Thu Huong. (Morrow, $23.) Ten years in the army
of North Vietnam transform the protagonist of this gritty novel as he and his
nation are stripped of the ideals they have sacrificed so much for.

TERRIBLE HONESTY: Mongrel Manhattan in the 1920s, by Ann Douglas. (Farrar,
Straus & Giroux, $25.) The great big city in the great good time, analyzed with
broad scope and minute complexity as the locus of the national psyche when
Americans attacked the conditioned responses of the pre-1914 world.

THE UNUSUAL LIFE OF TRISTAN SMITH, by Peter Carey. (Knopf, $24.) Its tough,
spare, considered language sustains this big and thoughtful novel, whose hero
learns that imperialism is universal, bad for weak and strong alike.

THE WEDDING, by Dorothy West. (Doubleday, $20.) A fascinating, deceptively
substantial novel by an 87-year-old survivor of the Harlem Renaissance; its main
subject is the subtle assumptions of color, class, race and status in a summer
colony of upper-class black families.

LOAD-DATE: February 19, 1995

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: List

                   Copyright 1995 The New York Times Company

                              121 of 211 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                February 19, 1995, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

New & Noteworthy Paperbacks

BYLINE: By MICHAEL MOLYNEUX

SECTION: Section 7;  Page 36;  Column 1;  Book Review Desk

LENGTH: 895 words


INSANELY GREAT: The Life and Times of Macintosh,
the Computer That Changed Everything
By Steven Levy. Penguin, $9.95.
Cyberspace was largely uncharted territory way back in 1984 when Steven Jobs of
Apple pulled the first Macintosh computer out of a canvas bag and introduced it
to the public. The author, a columnist for Macworld magazine, chronicles the
Mac's creation and busy first decade. "He has written a delightful and timely
book," our reviewer, Samuel C. Florman, said last year.


HAUNTED: Tales of the Grotesque
By Joyce Carol Oates.
William Abrahams/Plume, $10.95.
The author is no stranger to the grotesque and here brings together 16 such
tales. She retells Henry James's "Turn of the Screw" from the ghosts'
perspective and wheels through an A.&P. where something is very wrong. "Ms.
Oates gleefully entwines the horrific and the homespun, more often than not
eliciting goose bumps and a nervous laugh," Michael Upchurch said here last
year. A watcher of prizefights since childhood, Ms. Oates pays tribute to them
in ON BOXING (Ecco, $13). This expanded edition has a new section on Mike Tyson,
once the heavyweight champ and now a convict. The book "is better than its
subject," our reviewer, Anatole Broyard, said in 1987, awarding the author "a
stunning TKO."
A SCIENTIST IN THE CITY
By James Trefil. Anchor/Doubleday, $12.95.
Like any other natural organism, a city grows, declines and dies, says the
author, who sees the city of the future as limited only by what people can
imagine, or pay for. Our reviewer, Samuel R. Delany, last year praised Mr.
Trefil's "considerable explanatory powers."
THE BINGO PALACE
By Louise Erdrich. Harper Perennial, $13.
The windblown North Dakota plains are rich ground again for the author, who
writes in this novel of a young Chippewa man who is called home and becomes
involved in a scheme to build a new bingo hall alongside a sacred lake. "Love,
fate and chance are woven together like a braid," Lawrence Thornton said here
last year, praising the "beautiful evocation of the spirit world."
MARGARET WISE BROWN: Awakened by the Moon
By Leonard S. Marcus. Beacon, $15.
In books like "Goodnight Moon" and "The Runaway Bunny," Margaret Wise Brown
elevated the craft of children's book writing to art. This volume explores her
creativity, her tempestuous romantic life and her death at age 42. It is "an
absorbing biography," our reviewer, Edith Kunhardt Davis, said in 1992.
THE WAR OF THE SAINTS
By Jorge Amado. Translated by Gregory Rabassa. Bantam, $10.95.
At Carnival time in Bahia, Brazil, a statue of St. Barbara takes life and, with
a sway of her hips, disappears into the crowd. She becomes the savior of a
beautiful young woman in love. This novel, the author's 22d, "made me want to
head down to Bahia right away," Allen Josephs said here in 1993, calling the
story "unabashedly triumphant."
THE TYRANNY OF THE MAJORITY: Fundamental Fairness
in Representative Democracy
By Lani Guinier. Martin Kessler/Free Press, $13.
Nominated in 1993 to be Assistant Attorney General for civil rights, the author
was thwarted by her own words, in law review articles, advocating measures to
protect the voting rights of minorities. Five of her articles are collected in
this volume. Our reviewer, Alan Wolfe, last year praised Ms. Guinier's "powerful
intellectual curiosity" and her "admirable commitment to the powerless" but also
found "significant flaws in her analysis." The Guinier nomination is among the
topics discussed in WOMEN LAWYERS: Rewriting the Rules, by Mona Harrington
(Plume, $11.95). The author recounts the difficulties of women in the legal
profession and suggests some remedies. Our reviewer, Alice Kessler-Harris, last
year called the book "fascinating reading."
THE ANGEL CARVER
By Rosanne Daryl Thomas. Warner, $11.99.
This novel -- a magical urban fable -- brings together a shoe repairman who
makes wooden angels by night, a young woman who dreams of being the next Marilyn
Monroe and a Mephistopheles who uses computer graphics. It is "a tender novel,
vividly written, with a relentless momentum," Joanna Scott said here in 1993.
BIG STORY: How the American Press and Television
Reported and Interpreted the Crisis of Tet 1968
in Vietnam and Washington.
By Peter Braestrup. Presidio, $16.95.
The fight still rages over coverage of the Vietnam War, and the author marshals
new evidence in an updating of this study. Edwin Diamond, writing here in 1977,
called it "painstakingly thorough" and praised "its valuable lessons on how
press performance can be improved."
THE SOLOIST
By Mark Salzman. Vintage Contemporaries, $11.
A onetime child prodigy on the cello has settled into an adulthood of quiet
desperation in this novel, set in Los Angeles. Two things rejuvenate him:
teaching a brilliant Korean boy and serving on the jury in the murder of a
Buddhist monk. This story is "both absorbing and touching," Diane Cole said here
last year.
MIAMI, IT'S MURDER
By Edna Buchanan. Avon, $5.50.
Winner of a Pulitzer Prize for her police reporting for The Miami Herald, the
author has created a sleuth who is a tough Miami newspaperwoman, on the trail of
a serial rapist in downtown office buildings. Edna Buchanan "tells great stories
-- hot, horrible, homicidal stories," our reviewer, Marilyn Stasio, said last
year.   MICHAEL MOLYNEUX

LOAD-DATE: February 19, 1995

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Review

                   Copyright 1995 The New York Times Company

                              122 of 211 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                February 19, 1995, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

TOUGH TEXAN;
Phil Gramm

BYLINE: By Richard L. Berke;   Richard L. Berke is the national political
correspondent for The New York Times.

SECTION: Section 6;  Page 26;  Column 1;  Magazine Desk

LENGTH: 3048 words


YOU'RE GONNA BE AMAZED," boasts Senator Phil Gramm as the lights dim and he
proceeds to demonstrate to a roomful of potential supporters on a recent
Saturday in Columbia, S.C., how -- step by step -- he will win the Republican
nomination for President of the United States.

The show, featuring colorful graphics flashing across a screen, might well be
called Gramm the Invincible. It is meant to scare rivals into thinking they have
no chance to catch up in fund raising and organization, and to convince
Republicans that they had better join the juggernaut.

The barrage of figures is daunting, as intended: A green sack of money with a
dollar sign pops on the screen as Gramm details precisely how he will raise
$44,706,512 for the nomination. Then come the names of every person Gramm says
he has met in the last four years. There are 164,454, including 62,359 in Iowa,
site of the first caucuses a year from now, broken down by date, time and place.
Punch in the names Jack and Patti Barnette of Marietta, Ga., on a computer and
up flashes their photograph and a file that includes even their car phone
number.

When Gramm declares his candidacy this week, he will be the first major
contender to do so formally. But already, he argues gleefully if not
presumptuously, the field is down to himself and Senator Bob Dole, the majority
leader, because the logistical demands are so overwhelming that "there are
probably not more than two campaigns that can do this."

It is an impressive, unapologetically raw display of political might that he
takes around the country. And it leaves no doubt how a two-term Senator from
Texas who is known as more bully than charmer, who looks more like a
round-faced, stoop-shouldered Muppet than a stately public servant, has
propelled himself into the top tier of Republican contenders, at least at this
early stage. His motto is simple: "There's only one speed on my motor -- and
that's all out."

But the qualities that make Gramm seem unstoppable have long aroused suspicion
among his colleagues, Republican and Democratic, that could ultimately unhinge
his quest to win over Republican primary voters. His unvarnished hustle and zest
for savaging rivals is awe-inspiring to some; to others it is off-putting. He is
a clear-headed man of ideas, but not of compassion. He has an undignified
stridency that can make Bob Dole seem gentlemanly.

"Dole is in many ways more restrained, more measured," says former Senator
Warren B. Rudman, a Republican from New Hampshire who worked closely with the
Texan on the Gramm-Rudman budget-balancing bill in the 1980's and supports Dole.
"He has a certain calmness that you don't find in Phil particularly. If you want
to go one afternoon and relax, don't go with Phil Gramm."

From the earliest days of his political career, Gramm, 52, has been in a hurry
-- and always in attack mode. In 1986, Senator Daniel Patrick Moynihan of New
York was so outraged by Gramm depicting him as weak on the military that he
scolded Gramm: "You're one year in the Senate, fella, you don't do that to
another Senator."

The message didn't sink in. A year later, during the Supreme Court confirmation
battle over Robert Bork, Gramm savagely cut off two opposing Democrats, Senators
Edward M. Kennedy of Massachusetts and Joseph Biden of Delaware. Referring to
accusations that they cheated as students, he snapped, "The American people know
what the people who cheated in college think." Last summer, Gramm tore into
Roger C. Altman, then the deputy treasury secretary, at Whitewater hearings,
saying, "You didn't tell the truth."

This is a man who once sent a longtime foe, Representative Chet Edwards, a
Democrat from Waco, a card that proclaimed, "I feel so sorry for your many
problems, but you deserve them."

Braggadocio comes easily to Gramm. True to his professorial roots, he tends to
lecture rather than talk. Gramm has perfected the art -- widely known on Capitol
Hill as "Gramm-standing" -- of opposing a project for his state on the grounds
of cost, then, after the project was approved over his objections, calling a
news conference to take the credit.

Gramm delights in playing the bad boy. "One of the problems today is we have a
President who wants desperately to be loved," he says. He once assured a dinner
audience that he did have a heart, though. "I keep it in a quart jar on my
desk."

The image that Gramm will stop at nothing to win is steeped in more than his
mordant oratory. He has hired R. J. (Duke) Bodisch, a handgun-toting Texas
police officer turned political consultant, to conduct campaign research. Gramm
says Bodisch's assignment, for now, is to computerize clippings. But Bodisch
says his role is to "look under rocks and see if anything's there" on Gramm's
Republican rivals.

In the world of Presidential politics, where there is a premium on opportunism,
arrogance and hunger for power and publicity, Gramm has those traits in
abundance. But is it too much? Is he too calculating, too consumed, too ruthless
-- too, well, mean to be elected President? John B. Connally, a former Texas
Governor, learned that outspending his rivals in the 1980 primaries did not buy
him the voters' affection. His $12 million netted only one delegate.

But maybe the public will again yearn for a no-nonsense leader. Maybe Gramm
epitomizes a new political climate, in which the take-no-prisoners rhetoric of a
Rush Limbaugh -- or a Phil Gramm -- are popular. "He's mean. But I like mean,"
Carmen McNew says after hearing Gramm speak at a cocktail reception for
Louisiana Republicans in Baton Rouge.

Richard Bond, a former chairman of the Republican National Committee, dismisses
the notion that personality matters. "Since when has meanness or niceness been
one of the qualifications?" he asks. "Do I want him to be the godfather to my
children? That's not how you evaluate a Presidential candidate."

Even harsh critics like Representative Jim Chapman, a Democrat from Sulphur
Springs, Tex., speak admiringly of Gramm's political shrewdness. It will get him
the Republican nomination, he predicts, but not the White House because "under
the microscope and scrutiny that a serious Presidential contender gets, the
meanness will ultimately come through."

PHIL GRAMM IS MORE complicated than the rabidly partisan, classic good ol' boy
who looked oddly out of place during the State of the Union: Like a boisterous
frat boy, he leapt from his seat to lead the hoots and hollers when President
Clinton appropriated Republican language about shrinking Government.

Gramm failed the third, seventh and ninth grades yet became an economist with a
Ph.D. and a Senator recognized as one of the brightest.  Up north, his deep
Southern drawl makes him sound like Gramm the cracker, unsophisticated, yet he
is partial to Gilbert and Sullivan. His snarling facade masks a man who loves
dogs, who in the divorce settlement with his first wife kept their two Saint
Bernards.

Though he can be intimidating, Gramm has a disarming ability of serving up
complicated proposals in a folksy manner. His trademark is the story of Dicky
Flatt, a print-shop owner from Mexia, Tex., who struggles for a living and
"never quite gets the ink off the end of his fingers." Before lawmakers vote for
a program, he says, they should ask if "it's worth taking money away from Dicky
Flatt."

Gramm, notably, is consistent in his beliefs. Two decades ago, in his first,
failed Senate bid, Gramm sounded the identical themes about "the threats of
uncontrollable Government" that he sounds today. He thinks he can beat Dole by
presenting himself to the hard-right Republicans who vote in primaries as the
only candidate who was "conservative before conservative was cool." Gramm tries
to out-conservative Dole at every turn. Unlike Dole, he opposes welfare even for
legal immigrants and favors a limit on additional benefits for welfare mothers
who have more children. And Gramm parted company with Dole and Speaker of the
House Newt Gingrich to oppose Clinton's initial plan to support the peso, saying
there were financial risks not addressed. He also takes a hard line against
abortion and other social issues, though some religious conservatives worry that
he is more committed to economic matters.

A sense of purpose, and great sense of himself, has allowed Gramm to be an
influential, sometimes blaring, voice on issues that were not in the purview of
his committees, as with his early ridicule of Clinton's health care proposal.
When other Republicans were counseling compromise, he said the plan would pass
over "my cold, dead political body."

Gramm says his ability to see things starkly comes from his mother, Florence, an
81-year-old retired practical nurse who has two other sons from a first
marriage. She now lives just over the Georgia border in Phenix City, Ala. Don
White, one of Gramm's half brothers, says her philosophy was: "Take a stand.
Don't weasel. Everything was basically black and white. A guy was either honest
or a crook."

As appealing as it may be compared with a President known for his waffling,
Gramm's unwavering posture contributes to a perception that he is unduly rigid.
Given his belief that the Gramm way is always the right way, he often is
controlling and demanding.

"I certainly remember in the '84 campaign getting calls at 2 or 3 in the morning
to the point that we moved our phone from my wife's side of the bed to my side,"
says John Weaver, a consultant on several Gramm campaigns.

On occasion, Gramm's power plays backfire. At last summer's Texas Republican
Convention, he tried to have his handpicked candidate, Representative Joe
Barton, installed as the state chairman. While both Barton and his opponent, Tom
Pauken, were backed by religious conservatives, the rank-and-file resented the
interference and chose Pauken, who says, "We don't want to be told from the top
who ought to run the party."

Often, it seems, Gramm cannot help but meddle. Sitting back in his office
surrounded by trophy footballs, R. C. Slocum, the Aggies football coach at Texas
A & M University, allows how the Senator calls him after every game to register
his critique. "He'll say, 'You know, coach, you know we weren't very good today
on the offensive line,' " Slocum says. "He's got a real honest quality about
him. That may not be a good trait for a politician, but where I come from they
take a little pride in toughness."

WILLIAM PHILIP GRAMM'S feelings of superiority were apparent during his early
years growing up in Columbus, Ga., where another future Republican rebel, Newt
Gingrich, also attended high school. Gramm's half brother, Don White remembers
that when the Senator was in grade school, he played the colonel in an Army of
neighborhood kids. "The youngest kid, little Henry, went to my mother in tears,
saying, 'I'm the only sergeant, and they're all colonels or captains.' So my
mother said, 'I'll talk to the colonel,' " White recalls.

Young Gramm had a solution: He promoted Henry to lieutenant -- and himself to
major general.

Gramm's independence arose from necessity. His father, Kenneth, a career Army
sergeant who had been stationed at nearby Fort Benning, became partly paralyzed
soon after Gramm was born because of a stroke and heart condition. He died when
Gramm was 14. With her husband in and out of veterans hospitals, Florence Gramm
worked double shifts to support the family, leaving White, five years older, to
write checks, buy groceries and sign Gramm's report card.

Resisting both authority and schoolwork, Gramm preferred to cavort with friends.
After Gramm took his mother's Plymouth on a joyride when he was 16, she
dispatched him to the Georgia Military Academy.

He underwent a transformation there. "In the America I grew up in," he says in
his stock campaign speech, "mothers' dreams don't die easily." He got degrees in
economics at the University of Georgia. In 1963, when he was a 21-year-old bank
teller by day and student by night, Gramm married a fellow student, Sherry
Kinney. They divorced in 1969, two years after arriving at Texas A & M. Asked
about the divorce, he clams up, saying, "It's personal." But, eager to stanch
any notion that his past could haunt his ambitions, he adds, "I am certain she
will support me for President."

Despite Gramm's compelling personal story, there are contradictions in it. For
instance, Gramm succeeded in large part by the grace of Federal assistance but
is now an outspoken critic of Government social programs. He defends himself,
saying, "I've never said Government was all bad."

Then there is the draft. Gramm received deferments from serving in Vietnam. "As
a 26-year-old Ph.D. in economics I could have quit my job at A & M and joined
the Army," he said. "I would have probably ended up working in some library
somewhere or maybe teaching at West Point or working in the Pentagon. But I
thought what I was doing at Texas A & M was important." In fact, his first
deferment was granted when Gramm was still in Georgia. That did not stop Gramm
from vigorously campaigning on behalf of a fellow Republican against Chet
Edwards in 1990, declaring that Edwards "didn't serve in the military and I
don't know where he will run next." Gramm tells audiences that his father and
brothers served. But there will be the inevitable comparisons with Dole, a hero
of World War II.

TO UNDERSTAND WHY PHIL Gramm thinks he will be President is to understand his
history of going after the impossible so relentlessly that, sooner or later, he
gets what he wants. A case in point is how he courted his second wife, Wendy Lee
Gramm, a former chairman of the Commodity Futures Trading Commission with whom
Gramm has two college-age sons. They met in 1969, when she was at a conference
in Manhattan, interviewing for a job as an economics professor at Texas A & M,
where he was already teaching. He sat quietly watching the interview and then
ushered her out. "He gets my coat," she recalls, "he holds it on and he says in
a very thick Southern accent, 'As a single member of the faculty, I'd be very
interested in having you come to Texas A & M.' And I turn around and say, 'Oh,
yuck!' " She got the job; the Gramms were married six weeks after she arrived at
College Station. "He was very persistent," she says.

Charles Maurice, an A & M economics professor, recalls: "I thought he was
pushing a little too hard at the time. This was a sophisticated girl. It's hard
for you to imagine Phil being charming, but, doggone, he can be."

Gramm has always been in a hurry. He threw himself so single-mindedly into his
work and his research that he was appointed A & M's youngest full professor at
age 30.

Having conquered academics, Gramm tried politics -- and set his sights high.
Then a conservative Democrat, he took on Senator Lloyd Bentsen in the 1976
primary. Democrats were aghast that Gramm did not wait his turn. But it was a
pattern that would mark his career. Gramm went after Bentsen for running for the
Senate while toying with a Presidential bid, saying he "so shamelessly put his
own self-interest above those of his state and nation." (There is no talk from
Gramm these days about the propriety of running for the Senate and President
simultaneously, as Gramm plans to do in 1996.)

Gramm lost miserably, but he never stopped running. Two years later, he was
elected to the House, where he quickly made a name for himself with proposals to
balance the budget that would become his rallying cry. Gramm quit his seat in
early 1983 after the Democrats ousted him from the Budget Committee, branding
him a traitor for secretly scheming with Reagan Administration officials on a
substitute budget plan. He ran for re-election eight weeks later, as a
Republican, and won decisively.

The next year, he leaped at the opportunity to run for the seat held by Senator
John Tower, who was retiring. He defeated his Democratic rival, Lloyd Doggett,
after relentlessly attacking him for accepting a donation from a male strip show
sponsored by gay men in San Antonio.

Unlike Jack Kemp, Dick Cheney and Dan Quayle, who spent years thinking about
running for President but ultimately lacked the stomach for it, the race has
been practically inevitable for Gramm. He has out-organized other contenders in
states where Republican parties have held nonbinding straw polls. Gramm's
biggest coup so far was getting elected chairman of the National Republican
Senatorial Committee from 1990 to 1994. The post enabled him to travel the
country on behalf of candidates, building contacts, and adding his name to the
committee's statewide polls.

Senator Mitch McConnell of Kentucky had challenged Gramm for the Senatorial
committee, accusing him of using it to further his Presidential aspirations.
That is just what Gramm did; and he is unapologetic.

While there is little affection for Gramm among his colleagues, there is
grudging respect. "I guess he proved me wrong," McConnell now says. "He was able
to lead us back to the majority in the Senate and to promote himself for the
Presidency."

HOLDING HIS HAND aloft to a volunteer driver after a campaign stop, Gramm
concedes that sometimes the vaunted campaign machine can break down. "My little
finger hurts all the time from shaking hands," he says. "I have to be very
careful so I don't grimace."

Wendy Gramm may help soften her husband's image. Affable and engaging, she was
not, however, featured prominently in the earliest campaigns out of fear among
some advisers that her Korean-American descent might turn off voters.

But Gramm is undeterred. As his small chartered King Air prop plane jerked
violently through tornado weather over South Carolina recently, the politician
turned ashen, suggesting that he knew more about flying than the pilot. "Look at
the altimeter!" he says, jabbing his finger toward the pilot. "They don't know
how to fly these things."

The plane came to a bumpy landing and the pilot turned to apologize to Gramm.
But the Senator was already opening the plane door, anxious to jump into the
driving rain. Once again he was due to present his formula for victory to
another group of Republicans, this time in Greenville.

The candidate who vows to outsmart, outpace and outspend his rivals did not want
to be late.

NAME: Phil Gramm

LOAD-DATE: February 19, 1995

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo: Senator Phil Gramm in full cry at Whitewater hearings in August
1994. (PHOTOGRAPH BY LARRY DOWNING/SYGMA)(pg. 29)

TYPE: Biography

                   Copyright 1995 The New York Times Company

                              123 of 211 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                February 19, 1995, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

A Poet of Their Own

BYLINE: By DINITIA SMITH

SECTION: Section 6;  Page 39;  Column 1;  Magazine Desk

LENGTH: 2756 words


I'D GOT LOST LOOKING FOR W. S. Merwin's house on the Hawaiian island of Maui,
driving along roads lined with palms and sugar cane, then turning into a dense
area of ironwood and heliconia trees. It was almost like rain forest here --
pink and red hibiscus, ginger flowers filled with rain from the night.

Then, suddenly, there he was, as if he'd somehow materialized out of the rain.
He was standing by the gate to his land, looking like a Zen sensei, in a
kimonolike shirt. He had slanting blue eyes and wide cheekbones. His skin was a
silvery color. He was staring at me intently. "You said you'd be here at 10:15,"
he said in a precise voice.

I had come to see Merwin because he had just won the $100,000 Tanning Prize. And
I had the distinct impression he was not sure he wanted to be found.

For 18 years Merwin, now 67, has been living in this remote section of Hawaii,
obsessively restoring, inch by inch, an abandoned pineapple farm to its original
rain-forest-like state.

In Merwin's poetry, the subject is loss, loss of place especially, the
destruction of the environment:

Well they'd made up their minds to be every

where because why not.

Everywhere was theirs because they thought so.

They with two leaves they whom the birds despise.

In the middle of stones they made up their minds.

They started to cut.

When the Academy of American Poets announced it was giving Merwin the Tanning
Prize, some said Merwin's best work was behind him, that since his 1967 book,
"The Lice," a gloomy volume about the destruction of nature, his work had become
obscure and abstract. (The critic Helen Vendler once called Merwin "a lesser
Eliot," and his poems "elusive pallors.") In addition, Merwin is a chancellor of
the academy; the judges -- the late James Merrill, J. D. McClatchy and Carolyn
Kizer -- were all friends of Merwin's.

Initially, Kizer wanted the prize to go to Gwendolyn Brooks, an
African-American. "My qualm was it would look like the white male establishment
handing around prizes to each other." But James Merrill was chairman of the
jury. "We wanted to find a real master," he said last fall. "Gwendolyn Brooks
would be very distinguished. But somehow I don't think she's a master." Kizer,
herself a potential candidate for chancellor, was outnumbered and eventually
voted with the rest. "I revere him," says Kizer. "Thank God it was Merwin, who
has such enormous stature."

Merwin -- his first name is William, he doesn't like Bill -- tries to stay out
of literary politics. He would like to be left alone to tend his garden and to
write. He never answers his phone. Yet he's ambivalent about solitude. "He's a
strange combination of recluse and very convivial," says his wife, Paula. Merwin
is always being torn away -- especially to receive prizes. A few weeks after he
won the Tanning, he flew to New York to get the $10,000 Lenore Marshall Prize.
And then a few weeks after that he flew back again to receive a $105,000 Lila
Wallace-Readers' Digest Fellowship, awarded over a period of three years.

A Merwin poem is a highly crafted thing. The images seem etched; sometimes they
come together with an almost magnetic force. He doesn't use punctuation anymore,
and often begins a sentence on the preceding line. His poetry has an onrushing,
murmurous quality:

This is what I have heard

at last the wind in December

lashing the old trees with rain

unseen rain racing along the tiles

under the moon

wind rising and falling

wind with many clouds

trees in the night wind

"Everything's got to do with listening," Merwin says. We are sitting on the
porch of his house. The house, small and quite dark, is built on the lip of a
dormant volcano, Haleakala, that rises 10,000 feet above the sea.

"Poetry is physical. As Pound said, poetry has one pole in reason and one pole
in music. It's like making a joke. If you get one word wrong at the end of a
joke, you've lost the whole thing."

Merwin admits his work is sometimes abstract. "The word Lowell used was
'history.' I had great difficulty putting the actual, ephemeral, phenomenal fact
into a poem -- because I was interested in the universality of it. It's the way
the fact is heard or seen that counts."

Merwin puts a knife with honey on it on the table. "Watch," he says. Two geckos
climb from a hidden place in the eaves, and begin licking the knife with pink
tongues.

As Merwin and I talk, sudden, tropical rains come and go. The sun shines, then
there's a giant rainbow out over the Pacific. Under the table, Merwin's four
chows nap, their doggy smell filling the air. The chows are Merwin's substitute
for children. He carries photos of them in his wallet. "I've never had a desire
for children," he says. "I'm very sort of egotistical and impatient."

Merwin is a curious mixture of sensuality and reserve. The epithet "pretty boy"
has haunted him all his life. Time magazine once wrote that Merwin "flutters
female hearts." When he was younger, his face was almost faunlike -- the eyes
wary, trapped. Howard Moss, the late poetry editor of The New Yorker, used to
keep a picture of Merwin on his wall. "Nobody has a right to be that
good-looking," he would say.

Over the years, Merwin has almost reinvented himself in the 19th-century
Romantic ideal of the poet at one with nature. When he isn't writing, he's down
in his forest, trying to restore it to its primeval state. In conversation, he
refers constantly to "the environment," to a tree that doesn't belong in Hawaii
but was brought here by merchants or missionaries, to a geothermal project on a
neighboring island that he's campaigning against. In many ways, Merwin's is a
mythic self, far from the little boy who grew up in a family clinging
precariously to the middle class.

Merwin was the son of a Presbyterian minister in a poor parish in Scranton, Pa.,
surrounded by barren, strip-mined land. His mother had been orphaned as a child;
then her brother died; then her first baby, Merwin's older brother. Merwin grew
up haunted by this brother, in an atmosphere permeated by grief. (He has a
sister, Ruth, two years younger, a high-school teacher.)

Merwin's father almost never spoke of his own family. The Merwins were rough
people. Merwin's grandfather was a drunken, violent riverboat pilot on the
Allegheny. Merwin's father had violence in him, too. He was "a bully," says
Merwin. "I was frightened of him. There was a fair amount of physical
punishment. I turned on him physically two times in early adolescence. I thought
one time he was getting abusive to my mother. When I was 13, I said, 'Never
touch me again!' " The theme of violence runs through Merwin's poetry --
violence to animals, to plants, to the soil, human violence. Merwin's mother was
a committed pacifist. Today, Merwin is a pacifist, too, and also a Buddhist.
It's as if Buddhism will somehow overcome the violence in the world -- and the
potential for violence within Merwin himself. Merwin's father was also mean to
pets -- and to this day the sight of an animal being mistreated can send Merwin
into a rage. "He has a temper," says Merwin's wife, "but he loses it very
rarely. It's always been on the occasion of somebody or something helpless."

Merwin's first poems were hymns he wrote for his father. And he is indebted to
his father for a crucial lesson: "As long as you are doing something you
respect, it's O.K. not to make money," is the way Merwin defines it. Today,
Merwin lives on $25,000 to $30,000. With his resonant voice and dramatic pauses,
Merwin is a riveting reader. "He could always just go to a university, stand up,
open his mouth -- and pick up $2,000," says Moira Hodgson, a writer who lived
with Merwin during the late 60's. Unlike most poets, he doesn't teach.

Merwin's parents were uneducated, but Merwin is a translator of Neruda, "El
Cid," "The Chanson de Roland"; he reads and quotes often from Dante and the
Welsh sagas. He was a scholarship student at Princeton in the 40's -- a waiter
in one of the university's elite eating clubs. "He was a kind of prodigy,"
recalls Galway Kinnell, a Princeton classmate, "writing poetry that was so
incredibly resonant." Even then, Merwin attracted the attention of eminent older
figures. He studied writing with the critic R. P. Blackmur, and showed his poems
to Blackmur's teaching assistant, John Berryman. Berryman, literally trembling
with passion, would say, "You should get down on your knees to the Muse."
Sometimes Berryman told Merwin his poems were terrible, but he was encouraging
too, in a "guarded" way. One day, Merwin asked how he could be sure his poetry
was any good. Berryman's response was memorable, and later, Merwin wrote a poem
about it: "You can't you can never be sure/you die without knowing."

After Princeton, Merwin married Dorothy Jeanne Ferry, a secretary at Princeton.
Merwin decided to write verse plays, and supported himself teaching the children
of wealthy aristocrats. Eventually the poet Robert Graves hired him as a tutor
to his son in Majorca.

Soon tension developed between Graves and Merwin. Graves was flirting
outrageously with a house guest in front of his wife and children. "It was quite
nauseating," Merwin remembers. "He was treating her as though she were the Muse,
flirting and not going to bed with her." Merwin and Graves quarreled. Later,
Merwin got back at Graves in a poem: "Opportunist, shrewd waster, half
calculation,/Half difficult child; a phoney, it would seem." Another Graves
house guest was Dido Milroy, an Englishwoman with literary aspirations. Dido was
a powerful figure, 15 years older than Merwin. They began to collaborate on a
verse play. After Merwin left Majorca, he went to London, broke up with his
wife, Dorothy, and eventually married Dido.

Merwin's relationship with Dido dominated most of his adult life. She introduced
him to English literary figures, helped get him a job translating "El Cid" for
the BBC. Yet Dido was a devouring figure who wanted to inhabit Merwin's very
existence. "Dido's ex-husband said she always wanted to own a poet," says
Merwin.

In 1952, Merwin published his first book, "A Mask for Janus." The poems are
ornate, sometimes mannered -- and were good enough to win him the first prize an
establishment poet must win, the Yale Younger Poets Prize, judged then by W. H.
Auden.

Merwin felt confined by Dido and longed to hear American voices. In 1956, he won
a fellowship at the Poets' Theater in Boston and moved there. But Dido
resolutely followed. In Boston, Merwin became part of a group who surrounded the
charismatic, intermittently mad Robert Lowell, then teaching at Boston
University.  Lowell could be viciously competitive. One day, Lowell said to
Merwin: "You'll always be a good poet, but not a great poet."

In Boston, Merwin abandoned verse plays. He had begun to rediscover his
"American" voice and to explore his family's secrets. His 1960 collection, "The
Drunk in the Furnace," is less precious than Merwin's previous work, more in the
American vernacular. The title poem is evocative of Merwin's drunken
grandfather:

They were afterwards astonished

To confirm, one morning, a twist of smoke like a pale

Resurrection, staggering out of its chewed hole,

And to remark then other tokens that someone

Cozily bolted behind the eye-holed iron

Door of the drafty burner, had there established

His bad castle.

Ever restless, the Merwins again moved back to England. In London, Merwin was
friends with Sylvia Plath and Ted Hughes. Plath idolized Merwin -- she wanted to
be pure like him, free to just write. At one point, according to a memoir by
Dido Merwin, Plath became infatuated with Merwin. But Merwin didn't return her
affections. The Merwins were witness to the awful disintegration of the
Hugheses' marriage before Plath's suicide in 1963. Today, Merwin won't talk
about Plath. Plath is bad karma.

Finally, in 1968, Merwin separated from Dido (though she refused to give him a
divorce). She clung to Merwin's beloved house in Lacan, France, about which
Merwin has written many poems and a prose collection, "The Lost Upland."

Merwin began living part of the year in New York with Moira Hodgson, an English
writer 20 years younger. Ever reluctant to let him go, Dido befriended Hodgson.
"She had a very powerful personality," says Hodgson. "It was a bit like the
mother who says, 'Let my son bring his girlfriends home.' " (Dido died in 1990.)

"Merwin was incredibly difficult," adds Hodgson, "but all poets are incredibly
difficult. He had a lot of conflicting feelings about leaving France, but he
liked the excitement and hard edge of the city. Then he'd say, 'O, God, I can't
bear to be here!' "

Merwin opposed the Vietnam War. In 1971, when his book "The Carrier of Ladders"
won the Pulitzer, he gave the $1,000 away to antiwar causes in protest.

On a reading trip to Hawaii in 1975, he met Dana Naone, a Hawaiian and an
aspiring poet, also younger. "I think William was looking to chart a new
course," says Merwin's friend the poet William Matthews. "Dana had a willingness
to live in the country and get into the dirt." Merwin and Hodgson broke up, and
he began living with Naone.

One thing Naone and Merwin shared was an interest in Buddhism. Early in their
relationship, they were invited to the Naropa Institute in Boulder, Colo., a
center for Buddhist studies where Allen Ginsberg was teaching.

Naropa was presided over by a Tibetan guru, Chogyam Trungpa, a tireless drunk
and womanizer. At a Halloween party while Ginsberg was away, Trungpa ordered
everyone to undress. Merwin and Naone refused. Trungpa's bodyguards tried to
batter down the door to their room. "I was not going to go peacefully," Merwin
recalls. "I started hitting people with beer bottles. It was a very violent
scene." Trungpa's bodyguards stripped them, and the two figures cowered together
before the guru like a chastened Adam and Eve.

The incident came to be mythologized as "The Great Naropa Poetry Wars." Naropa
became an epitaph for an era, a paradigm of the difference between two kinds of
poetry -- between Ginsberg's passionate, declamatory style and Merwin's
restrained, Western formalism.

Despite what happened at Naropa, Merwin is still a Buddhist. He likes to quote
the 13th-century Buddhist teacher Dogen, a contemporary of Dante's: " 'You must
let the body and mind fall away.' " In his house, Merwin has a zazen
(meditation) room, a sparse place with four pillows, where he meditates -- 45
minutes before breakfast, and again before dinner.

After Naropa, Merwin moved to Hawaii for good. He built his house with an
inheritance from his mother. Later, he bought additional land with money left to
him by George Kirstein, former publisher of The Nation. Eventually, he broke up
with Dana Naone

In 1970, Merwin met a blond woman who seemed to him "beautiful, terrified." She
was Paula Schwartz, an editor of children's books. Schwartz was married, and
they went their own ways. Then in 1982, Merwin (finally divorced from Dido) met
Schwartz again at a dinner party in New York. In a poem, "Late Spring," he
describes the moment:

After looking and mistakes and forgetting

turning there thinking to find

no one except those I knew

finally I saw you

sitting in white

They were married in a Buddhist ceremony in 1983.

ONE AFTERNOON, IN THE RAIN, MERWIN takes me on a tour of the garden. "That's a
koa tree, what Hawaiian canoes were made from," he says as we trudge along a
wet, rocky path. "I put that in as a tiny tree."

We come to an eroded ledge, one patch he hasn't restored yet. "See there, that's
what it used to be like. It wants to be a forest!"

As he digs in the garden, Merwin thinks about poetry. Recently Milton's sonnet
about his wife came to mind: " 'Me thought I saw my late espoused saint/brought
to me like Alcestis from the grave.' "

"The fact is he never saw her," says Merwin. "He was blind before he married
her. It hadn't occurred to me -- his wife appears to him in a dream! I realized
'Jove's great son' was Jesus, who rescues her from death."

Since the restoration of Merwin's land, since his marriage to Paula, his poetry
has become more accessible, more celebratory. Now in his poems, you can almost
feel the rain in the trees:

I lie listening to the black hour

before dawn and you are

still asleep beside me while

around us the trees full of night lean

hushed in their dream that bears

us up asleep and awake then I hear

drops falling one by one into

the sightless leaves
   -- DINITIA SMITH

LOAD-DATE: February 19, 1995

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1995 The New York Times Company

                              124 of 211 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                February 19, 1995, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

IDEAS & TRENDS;
Some Spying Secrets Will Stay out the Cold

BYLINE: By TIM WEINER

SECTION: Section 4;  Page 3;  Column 4;  Week in Review Desk

LENGTH: 763 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON


THREE years ago this week, Robert M. Gates, then Director of Central
Intelligence, promised "a real shift on the C.I.A.'s part toward greater
openness." He said the "continuing undifferentiated secrecy" would end, and that
its old files on the great secret operations of the cold war would be made
public.

Mr. Gates's promise remains unkept, and much evidence suggests that it will not
soon come true.

In the classified archives of the C.I.A. lie millions of documents 30 years old
and older. Under law, these papers should now be public. They detail the dozen
years between the end of the Korean war in 1953 and the formal beginning of the
Vietnam war in 1965, years in which the C.I.A.'s covert operators set out on a
hundred different missions, like "an order of Knights Templar to save Western
freedom from Communist darkness," in the words of William E. Colby, a former
Director of Central Intelligence.

Some of the biggest operations are famous, though undocumented -- the coup that
installed the Shah of Iran in 1953, another that overthrew the President of
Guatemala in 1954, a series of failed efforts to depose or murder Fidel Castro.
Others operations remain obscure, such as aid to Tibetan rebels and covert
assistance to conservative political leaders in Japan.

All these records remain sealed at the C.I.A.'s behest. But the agency's reach
exceeds its own files. Last week, it blocked the release of White House and
State Department papers documenting its secret support for Japanese
conservatives.

The papers were to be published as part of the State Department's official
history of American foreign policy, which has been printed in bound volumes
since 1861 and is known as "The Foreign Relations of the United States." An
advisory committee of historians overseeing the foreign relations series says
the volume covering the Kennedy Administration's relations with Japan should not
be published if the documents detailing the covert operation are withheld. To do
otherwise, it said, would create a misleading and incomplete official record.
Thus the C.I.A.'s action makes it likely that, for the first time in 134 years,
a volume of the foreign relations series will contain a blank space where
history should be.

The strongest force for keeping the seal of secrecy is the agency's directorate
of operations, the same people who ran the missions. Many of them believe that
these documents remain explosive, despite the passage of time. They fear the
disclosure of sources and methods and are unwilling to embarrass the
still-living recipients of their largesse. Inertia at the agency's Center for
the Study of Intelligence, which was created to review the old files, is another
factor. Its process of historical review began 10 years ago as a way of keeping
the same files forever from the grasp of historians and researchers using the
Freedom of Information Act. The C.I.A. controls the documents and, thus, its own
history.

Unshared Secrets

Despite Mr. Gates's warning that America's intelligence services "must change
and be seen to change, or confront irrelevance and growing sentiment for their
dismemberment," his openness campaign achieved little. His promise to publish
the overall intelligence budget, some $28 billion a year, went unfulfilled. The
agency is giving lie-detector tests to senior officials suspected of talking to
the press. The problem of sharing secrets while preserving the agency's mystique
appears to have proved unsolvable.

"They don't understand openness as anything other than a public relations
problem," said Mel Goodman, a National War College professor who worked as an
analyst of Soviet affairs for 20 years at the C.I.A. "The new director is going
to have to come to terms with what openness means for a secret institution in a
democratic society. It has to convince people that it is working in the best
interests of the public. And to be convinced, we have to understand what the
C.I.A. was doing in history."

In a few weeks, after nearly two years of bureaucratic dithering, President
Clinton is supposed to issue an order automatically declassifying documents 25
years old and older by the end of the century. It will be fascinating to see how
the C.I.A. copes. It has successfully defended its operational files for so long
that historians compare its record of openness unfavorably to that of its old
enemy, the K.G.B. And the C.I.A. knew the Soviet Union well enough to understand
what happened when old truths were exhumed. The revival of history proved to be
the death of the old regime.

LOAD-DATE: February 19, 1995

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1995 The New York Times Company

                              125 of 211 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                February 19, 1995, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

Manila Sees China Threat On Coral Reef

BYLINE: By PHILIP SHENON,   Special to The New York Times

SECTION: Section 1;  Page 9;  Column 1;  Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 551 words

DATELINE: MANILA, Feb. 18


The sight of a Chinese flag fluttering over a coral reef 135 miles from the
Philippines has alarmed China's Southeast Asian neighbors and raised fears that
Beijing is prepared to use force in staking claim to shipping lanes and a chain
of potentially oil-rich islands in the South China Sea.

The construction of what appears to be a Chinese military guard post atop the
aptly named Mischief Reef is of direct concern to Manila, which has long claimed
the reef as Philippine territory.

The reef is part of the Spratly Islands, a chain of more than 100 tiny atolls
and other rocky formations that straddle vital shipping lanes and, more
importantly, are believed to shelter large oil reserves. The Spratlys are
claimed in full or in part by China, the Philippines, Vietnam, Taiwan, Malaysia
and Brunei.

President Fidel V. Ramos of the Philippines has sent warships and fighter planes
to the area of Mischief Reef, warning that "while we are hoping for the best, we
must prepare for the worst."

The threat of Philippine military force is largely a hollow one, given the
dilapidated state of the country's navy and air force. Of the nations with
claims on the Spratlys, only Vietnam has demonstrated any willingness to fight
the Chinese over territorial claims in the region.

The Chinese platform was discovered on Feb. 2, when a Philippine patrol boat and
reconnaissance plane followed up on the report of a Filipino fisherman who said
he had been taken captive by Chinese soldiers on the reef. It is also known in
the Philippines as Panganiban Reef and is about 135 miles west of the Philippine
island of Palawan.

Aerial photographs show that the platform is made up four octagonal structures
perched on stilts over the reef, with a satellite dish for communications with
the Chinese mainland. A Chinese flag flutters high above the platform.

While Philippine military officials reported that Chinese soldiers have been
seen on the platform, foreign diplomats and military analysts agreed that it had
no value as a military staging area or supply depot. They say the platform was
meant instead to serve as a marker of Chinese territorial claims.

China has often fought in the South China Sea with its traditional rival in
Southeast Asia, Vietnam, most recently in 1988, when the Chinese captured six
tiny islands in the Spratlys from the Vietnamese in a naval battle that took
scores of Vietnamese lives.

The construction on Mischief Reef marks the first time in decades that the
Chinese have directly challenged the territorial claims of its non-Communist
neighbors in Southeast Asia.

The Philipines may have been the obvious first target for the Chinese since the
armed forces of the Philippines are among the weakest of major nations in the
Southeast Asia.

The Vietnamese, who have been warning for years that Beijing would eventually
move to convert the South China Sea into what would amount to a Chinese lake,
have described the Chinese presence on the reef as an "expansionist act" and a
"serious development."

The Chinese Government has claimed sovereignty over virtually all of the South
China Sea, including the Spratlys, but it has insisted in recent days that the
compound at Mischief Reef was built for use as a shelter by Chinese fishermen,
not for any military purpose.


LOAD-DATE: February 19, 1995

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Map shows the location of the Spratly Islands.

                   Copyright 1995 The New York Times Company

                              126 of 211 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                February 19, 1995, Sunday, Late Edition - Final
                              Correction Appended

IDEAS & TRENDS;
Rhyme's Reason: Linking Thinking To Train the Brain?

BYLINE: By GINA KOLATA

SECTION: Section 4;  Page 3;  Column 1;  Week in Review Desk

LENGTH: 993 words


HENRY JAMES described a baby's world as a "blooming, buzzing confusion." But
parents know better. Almost instinctively, they speak to their infants in
"motherese" -- a universal language of parents, spoken in a lilting, singsong,
rhyming pattern. And parents around the world are rewarded with burbles and
smiles as the babies cut through the confusion and focus on the intonation and
rhymes.

"What did you dooo? Did you get a boobooo?" sang a nurse to a baby in a doctor's
office last week. The child looked up at her and beamed.

But what is it about rhymes? Why do parents know to spout doggerel to their
offspring, and why are many of the most beloved children's books -- from Mother
Goose to Dr. Seuss's "Hop on Pop" -- written in rhyming verse? Why is it that
when developmental psychologists want to see if preschoolers are ready to learn,
they first ask them to find words that rhyme? Why do popular songs rhyme?

National myths, for instance, are often relayed in rhymes. The first patriot
Americans remember is usually Paul Revere: "One if by land, two if by sea. And I
on the opposite shore will be." In the bitter Vietnam era, rhymes of protest
became devastating taunts: "Hey, hey, L.B.J., how many kids did you kill today?"

Now the first definitive evidence that men and women use their brains
differently has come from a study involving rhymes. That study, reported last
week, probed what happens in the brain when people take the initial step in
decoding a written word. First, people must break words into their constituent
parts, or phonemes. The word "cat," for example, is made of three phonemes: the
sounds of the c, a and final t.

The Human Factor

Researchers at Yale University School of Medicine asked men and women who were
normal readers to study lists of nonsensical words and decide if any words
rhymed.  Participants had to sound them out, breaking them into phonemes. As
they did, the investigators watched their brains through functional magnetic
resonance imaging, a scanning technique that shows areas of the brain into which
blood flows as people think.

To their surprise, the researchers discovered that the sexes used their brains
differently. Men used a small area near the temple on the left side of the
brain; women used that area as well as an area on the right side. Yet both were
equally good at the task. The outcome gave no clue to the brain processes
involved.

To the researchers, who primarily study reading disabilities, a rhyming task was
an obvious choice for the participants in their study. "We used rhymes to get at
the sound structure of words," said Dr. Sally Shaywitz, one of the lead
researchers in the Yale study.

Dr. Reid Lyon, who directs research on reading disabilities at the National
Institute for Child Health and Human Development in Bethesda, Md., said that
reading specialists use rhymes to identify children who might have trouble
learning to read. About 80 percent of kindergarteners will readily find, for
example, three words that rhyme with "cat." The other struggling 20 percent are
headed toward difficulties that will require remediation.

One way to help these children, Dr. Lyon said, is to play rhyming games. Dr.
Shaywitz added that when parents ask her how they can prepare their children for
reading, she tells them to read to the children -- and read books written in
rhyme.

Rhyming may also be a window on the mind, said Dr. Norman Krasnegor, who directs
the human learning and behavior department at the National Institute of Child
Health and Human Development.  Breaking words into phonemes and rhyming is an
integral part of language, Dr. Krasnegor said, and "language is part of what
makes us human." It may be more than a coincidence that motherese emphasizes
rhymes. "It may be part of what creates an opportunity for learning language,"
he said.

The urge to rhyme, and perhaps the reasons for rhyme, cut across linguistic
barriers. In his book on child development, "From Two to Five," the Russian
children's author Kornei Chukovsky wrote, "There is hardly a child whose verbal
development in this early period does not use linking pairs -- most often
rhythmic pairs -- of sounds and words."

A child can even be primed to respond to rhymes as a fetus. About a decade ago,
Dr. Tony DeCasper of the University of North Carolina in Greensboro and Dr.
Melanie Spence, now at the University of Texas at Austin, asked pregnant women
to read "The Cat in the Hat" by Dr. Seuss repeatedly during the last trimester
of their pregnancy. When the babies were born, they recognized the verse,
distinguishing it, in behavioral tests that involved sucking, from a book
without rhymes.

"Everyone like rhymes," said Dr. Steven Pinker, the author of "The Language
Instinct" (HarperCollins) and a linguist who directs the Center for Cognitive
Neuroscience at the Massachusetts Institute of Technology. Rap artists declaim
in rhymes. Gifted orators, like the Rev. Jesse Jackson, use rhyme. Irregular
English verbs fall into groups based on rhyme: ring rang, sing sang.

But the question, Dr. Pinker asks, is, "Why is rhyme so pleasurable?" One theory
is that humans like anything that purifies the basics of their world, he said,
and that resonates with the way the brain decodes the blooming, buzzing
confusion out there. We like stripes and plaids, we like periodic and harmonic
sounds and we like rhymes.

No Boundaries

Yet if men and women use their brains differently in thinking about rhymes, does
that say that women may feel a different sort of pleasure when they hear a rhyme
from what men feel? Do boys and girls experience something different when they
rhyme?

We may never know for sure, but the power of rhymes -- whether they are doggerel
or ethereal -- seems to know no gender boundaries. For, as Alexander Pope wrote
in the 17th century: "Call if you must bad rhyming a disease. It gives men
happiness, or leaves them at ease."

LOAD-DATE: February 19, 1995

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

CORRECTION-DATE: February 26, 1995, Sunday

CORRECTION:

An article last Sunday about rhyme and language misidentified the writer who
said a baby's world was a "blooming, buzzing confusion." It was the philosopher
William James, not the novelist Henry James.


GRAPHIC: Photo: Rhymes provide the educational structure for many children's
books like Dr. Seuss's "Hop on Pop," above. (From "Hop on Pop" by Dr.
Seuss/Random House)

                   Copyright 1995 The New York Times Company

                              127 of 211 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                February 19, 1995, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

Lie Detectors Lie (Tell the C.I.A.)

BYLINE: By Jeff Stein;   Jeff Stein, a former Army intelligence officer, is
author of "A Murder in Wartime: The Untold Spy Story that Changed the Course of
the Vietnam War."

SECTION: Section 4;  Page 13;  Column 2;  Editorial Desk

LENGTH: 739 words

DATELINE: FREDERICKSBURG, Va.


In 1983, an Army intelligence officer made a desperate call to David Lykken, a
psychology professor at the University of Minnesota and expert on polygraphs.
The officer said that he had just flunked two routine lie detector tests but
that he hadn't done anything illegal, and wanted to know if Mr. Lykken had any
advice on beating the machine.

Sure, the professor said, offering a few suggestions involving altering the
body's breathing rate and blood pressure at strategic times. The officer passed
the next test easily. "The only hard part was learning how to keep a straight
face," he later told Mr. Lykken.

Three years later, at the start of his career as a Russian mole, Aldrich Ames
passed a Central Intelligence Agency lie detector test. In 1991, he passed
another, even though he was on the agency's list of suspected moles and living
at a level far above his $70,000 Government salary. Last summer, Dennis
DeConcini, then chairman of the Senate Intelligence Committee, visited Mr. Ames
in jail and asked how he passed the exams. "Well," Mr. Ames replied, "they don't
work."

Well, no kidding. But tell that to the C.I.A. Astonishingly, the security
experts at Langley, Va., and in the Pentagon still use the test Mr. Ames passed
with no sweat, the Control Question Test. The F.B.I. has just started screening
its applicants and employees with it. "Polygraphs are little more accurate than
flipping a coin," says Dr. Lykken.

So why does the Government persist in using tests that don't work? Critics say
it has to do with the millions of dollars and thousands of Government jobs
invested in such testing.

There was another clue in the November 1993 issue of the International Journal
of Psychophysiology, the professional journal of polygraphers. The article,
which argues that the Control Question Test is a disaster, was credited to John
J.  Furedy, a psychologist at the University of Toronto. But a footnote explains
that he had a co-author, Drew C. Richardson, an F.B.I. supervisor with a Ph.D.
in physiology. The F.B.I. forced Mr. Richardson to remove his byline from the
piece.

You'd think the F.B.I. would want to heed what Mr. Richardson, its only
polygrapher with a doctorate, has discovered about the holes in its security
screen. Instead, it has transferred him out of the polygraph unit and forbidden
him to speak publicly on the issue. Thus the Congressional Select Intelligence
Committees and the Joint Security Commission, the Government bodies that have
been staring at the tea leaves at the bottom of the Aldrich Ames case, have not
had the benefit of his wisdom.

Last year, however, Mr. Richardson did say at a conference of polygraphy experts
that he had successfully taught his 10-year-old son the techniques to beat the
Control Question Test.

"It's a fine instrument for interrogation if you already have strong evidence of
someone's guilt," Dr. Furedy told me. But as a trap to catch moles randomly, he
described it as "astrology," "magic," "wishful thinking" and "a lousy way of
finding out if somebody is a double agent."

He said the problem stems from ignoring that the polygraph isn't really a
standardized test. It depends on the skills of its operator: a polygrapher
interprets the subject's answers and alters his questions accordingly. Some
operators are better than others.

Is the F.B.I.'s new test an improvement? Not according to Lawrence A. Farwell, a
former C.I.A. consultant now at on the faculty at Harvard Medical School, who
wrote that "if all of the hostile intelligence agencies in the world had put
their heads together, they could not have come up with a program better designed
to produce future Ames cases than this new F.B.I. polygraph."

What should be done? First, the Pentagon should be made to release the polygraph
study it did in the late 80's, which showed the tests to be useless in screening
for moles. The report was quickly suppressed. Then the F.B.I.'s polygraph chief,
David Murphy, should be asked to back up his questionable claims to Congress
that F.B.I. polygraphers could have fished Aldrich Ames from the dark.

Finally, the intelligence agencies should drop their touching concern about the
civil rights of their officers and start scrutinizing the bank balances and tax
returns of all employees with access to secrets. That is a lot fairer than
subjecting them to polygraphs, which can demean the innocent and free the
guilty.

LOAD-DATE: February 19, 1995

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Drawing

TYPE: Op-Ed

                   Copyright 1995 The New York Times Company

                              128 of 211 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                February 19, 1995, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

No Heroes, No Villains

BYLINE: By Robert Dallek;   Robert Dallek is the Harmsworth Visiting Professor
of American History at Oxford University. His books include "Franklin D.
Roosevelt and American Foreign Policy, 1932-1945" and "Lone Star Rising: Lyndon
Johnson and His Times, 1908-1960."

SECTION: Section 7;  Page 15;  Column 1;  Book Review Desk

LENGTH: 1105 words



FOR THE PRESIDENT'S EYES ONLY
Secret Intelligence and the American Presidency
From Washington to Bush.

By Christopher Andrew.
Illustrated. 660 pp. New York:
HarperCollins Publishers. $30.

FOR many Americans the Central Intelligence Agency, the Federal Bureau of
Investigation, the National Security Agency and the National Security Council
are synonymous with skulduggery in high places. These are the secret agencies of
Government that have supposedly plotted assassinations of foreign enemies,
indiscriminately wiretapped American citizens and abused the public trust by
questionable expenditures of billions of dollars in the name of national
security.

Most of the country's recent Presidents are seen as largely responsible for
these abuses of power. Franklin Roosevelt is said to have lied the country into
World War II by allowing it to be surprised at Pearl Harbor; Harry Truman to
have built the apparatus of an American police state; Dwight Eisenhower to have
used that apparatus to topple regimes in Iran and Guatemala; John Kennedy to
have tried to do the same in Cuba; Lyndon Johnson to have deceived the press and
public about what he was doing in the Dominican Republic and Vietnam; Richard
Nixon to have toppled Salvador Allende in Chile, and then to have toppled
himself through Watergate; and Ronald Reagan to have continued the pattern of
hidden, illegal foreign actions in the Iran-contra scandal.

Presidents and the intelligence agencies serving them are not without sin; many
complaints about secret government are justified. But many are not. Moreover,
too little has been said about the successes of United States intelligence, both
during and after World War II. What we have needed in this post-cold-war era is
an objective assessment of the country's intelligence agencies and Presidential
performance in dealing with them.

Christopher Andrew is a professor of history at Cambridge University and the
author of numerous books on intelligence operations, including "Her Majesty's
Secret Service." He believes that "whether Presidents have used intelligence and
the intelligence community well or badly, how they have used it is an essential
-- though frequently neglected -- part of the history of every Administration
since the Second World War." Though "much of the story still remains officially
secret," enough of it is open for Mr. Andrew to have written a thoughtful,
judicious book.

MOST of "For the President's Eyes Only" is devoted to the 10 men who occupied
the White House from Franklin Roosevelt to George Bush and their handling of
American intelligence operations. Mr. Andrew critically assesses the performance
of both the Presidents and the agencies, particularly the C.I.A., about which
far more is known than about the National Security Agency. His book is as
objective an account as seems possible on so controversial a subject. There are
no heroes and villains here -- only fallible Presidents and military and
civilian officials struggling to make sense of a complicated and dangerous
world.

As often as not, in Mr. Andrew's view, the Presidents and intelligence chiefs
failed to find realistic answers to the questions before them. Of the recent
Presidents, only Dwight Eisenhower, John Kennedy and George Bush showed any
"real flair for intelligence," though even they were far from perfect. Kennedy,
for example, performed poorly in the planning for the Bay of Pigs invasion.
Because he was too accepting of wildly exaggerated C.I.A. estimates of the
chances for overthrowing Fidel Castro, he suffered a major setback at the start
of his Presidency.

As Mr. Andrew sees it, at least Kennedy learned from his error (as in the Cuban
missile crisis). Most of his predecessors and successors compiled less
successful records in using the intelligence data generated for them
(principally by cryptographers deciphering diplomatic and military signals).
Roosevelt, for instance, failed to give priority to breaking Japanese naval
codes in 1940-41. Had he done so, Mr. Andrew says, United States naval
intelligence would have had clear indications that Tokyo was planning an attack
on Pearl Harbor. Truman, likewise, neglected to put sufficient resources into
cryptographic analysis to have advance warnings of a North Korean attack on
South Korea. And even when decoded messages indicated that the Chinese were
going to cross the Yalu River and enter the war, Truman and his principal
advisers, moved by false convictions about the Chinese Communists, neglected to
heed the warnings. Johnson's antagonism to the C.I.A. and his conviction that
American power would force a North Vietnamese surrender made him resistant to
the agency's more realistic assessments of American prospects in Vietnam, thus
leading the United States to a disaster in Southeast Asia.

Mr. Andrew is critical of America's intelligence agencies as well. Their
bureaucratic rivalries (like the conflict within the C.I.A. between the
operations and intelligence divisions), as well as their madcap assassination
plots and their blind prejudice, caused them to be less successful than they
might have been. Still, even if these problems were eliminated, Mr. Andrew would
have no illusions about the perfectibility of intelligence operations. "Good
intelligence," he says, "diminishes surprise, but even the best cannot possibly
prevent it altogether. Human behavior is not, and probably never will be, fully
predictable." Nevertheless, Mr. Andrew predicts, "The Presidents of the 21st
century, like their cold war predecessors, will continue to find an enormously
expensive global intelligence system both fallible and indispensable."



THOSE CLOWNS IN LANGLEY

Since the missile crisis . . . Presidents have tended, more often than not, to
take for granted their daily diet of all-source global intelligence. Indeed,
they have frequently seemed disappointed by it. All remember international
crises that took them by surprise, and most are inclined to treat the surprises
as intelligence failures. "What the hell do those clowns do out there in
Langley?" Nixon demanded after the unexpected overthrow of the Cambodian leader
Prince Sihanouk in 1970. Eight years later Carter asked much the same question,
more politely phrased, when he was suddenly informed that the Shah of Iran was
in danger of losing his throne.

The intelligence community has had its fair share of failures. Presidents'
recurrent disappointment with the intelligence they receive, however, has
derived, at least in part, from their own exaggerated expectations.
   From "For the President's Eyes Only."

LOAD-DATE: February 19, 1995

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo: President Ronald Reagan and his first Director of Central
Intelligence, William J. Casey. (UNITED PRESS INTERNATIONAL/BETTMANN)(pg. 16)

TYPE: Review

                   Copyright 1995 The New York Times Company

                              129 of 211 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                February 19, 1995, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

Confronting Head On the Face of the Afflicted

BYLINE: By JOYCE CAROL OATES;   Joyce Carol Oates, the novelist, is the Roger S.
Berlind Professor in the Humanities at Princeton University. Her play "The
Truth-Teller" is currently at Circle Rep.

SECTION: Section 2;  Page 1;  Column 1;  Arts & Leisure Desk

LENGTH: 2566 words


THE VERY CONCEPT OF "VICTIM ART" IS an appalling one. Only a sensibility
unwilling to attribute full humanity to persons who have suffered injury,
illness or injustice could have invented such a crude and reductive label.

There is a long and honorable tradition of art that "bears witness" to human
suffering, but this is not "victim art" as the current term would have it, still
less an art that manipulates or intimidates its audience to any perverse degree.
(Doesn't all art, especially the conventional and pleasing, have the goal of
affecting an audience's emotions?) That a human being has been "victimized" does
not reduce his or her humanity but may in fact amplify it.

This issue, with its many political implications, has emerged most recently in
the maelstrom of response to an article in The New Yorker by the magazine's
veteran dance critic, Arlene Croce, on Bill T. Jones's dance "Still/Here."
"Discussing the Undiscussable" was the paradoxical title of the article, which
began, "I have not seen Bill T. Jones's 'Still/Here' and have no plans to review
it."

Ms. Croce's main objection was that "Still/Here" integrated videotapes and
audiotapes of AIDS and cancer victims in a dramatic dance work and that the
presence of terminally ill "real" persons in the program rendered it, for her,
"beyond criticism." It was, to her, a prime example of "victim art" -- a "raw
art . . . deadly in its power over the human conscience" and part of a larger
"pathology in art" that seeks to manipulate audiences' feelings of sympathy,
pity, intimidation and terror.

By the end of her essay, which appeared in the magazine's Dec. 26/Jan. 2 issue,
Ms. Croce had lashed out indiscriminately at "issue-oriented" art (a thinly
veiled slap at Tony Kushner's AIDS epic "Angels in America") and all
"mass-produced art of the 20th century" (encompassing not only commercial
television but the "grisly" Holocaust film "Schindler's List"); she acknowledged
her resentment at being "forced" to feel sorry for "dissed blacks, abused women
[and] disfranchised homosexuals."

For her, this "pathology in art" began with the anarchic freedoms of the 1960's
(anti-Vietnam War protest, blacks' and women's rights agitation) and flourished
in the 80's, when hitherto marginalized ethnic-minority and gay Americans began
to win grants from the National Endowment for the Arts and other institutions
for their creative work.

From the start, Bill T. Jones was perceived as a threat, a radical black/gay
artist who seemed peculiarly immune to harsh criticism from Establishment
voices. ("When I blasted an early work of his with the phrase 'fevered swamps,'
he retaliated by using the phrase as the title of a piece," Ms. Croce
complained.)

Response to "Discussing the Undiscussable" was immediate and vociferous: an
outpouring of letters to The New Yorker, both pro and con; columns and
editorials in the news magazines, The Village Voice and elsewhere, and a
renewed, embittered debate between conservatives and liberals about the changing
nature of art. As with the Mapplethorpe obscenity trial of several years ago,
the article has raised crucial questions about esthetics and morality, about the
role of politics in art and about the role of the professional critic in
assessing art that integrates "real" people and events in an esthetic framework.

Why should authentic experience, in art, render it "beyond criticism"? Consider
great memoirist work like Dostoyevsky's "House of the Dead," American slave
narratives by ex-slaves like Frederick Douglass and Harriet Jacobs, the
witness-bearing testimonies of the Holocaust survivors Primo Levi, Elie Wiesel,
Aharon Appelfeld and Tadeusz Borowski, and poetry by Nelly Sachs and Paul Celan
among many others.

"The Diary of Anne Frank," by the young Dutch Jew who died in Bergen-Belsen in
1945, is hardly the document of a mere victim, any more than the powerful elegy
"The Ship of Death," D. H. Lawrence's last poem, written on his deathbed, is.

We have poems of psychic disintegration by Gerard Manley Hopkins, Emily
Dickinson and Sylvia Plath that are nonetheless poems of transfiguration. We
have certain of Dorothea Lang's photographs -- "Damaged Child," for instance;
Walker Evans's portraits of tragically exhausted migrant workers; the strange,
isolated, painfully human subjects of Diane Arbus; the Buchenwald photographs of
Margaret Bourke-White, who considered herself a witness, an emissary. "To
understand another human being you must gain some insight into the conditions
that made him what he is," she said.

Consider the graphic depictions of the oppressed by Goya and Hogarth and Kathe
Kollwitz, the lyric tenderness of Edvard Munch's "Sick Child" and "Spring,"
which depict the artist's dying young sister. There are tortured self-portraits
by Egon Schiele, Frida Kahlo, Francis Bacon. There are heart-rendingly powerful
works of drama -- Eugene O'Neill's "Long Day's Journey Into Night," Tennessee
Williams's "Streetcar Named Desire," Edward Albee's "Who's Afraid of Virginia
Woolf?," Sam Shephard's "Buried Child," Marsha Norman's " 'Night, Mother," Scott
McPherson's "Marvin's Room," among notable others, that deal with extremes of
emotional distress -- but how imaginatively, and how differently from one
another!

Of recent dramatic works that use "real" material most effectively, Emily Mann's
"Still Life" and "Execution of Justice" are exemplary and have had an obvious
influence on Anna Deveare Smith's one-woman documentary-performances, "Fires in
the Mirror" and "Twilight: Los Angeles 1992." Romulus Linney's "Two," a play
about the trial of Hitler's second-in-command Goebbels, incorporates film
footage from Nazi extermination camps; once the "real" is experienced by the
audience, the stage sophistry and devious charm of Goebbels are shattered.

What is particularly revealing in Ms. Croce's position is a revulsion for art
with "power over the human conscience." But what is wrong with having a
conscience, even if one is a professional critic? If art is too "raw" to be
reviewed, shouldn't it be witnessed, in any case, as integral to cultural
history? (Surely the critic cares for art even when it isn't for "review.")

THE COUNTERMININGS OF tragedy are more subtle than those of comedy. It is an
absurd expectation that in the face of suffering the afflicted should invariably
"transcend" their fates. Sometimes, yes: Dostoyevsky, by his account, seems
truly to have embraced his destiny and experienced a mystic oneness with God (in
an epileptic's ecstasy?). But hardly Samuel Beckett, Primo Levi or Tadeusz
Borowski. Many of our human stories end not in triumph but in defeat. To demand
that victimized persons transcend their pain in order to make audiences feel
good is another kind of tyranny.

To declare some works of art "non-art" presupposes a questionable authority.
"It's art if I say it is," Humpty Dumpty declares in "Alice in Wonderland," and
while we're meant to laugh at his smugness, Alice's creator, Lewis Carroll,
meant more than a joke.

Art is a mysterious efflorescence of the human spirit that seems not to have
originated in a desire to please or placate critics. At the juncture of the
communal and the individual, in ancient cultures, "art" sprang into being: the
individual artist expressed the communal consciousness, usually of a "divinely"
inspired nature. The scribes of the Hebrew Bible and the New Testament were
extraordinary storytellers and gifted craftsmen of narrative, but their tales
were presumed not to be of their own invention. The earliest visual artists may
have been visionaries, but their visions were surely not private ones; their art
is anonymous, for the concept of "individual" did not yet exist.

At the point at which the individual begins to detach himself from the
collective, the artist begins to achieve what we call "identity"; art may still
be in the service of the nation or the tribe, but it has the unmistakable stamp
of personality on it, and may be highly original.

Consider Hieronymus Bosch, the late-15th-century Belgian, and the remarkable
paintings he set beside conventional Christian-iconographic art of his era and
earlier: how bold, how bizarre, how hallucinatory were Bosch's great altarpieces
"The Garden of Earthly Delights," "The Hay Wagon," "The Temptation of St.
Anthony" and "John the Baptist in the Desert." If ever there was a brilliant
"pathology of art," Bosch is our patron saint.

The exquisite mosaics and frescoes of the Byzantine-Roman world, in the service
of an impersonal religious piety, blend together in their harmony (or blandness)
once one has seen the eruption of sheer genius in a visionary like Bosch. Where
was the critical intelligence that could have begun to assess Bosch in his time,
let alone presume to prescribe his art?

The earliest sustained work of literary criticism in Western culture is
Aristotle's "Poetics" (circa 335-322 B.C.), believed to be primarily a defense
of tragedy and the epic as they were attacked by Plato in "The Republic." Where
Plato saw drama as disturbing and disruptive to the well-run state and argued
that the poet should be banished from it, Aristotle argued that literature's
more profound effects were beneficent and purgative and that the poet was a
valuable citizen of the republic. "The Poetics" is a meticulously descriptive,
not a prescriptive, work; Aristotle based his famous theory of catharsis on
drama he had seen, works by Aeschylus, Sophocles and Euripides. Twenty-three
hundred years after it was written, "The Poetics" is arguably our greatest
single work of esthetics.

Yet out of this seminal work by one of the world's great imaginative minds,
there came to be, in subsequent centuries, as interpreted by less imaginative
minds, a set of rigid rules meant to prescribe how drama must be written, else
it is "not art." So Neo-Classic dogma decreed that art insufficiently
"Aristotelian" was not art. Even Voltaire, the inspired demolisher of others'
delusions, rejected Shakespeare as barbaric because he did not conform to
Neo-Classic principles of unity.

THE ENGLISH CRITIC Thomas Rhymer might have thought he'd wittily disposed of
Shakespeare's "Othello" by calling it "much ado about a handkerchief." Samuel
Johnson, the greatest critic of his time, felt obliged to reject such
masterpieces as Milton's "Lycidas" and "Samson Agonistes" for violations of
Neo-Classical decorum. (Yet Johnson was not so blind as to reject Shakespeare,
for whose genius he was willing to stretch Aristotle's principles, choosing to
interpret Shakespeare's drama as something he could call a "mirror of life.")
Nahum Tate, English poet laureate of the early 18th century, "corrected" the
insufficiently uplifting ending of "King Lear," providing Cordelia with both
life and a husband, Kent; this popular stage version ran into the 1830's.

Through the centuries, through every innovation and upheaval in art, from the
poetry of the early English Romantics to the "Beat" poetry of the American
1950's, from the explosion of late-19th-century European Modernist art to the
Abstract Expressionism of mid-20th-century America, professional criticism has
exerted a primarily conservative force, the gloomy wisdom of inertia,
interpreting the new and startling in terms of the old and familiar; denouncing
as "not art" what upsets cultural, moral and political expectations. Why were
there no critics capable of comprehending the superb poetry of John Keats, most
of it written, incredibly, in his 24th year? There were not; the reviews Keats
received were savage, and he was dead of tuberculosis at the age of 25.

When, in 1862, Emily Dickinson sent several of her characteristic poems to one
Thomas Wentworth Higginson, an Atlantic Monthly man of letters on the lookout
for "new genius," her hopes were dashed by the smug sensibility of an era:
Higginson was a traditionalist confronted by poetry as radical for its times as
Cezanne's landscapes would have been in provincial New England. Is this,
Higginson wondered, poetry at all? Imperfectly rhymed, its metrics spasmodic,
punctuation eccentric. "Remarkable, though odd . . . too delicate -- not strong
enough to publish." Dickinson did not publish any of her 1,775 poems during her
lifetime.

Walt Whitman's "Leaves of Grass," privately printed in 1855, received only a few
enthusiastic reviews -- Whitman's pseudonymous own. Otherwise, poet and book
were denounced -- and would be for decades -- as "obscene." So, too, Kate
Chopin, whose elegantly written novel "The Awakening" brought her arguably the
most violent critical opprobrium ever endured by an American artist.

Our most beleaguered American Modernist writer, William Faulkner, long a target
for jeering, uncomprehending reviews (his principal nemesis was the influential
Clifton Fadiman, writing for The New Yorker, greeting one after another of
Faulkner's great novels with unflagging and gleeful scorn) emerged at last to
international acclaim and a Nobel Prize by way of the effort of French literary
critics and the support of the American critic and man of letters Malcolm
Cowley. Only after his canonization by the Nobel Prize did Faulkner begin to
receive enthusiastic reviews here at home -- though, of course, his finest work
was long behind him.

When, in 1913, the Armory Show of European Modernist art came to the United
States, there was an opportunity for American art and cultural critics to assess
the new, innovative art that had swept Europe by storm. Instead, professional
critics, like the general public, from Teddy Roosevelt on down, received the
work of Gauguin, van Gogh, Cezanne, Matisse, Picasso, Braque and Duchamp with
cheerful derision.

Roosevelt publicly noted that Duchamp's "Nude Descending a Staircase" resembled
a Navajo blanket; the most popular description of the painting was "an explosion
in a shingle factory." Matisse's 13 canvases drew the most savage reviews, and
the artist had the honor of being hanged in effigy in Chicago, by students at
the presumably conservative Art Institute.

Of course, there have been exceptions to this dismaying history. An exemplary
critic comes immediately to mind: Clement Greenberg, the early, for years the
sole critic championing the ridiculed work of Jackson Pollock. There was the
intrepid Frank Budgen, preparing the critical groundwork for understanding James
Joyce. One can name individuals here and there, but these are likely to have
persisted in the face of their fellow critics' inclination for what is known,
what is safe, what is "traditional."

One might expect, after so spotty a record, more hesitancy, more modesty on the
part of critics. Yet the censorious-conservative impulse remains: to define art,
to appropriate art, to "protect" art from apparent incursions of disorder, even
by artists themselves.

If this is indeed an era, as Arlene Croce charged in "Discussing the
Undiscussable," when critics seem "expendable," the news will not be greeted as
a disaster in all quarters. Criticism is itself an art form, and like all art
forms it must evolve, or atrophy and die. There can be, despite the conservative
battle cry of "standards," no criticism for all time, nor even for much time.
Ms. Croce's cri de coeur may be a landmark admission of the bankrupcy of the old
critical vocabulary, confronted with ever-new and evolving forms of art.

LOAD-DATE: February 19, 1995

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photos: Manci Rosner, center, in the film "Schindler's List" -- Why
should authentic experience, in art, render it "beyond criticism"? (David
James/Universal Pictures)(pg. 22); Detail from Hieronymus Bosch's "Temptation of
St. Anthony" -- Was there ever a critic capable of assessing the artist in his
time? (pg. 23); "Still/Here," Bill T. Jones's dance about the terminally ill --
Is such a work beyond criticism? (Daniel Rest/Brooklyn Academy of Music)

                   Copyright 1995 The New York Times Company

                              130 of 211 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                February 21, 1995, Tuesday, Late Edition - Final

A Detective Could Become An Issue at Simpson Trial

BYLINE: By KENNETH B. NOBLE,   Special to The New York Times

SECTION: Section A;  Page 14;  Column 5;  National Desk

LENGTH: 1277 words

DATELINE: LOS ANGELES, Feb. 20


Sometime this week in the O. J. Simpson murder trial, a tough, straight-talking
police detective, Mark Fuhrman, will be called to testify about how he found a
single bloody glove behind Mr. Simpson's Brentwood home. The glove is considered
crucial evidence because prosecutors say it matches one found near the bodies of
Nicole Brown Simpson and her friend Ronald L. Goldman.

In the minds of some, however, Mr. Fuhrman himself will be on trial, depicted by
defense lawyers as a racist rogue cop who may have tampered with or planted
evidence to frame an innocent man.

Prosecutors insist that the evidence Mr. Fuhrman collected will hold up at
trial. But at the same time reports of incidents in his career are emerging and
could affect a case in which his credibility and integrity are likely to become
central issues.

Mr. Fuhrman, 43, is a complex figure whose career appears to reflect some of the
best and worst aspects of the often-assailed Los Angeles Police Department.
During his 19 years as an officer he has been accused at least a half-dozen
times of threatening or beating suspects, especially black and Hispanic people,
but records of police department internal investigations show that the charges
have been found groundless.

Still, a constant theme among Mr. Fuhrman's detractors is that he has often been
too ready to perceive the city's nonwhite residents as enemies and to react to
them aggressively.

"I've talked to many black officers who know Detective Fuhrman personally, and
the general feeling among the officers is that Fuhrman should have been fired,
retired or taken off the job because of his racial attitudes and beliefs," said
Garland Hardeman, a former Los Angeles police officer who is a member of the
Inglewood City Council.

At the same time, some friends and colleagues speak admiringly of Mr. Fuhrman's
skills as an officer and insist that he has never publicly showed evidence of
racism.

Gary Fullerton, Mr. Fuhrman's former supervisor, now director of the Los Angeles
Police Protective League, called him "one of the finest detectives I know."

Asked about reports that Mr. Fuhrman often used racial epithets when describing
black and Hispanic people, Mr. Fullerton responded: "In certain circumstances he
has had conflicts because he tells people, 'Hey, I don't like the way you work'
or whatever, and sometimes people take it personally and consider it to be a
racial thing or a gender thing or a gay thing."

Many documents concerning Mr. Fuhrman have been released during pretrial
maneuvering in the Simpson case, including psychiatric and other personnel
records that stem from a disability claim he filed in the early 1980's. Other
court documents were released several years ago but have only now attracted
attention. Mr. Fuhrman's lawyer, Robert H. Tourtelot, has also recently made
some depositions and other court documents available.

It is too early to tell how much evidence regarding Mr. Fuhrman's character will
be admitted. Judge Lance A. Ito ruled last month that many of the racial
comments attributed to Mr. Fuhrman from the disability claim records were too
old to have direct relevance. At the same time, he indicated that other racial
comments attributed to Mr. Fuhrman might be admissible.

In any event, Mr. Fuhrman's courtroom appearance will no doubt be a arduous.
Defense lawyers are expected to question him closely about the glove and other
evidence, and to try to depict him as an embittered racist who seized an
opportunity to frame Mr. Simpson, a handsome and wealthy celebrity. They will
try to convince jurors that he is especially prejudiced toward black men married
to white women.

In particular, they are expected to cross-examine Mr. Fuhrman about a statement
he is said to have made in 1985 or 1986 to Catherine Bell, a Los Angeles real
estate agent. In a deposition to Mr. Simpson's lawyers, Ms. Bell said Mr.
Fuhrman told him that, if he had his way, "they would take all the niggers and
put them together in a big group and burn them."

Before a jury that includes nine blacks, Mr. Fuhrman's sentiments -- and choice
of words -- could be very damaging to the prosecution and plant broad doubts
about its case.

Mr. Fuhrman grew up in Washington State, joined the Marine Corps in 1970 and
served in Vietnam. At first he thrived on the military service, but that
gradually changed. According to a 1983 psychiatric evaluation by Dr. John
Hochman in relation to the disability claim, Mr. Fuhrman explained that he
stopped enjoying the Marines because "there were these Mexicans and niggers,
volunteers, and they weren't going to do something." Mr. Fuhrman left the
service in 1975 and soon joined the Los Angeles Police Department.

On the force, Mr. Fuhrman's early personnel ratings were strong. But in 1977 he
was assigned to East Los Angeles, the epicenter of the city's gang warfare, and
his evaluations became mixed. One superior wrote that he was "an intelligent and
vocal officer who has done a good job," but added that he was "strong willed"
and "reacted defensively toward constructive criticism."

The tension of police work began to take its toll in the early 1980's, and Mr.
Fuhrman made his claim for a disability pension, citing stress.

Mr. Fuhrman had to undergo a battery of psychiatric tests, including the
interview with Dr. Hochman and one with Dr. Ira Brent in January 1983.

Dr. Brent wrote that Mr. Fuhrman told him that during the 10 months he worked in
East Los Angeles, "he hated it.

"He stated that he 'beat-up' on suspects and that he 'blacked-out' and became 'a
wild man.' "

Dr. Brent concluded that there were in Mr. Fuhrman's personality "many aspects
of paranoia, underlying hostility and rage."

Mr. Tourtelot, Mr. Fuhrman's lawyer, said in an interview that Dr. Brent's
evaluation accurately portrayed his client's state of mind at the time. But Mr.
Tourtelot denied that Mr. Fuhrman ever made the disparaging remarks about black
and Hispanic people that were attributed to him by Dr. Hochman.

Mr. Tourtelot said that in addition to the job stress, Mr. Fuhrman and his wife
were breaking up at the time of his reassignment to East Los Angeles, and the
combination of factors "kind of brought him to the edge."

But Mr. Tourtelot said "there is nothing in those reports that go to any racial
issues."

Mr. Fuhrman was ultimately denied a disability pension.

According to complaints filed with Police Watch, a nonprofit Los Angeles lawyer
referral service, Mr. Fuhrman has been accused five times since 1988 of using
excessive force in dealing with crime suspects.

Michael M. Salcido, a Police Watch official, said, "I know no other officer that
has five complaints filed against him."

One of those incidents, in 1987,involved Joseph Britton, a black teen-ager
accused of robbing a bank customer.

Mr. Britton, who filed a lawsuit against Mr. Fuhrman and other officers involved
in the incident, said Mr. Fuhrman and a partner chased him into an alley where
they accused him of brandishing a knife and subsequently shot him.

Mr. Britton later told his lawyer, James DeSimone, that before shooting him, one
of the officers had yelled, "Drop the knife, nigger, drop the knife." Mr.
Britton insisted in court documents that at the time he was unarmed.

He was charged with robbery and assault and eventually pleaded guilty to lesser
charges. The lawsuit was settled earlier this month, but the settlement is under
court seal.

Mr. Simpson's lawyers fought to get the Britton case admitted as evidence, but
Judge Ito ruled against them last month, saying that facts surrounding the case
appeared to be "highly speculative."

LOAD-DATE: February 21, 1995

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo: Mark Fuhrman, the Los Angeles police detective whose testimony
could prove crucial in the murder trial of O. J. Simpson. (Associated Press)

                   Copyright 1995 The New York Times Company

                              131 of 211 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                February 21, 1995, Tuesday, Late Edition - Final

TELEVISION REVIEW;
For Panhandlers, the Truth Is a Start

BYLINE: By WALTER GOODMAN

SECTION: Section C;  Page 18;  Column 4;  Cultural Desk

LENGTH: 546 words


Been wondering how the panhandlers around town got that way, whether their
pitches resemble the truth, how much they make, where they bed down? Such
questions are raised if not laid to rest by "The Begging Game," a look at
several people who work the sidewalks of New York.

These are among the findings:

*A fellow who begs from a wheelchair can be seen at the end of his working day
striding briskly toward his heroin fix.

*A 60-year-old man who purports to be a wounded Vietnam veteran and really needs
a wheelchair never served in Vietnam.

*A 14-year-old called Dana who pleads on Wall Street for help in paying for her
mother's dialysis is 17 years old; she wears a soiled outfit for begging
purposes and lives in a nice building with her mother, who is not on dialysis.
Like other Wall Streeters, Dana does particularly well on days the market goes
up.

"Truth on the streets," observes the hour's reporter, Deborah Amos, "depends on
what works best." But tonight's "Frontline" offering, produced and directed by
Joe Berlinger and Bruce Sinofsky, is not at heart an expose. It mixes sympathy
with skepticism, in the spirit of the New Yorker who hands over a dollar even
while suspecting it may go for drink or drugs.

The program's star is Theresa, who says she is 74 but is probably in her 60's
and who when Ms. Amos meets her has been operating with fair success from the
corner of 32d Street and Seventh Avenue in Manhattan for about six years. She
says her career started one afternoon when she sat down for a rest with a Coke
and somebody dropped $5 into the cup.

She has a good-humored view of her work, explaining that she does particularly
well when people think she is praying. She calls herself Mother Theresa of
Aqueduct. Faced with the possibility that her bad leg may have to be amputated,
her thoughts turn to merchandising. She rejects the idea of a prosthetic limb:
"We need the crutches and the leg dangling loose, you know, so I can make a
buck."

No, not everything Theresa tells Ms. Amos turns out to be strictly accurate, but
you do get a glimpse of her street life with an extended family whose members
help one another survive the long days of begging and chilly nights on cardboard
boxes. Theresa says: "These are addicts, chain-snatchers, crackheads, all the
bad people that went out of their way to protect me." A night in a hotel room
with her alcoholic friend Shirley is a big holiday.

No claim is made here that Theresa or the others briefly encountered are
representative of anything. But without either sentimentality or indignation,
the program does catch the last-stand appeal of street life for some who are
driven or drawn to it. Theresa reflects, "There's always something very
seductive about the ease of panhandling." It turns out her real name is
Gertrude.

FRONTLINE
The Begging Game PBS, tonight
(In the New York area, Channel 13 at 9 and Channel 49 at 10:30)

Produced and directed by Joe Berlinger and Bruce Sinofsky. Robert Richman,
director of photography; Dana Heinz Perry, editor; Loren Eiferman, associate
producer. A production of Creative Thinking International Ltd. in association
with ABC News for Frontline. For Frontline: David Fanning, executive producer.
Deborah Amos, correspondent.

LOAD-DATE: February 21, 1995

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Review

                   Copyright 1995 The New York Times Company

                              132 of 211 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               February 22, 1995, Wednesday, Late Edition - Final

FILM REVIEW;
Playful Puppetry, for Adults Only

BYLINE: By JANET MASLIN

SECTION: Section C;  Page 18;  Column 4;  Cultural Desk

LENGTH: 556 words


The well-named Feebles are a raunchy troupe of show-biz puppets able to ooze,
drool, sniff, retch and copulate in ways that would make the Muppets blush.
Sprung from the febrile imagination of Peter Jackson, they run seriously amok in
"Meet the Feebles," a 1989 film padded out to feature length and destined to
stand as an unfortunate footnote to Mr. Jackson's career.

Mr. Jackson is best known as the director of "Heavenly Creatures," which has
bizarre, elaborate fantasy sequences animated by the same overwrought
playfulness that is seen here. But in "Heavenly Creatures," with its tale of a
murder committed by two love-struck, delusional teen-agers, Mr. Jackson found
the ballast to give his wildly fanciful outbursts a somber tinge. "Meet the
Feebles," which opens today at the Film Forum, has an overload of aimless
giddiness without anything to keep it in check. Had Mr. Jackson not already used
up the title "Bad Taste" on an earlier film, it would have fit "Meet the
Feebles" well.

It's possible to appreciate Mr. Jackson's irrepressible fancifulness without
remotely admiring the uses to which it has been put here. A flamboyantly
vigorous film maker, he hitches his energies to a string of unremittingly
sophomoric sight gags, limiting his audience to only the most ardent fans of
knee-jerk decadence. The fun of caricaturing and humiliating silly animal
characters, like the lewd-looking Miss Piggy type (Heidi the Hippo) who winds up
blasting her fellow puppets with a machine gun, is about as much wit as "Meet
the Feebles" has to offer.

Structured as a deliberately cliche-ridden backstage drama, "Meet the Feebles"
turns a set of standard show-biz characters into assorted animal creatures.
There's a walrus producer, a worm stage manager, a fox director and a rabbit
that has AIDS (played for laughs, and diagnosed by a duck doctor who snickers
like Paul Lynde). There's a fly journalist who turns muckraking into a literal
concept while supplying the film with the grossest of its many toilet jokes.
Drugs, porn movies and a parody of a Vietnam flashback heighten the mood of
hothouse fantasy without contributing much fun.

The puppets themselves aren't of a caliber to one-up the Muppets, but they are
numerous and varied enough to underscore Mr. Jackson's ingenuity. From a
technical standpoint, "Meet the Feebles" does an impressive job of staging
action sequences that stretch the boundaries of ordinary puppet drama.

This may also be one of those rare times when puppets are outfitted with blood
bags for the slow, deliberate sequences -- one of them interspersed with a
song-and-dance number about sodomy -- that show them being blown to bits.

MEET THE FEEBLES

Directed by Peter Jackson; written by Danny Mulheron, Frances Walsh, Stephen
Sinclair and Mr. Jackson; director of photography, Murray Milne; edited by Jamie
Selkirk; music by Peter Dasent; puppet designer, Cameron Chittock; production
designer, Mike Kane; supervising puppeteers, Jonathan Acorn and Ramon Aguilar;
produced by Jim Booth and Mr. Jackson; released by Greycat Films. At Film Forum,
209 West Houston Street, South Village. Running time: 94 minutes. This film is
not rated.

WITH: The voices of Donna Akersten, Stuart Devenie, Mark Hadlow, Ross Jolly,
Brian Sergent, Peter Vere Jones and Mark Wright.


LOAD-DATE: February 22, 1995

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Review

                   Copyright 1995 The New York Times Company

                              133 of 211 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               February 25, 1995, Saturday, Late Edition - Final

On a Familiar Texas Campus, Gramm Makes It Official

BYLINE: By RICHARD L. BERKE,   Special to The New York Times

SECTION: Section 1;  Page 10;  Column 3;  National Desk

LENGTH: 1012 words

DATELINE: COLLEGE STATION, Tex., Feb. 24


Senator Phil Gramm formally declared his candidacy for the Republican
Presidential nomination today, presenting himself as an unwavering conservative
with the record and the grit to carry forward a rightward revolution that began
last November.

Returning here to Texas A & M University, where he was an economics professor
for 12 years, Mr. Gramm stood on the steps of the limestone administration
building and delivered a message that was plainly spoken and razor-sharp.

"We need a leader that has the courage to tell our people the truth," he told an
ebullient crowd of thousands that was stocked with placard-waving students
swaying to the Aggie Band. "We need a leader who has the vision to define
solutions to our problems, solutions that people can understand and can believe
in. And we need a leader who is tough enough to get the job done. In the next 20
months, I hope to convince the American people that I am that leader."

The morning sun re-emerged from clouds, and the two-term Senator from Texas made
it official: "With a love for America and a resolve to make her right again, I
today declare myself a candidate for President of the United States."

Of nine or so Republicans who are already running for the Presidential
nomination, the 52-year-old Mr. Gramm is the first to declare his candidacy
formally. He has set the early pace of the campaign by building the largest war
chest, including $4.1 million -- a record for a single event -- that he reports
raising at a dinner in Dallas on Thursday night. And he has won nonbinding straw
polls among active party members in a handful of states, a result that speaks to
the merits of his early organization.

But half the voters do not yet have an opinion of him, a New York Times/CBS News
Poll shows, and among those who do, the sentiment is mixed.

The poll, conducted by telephone among 586 Americans on Wednesday and Thursday,
found that 14 percent viewed him favorably, 13 percent viewed him not favorably,
22 percent were undecided, and 51 percent had not heard enough about him to form
an opinion.

Among Republicans, the balance of opinion is more positive, although he is still
largely unknown. The poll found that 23 percent of Republicans viewed him
favorably, 13 percent viewed him not favorably, 19 percent were undecided, and
46 percent had not heard enough.

The poll's margin of sampling error was plus or minus four percentage points.

Here today in College Station, about 60 miles northwest of Houston, Mr. Gramm
reminded his audience of his best-known legislative achievement: his
co-authorship of the Gramm-Rudman-Hollings budget-balancing law of the 1980's,
which was ultimately undone by subsequent legislation. Asserting that no goal
was more critical than eliminating the Federal budget deficit, he repeated an
earlier pledge that he would not seek re-election as President if he failed to
do so.

He did not outline specific budget cuts, saying only that there would have to be
"hard choices" but telling reporters later that he would not tamper with Social
Security.

Seeking to distinguish himself as the only genuine conservative in the field,
Mr. Gramm gleefully recalled that he had stood alone "in the darkest hour" of
the health care debate when he opposed President Clinton's proposed overhaul.
"When pollsters were saying it was political suicide to take on the Clinton
health care bill head on, when 20 Republican senators had signed on to a
big-government compromise that raised taxes," he declared, "I stood up and said,
'The Clinton health care bill is going to pass over my cold, dead political
body.' "

After pausing for the hoots and hollers, he added: "I am happy today to say that
my political body is alive. The President's health care bill is deader than
Elvis. And Elvis may be back, but the President's health care bill will not be
back."

The Senator, whose last major speech before a national audience was a poorly
received keynote address at the 1992 Republican National Convention, in Houston,
took the opportunity today to stake out hard-line positions on a number of
issues:

*He pledged to dismantle the welfare system, saying, "I will ask able-bodied men
and women riding in the wagon on welfare to get out of the wagon and help the
rest of us pull."

*He said he would "stop building prisons like Holiday Inns" and press for
vigorous application of the death penalty. "If I have to string barbed wire on
every closed military base in America," he said of criminals, "I am going to put
these people in jail."

*He vowed to sign an executive order ending quotas, preferences and set-asides
for members of minority groups. "I will fight for equal and unlimited
opportunity for every American," he said, "but there will be special privilege
for no one."

*And he called for a strengthening of the American military.

The event here was marked by military symbolism that posed some unstated but
unmistakable incongruities on a day seized by a candidate whose draft deferments
kept him out of military service during the Vietnam War. One speaker was his
close friend and campaign chairman, Senator John McCain of Arizona, who was a
prisoner of war in Vietnam. Members of the A & M Corps of Cadets, dressed in
crisp white uniforms, formed a backdrop for the news photographers. Mr. Gramm
arrived with his wife, Wendy Lee, and their two college-age sons by walking
through the cadets' raised sabres.

And at the end of his speech, there was even the roar of a cannon.

William Philip Gramm

 CURRENT JOB United States Senator from Texas since 1985.

 BORN July 8, 1942, Fort Benning, Ga.

 EDUCATION University of Georgia, B.B.A. 1964, Ph.D. 1967.

 RELIGION Episcopalian.

 MILITARY SERVICE None.

 MARRIED To Wendy Lee since 1970.

 CHILDREN Two sons, Marshall, 21, and Jeff, 19.

 GOVERNMENT POSITIONS United States Representative from Texas's Sixth District
(as a Democrat 1979-83, a Republican 1983-85).

 OTHER MAJOR POSITIONS Professor of economics, Texas A & M University, 1967-78.

NAME: William Philip Gramm

LOAD-DATE: February 25, 1995

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Biography

                   Copyright 1995 The New York Times Company

                              134 of 211 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               February 25, 1995, Saturday, Late Edition - Final

FILM REVIEW;
About Black Marines Fighting in Vietnam

BYLINE: By STEPHEN HOLDEN

SECTION: Section 1;  Page 18;  Column 1;  Cultural Desk

LENGTH: 448 words


You can't patch together an epic film from the cinematic equivalent of Scotch
tape and construction paper. That is one of the lessons of "The Walking Dead," a
well-meaning mess of a movie about black troops fighting in Vietnam.

"The Walking Dead," which opened yesterday, follows a group of marines, most of
them new recruits, who are dispatched by helicopter to airlift the survivors
from an abandoned prisoner-of-war camp in North Vietnam. The five main
characters, whose civilian lives are shown in crudely inserted flashbacks,
represent the typical cross section found in an old-time G.I.-Joe film.

Pfc. Cole Evans (Allen Payne) is a clean-cut young husband and father from Los
Angeles fleeing the pain and humiliation of racial discrimination. Cynical,
pot-smoking Pvt. Hoover Branche (Eddie Griffin) joined the marines after being
caught stealing hamburger from the butcher shop where he works. His speeches are
feverish torrents of comic profanity.

Pfc. Joe Brooks (Vonte Sweet), a 19-year-old who has been living in his
grandmother's basement, enlisted to impress his girlfriend. The imperious
Sergeant Barkley (Joe Morton), who recites the poetry of Countee Cullen over
dead soldiers' bodies, is a former preacher with a terrible secret.

The only white member of the group, Corporal Pippins (Roger Floyd) is a
psychotic gun-crazed gangster.

"The Walking Dead," which was written and directed by Preston A. Whitmore 2d,
stumbles at the most basic level of film making. The cinematography is murky,
the camera movements inflexible and the sound so poorly mixed that whole
swatches of dialogue remain unintelligible. In Mr. Whitmore's screenplay, the
characters, all of them one-dimensional stereotypes, don't banter so much as
they shout speeches at one another. And in the middle of the jungle!

Mr. Whitmore clearly wants to say something about the Vietnam War, race and
American society, but the message is blunted by the movie's mechanical
ineptitude and bargain-basement production.

This film is rated R (Under 17 requires accompanying parent or adult guardian).
It is filled with strong language and is very violent.

THE WALKING DEAD

Written and directed by Preston A. Whitmore 2d; director of photography, John L.
Demps Jr.; edited by Don Brochu and William C. Carruth; music by Gary Chang;
production designer, George Costello; produced by George Jackson, Douglas
McHenry and Frank Price; released by Savoy Pictures. Running time: 90 minutes.
This film is rated R.

WITH: Allen Payne (Pfc. Cole Evans), Eddie Griffin (Pvt. Hoover Branche), Joe
Morton (Sergeant Barkley), Vonte Sweet (Pfc. Joe Brooks) and Roger Floyd
(Corporal Pippins)

LOAD-DATE: February 25, 1995

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Review

                   Copyright 1995 The New York Times Company

                              135 of 211 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                February 26, 1995, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

BEST SELLERS: February 26, 1995

SECTION: Section 7; Page 26; Column 2; Book Review Desk

LENGTH: 1485 words



          Weeks
This Last    On
Week Week  List Fiction

 1      1  52   THE CELESTINE PROPHECY, by James Redfield. (Warner, $17.95.) An
                ancient manuscript, found in Peru, provides insights into
                achieving a fulfilling life.

 2      2  36   POLITICALLY CORRECT BEDTIME STORIES, by James Finn Garner.
                (Macmillan, $8.95.) Classic tales respun to avoid offending
                current sensibilities.

 3          1   BORDER MUSIC, by Robert James Waller. (Warner, $17.95.) A Texas
                rancher, trying to erase his Vietnam trauma, takes to the road
                with an exotic dancer.

 4      4   3   ORIGINAL SIN, by P.D. James. (Knopf, $24.) Adam Dalgliesh
                probes a case involving intrigue, malice and murder in a
                prestigious London publishing house.

 5      3   6   KISS THE GIRLS, by James Patterson. (Little, Brown, $22.95.)
                The police detective Alex Cross pursues a serial killer and the
                kidnapper of his niece.

 6      5   2   DAISY-HEAD MAYZIE, by Dr. Seuss. (Random House, $15.) In words
                and pictures, the story of a girl whose head unexpectedly
                sprouts a daisy.

 7      7   3   HOME SONG, by LaVyrle Spencer. (Putnam, $23.95.) The appearance
                of his unknown biological son threatens the serenity of a man's
                family life.

 8      6   5   ACCEPTABLE RISK, by Robin Cook. (Putnam, $23.95.) A
                researcher's quest for the ultimate drug to treat depression
                has devastating consequences.

 9     11  133  THE BRIDGES OF MADISON COUNTY, by Robert James Waller. (Warner,
                $16.95.) A photographer and a farmer's lonely wife in Iowa.

 10    13  21   MUTANT MESSAGE DOWN UNDER, by Marlo Morgan. (HarperCollins,
                $18.) In Australia's outback, an American woman learns about
                aboriginal philosophy.

 11     8   6   EYES OF A CHILD, by Richard North Patterson. (Knopf, $24.) The
                apparent suicide of a San Francisco man leads to courtroom
                encounters.

 12     9   3   ALWAYS A RECKONING, by Jimmy Carter. (Times Books/Random House,
                $18.) A collection of poems by the former President.

 13    10   5   THE MURDERERS, by W.E.B. Griffin. (Putnam, $23.95.) A series of
                murders and "willful deaths" beleaguers the Philadelphia police
                force.

 14         1   THE CAT WHO BLEW THE WHISTLE, by Lilian Jackson Braun. (Putnam,
                $21.95.) Aided by his two cats, Jim Qwilleran investigates
                embezzlement and a murder.

 15    12   7   SELF-DEFENSE, by Jonathan Kellerman. (Bantam, $22.95.) The
                psychologist-detective Alex Delaware tries to help a woman who
                says she is being stalked.

          Weeks
This Last    On
Week Week  List Nonfiction

 1      1   3   I WANT TO TELL YOU, by O.J. Simpson. (Little, Brown, $17.95.)
                The former football star, now on trial for murder, responds to
                letters he has received.

 2      5   9   SISTERS, by Carol Saline. Photographs by Sharon J. Wohlmuth.
                (Running Press, $27.50.) The relationships of 36 sets of
                sisters, reported in words and pictures.

 3      2   3   RAGING HEART, by Sheila Weller. (Pocket, $18.) An account of
                the marriage of O.J. and Nicole Brown Simpson.

 4      3  20   THE HOT ZONE, by Richard Preston. (Random House, $23.) The
                discovery of a lethal virus, more infectious than H.I.V., and
                the efforts to keep it from spreading.

 5      8  25   COUPLEHOOD, by Paul Reiser. (Bantam, $19.95.) Essays on the ups
                and downs of marriage by the television star and stand-up
                comedian.

 6      4   5   INSIDE THE WHITE HOUSE, by Ronald Kessler. (Pocket, $23.)
                Anecdotes about events at 1600 Pennsylvania Avenue during the
                past 30 years.

 7     11  51   MIDNIGHT IN THE GARDEN OF GOOD AND EVIL, by John Berendt.
                (Random House, $23.) The mysterious death of a young man in
                Savannah, Ga.

 8     12   2   THE DEATH OF COMMON SENSE, by Philip K. Howard. (Random House,
                $18.) How governmental rules and regulations are fettering the
                lives of all Americans.

 9     14  21   DON'T STAND TOO CLOSE TO A NAKED MAN, by Tim Allen. (Hyperion,
                $19.95.) Meditations on life by the star of "Home Improvement."

 10     6  17   CROSSING THE THRESHOLD OF HOPE, by John Paul II. Edited by
                Vittorio Messori. (Knopf, $20.) The Pope discusses matters of
                belief, suffering and hope.

 11    10  13   THE WARREN BUFFETT WAY, by Robert G. Hagstrom Jr. (Wiley,
                $24.95.) An account of the career of the man said to be the
                world's most successful investor.

 12*    7   5   ALL MY CHILDREN, by Gary Warner. (General Publishing, $25.) A
                scrapbook of photographs and mementos about the long-running
                television show.

 13     9   9   NICOLE BROWN SIMPSON, by Faye D. Resnick with Mike Walker.
                (Dove Books, $14.95.) The former wife of O.J. Simpson as
                remembered by a friend.

 14    13  62   THE BOOK OF VIRTUES, by William J. Bennett. (Simon & Schuster,
                $30.) Moral stories adapted from the Greeks, the Bible,
                folklore and elsewhere.

 15    15  22   JAMES HERRIOT'S CAT STORIES, by James Herriot. (St. Martin's,
                $16.95.) A collection of tales by the Yorkshire veterinarian.

          Weeks
This Last    On
Week Week  List Advice, How-to and Miscellaneous

 1      1  92   MEN ARE FROM MARS, WOMEN ARE FROM VENUS, by John Gray.
                (HarperCollins, $23.) Communicating.

 2      3  44   IN THE KITCHEN WITH ROSIE, by Rosie Daley. (Knopf, $14.95.)
                Recipes by Oprah Winfrey's cook.

 3      2   2   THE BEARDSTOWN LADIES' COMMON-SENSE INVESTMENT GUIDE.
                (Godin/Hyperion, $19.95.) Tips.

 4      4   6   FOOD, by Susan Powter. (Simon & Schuster, $24.) Information
                about recipes, nutritional menus and diets.

 5*         1   THE DISCIPLINE OF MARKET LEADERS, by Michael Treacy and Fred
                Wiersema. (Addison-Wesley, $25.) Marketing techniques.


Rankings reflect sales figures, for the week ending Feb. 11, at 3,050 bookstores
plus wholesalers serving 28,000 other retailers (gift shops, department stores,
newsstands, supermarkets), statistically weighted to represent sales in all such
outlets nationwide. An asterisk indicates that a book's sales are barely
distinguishable from those of the book above.
And Bear in Mind
(Editor's Choices of other recent books of particular interest)

THE AGE OF CONSENT, by Geoffrey Wolff. (Knopf, $22.) In Mr. Wolff's sixth novel
Teddy Jenks, a 13-year-old child of the children of the 1960's, is transformed
by his sister's near suicide into the historian of his family's emotional life.

AN ANTHROPOLOGIST ON MARS: Seven Paradoxical Tales, by Oliver Sacks. (Knopf,
$24.) More tales of the engrossingly abnormal by a generous, humane neurologist
who explores the peculiar thinking of both physician and patient.

BETWEEN FRIENDS: The Correspondence of Hannah Arendt and Mary McCarthy,
1949-1975, edited by Carol Brightman. (Harcourt Brace, $34.95.) The 26-year
correspondence of two extraordinarily bright, active, articulate women who
thought a lot and gossiped no little.

A CROOKED MAN, by Christopher Lehmann-Haupt. (Simon & Schuster, $23.) An
attentive thriller by a daily reviewer for The Times; it debates the
decriminalization of drugs in an up-to-date Washington environment.

THE CUNNING MAN, by Robertson Davies. (Viking, $23.95.) The hero of this
intelligent, entertaining novel, a chronicle of personal and social change in
Toronto, is a doctor whose superb diagnostic skills rest on shamanism and
Platonism as well as scientific medicine.

DOSTOEVSKY: The Miraculous Years, 1865-1871, by Joseph Frank. (Princeton
University, $35.) Volume 4 of this planned five-part biography excels in
providing a cultural, literary, social and biographical context for
Dostoyevsky's works.

FRANCO: A Biography, by Paul Preston. (Basic Books, $37.50.) A huge,
all-inclusive life of the outright winner of Spain's civil war, the shrewd,
lucky dictator of his country for almost 40 years.

FROM TIME TO TIME, by Jack Finney. (Simon & Schuster, $23.) Simon Morley, hero
of Mr. Finney's idiosyncratic novel "Time and Again," returns to scramble the
pages of history by trying to prevent World War I.

KWANZAA AND ME: A Teacher's Story, by Vivian Gussin Paley. (Harvard University,
$18.95.) A wise kindergarten teacher, long committed to integration, re-examines
its value by paying attention to what children and parents say.

TERRIBLE HONESTY: Mongrel Manhattan in the 1920s, by Ann Douglas. (Farrar,
Straus & Giroux, $25.) The great big city in the great good time, analyzed with
broad scope and minute complexity as the locus of the national psyche when
Americans attacked the conditioned responses of the pre-1914 world.

THE UNUSUAL LIFE OF TRISTAN SMITH, by Peter Carey. (Knopf, $24.) Its tough,
spare, considered language sustains this big and thoughtful novel, whose hero
learns that imperialism is universal, bad for weak and strong alike.

THE WEDDING, by Dorothy West. (Doubleday, $20.) A novel by an 87-year-old
survivor of the Harlem Renaissance; its main subject is the subtle assumptions
of color, class and status in a summer colony of upper-class black families.

LOAD-DATE: February 26, 1995

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: List

                   Copyright 1995 The New York Times Company

                              136 of 211 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                February 26, 1995, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

'I'll Be Ever'where'

BYLINE: By Terry Teachout;   Terry Teachout is the editor of "A Second Mencken
Chrestomathy." He is writing "H. L. Mencken: A Life."

SECTION: Section 7;  Page 25;  Column 1;  Book Review Desk

LENGTH: 1356 words



JOHN STEINBECK
A Biography.
By Jay Parini.
Illustrated. 536 pp. New York:
Henry Holt & Company. $30.

IF sales equal success, the posthumous career of John Steinbeck is one of the
most spectacular success stories in the annals of modern American literature. A
quarter-century after his death in 1968 at the age of 66, all of his novels
remain in print, selling more than 700,000 copies each year. Yet Steinbeck gets
even less respect today than during his lifetime, when he was generally regarded
by serious critics as a well-meaning middlebrow. Perhaps the kindest thing ever
said about him by an intellectual came from Edmund Wilson, who wrote in 1940
that "there remains behind the journalism, the theatricalism and the tricks . .
. a mind which does seem first-rate in its un panicky scrutiny of life." As
left-handed compliments go, that one deserves some sort of prize.

Jay Parini argues in his new biography that Steinbeck got a raw deal. "A number
of influential critics thought his writing had generally declined since the
publication of 'The Grapes of Wrath,' in 1939, and they banished Steinbeck to
the swollen ranks of the second-rate and half-forgotten," Mr. Pa rini writes.
"When he received the Nobel Prize in 1962, the decision of the Swedish Academy
was ridiculed in America by a few well-known academic critics and a handful of
journalists who refused to believe that a writer with a popular following could
be any good." Unfortunately, the case against Steinbeck isn't quite that simple,
and Mr. Parini's seeming unawareness of this fact is the only blot on an
otherwise excellent book.

"John Steinbeck: A Biography" runs rings around its immediate predecessor, "The
True Adventures of John Steinbeck, Writer" (1984), by Jackson J. Benson, which
at 1,116 pages is as elephantine as its title is arch. Mr. Parini, by contrast,
wraps things up in just under 500 pages of text, a length nicely suited to the
life of a man who married three women and published nearly 30 books. Not that
Steinbeck's story has much to offer in the way of high drama: it was for the
most part the usual depressing tale of serial monogamy interspersed with heavy
drinking. Still, Mr. Parini lays out the facts with clarity and sympathy, and
anyone curious as to precisely how famous American novelists earn the money to
pay their liquor bills will find the resulting narrative of more than passing
interest.

The trouble with "John Steinbeck" is that its author sincerely believes his
subject was a major novelist and spends far too much time trying to prove the
point. Whenever Mr. Parini strays from the straight and narrow path of biography
and starts playing critic, his book grinds to a halt amid clouds of dusty prose:
"The heroes (and they are always male) are seen in the later work (especially in
'Viva Zapata!,' 'East of Eden,' 'Travels With Charley' and 'The Winter of Our
Discontent') as separate integers within the larger context of the group and the
environment as a whole."

As for the critical judgments themselves, suffice it to say that there must be
something wrong with the ear of a novelist and professor of English (Mr. Parini,
who teaches at Middlebury College in Vermont, is the author of "Bay of Arrows,"
"The Last Station," "The Patch Boys" and "The Love Run") who can cite without
the slightest flicker of irony Steinbeck's description of a character in
"Cannery Row" as "concupiscent as a rabbit and as gentle as hell."

To his credit, Mr. Parini's admiration for Steinbeck's work has not stopped him
from placing in evidence numerous exhibits for the prosecution, among the most
damning of which is a remark made by Edith Mirrielees, Steinbeck's
creative-writing teacher at Stanford University, who told a later student how
"she tried to curb his sentimental side. That was his Achilles' heel." Indeed it
was, and Steinbeck never overcame it. His style, a clunky blend of
hypermasculine sentimentality and Hemingwayesque faux simplicity, is at times
almost eerily reminiscent of the simile-happy hard-boiled mystery novelists of
the 1930's. (Here is my favorite bad line from "The Grapes of Wrath": "Ma looked
down at her hands, lying together like tired lovers in her lap.")

But while Raymond Chandler and Dashiell Hammett scrupulously avoided mounting
the soapbox, Steinbeck camped out on top of his, most notably in "The Grapes of
Wrath": "I'll be ever'where -- wherever you look. Wherever they's a fight so
hungry people can eat, I'll be there. Wherever they's a cop beatin' up a guy,
I'll be there. . . . An' when our folks eat the stuff they raise an' live in the
houses they build -- why, I'll be there." Small wonder Steinbeck spent the rest
of his career trying not to write another "Grapes of Wrath." Rarely has an
author so completely revealed himself in a single book, for better or worse.

His flaws notwithstanding, Steinbeck continues to sell by the carload, something
that cannot be said of any number of superior novelists who made a comparable
stir in their day. It is not hard to see why. For all his sentimentality and
derivativeness, Steinbeck knew how to tell a story. The sheer narrative sweep of
his best books is undeniable, and admirable. It is no surprise that most of
Steinbeck's novels were made into movies or plays and were usually improved in
the process: Hollywood kept the plots and cut the sermons.

Steinbeck is also one of the most teachable of American novelists. Mr. Parini
recalls how a junior high school teacher steered him to "Of Mice and Men": "She
led me to his long shelf of books, where I have lingered happily for many
decades." It is a charming story, and an illuminating one. "Of Mice and Men" and
"The Grapes of Wrath" are novels with training wheels -- ideal preparation for
the greater challenges posed by better writers. Their combination of juicy
plots, crudely obvious symbolism and good liberal politics is as irresistible to
teen-agers as it is to teachers. (One wonders exactly how many of the 50,000
copies of "The Grapes of Wrath" sold in this country annually are bought by
readers over the age of 21.)

Steinbeck's work, as Mr. Parini suggests, may well be ripe for a critical
revival. The market for utilitarian art with a maudlin streak is at least as
large today as it was in his heyday, and though he was hardly a cookie-cutter
ideologue (he loathed Communism and supported the Vietnam War), Steinbeck was in
every other way a child of the 30's, that painfully earnest decade of
proletarian fiction, Socialist Realism and art as a weapon. In 1940, the year
"The Grapes of Wrath" won the Pulitzer for fiction, Steinbeck's fellow
prizewinners included Carl Sandburg (for "Abraham Lincoln: The War Years") and
William Saroyan (for "The Time of Your Life"). "While in the past I have
sometimes been dubious about Pulitzer choices," Steinbeck told a friend, "I am
pleased and flattered to be chosen in a year when Sandburg and Saroyan were
chosen. It is good company." He certainly knew a peer when he saw one.



Cleaning 'Grapes'

Viking planned to bring out "The Grapes of Wrath" in late March or early April
[of 1939], but there were some delicate problems in the manuscript that had to
be addressed. . . . The fear was that bookstores might refuse to stock a novel
full of "obscene" dialogue; the book might even be banned. Thus, Elizabeth Otis
was dispatched to California to work with Steinbeck. . . .

Each little change, he later recalled, felt like a blow. "My whole system
recoiled," he said. As any decent novelist would, he had strong feelings about
the rhythmical flow of the dialogue, insisting that if anything was dropped he
must add something to maintain the rhythm. Otis meticulously extracted the
four-letter words, putting in their place whatever Steinbeck suggested; but she
had difficulties in sending a telegram with the changes via Western Union. The
operator was horrified by what she heard. "You are obviously not a Christian,
madam!" the woman intoned. It took some fancy talking to convince her that what
she was doing was, indeed, an act of purification!
   From "John Steinbeck."

LOAD-DATE: February 26, 1995

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo: John Steinbeck in 1962. (THE NEW YORK TIMES)

TYPE: Review

                   Copyright 1995 The New York Times Company

                              137 of 211 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                February 26, 1995, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

FILM;
Western Canvas, Palette of Blood

BYLINE: By JAMES GREENBERG;   James Greenberg is a freelance writer who covers
the entertainment industry.

SECTION: Section 2;  Page 19;  Column 1;  Arts & Leisure Desk

LENGTH: 2110 words


SAM PECKINPAH WAS already regarded as a volatile personality in Hollywood when
he and his band of outsiders went down to Mexico in the spring of 1968 to film
"The Wild Bunch." With his use of slow-motion gunfights, spurting blood and
fractured editing, Peckinpah created a savage tableau of violence and
redemption. But for all its bloodletting "The Wild Bunch" has influenced a
generation of film makers, not only with its bold technique but with its
surprisingly graceful exploration of character.

"I think Peckinpah has been misinterpreted to mean how many heads can you blow
off," says the director Ron Shelton. "But in the middle of the action there are
characters to whom great attention has been paid."

Peckinpah's name has long been a benchmark for action directors (John Woo is
"Hong Kong's answer to Sam Peckinpah," said Stephen Holden of The New York
Times) and for violent films ("Reservoir Dogs" is "the most aggressively brutal
movie since Sam Peckinpah's 'Straw Dogs,' " said The Times's Vincent Canby).

Now Peckinpah, who died of a heart attack in 1984, is undergoing the kind of
public reappraisal that often happens to dead artists. On Friday Warner Brothers
will re-release "The Wild Bunch," and a retrospective of 14 of the director's
films, "Blood of a Poet: The Cinema According to Sam Peckinpah," will run from
March 10 through March 31 at the Film Society of Lincoln Center.

"The Wild Bunch" generated debate as soon as it opened, in July 1969. One irate
audience member at a Kansas City preview wrote her Congressman complaining about
the violence. Warner Brothers trimmed the film in response to poor initial
business. And even today the film creates controversy. When the studio announced
last year that it would release a restored version of the movie -- a movie that
was rated R by the Motion Picture Association of America in 1969 -- it was
deemed so violent that it was given an NC-17 rating. The M.P.A.A. subsequently
determined that the film was entitled to its original R, andon Friday American
moviegoers will have their first chance to see "The Wild Bunch" in a theater as
it was intended by its director.

The mournful story the film tells is of a changing West where there is no room
for honest outlaws. It's 1913, and the shrinking wild bunch, led by a weathered
William Holden and Ernest Borgnine, wants to pull one more job and gets caught
up stealing guns for a renegade Mexican general who's fighting Pancho Villa. At
the same time, the men are being chased by bounty hunters led by an ex-partner
in crime, Robert Ryan.

"Peckinpah instantly understood the dark philosophy and inherent violence of the
film, and he went for the throat of that," says Walon Green, whose screenplay
for the film was later embellished by the director. "But more important, he also
picked up on the fact that these guys only had loyalty going for them. He saw
this incredibly violent existence and this romantic, almost pathetic, loyalty."

The cynical disillusionment of Peckinpah's characters was in keeping with the
times. Robert Kennedy and Martin Luther King were assassinated while Peckinpah
was making "The Wild Bunch." The Vietnam War escalated. Despite the protests of
the old Hollywood, movies were turning toward meaner, more realistic stories.
"Midnight Cowboy" won the Academy Award for best film in 1969. Traditional
boundaries between good guys and bad guys became meaningless. With the release
of "Butch Cassidy and the Sundance Kid" and "Once Upon a Time in the West" the
same year, the western would never be the same.

"Let's face it, these were no longer the tranquil, benign Eisenhower years,"
says the director Arthur Penn, whose film "Bonnie and Clyde" had caused a stir
two years earlier. "No one could touch a subject without being affected by what
was going on in the country. You had to be an ostrich with a neck two miles long
buried in the sand not to see we were living in a violent time."

If Warren Beatty and Faye Dunaway in "Bonnie and Clyde" led audiences toward
social and political rebellion, Peckinpah seduced them with violence.
Interviewed at the time of the film's release, Peckinpah said that he wanted to
"take the facade of movie violence and open it up, get people involved . . . and
then twist it so that it's not fun anymore, just a wave of sickness in the gut.
It's not fun and games and cowboys and Indians," he said. "It's a terrible, ugly
thing."

IN THE FILM, HOLDEN BLOWS A woman off her feet, and viscera fly through the air
in the final, slow-motion bloodbath. It is obvious that Peckinpah was as
attracted to destruction as he was repulsed by it. A heavy drinker most of his
life, Peckinpah poured his pain and self-loathing into the film and inflicted
his suffering on family, friends and colleagues. "He could be hell on wheels,"
Mr. Borgnine says. "He fired an assistant director 17 times."

His gift was that he could dramatize his demons on screen, and in "The Wild
Bunch" they came roaring to life. Paul Schrader, who plowed similar territory in
his screenplay for "Taxi Driver" (1976) and who has directed pictures like
"Patty Hearst" (1988) and "Light Sleeper" (1992), says he learned from Peckinpah
to "go into your neuroses, to go into those things about yourself that you fear,
not to cover them up but open them up."

When it came time to make "The Wild Bunch," it wasn't enough for Peckinpah to
have men simply fall over and die. Both Peckinpah and Mr. Penn had observed
Akira Kurosawa's use of slow motion in "The Seven Samurai" and had experimented
with the technique in their early films. And with the endless dissection of the
Zapruder film of President John F. Kennedy's assassination and the shooting of
Lee Harvey Oswald on television, slow motion almost unconsciously became the
voice of violence.

"Bonnie and Clyde" had already used four cameras filming at different speeds to
record the 22-seconds of what Mr. Penn calls "the spastic lyricism" of its
climactic scene, and Peckinpah was aiming to outdo that.  "We're going to bury
'Bonnie and Clyde,' " he told a crew member on the set of "The Wild Bunch."

Peckinpah set up six cameras and spent four weeks composing the four minutes of
climactic carnage. He planted thousands of squibs, tiny blood-filled explosive
devices concealed on an actor's body, to show the impact of the bullets. But
ordinary squibbing wasn't enough for Peckinpah; he ordered the movie blood mixed
with pieces of meat. He also wanted actors squibbed front and back so that a
bullet would appear to go in and come out.

On breaks between scenes, with hundreds of extras from the Mexican Army standing
by, Peckinpah wandered the set with a can of freshly mixed movie blood,
sprinkling it around, Mr. Borgnine recalls. "We'd watch him and say, 'Atta boy,
Sam. More blood,' " the actor says with a hearty laugh.

On some days the action became so real that grown men would break down. "I had a
stand-in who had been with Patton during World War II," Mr. Borgnine says.
"After an extremely hard day in which guns were going off and blasting away and
everything else, I looked over at him and he was crying. 'What's the matter,
Freddy?' I asked him. 'I can't take it, I can't take it.' he said. "He had been
shell-shocked during the war, and this brought back too many memories."

Despite the frequent fireworks on the set, few of the cast or crew recognized
the expressionist vision of violence that Peckinpah had in mind. Working with
his editor Lou Lombardo, Peckinpah stitched together varying speeds of
slow-motion with normal-speed action to build an intense and irresistible ballet
of violence.

In the opening scene -- a bank robbery in which the bunch is ambushed by the
bounty hunters -- a gunfighter's fall from a balcony is intercut with
surrounding action four times before he hits the ground. By cutting between
parallel action, Peckinpah and Mr. Lombardo stretched time and trapped the
audience in an emotional maelstrom. The first 151-minute version of the film had
3,642 cuts -- compared with 600 in the average two-hour film of the period.

"The Wild Bunch" carries such an emotional punch that many film makers remember
the first time they saw it as a formative experience. Kathryn Bigelow, the
director of "Point Break" (1991) and one of the few women making action movies
in Hollywood, saw "The Wild Bunch" in the mid-70's on a double bill with Martin
Scorsese's equally explosive "Mean Streets." After that, Ms. Bigelow, then a
painter, found herself thinking more and more about film as a vehicle of
expression. "If you looked at it from an editorial standpoint, it's almost
gestalt editing," she says. "It defied so many principles, basically turning
everything around. It imploded standard theories. It was radical and
tremendously vibrant."

Mr. Shelton, the director, who first saw a matinee of "The Wild Bunch in Little
Rock, Ark., where he was playing minor-league baseball, says: "Sam shot massive
amounts of coverage and angles, and that added to the nervous energy. He created
life through cuts." The film, Mr. Shelton notes, got "all over and under my
skin, and it's been there ever since." In appreciation, he says, his
interpretation of the self-destructive and bad-tempered hero of his latest film,
"Cobb," was based on stories he had heard about Peckinpah.

When Mr. Scorsese was still a New York University film instructor trying to
break into features, his friend Jay Cocks, then a critic for Time magazine and
later a screenwriterof Mr. Scorsese's "Age of Innocence," took him to an early
screening of "The Wild Bunch." The two of them sat alone in the theater
spellbound.

"The exhilaration had to do with the way he used film and the way he used the
images with a number of different cameras going at different speeds," Mr.
Scorsese is quoted as saying in "If They Move . . . Kill 'Em!," a biography of
Peckinpah by David Weddle (Grove Press). "You really got a wonderful
choreographed effect; it's like dance or like poetry." Peckinpah's innovations
were later adapted and advanced by Mr. Scorsese in the startling multispeed,
blood-drenched boxing sequences of "Raging Bull."

Peckinpah's influence was not limited to America. In the opening sequence of the
Macedonian film "Before the Rain," which has been nominated for an academy award
in the best-foreign-film category, the director Milcho Manchevski has a group of
children torture two turtles, then set them on fire. This seems an obvious
homage to the opening of "The Wild Bunch," in which children cover a scorpion
with red ants and then burn it.

In the 1993 film "Flight of the Innocent," the Italian director Carlo Carlei
tells a story of rural gang warfare and kidnapped children in the cinematic
language he learned from Peckinpah. "The influence of Peckinpah comes to me
filtered by other directors I like who were influenced by him," Mr. Carlei says.
"There is a chain of inspiration like the Bible. Everything comes from Peckinpah
when talking about shooting scenes. Other prophets tried to perfect it and are
part of an evolution."

It is virtually impossible to see a killing on film or television today that is
not shot in graphic slow motion. In his film "Extreme Prejudice" Walter Hill
re-created action sequences from "The Wild Bunch" shot for shot. And film makers
who are not familiar with Peckinpah's work still emulate it. Sharon Stone's
recent feminist western, "The Quick and the Dead," features Peckinpah-esque
gunplay even though the director, Sam Raimi, says he has never seen "The Wild
Bunch." Mr. Schrader says, "Clearly there are a lot of imitators who don't come
from the same place and are just picking the fruit without feeling the pain."

While many films today surpass "The Wild Bunch" in explicitness, their violence
is often cartoonish or self-referential. "I find the violence in the Joel Silver
films pretty offensive, where it's totally there for entertainment value," says
Mr. Green, the screenwriter for "The Wild Bunch" and now a co-executive producer
for the television series "N.Y.P.D. Blue." "The violence is made so accessible
and thrown at you at such high speed that it's no longer violent. People laugh
or goof off and eat popcorn."

For Mr. Penn, even the much-heralded movies of Quentin Tarantino -- "Reservoir
Dogs" and "Pulp Fiction" -- are films about films and not films about
experience. "No one in 'Pulp Fiction' had function or depth or individuation,"
he says. "It's kind of a movie comic strip, and that's what Tarantino does very
well. But it doesn't have the visceral power. When violence is grounded in
character, then you suffer loss and terror and pain."

LOAD-DATE: February 26, 1995

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photos: Ken Hutchison, left, Dustin Hoffman and Del Heeney in Sam
Peckinpah's 1971 "Straw Dogs"--A legacy of intense ballets of violence. The
director on the set of "Convoy" (1978)--Not fun and games. (John
Bryson/Sygma)(pg. 26); William Holden in "The Wild Bunch"--The outlaw leader
takes a bullet in the back (he doesn't die) and then turns around to kill the
woman who shot him. (Photofest)(pg. 19)

                   Copyright 1995 The New York Times Company

                              138 of 211 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                February 27, 1995, Monday, Late Edition - Final

Foreign Aid Budget: Quick, How Much? Wrong.

BYLINE: By BARBARA CROSSETTE

SECTION: Section A;  Page 6;  Column 1;  Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 921 words


As Congress moves to cut foreign aid and overhaul the apparatus that delivers
it, supporters of such assistance are gathering evidence that Americans have
little or no idea how small the aid budget actually is.

When confronted with figures, poll takers are discovering, American voters often
seem to be instinctively more generous than their representatives in Washington.

A survey last month, conducted jointly by two independent policy centers -- the
University of Maryland Center for International and Security Studies and the
Center for the Study of Policy Attitudes -- found that Americans were wildly off
the mark in guessing how much their nation spends on foreign aid.

Among the 801 people surveyed, 15 percent was the median figure given when
Americans were asked about how much of the budget went to foreign aid. Other
recent polls, including a Harris Poll in November 1993, indicated that Americans
thought the Government devoted 20 percent or more of its spending to foreign
assistance.

The figure is about 1 percent of the Federal budget. Total foreign aid --
military and non-military combined -- is now about $13 billion a year. About
half that, devoted largely to human-development programs relating to health,
family planning and economic self-help, is administered by the United States
Agency for International Development.

When asked about an "appropriate" expenditure for aid, respondents to the
January poll said about 5 percent of the budget, or about five times what is
spent now.

Measured another way, by per capita gross domestic product, the United States
devotes only 0.15 of its G.D.P. to foreign aid, far less than all other
industrial countries. And the figure has been steadily declining in recent
years.

According to the Agency for International Development and the Organization of
Economic Cooperation and Development, which tracks the economies in richer
nations, about $44 of the taxes paid annually by an average American family
would go to foreign aid. In Denmark, the equivalent figure would be $900.

"There are four very common myths about foreign aid," said Catherine Gwin, vice
president for studies at the Overseas Development Council, an independent policy
and research organization in Washington.

"One is that we spend an awful lot of money," Ms. Gwin said in an interview.
"All the polling data show that the gap between what we spend and what Americans
think we spend is astronomical."

"The second myth is that Americans are very generous as a nation, despite the
fact that the percentage we spend is lowest in the O.E.C.D.," she said.

This myth, however, does not extend to personal contributions to private groups,
donations that continue to rise, said John W. Sewell, president of the policy
and research organization.

"The third myth is that aid is money down a rat hole, and that there have been
no successes," she said, referring to a comment on such aid made by Senator
Jesse Helms, Republican of North Carolina. "And the fourth is that there is no
direct, immediate payback to the U.S."

There are reasons for the "rat hole" argument, Ms. Gwin said.

"During the cold war, we allocated foreign aid money on cold war rationales and
then critiqued it on the basis of development effectiveness -- so we get a
Zaire," she said, alluding to United States support an anti-Communist Zairian
leader who has been widely viewed as corrupt and authoritarian.

Or a Vietnam. Ms. Gwin said many supporters of aid became disillusioned after
large amounts of money were spent trying to prevent the South from falling to
Communism. "We have never really recovered," she said.

"During the cold war, we gave aid for one reason and then judged it for
another," she said. "But in countries where the aid was given for development
reasons, the anecdotes are much more positive -- and there are many of them.
Americans don't know what's been happening in literacy rates, in population and
fertility decline, and how much of a change has occurred."

J. Brian Atwood, the Administrator of the Agency for International Development,
said in an interview that the United States "has been a leader in the world."

"For example," Mr. Atwood said, "43 percent of all the family-planning services
offered to women around the world are from A.I.D."

If other donors joined the campaign with similar commitment, he said, "we can
indeed achieve the goal of stabilizing world population by the year 2030.

"There is nothing right about the words 'foreign' or 'aid,' " he said. "It's not
charity. It's not a gift. It's something we do in our own interests."

Whether stemming the spread of epidemic diseases, helping to create jobs that
keep would-be immigrants at home or sustaining and nurturing new democracies and
their shaky private-sector economies, the job of aid, Mr. Atwood said, is to
keep countries from "falling off the edge," with global results. He said
Americans understand that the United States cannot escape the consequences.

The development agency points to a July 1993 Gallup Poll that said only one in
four Americans agreed that the United States "should avoid becoming involved
with other nations as much as possible." In the mid-1980's, Gallup found that 3
in 10 Americans took that position.

"Because of the impression that has been created that our foreign aid program is
nothing more than an international welfare program, it has been possible for
demagogues, isolationists and populists -- some all in the same person -- to
exploit that," Mr. Atwood said.

LOAD-DATE: February 27, 1995

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1995 The New York Times Company

                              139 of 211 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 March 1, 1995, Wednesday, Late Edition - Final

Vietnam Bike Tour Challenges Western Hearts and Minds

BYLINE: By BRUCE WEBER,   Special to The New York Times

SECTION: Section A;  Page 1;  Column 1;  Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 2927 words

DATELINE: HO CHI MINH CITY, Vietnam


The man lying in the hammock remembered the supply trucks rumbling past his
house at night.

"Yes," he said through an interpreter, gesturing out at the road before him.
"This was the Ho Chi Minh Trail."

We got back on our bicycles and continued south.

This was in Giang, a river village some 500 miles north of here, in the Central
Highlands. The road is known as Highway 14, but that's a joke. Though it has
been widened since the Vietnam War ended, it is still a precipitous and tortuous
route that negotiates densely overgrown hillsides, the roadbed in places a
red-dirt path that often turns to mud in the jungle dampness, in others an
obstacle course of jagged stones.

The Ho Chi Minh Trail was constructed largely in Laos and Cambodia, of course,
out of the way of American bombers, but it didn't take much to imagine Highway
14 as part of the network of roads used by the Communists to ferry supplies and
reinforcements from north of the demilitarized zone to Dak To, Pleiku, Kontum,
Ban Me Thuot and the other southern battlefronts.

What was tough to imagine was this as a bike route, and indeed for the next
several days it was slow, even dangerous going, a rattling endurance test for
both bike and body.  The bicycle trip, which ended in early February, was
organized by a company in Portland, Ore., called Cycle Vietnam, now in its
second year of organizing bike tours in Southeast Asia. There were about 60 of
us all told, ranging in age from 23 to 74, nearly all Americans, about a third
women, about 10 Vietnam vets.

Eleven of us navigated Highway 14 -- we'd left a larger group in the coastal
city of Da Nang -- and nearly all of us took nasty spills and were forced into
roadside repairs. And more than once we had to cut short the riding day and
board our support vans because we hadn't a prayer of completing the mileage to
our scheduled stopping place before dark.

Still, in many ways this was the most rewarding stretch of our 1,200-mile,
three-week journey from Hanoi to Ho Chi Minh City, as Saigon was renamed after
the Communists captured it in 1975.

This was the landscape we had come all this way to see, the deep green jungles,
the lush riverbank villages, the Vietnam terrain that still looks like a war
zone, familiar from newsreels and movies. Hanoi, once the battered enemy
capital, is, amazingly, a friendly city. At Khe Sanh, the American garrison that
was the object of the miserable siege in 1968 is gone. But beyond Giang, in the
seemingly impenetrable wilderness between the village of Phuoc Son and the city
of Dak To, the war's terrors lingered.

There, on a thick-misted morning, Morris Erickson, now a 48-year-old real estate
lawyer in Bloomington, Ind., dismounted his bicycle on a small cement bridge
over a creek and remembered patrolling as an infantry platoon leader in 1970.

His men would go out in similarly forbidding terrain for two weeks at a time,
Mr. Erickson said; they'd move through the jungle a few hundred yards a day,
eating dry rations, sleeping in their ponchos, ever-alert for trip-wires that
might set off a mine or a booby trap, or for guerrilla machine-gun nests
camouflaged in the hills.

I'd been old enough to serve in Vietnam, but had avoided conscription because of
a fortuitously high draft number. And though I had heard veterans describe
details like these before, I'd never stood in a place like this while hearing
them, and I could only imagine what it must have been like for an American
soldier waking up in the jungle to another day of war. The air that morning was
heavy and wet, a bit chill, and it could make you homesick all by itself.

"It's not bothering me at all to be back," Mr. Erickson had said in Hanoi. But
standing on that bridge, reliving that time, he looked like a younger, less
confident version of himself. He hugged his shoulders, and as he continued the
story his grip tightened noticeably.

"I'll tell you one thing," he said. "You'd never, ever stand out in the open on
a bridge like this."

Setting Off
60 Bicyclists, Of Many Pasts

The trip began with a brisk ride out of Hanoi, passing through the bleakly
beautiful landscapes of the north -- the humped mountains looming in the mist
beyond vast rice paddies -- and the energetic but uninspiring cities: Ninh Binh,
Than Hoa and Ky Anh. Still, by the time we reached the former demilitarized
zone, it had already been eye-opening, exhilarating even, with a reception from
the Vietnamese that we could not have anticipated. All along Highway 1, entire
villages came to the roadside to greet us as we passed through. And from people
so far away we could barely see them, hundreds of yards away knee-deep in the
rice fields, calls of "Hello!" echoed at our backs.

There were some discomforting incidents -- Vietnamese threw stones at our group
a few times and one young woman made a threatening gesture at me with a machete
-- but even those of us most unsettled by the occasional shows of hostility
admit that the overwhelming reaction of the Vietnamese in the North was one of
unqualified welcome.

"It's weird," said Wilson Hubbell, 49, who was a helicopter crewman in the war.
"I've gotten a better reception as an American returning to Vietnam than I did
as a Vietnam veteran returning to America."

It is hard to conceive of the Vietnam War as a tourist attraction, but that is
what it is becoming.

There was the Ham Ron Bridge, just north of Than Hoa, near which more than 50
American planes were shot down; the hillsides around the bridge are pockmarked
with bomb craters, now grassed over, in which children play.

In Hanoi, we went to Bach Mai Hospital, rebuilt now, but nearly destroyed during
a Christmas week bombing in 1972; a bas-relief memorial to the dead fills a
courtyard wall. And we visited the site of Hoa Lo Prison, the so-called Hanoi
Hilton, part of which is being torn down so a real hotel can be built. I picked
up a brick from the rubble to bring home as a souvenir and was immediately
surrounded by several men who fixed me with severe expressions of reprimand. It
was a few seconds before one of them spoke.

"One dollar," he said.

A Rough Ride
Road Conditions: Hell on Wheels

Traveling in Vietnam on a bicycle is stirring, daunting, grueling. You might
expect a place where everyone, it seems, is on a bike to have decent roads, but
even the country's main north-south artery, Highway 1 (due for repaving this
year as part of the Government effort to encourage tourism) is generally trying
for a cyclist.

The traffic is chaotic. Vietnamese drive on the right side of the road, but
unlike Americans they are not fanatical about it, so it was not unusual for a
cyclist to be forced onto the shoulder by an overstuffed bus or an
exhaust-belching truck coming from the opposite direction.

And although there are intermittent stretches of smooth and soothing asphalt,
the roadbed is mostly pocked and pitted, occasionally just a rutted and rocky
dirt path -- road conditions more suited to the fat-tire hybrid bikes and
mountain bikes that most of us brought with us than to conventional road bikes.

We spent nearly all of the first four days on Highway 1; so even without the
history that is literally buried at the end of it, the bike ride from Highway 1
to the tiny coastal village of Vinh Moc was a worthwhile detour.

The eight miles of rugged dirt road begins with a brief, steep climb to a
panoramic ridge and then descends gradually through the jungle, spilling into
the village, which is just north of the Ben Hai River, the former dividing line
between North and South Vietnam, atop beachfront cliffs on the Gulf of Tonkin.

During the war, as the closest mainland point to the island of Con Co, an
important Communist supply depot, Vinh Moc -- even now a collection of huts
without electricity set among jungle palms and banana trees -- was bombed from
the air, from the sea and even from howitzers lobbing their shells over the
demilitarized zone.

In response, the villagers went underground, digging almost two miles of
tunnels, three levels of rooms and passageways as deep as 85 feet below the
ground. As many as 1,200 people at a time lived there between 1966 and the end
of the war in 1975.

Nguyen Quang Chuc, 34, who guided us for a half-hour tour in the clammy darkness
of the tunnels, said through an interpreter that he had lived underground with
his family for six years, until he was 12. He said his father was killed by an
American bomb in 1972.

But if it strikes him as ironic or troubling now to be escorting Americans on
the site of his difficult childhood, he does not acknowledge it.

"I am happy to receive tourists," he said. "Especially the Americans. They will
learn about the Vietnamese and sympathize."

Trip to the Past
For Ex-Soldiers, Painful Memories

As an American with no memories to settle here, to visit a place with such a
grim legacy is to be both ensnared by the past and troubled by it. For a
returning veteran it is of course more personal.

This was actually Wilson Hubbell's second return to Vietnam. A year earlier, Mr.
Hubbell, a normally amiable and loquacious man, had been on the first Cycle
Vietnam trip, but when he landed in Hanoi, a crippling anxiety overtook him at
the airport. Also suffering from a sinus infection, he returned home.

"I had put the war behind me years and years ago, I thought," Mr. Hubbell, now a
transportation official in Santa Barbara County in California, said in Hanoi.

"But the very first thing that happens when you get off the plane and you go
through customs, you see the guy there in the uniform. A North Vietnamese Army
soldier. If I had seen a guy dressed like that 25 years ago, I'd have shot him
on sight and he'd have shot me on sight. So suddenly here I am standing face to
face with this guy, and I can feel the hair on the back of my neck starting to
crawl up.

"Where I had been in Vietnam, especially in the Central Highlands, you couldn't
trust little kids. You couldn't trust Mama-sans. There were a lot of different
ways you could die. It was totally irrational, but what's going on in my head is
that any one of these people might kill me at any given moment.

"And then I had nightmares. People I was here in Vietnam with would appear and
say: 'You came here on a bicycle ride? Don't you remember how we all suffered in
this place? You came here to have fun?' "

Months of counseling and talking to other veterans have prepared him better for
this second confrontation with his demons, Mr. Hubbell said.

"I met a lot of guys, when they found out what I was going to do, said, 'While
you're going down the road, when you get to this place or that place, will you
take a picture for me? " he said. "Guys gave me theirshoulder patches and said,
'Nail this to a tree for me.' So this time I've got a purpose."

On this trip, Mr. Hubbell rode his bike through Qui Nhon, a coastal town some
250 miles north of Ho Chi Minh City, where he was stationed in 1968 during the
Tet offensive. There is a Vietnamese Army base now on the site of the old
American base, and Mr. Hubbell went to see it. He was introduced to a former
North Vietnamese soldier, a man about his age, and soon the two men were
astounded to discover that they may well have exchanged gunfire during Tet. The
man invited Mr. Hubbell into his home. They had tea.

Finally, Mr. Hubbell said, recalling the conversation later in a hotel bar in Ho
Chi Minh City, "I feel like the war is over."

Off the Beaten Track
Ride on Wild Side And a Night in Jail

According to Vietnamtourism, the largest of the country's Government-subsidized
tourist agencies, as few as 8,000 to 10,000 Americans visited Vietnam as
tourists in the year since President Clinton lifted the American trade embargo.

The numbers are likely to increase, now that diplomatic relations between the
two countries are expected to resume, but for now most American visitors are
cruise ship passengers, or else they remain in the area near Ho Chi Minh City.

In the interior of the country, the sudden appearance of a Westerner on a
bicycle can still be shocking, or even illegal.

It was outside A Luoi, a small city near the Laotian border south of the
demilitarized zone, that I was arrested and detained overnight for being in a
restricted area without authorization papers.

I was traveling alone in a relatively unpopulated area, after a companion had
become ill and taken a bus back to the coast earlier in the day. It was foolish,
perhaps, to be biking alone, but the remoteness and danger of it all was, of
course, the spur. And indeed, for 20 or so miles, south of the village of Ta
Rut, it was the ride of a lifetime, through a rolling jungle where people no
longer returned my greetings but stared -- a helmeted, 6-foot-tall white person
on a futuristic bicycle -- with incredulity.

After a while, the road turned for a final, long ascent over a mountain pass.
For nearly an hour I climbed, in and out of the sunlight as the road switched
back and forth against the mountainside. There were no people up there, no cows
or dogs, no water buffalo, no pigs; nor, surprisingly, was there any wildlife in
evidence, not even birds.

Earlier, I had noticed the ratchety warble of crickets, but now nothing. The
silence was profound. It was a thrilling, terrifying experience of solitude.

Over the pass, the road, now surprisingly well paved, plunged into a magnificent
broad valley. As the sun began to settle toward the horizon, I passed through
cultivated farmland -- they were growing lettuce, or something that looked like
it -- and was comforted by seeing a few villages. In one, young men were playing
a game of volleyball.

Suddenly, three young men in long-sleeved brown shirts and caps with gold stars
pinned to the crowns appeared in the center of the road and flagged me down. My
passport was confiscated, and one of the men escorted me, by bicycle, into town,
where we entered a compound of barracks surrounding a courtyard. By then it was
dark, and the officers in the compound made it clear that I would be spending
the night.

I was walked into town for dinner, where I picked up the tab for me and my
escort, and given a reasonable bed in a reasonable room in the barracks. There
was, however, one frightening moment. Not understanding why I was being held and
frustrated by our inability to communicate, I tried to snatch my passport back
from the officer who held it. He instantly turned angry, pointing to the star on
his hat as if to say, 'Don't you know who I am?' and aimed an imaginary gun at
me.

The next morning, a young woman, a translator, arrived on a motor scooter for
what turned out to be an interrogation. I sat at a table with her and with the
man who had threatened to shoot me. I counted 15 other people, all young men,
standing around us. My interrogator spoke directly to the translator; she
redirected the questions, in occasionally fractured English, at me.

"When you were captured," she said. "You were traveling lonely. Why?"

"Your passport was issued in New York, but your visa was issued in Mexico City.
Why?"

"Did you go to Mexico City?"

"Why not?"

"Do you have other papers?"

"Why not?"

"What are the names of all of the people you are meeting in Hue?"

In the end, she told me, "You have violated administrative law." She added: "You
must be punished. You agree?"

I agreed, which meant, as it turned out, a $20 fine, for which I was given a
receipt. I signed a confession, written out during my interrogation, which
included the line, according to the translator: "All he wants is to be free."

About 10 days later, during an interview in Ho Chi Minh City with Dang Van Tin,
the general managing director of Vietnamtourism, I told this story and asked for
an explanation. Why had I been arrested? Mr. Tin and his marketing manager, Phan
Xuan Anh, broke into giggles.

"The news of our open society has not yet gotten out to some of the more remote
provinces," Mr. Tin finally said.

A Journey's End
One-Time Enemies Look Back in Peace

It was in a roadside cafe near Di Linh, the day before we arrived in Ho Chi Minh
City, that Than Minh Son talked about the war and its aftermath. Mr. Than, a
retired Government driver, moved to the south in the late 1970's, but he had
served on the side of the Communists, driving a supply truck along the northern
reaches of the Ho Chi Minh Trail.

A friendly man with a shrewd, wry manner, he described, through an interpreter,
perilous journeys of 30 or 40 miles a night, driving on barely discernible
roads, with lights mounted only beneath the truck so as not to be spotted from
the air.

"We were attacked frequently by American planes," he said. "If 10 out of 100
trucks arrived safely, that was a great victory. If a bomb hit in front of us,
we drove through the forest and made a new road. Sometimes, revolutionaries in
the villages saw that a truck couldn't move and they helped dig the new road
through the jungle."

He lost a brother and two cousins in the war, he said; he was wounded when bomb
shrapnel took a chunk from his scalp.

"When I smile or laugh a lot, I get a headache," he said.

Asked how he felt now, with Americans visiting Vietnam as tourists, he responded
philosophically.

"As Uncle Ho said, wartime is one thing but peacetime is quite another," Mr. Son
said. "And now let me ask you. You have come halfway around the world, and now
you are sitting in a cafe and talking to the V.C. How do you feel?"

It was a good question.


LOAD-DATE: March 1, 1995

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo: Along a section of road in central Vietnam that was once part of
the Ho Chi Minh Trail. (pg. A1); A group of Vietnamese men gathered around the
carcass of a boar strapped to the back of a motor scooter at a ferry crossing
near Hue; Boys played in a park near the Ho Chi Minh mausoleum in Hanoi.
(Photographs by Bruce Weber/The New York Times) (pg. A10)

Map shows the biking route in Vietnam. (pg. A10)

                   Copyright 1995 The New York Times Company

                              140 of 211 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 March 1, 1995, Wednesday, Late Edition - Final

SECTION: Section A; Page 2; Column 6; Metropolitan Desk

LENGTH: 44 words


"And then I had nightmares. People I was here in Vietnam with would appear and
say: 'You came here on a bicycle ride? Don't you remember how we all suffered in
this place? You came here to have fun?' "   WILSON HUBBELL, a veteran, back in
Vietnam. [A10:3.]

LOAD-DATE: March 1, 1995

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1995 The New York Times Company

                              141 of 211 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 March 1, 1995, Wednesday, Late Edition - Final

NEWS SUMMARY

SECTION: Section A; Page 2; Column 5; Metropolitan Desk

LENGTH: 821 words



International A2-11

MEXICO ARRESTS A SALINAS
The Mexican police arrested the elder brother of former President Carlos Salinas
de Gortari on charges of having ordered and paid for the killing of a governing
party official last year.  A1

Raul Salinas's presence has been felt in other illicit deals. A9


ON THE HO CHI MINH TRAIL
On a 1,200-mile, three-week journey from Hanoi to Ho Chi Minh City, cyclists
encounter signs of a budding tourism and remnants of a war's terrors.  A1

NATO LEADER UNDER SCRUTINY
A corruption scandal in Belgium involving kickbacks and bribes in the purchase
of helicopters from an Italian company has led to the investigation of the
Secretary General of NATO, Willy Claes. A3

COLOMBIA HARDENS TONE ON DRUGS
Racing toward a deadline, Colombia has been trying to convince the United States
that it has stepped up drug enforcement. The hope is to avoid being placed on an
outlaw list that last year included only Iran, Nigeria, Syria and Myanmar. A7

IRANIAN MISSILE SHIFT WORRIES U.S.
Iran has increased its forces on three islands at the mouth of the Persian Gulf
in recent months, provoking alarm at the Pentagon and among America's gulf
allies, military officials said. A11

Port-au-Prince Journal: Haiti enjoys a "Carnival of Hope." A4

National A12-17, B6-7

ANTI-REGULATION BILL PASSES
The House of Representatives approved a bill that would make it more difficult
for Federal agencies to impose new rules on health, safety and the environment.
A1

BALANCED-BUDGET VOTE DELAYED
Clearly short of the 67 votes needed to pass an amendment to the Constitution
requiring that the nation's budget be balanced, Senate Republicans reneged on a
promise to vote on the measure last night and threw the chamber into recess.  A1


AIRPORT OPENS -- VERY LATE
Sixteen months behind schedule and $2 billion over budget, Denver International
Airport opened, inaugurating what is expected to be the nation's eighth-busiest
airport.  A12

CLINTON BANKER INDICTED
An Arkansas banker was indicted by a Federal grand jury in a case involving
several members of Bill Clinton's 1990 campaign for governor, including one of
the President's confidants.  A12

NEW WELFARE PROVISIONS
Hoping to pass a major welfare bill, House Republicans modified some earlier
provisions, but also added incentives for states to reduce the proportion of
babies born out of wedlock.  A17

BASE CLOSINGS ANNOUNCED
The Defense Department said 34,200 civilians might lose their jobs when the
military began dismantling and shrinking its bases in the latest round of
closings.  B6

Education B8

WANTED: QUALIFIED SUBSTITUTES
Each day about 3,000 substitute teachers are needed in New York City, and
increasingly, the public schools are having a difficult time finding qualified
candidates.  B1

Metro Digest B1

NEW BLOW TO 'MEGAN'S LAW'
A New Jersey law to monitor sex offenders was dealt a new legal blow when a
Federal judge ruled that its central tenet -- notifying a community of a sex
offender's presence -- could not be applied in cases of crimes committed before
the law was passed.  A1

BISHOPS ASSAIL PATAKI CUTS
New York State's Roman Catholic bishops harshly criticized Gov. George E.
Pataki's proposed budget, saying its deep cuts would be devastating for the
poor.  A1

Business Digest D1

Arts/Entertainment C13-18

Grumbling over the voting for the Grammys.  C13
Erick Hawkin's muse and mate.  C13
Theater: "Raised in Captivity." C13
Dance: Debuts in "Jewels." C15
Books: "American Tabloid," by James Ellroy.  C17
Book Notes C18
Television: "Two by Dove." C18
Bochco moving to CBS.  C18

The Living Section C1-10

When the table matters more than the meal.  C1

Health Page C11

Personal Health: Living with Tourette syndrome.

Sports B10-15

Baseball: Bobby Bonilla's spring travels.  B11
Negotiators are making a genuine effort.  B13
Fred Wilpon, the Mets' "moderate" owner.  B13
Basketball: Knicks lose to the Magic.  B11
Butch Beard draws the line.  B12
Cause of Chris Mullin's blackout found.  B12
St. John's learns to defend.  B15
No. 9 Wake Forest upsets No. 2 North Carolina.  B15
Columns: Vecsey on baseball's strange sights B11
Football: Jets sign Dexter Carter from 49ers.  B11
Hockey: Rangers tie Panthers.  B14
Islanders edge Canadiens.  B14

Obituaries B9

Jack Clayton, British film director.

Editorials/Op-Ed A18-19

Editorials

Mr. Giuliani's police ploy.
New look at a Mexican murder.
Special place in history for Bush.
Topics: Mr. Gramm's candor.

Letters

Bob Herbert: A nation of nitwits.
Thomas L. Friedman: The global casino.
Shelby Steele: Affirmative action must go.

Neediest Cases B2

Chronicle B2

Crossword C18

LOAD-DATE: March 1, 1995

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Summary

                   Copyright 1995 The New York Times Company

                              142 of 211 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                  March 3, 1995, Friday, Late Edition - Final

FILM REVIEW;
The Rent Is the Least Of Problems

BYLINE: By JANET MASLIN

SECTION: Section C;  Page 10;  Column 6;  Weekend Desk

LENGTH: 719 words


One look at the photograph on the cover of "Roommates," Max Apple's book about
life with his grandfather, and it's easy to see this story's appeal. There is
Rocky, the author's curmudgeonly 5-foot-tall grandparent, glaring at the camera
with a sourpuss pucker on his face. On his chest is an apron with cheery
illustrations that would suit a nursery-school child. By his side is a tot who
smiles happily despite the old man's gruff expression. Rocky's hands are messy.
He appears to be making cookie dough.

As the fond tale of a boy and grandfather whose odd-couple intimacy lasted until
Rocky was 107, "Roommates" has stubbornly insistent charms. Homogenized for the
screen into a hokier Hollywood version (with a screenplay by Mr. Apple and
Stephen Metcalfe), it still hangs onto its affectionate tone. It's Peter Falk
whose expert crankiness makes that possible. Given the inevitabilities of the
film's last reel, it was a slam dunk to make Rocky lovable. Mr. Falk makes him
likable, too.

Imprisoned behind wizened, rubbery facial makeup, Mr. Falk still supplies a
nimbleness that the rest of the film lacks. On film, "Roommates" loses its
real-life references (like those to the Vietnam war), pointlessly turns Rocky
into a Polish Catholic (he was a Lithuanian Jew), converts a wasting disease
into a conveniently sudden accident and otherwise weakens a once vibrant story.
The film counts entirely on Mr. Falk's crotchety wisecracks, but he often
delivers.

Directed by Peter Yates with more cuteness than credibility, "Roommates" becomes
a vehicle for Mr. Falk and his cantankerous grumping. "Baby, you didn't beat me:
you bored me to death!" he tells the woman who bests him at gin rummy. "You find
me a job and I'll pay you 20 bucks," he promises the lawyer he hopes will
represent him in an age-discrimination case.  (Rocky is never too old to read
the help-wanted pages of the newspaper with interest.) A veteran baker, he
appears on a television show and is asked for "one of those old-world recipes,"
which he refuses to impart.

"Bread!" says Rocky to a worried-looking talk-show host. "You take 100 pounds of
flour. Eleven quarts of water. Yeast: how much? I won't tell you."

Not enough of "Roommates" has the energy to compete with that, as the film
describes the give-and-take between Rocky and his grandson, who is called
Michael (D. B. Sweeney). This is the kind of film in which Rocky gives the boy a
microscope, and we immediately skip forward to the sight of grown-up Michael as
a doctor, busy on emergency-room duty in television hotshot style. It's also a
film that makes Michael a terrible slob and then has Rocky immediately clean up
Michael's apartment when the two move in together.

At a typically implausible moment, it tries to be funny about Michael's bringing
home a date for a sexual tryst without telling her there's an old man sleeping
in the same room. Mr. Apple gave that anecdote a sweet, crazy logic that eludes
the film.

Julianne Moore, a luminous actress who brightens every film she's in, plays that
young woman with an allure that overrides the screenplay's contrivance, even if
she's asked to spend too much time simply beaming at Michael or Rocky. Ellen
Burstyn is well cast as Ms. Moore's mother, turning a stiffly patrician
character into a scene-stealer. Mr. Sweeney tries hard but remains less
interesting as a nice young man who's not much more than Rocky's comic foil. The
film becomes especially thin when it asks him to endure a terrible tragedy
without getting a hair out of place.

"Roommates" may lack daring, but it still deserves some praise for restraint. A
film that could have been adorable to a fault manages to be jaunty instead.

"Roommates" is rated PG (Parental guidance suggested). It includes mild
profanity and one brief sexual situation.

ROOMMATES

Directed by Peter Yates; written by Max Apple and Stephen Metcalfe, based on the
story by Mr. Apple; director of photography, Mike Southon; edited by John
Tintori; music by Elmer Bernstein; production designer, Dan Bishop; produced by
Ted Field, Scott Kroopf and Robert W. Cort; released by Buena Vista Pictures.
Running time: 109 minutes. This film is rated PG.

WITH: Peter Falk (Rocky), D. B. Sweeney (Michael), Julianne Moore (Beth) and
Ellen Burstyn (Judith)

LOAD-DATE: March 3, 1995

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Review

                   Copyright 1995 The New York Times Company

                              143 of 211 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                  March 3, 1995, Friday, Late Edition - Final

Driven to Succeed, They Died in the Ultimate Test in Frigid Water and Fog

BYLINE: By SARA RIMER

SECTION: Section A;  Page 20;  Column 1;  National Desk

LENGTH: 924 words


Norman Tillman grew up poor and ambitious in rural Grenada, Miss., one of five
children reared by a mother who scrubbed floors at the local hospital.

He joined the Army in October 1989.

"Gangs were starting in Grenada back then," said Janie Campbell, the records
clerk at Grenada High School, whom Mr. Tillman called his godmother. "Drugs were
getting worse. He said, 'I just want to get out.' He thought the Army would be
the best thing for him. And the Rangers were the top dog."

He served as a mortarman in the 82d Airborne Division, made sergeant and entered
the Ranger training course to advance his career. But on Feb. 15, he became one
of four trainees to die of exposure in a Florida swamp.

At the age of 28, Sergeant Tillman was the oldest of the four, the only enlisted
man, the only husband and the only father. He left his wife, Vanessa Williams,
and three children, ages 7, 5 and 1.

For all that set him apart, Sergeant Tillman shared much with the men who died
with him. All were from modest backgrounds, all were driven, determined and
disciplined, all were at the tops of their classes, or stars on their high
school athletic teams. They had all invested their hopes for the future in the
Army and, especially, in Ranger school.

Spencer D. Dodge, 23, was an auto mechanic's son from Gorham, N.Y., a town of
about 3,600 people. As a boy he picked cabbages and stocked shelves at the
grocery store.

He graduated from West Point in 1994, president of his class, and the cadet in
charge of the Special Olympics. His hero was Gen. H. Norman Schwarzkopf.

"He wanted to be an infantry officer," said his West Point roommate, Lieut.
David Choe, who is stationed at Fort Benning, Ga., and who gave the eulogy at
Lieutenant Dodge's funeral in Rochester. "That was his life."

Lieutenant Dodge's brother, Jason, 22, an Army combat engineer at Fort Knox,
Ky., wept at the funeral. "I came home in December, and Spencer opened the
door," he said, addressing the mourners in church. "The first thing he did was
push me back outside and make me salute him. That was Spencer. Then he hugged
me."

His brother was always on the go, Jason Dodge said, always running, always
striving. "When he first got to West Point, I remember joking he'd never be an
officer because all they did was sit at a desk and push pencils," he said. "That
wasn't Spencer. When he told me he was going to Ranger school, I told him that
would be the challenge for him."

Milton Palmer, 27, grew up on military bases throughout the United States and
Germany. He wanted to be like his father, Maj. Nathan Palmer, a career Army man
who is now retired.

When Milton was 13, his father went to Korea. His mother, Patricia, told The
Indianapolis Star: "Milton came to me and said, 'I want you to know that I won't
give you any problems while dad is gone.' I said, 'Child, when have you ever
been a problem?' "

The four Rangers who died were all like that: They followed the rules, did what
they were told.

Mr. Palmer won a Reserve Officers Training Corps scholarship to The Citadel, in
Charleston, S.C., graduating in 1990. "Milton knew what he wanted, and he really
knew how to get there," said a fellow Citadel student, C. Thomas Tolly 3d.

At the Citadel, Mr. Palmer rose to battalion commander, and serving under him
was a classmate and friend, Robert P. Palmer (no relation). He took his role
seriously, said Robert Palmer, recalling an inspection.

"I had left something on my desk out of place, and he proceeded to confine me
for the weekend," he said. "I said, 'Milton, how could you do that,' and he
said, 'Well, it wasn't right, and that's my job.' "

Curt G. Sansoucie, 23, also a graduate of West Point, was from Rochester, N.H.,
where his father, Gary A. Sansoucie, a Vietnam combat veteran, runs Therrien
Furniture Store.

Like Lieutenant Dodge, Lieutenant Sansoucie wanted to be a general.

"He knew the names of generals," said his mother, Theresa. "First names, their
last names, the dates; you could never argue with him about any of that. His
biggest dream since he was 12 was going to West Point."

Lieutenant Sansoucie, too, had been a varsity football player, at Somersworth
High School, and an honors student. When he graduated, in 1989 his picture,
taken next to an American flag, was on the front page of the yearbook. Curt
Sansoucie, the caption said, "brought pride to his high school by being elected
one of 50 governors in the nationwide American Legion Boy's State Program."

Even though he was only 5 feet 8 inches, Norman Tillman also played high school
football, as a defensive lineman. "He was small, but he played big," said his
coach, Jack Holliday. He never missed a practice, Mr. Holliday said, and "he
always had a smile."

His size precluded a college football scholarship, so he ran track, too, and
that paid his way to Mississippi Valley State University.

At the age of 16 he had started helping out at home by working as a cook at the
Best Western motel in town, a job he kept all through college. "He'd come home
on weekends and work double shifts," said Mrs. Campbell, whose son, Tim, had
shared a jersey -- No. 25 -- with Norman in the football program.

Mrs. Campbell recalled the last time she talked to Sergeant Tillman, on Jan. 1.

"It was just before he left for the mountain part, and then onto Florida," she
said. "He said he knew it was going to be hell. That's what they called it --
hell. He didn't complain one bit. He wanted it more than anything he wanted in
his whole life."


LOAD-DATE: March 3, 1995

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo: Second Lieut. Spencer D. Dodge was buried last month in the
cemetery of the United States Military Academy at West Point, N.Y., from which
he graduated. (Claire Yaffa for The New York Times)

                   Copyright 1995 The New York Times Company

                              144 of 211 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                  March 5, 1995, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

BEST SELLERS: March 5, 1995

SECTION: Section 7; Page 22; Column 2; Book Review Desk

LENGTH: 1499 words



          Weeks
This Last    On
Week Week  List Fiction

 1      1  53   THE CELESTINE PROPHECY, by James Redfield. (Warner, $17.95.) An
                ancient manuscript, found in Peru, provides insights into
                achieving a fulfilling life.

 2      3   2   BORDER MUSIC, by Robert James Waller. (Warner, $17.95.) A Texas
                rancher, trying to erase his Vietnam trauma, takes to the road
                with an exotic dancer.

 3      2  37   POLITICALLY CORRECT BEDTIME STORIES, by James Finn Garner.
                (Macmillan, $8.95.) Classic tales respun to avoid offending
                current sensibilities.

 4      4   4   ORIGINAL SIN, by P.D. James. (Knopf, $24.) Adam Dalgliesh
                probes a case involving intrigue, malice and murder in a
                prestigious London publishing house.

 5      5   7   KISS THE GIRLS, by James Patterson. (Little, Brown, $22.95.) A
                police detective pursues a serial killer.

 6      7   4   HOME SONG, by LaVyrle Spencer. (Putnam, $23.95.) The appearance
                of his unknown biological son threatens the serenity of a man's
                family life.

 7      6   3   DAISY-HEAD MAYZIE, by Dr. Seuss. (Random House, $15.) A girl's
                head unexpectedly sprouts a daisy.

 8      9  134  THE BRIDGES OF MADISON COUNTY, by Robert James Waller. (Warner,
                $16.95.) A photographer and a farmer's lonely wife in Iowa.

 9          1   THE JUROR, by George Dawes Green. (Warner, $21.95.) A woman's
                life takes a fearful turn when she is chosen as a juror for a
                mob trial.

 10*   14   2   THE CAT WHO BLEW THE WHISTLE, by Lilian Jackson Braun. (Putnam,
                $21.95.) Aided by his two cats, Jim Qwilleran investigates
                embezzlement and a murder.

 11     8   6   ACCEPTABLE RISK, by Robin Cook. (Putnam, $23.95.) A medical
                researcher's quest has devastating results.

 12    12   4   ALWAYS A RECKONING, by Jimmy Carter. (Times Books/Random House,
                $18.) A collection of poems.

 13    11   7   EYES OF A CHILD, by Richard North Patterson. (Knopf, $24.) The
                apparent suicide of a San Francisco man leads to courtroom
                encounters.

 14         1   ROGUE WARRIOR: GREEN TEAM, by Richard Marcinko and John
                Weisman. (Pocket, $23.) Navy Seals contend with a violent
                religious movement.

 15         1   FROM TIME TO TIME, by Jack Finney. (Simon & Schuster, $23.)
                Simon Morley of "Time and Again" returns to the past, trying to
                prevent World War I.

 16*        1   THE CUNNING MAN, by Robertson Davies. (Viking, $23.95.) A
                doctor uses shamanism and Platonism as well as scientific
                medicine in his practice.

          Weeks
This Last    On
Week Week  List Nonfiction

 1      1   4   I WANT TO TELL YOU, by O.J. Simpson. (Little, Brown, $17.95.)
                The former football star, now on trial for murder, responds to
                letters he has received.

 2      2  10   SISTERS, by Carol Saline. Photographs by Sharon J. Wohlmuth.
                (Running Press, $27.50.) The relationships of 36 sets of
                sisters, reported in words and pictures.

 3      4  21   THE HOT ZONE, by Richard Preston. (Random House, $23.) The
                discovery of a lethal virus, more infectious than H.I.V., and
                the efforts to keep it from spreading.

 4      3   4   RAGING HEART, by Sheila Weller. (Pocket, $18.) An account of
                the marriage of O.J. and Nicole Simpson.

 5      5  26   COUPLEHOOD, by Paul Reiser. (Bantam, $19.95.) Essays on the ups
                and downs of marriage by the television star and stand-up
                comedian.

 6      8   3   THE DEATH OF COMMON SENSE, by Philip K. Howard. (Random House,
                $18.) How governmental rules and regulations are fettering the
                lives of all Americans.

 7      9  22   DON'T STAND TOO CLOSE TO A NAKED MAN, by Tim Allen. (Hyperion,
                $19.95.) Anecdotes and meditations on life by the star of "Home
                Improvement."

 8          2   THE DISCIPLINE OF MARKET LEADERS, by Michael Treacy and Fred
                Wiersema. (Addison-Wesley, $25.) A discussion of marketing
                techniques; reclassified this week as nonfiction.

 9      6   6   INSIDE THE WHITE HOUSE, by Ronald Kessler. (Pocket, $23.)
                Anecdotes about events at 1600 Pennsylvania Avenue during the
                past 30 years.

 10     7  52   MIDNIGHT IN THE GARDEN OF GOOD AND EVIL, by John Berendt.
                (Random House, $23.) The mysterious death of a young man in
                Savannah, Ga.

 11*   12   6   ALL MY CHILDREN, by Gary Warner. (General Publishing, $25.) A
                scrapbook of photographs and mementos about the long-running
                television show.

 12    11  14   THE WARREN BUFFETT WAY, by Robert G. Hagstrom Jr. (Wiley,
                $24.95.) An account of the career of the man said to be the
                world's most successful investor.

 13    13  10   NICOLE BROWN SIMPSON, by Faye D. Resnick with Mike Walker.
                (Dove Books, $14.95.) The former wife of O.J. Simpson as
                remembered by a friend.

 14         1   LOVE LETTERS, edited by Michelle Lovric. (Marlowe/Shooting
                Star, $19.95.) An illustrated collection of romantic missives
                exchanged over the past 300 years.

 15*   14  63   THE BOOK OF VIRTUES, by William J. Bennett. (Simon & Schuster,
                $30.) Moral stories adapted from the Greeks, the Bible,
                folklore and elsewhere.

          Weeks
This Last    On
Week Week  List Advice, How-to and Miscellaneous

 1      2  45   IN THE KITCHEN WITH ROSIE, by Rosie Daley. (Knopf, $14.95.)
                Recipes by Oprah Winfrey's cook.

 2      1  93   MEN ARE FROM MARS, WOMEN ARE FROM VENUS, by John Gray.
                (HarperCollins, $23.) Ways to improve communication and
                relationships between the sexes.

 3      3   3   THE BEARDSTOWN LADIES' COMMON-SENSE INVESTMENT GUIDE.
                (Godin/Hyperion, $19.95.) Tips for successful investing from 16
                Illinois women.

 4      4   7   FOOD, by Susan Powter. (Simon & Schuster, $24.) Information
                about recipes, nutrition and diets.


Rankings reflect sales figures, for the week ending Feb. 18, at 3,050 bookstores
plus wholesalers serving 28,000 other retailers (gift shops, department stores,
newsstands, supermarkets), statistically weighted to represent sales in all such
outlets nationwide. An asterisk indicates that a book's sales are barely
distinguishable from those of the book above.
And Bear in Mind
(Editor's Choices of other recent books of particular interest)

THE ADVENTURES OF MAQROLL: Four Novellas, by Alvaro Mutis. (HarperCollins, $24.)
Brilliant stuff from a Colombian writer, the second volume of interrelated,
outrageous tales from the life and times of Maqroll, a mysterious, mythic
seafarer.

AN ANTHROPOLOGIST ON MARS: Seven Paradoxical Tales, by Oliver Sacks. (Knopf,
$24.) More tales of the engrossingly abnormal by a generous, humane neurologist
who explores the peculiar thinking of both physician and patient.

A DIVING ROCK ON THE HUDSON: Volume 2 of "Mercy of a Rude Stream," by Henry
Roth. (St. Martin's, $23.95.) When it rains it pours: 60 years after "Call It
Sleep," Mr. Roth, back at the keyboard, plunges on with a purposely garrulous
narration whose hero looks much like himself; the novel centers on a spectacular
sin.

DOSTOEVSKY: The Miraculous Years, 1865-1871, by Joseph Frank. (Princeton
University, $35.) Volume 4 of this planned five-part biography excels in
providing a cultural, literary, social and biographical context for
Dostoyevsky's works.

FRANCO: A Biography, by Paul Preston. (Basic Books, $37.50.) A huge,
all-inclusive life of the outright winner of Spain's civil war, the shrewd,
lucky dictator of his country for almost 40 years.

KWANZAA AND ME: A Teacher's Story, by Vivian Gussin Paley. (Harvard University,
$18.95.) A wise kindergarten teacher, long committed to integration, re-examines
its value by paying attention to what children and parents say.

THE LIFE OF GRAHAM GREENE. Volume 2: 1939-1955, by Norman Sherry. (Viking,
$34.95.) Mr. Sherry brings to the grotesquely complicated life of Greene a
relentless passion for detail, resulting in a compulsively readable account.

OVERCOMING LAW, by Richard A. Posner. (Harvard University, $39.95.) The author,
a high Federal judge and former law professor, examines the plight of the law
from a "law and economics" viewpoint, urging more respect for the empirical
reality of legal issues.

THE POINT: Stories, by Charles D'Ambrosio. (Little, Brown, $19.95.) An
impressive collection, mixing the exotic and the familiar, precise as to prose,
various as to tone, emotionally generous.

TERRIBLE HONESTY: Mongrel Manhattan in the 1920s, by Ann Douglas. (Farrar,
Straus & Giroux, $25.) The great big city in the great good time, analyzed with
broad scope and minute complexity as the locus of the national psyche when
Americans attacked the conditioned responses of the pre-1914 world.

THE TUNNEL, by William H. Gass. (Knopf, $30.) This great big novel (652 pages)
by an American master is all spun out of the head of its monstrous protagonist,
a language-driven professor of fascist views who is as dreadful as he is
plausible.

THE WEDDING, by Dorothy West. (Doubleday, $20.) A novel by an 87-year-old
survivor of the Harlem Renaissance; its main subject is the subtle assumptions
of color, class and status in a summer colony of upper-class black families.

LOAD-DATE: March 5, 1995

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: List

                   Copyright 1995 The New York Times Company

                              145 of 211 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                  March 5, 1995, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

WORD & IMAGE;
Innumeracy<2>

BYLINE: By MAX FRANKEL

SECTION: Section 6;  Page 24;  Column 3;  Magazine Desk

LENGTH: 1262 words


NEWSPAPERS AND newscasts that would never permit reports on "President Bill" and
"Mayor Rudy" without their family names seem to have no compunction about
regularly omitting the family names of vital news statistics -- the denominators
without which most numerical facts are just mush. So Bill has reduced the
Federal payroll by 98,000 jobs: yes, but out of how many? Is that an impressive
saving or a drop in the bucket? And yes, Rudy has vowed to close a gap of $2.7
billion: in how large a budget? In a whole page about the deficit one day last
month, The Times never said.

That gap, by the way, is only a projected deficit -- dependent on estimates of
future tax collections, about which Rudy was wrong last year. It is also
dependent on future Federal and state subsidies, about which President Bill and
Governor George must still bargain with Congress and the New York Legislature.
The gap will be further affected by inflation and maybe also by Yankee batting
averages (if Owner George and his colleagues permit a proper pennant race that
will draw crowds).

America needs baseball back, if only because that's the only way it learns to
handle rates (batting averages), probabilities (who expects to live long enough
to see 61 homers again?) and context (how come the team with the lowest wages
had the best record before the strike?).

Deploying numbers skillfully is as important to communication as deploying
verbs, but you won't find many media practicing that philosophy. Most schools of
journalism give statistics short shrift and some let students graduate without
any numbers training at all. How can such reporters write sensibly about trade
and welfare and crime, or air fares, health care and nutrition? The media's
sloppy use of numbers about the incidence of accidents or disease frightens
people and leaves them vulnerable to journalistic hype, political demagoguery
and commercial fraud.

THANKS TO NORMA SOSA, A Times editor who often goes on numbers patrol in the
paper's columns, I have at hand a few examples of such sloppiness, which, I
choose to believe, occurs in this newspaper much less frequently than elsewhere.
About a year ago, The Times reported the startling conclusion of a study
published by The Journal of Clinical Psychiatry that depression was costing
America $43.7 billion a year -- "on a par with heart disease." One element in
that total was the alleged loss of "lifetime earnings" by one year's 18,400
suicides -- magically rendered as $7.5 billion ($407,608.69 each?). Days lost
from work were more modestly reckoned as worth about $11.7 billion and
"impairment of work from symptoms" while people continued on the job was said to
have cost $12.1 billion. The rest was the cost of psychiatric care, generously
omitting unnecessary medical tests and other "hidden" charges.

I dwell on this example only because it combines adding apples and oranges with
false precision and pure guessing in what was surely meant to be a helpful
warning about a major health problem. Some other examples in the Sosa file were
less complex but equally unhelpful. The Times described a plan to put a 10
percent surcharge on taxable incomes above $1 million as a "10 percent surcharge
on millionaires." It reported that Russian miners were demanding a "150 percent
pay increase" (in one paragraph) and wanting their salaries "increased by two
and a half times" (in the next). It reported that China's clothing sales to the
United States might be reduced "by more than $1 billion," without a hint of
whether that's a billion paid to the Chinese or charged at retail, and what
portion of China's business was at risk.

THE TIMES AND other good papers, I'm sure, are slowly raising the numeric
consciousness of their staffs. But the dirty secret about the media's
contribution to American "Innumeracy," first examined in a delightful book by
that title by John Allen Paulos, is about to be revealed in his sequel, "A
Mathematician Reads the Newspaper." Wittily, but also sometimes obscurely,
Paulos demonstrates how mathematical thinking might have enhanced the public's
understanding of the news or at least avoided egregious error and simplistic
conclusion. "Mathematics," he reminds us, "is not primarily a matter of plugging
numbers into formulas and performing rote computations. It is a way of thinking
and questioning that may be unfamiliar to many of us, but is available to almost
all of us."

By far his most elegant example -- relevant to a great number of news articles
-- shows how easily unthinking writers or readers will be misled by "conditional
probability," as experienced in a test to discover disease:

Suppose that a test for disease D is celebrated as 99 percent accurate --
meaning that if you have the disease the test will be positive 99 times out of
100 and if you don't it will be negative 99 times out of 100. And suppose that 1
of every 1,000 people actually has this disease. Now assume the test for D is
given to 100,000 people; 99 of them will both have the disease and test
positive. But of the 99,900 healthy people, 1 percent or 999 will also test
positive -- falsely. In other words, of the 1,098 (99 plus 999) who tested
positive, only 9 percent, a mere 1 out of 11, will actually be sick. And that
small number, remember, in a test that was rightly called 99 percent accurate!

How many newspapers reporting such a study could correctly instruct their
readers in the meaning of "99 percent accurate" and thus prevent panic among the
positives? How many physicians could? How many of us had the wit to question, as
Paulos does, the judgment that proportionately more blacks (95 percent) voted
for David Dinkins because he is black than whites (75 percent) voted for Mayor
Giuliani because he is white? Noting that 80 percent of New York's blacks
normally vote Democratic while only 50 percent of whites normally vote
Republican, Paulos says it could also be argued that only 15 percent of blacks
voted racially as against 25 percent of whites.

Paulos urges that shrewdly chosen numbers would offer healthy context to
otherwise alarming news. While "drugs are an undeniable scourge," he notes, the
biggest killers are tobacco (400,000 deaths annually) and alcohol (90,000), not
cocaine (8,000) or heroin (6,000). Through all the years of anxiety about some
2,000 Americans missing in action in Vietnam, he asks, who remembered that about
8,000 were left missing in Korea and nearly 80,000 in World War II?

More focused instruction, particularly for anyone writing about health, is
available in a manual, "News and Numbers," by Victor Cohn. He, too, begins with
a lecture on "the certainty of uncertainty," a warning that most scientific
information, like the morning weather report, is of a probable nature. And like
other students of this subject, Cohn cautions against semantic as well as
numerical confusion in the handling of statistics -- between, say, the incidence
and prevalence of a disease. ("If incidence is like an entering class" at one
period of time, "prevalence is the whole school.")

In one year alone, Sosa found The Times using shortfall ("the quantity or extent
by which something falls short") to mean shortage, decline, unpaid bill,
difference, unmet budget request, debt, remainder and deficit. And then there
was the Broadway critic who observed that bludgeoning the audience into laughter
with fast and furious action was one director's response "to the comic
shortfall."

Fast and furious action is usually how the media distract from a vast numeric
shortfall.

LOAD-DATE: March 5, 1995

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Drawing

                   Copyright 1995 The New York Times Company

                              146 of 211 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                  March 5, 1995, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

ON LANGUAGE;
Dominoes' Return

BYLINE: By WILLIAM SAFIRE

SECTION: Section 6;  Page 16;  Column 3;  Magazine Desk

LENGTH: 1052 words


ROBERT RUBIN, THE new Treasury Secretary, believed strongly that a collapse of
investor confidence in Mexico would lead to similar dismay in other economies
that need foreign investment.

"Not all of Mr. Rubin's friends on Wall Street," David E. Sanger wrote in The
New York Times, "fully subscribe to what he calls this 'theory of
interconnectedness' -- 'if that's a word,' he adds."

My job in this space is to reassure new Cabinet members, insecure in their
diction, that the words they use are indeed part of the 650,000-word English
vocabulary. It's hard to put together a word that hasn't been used, and duly
recorded, before.

The noun interconnectedness first saw the light of print in the English
theologian A. G. Hogg's 1922 tract, "Redemption From This World," in which he
averred, "We labor hardest to perceive the interconnectedness of events," a
sentiment echoed seven decades later by Mr. Rubin. In the meantime, the poet
Stephen Spender referred in 1952 to "the interconnectedness of Western and
Eastern influences." A current catalogue of scholarly books describes one title
as an exploration of "the interconnectedness of painting, prints and film as
modes of art."

I predict that the Rubin theory, as presently stated, will not make it, because
no noun of 18 letters can fit into a headline.

Why not the shorter noun, interconnection? That isn't exactly a grabber of a
name for a theory, either, but it has the advantages of relative brevity and
greater familiarity.

Why not, while we're compressing, drop the inter- and go directly to a theory of
connection? Because it would be wrong. A clear distinction can be drawn between
connection (from the Latin nectere, "to bind," and con-, "with"), which suggests
a single link, perhaps initiated by one of the joined elements, and
interconnection; by adding the prefix inter-, meaning "between," the longer word
means "a mutual joining" or "a linking of internal parts at several places."
(Watch the difference between connection, which can refer to the act of
connecting, and connectedness, which is simply the state of being connected.)

Besides, connection has a sinister connotation: "The French Connection" was a
movie about a drug dealer's method of doing business, its operative word based
on the American underworld meaning of connection as "an inside source" for
nefarious or corrupt dealings.

An even shorter word leaps to the political mind: linkage. But a word associated
so closely with Henry Kissinger's diplomacy may not be desired in the Clinton
Administration.

Another solution for Secretary Rubin can be found in a figure of speech favored
by the columnist Joseph Alsop and popularized by President Eisenhower in 1954:
"You have a row of dominoes set up. You knock over the first one, and what will
happen to the last one is that it will go over very quickly.

"So you have the beginning of a disintegration," Eisenhower said, explaining his
decision to offer economic aid to South Vietnam, "that would have the most
profound influences."

From the domino theory to linkage to interconnectedness; we've come a long way,
Lone Ranger.

Fire!

"I see 'shouting fire in a crowded theater' quoted in your paper -- and
everywhere else -- all the time," writes David Dreyer, who has left the White
House to join Robert Rubin at Treasury. (An interminable word was coined in 1922
by A. G. Hogg to describe the relationship of this to the foregoing item.)

"Have you ever done a column on the misuse of the phrase 'shouting fire falsely
in a crowded theater'? Everyone drops the word 'falsely,' but never explains why
it would be improper to warn patrons that their movie house is about to be
consumed by flames."

Let us fully cite the great stricture written by Justice Oliver Wendell Holmes
Jr. Note in his wording that crowded is not used to describe the theater; also,
the word falsely appears before shouting fire, perhaps the reason that adverb is
often dropped. In the 1919 case of Schenck v. United States, Justice Holmes
wrote:

"The most stringent protection of free speech would not protect a man in falsely
shouting fire in a theater and causing a panic. . . . The question in every case
is whether the words used are used in such circumstances and are of such a
nature as to create a clear and present danger that they will bring about the
substantive evils that Congress has a right to prevent."

Fore!

"We chose to put our family first," said Dan Quayle, announcing his noncandidacy
for President in 1996, "and to forgo the disruption to our lives."

The Washington Post picked up his verb in its headline: "Quayle Forgoes
Presidential Race."

"Gotcha!" I cried at the breakfast table. Forgoes looked funny to me; what
happened to the other e? I turned to my New York Times, and there it was: "and
to forego the disruption to our lives."

I was mistaken; so was my colleague at The Times. The prefix for- means "away"
or "wrongly" and refers to omission or prohibition, as in forbid, forbear and
forswear. The verb forgo, without the e, comes from the Old English forgan,
meaning "to pass by," or as we would say now, "to pass up"; it means "to do
without, to give up."

What threw me off? There is an archaic verb forego, meaning "to go before," but
it survives in the language as foregone, and that it will be a source of
confusion is a foregone conclusion.

The prefix fore-, with an e, with its "to go ahead of" meaning, pops up in
forecast, foremost and -- as Simpson-potatoes can tell you -- "the foreperson of
the jury."

Pronounce forgo with the stress on the second syllable: for-GO. Brit Hume of ABC
News mispronounced that verb right before the latest State of the Union address.
He said President Clinton "will call on Congress voluntarily to FOR-go gifts
from lobbyists now."

Many dictionaries list both spellings -- forgo and forego -- and helplessly
suggest we pick 'em. Merriam-Webster, for example, has forgo as its main entry
and a separate entry of forego as "a variant of forgo."

None of that permissive stuff in the foregoing paragraph for me: what the
noncandidate did was to forgo a run.

A nice choice of a word for a man who was publicly pilloried for adding an e to
potato. Dan Quayle chose the apt verb, spelled it right and caught a few of us
off base.

LOAD-DATE: March 5, 1995

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Drawing

                   Copyright 1995 The New York Times Company

                              147 of 211 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                  March 5, 1995, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

On Sunday;
Liberal Voices Against A Rising Tide

BYLINE: By FRANCIS X. CLINES

SECTION: Section 1;  Page 29;  Column 1;  Metropolitan Desk;  Second Front

LENGTH: 756 words


STEVE POST, New York's ranking iconoclast across 30 years of radio broadcasting,
looked haggard, fairly staggering away from the microphone after his sixth day
of fund raising on the air in behalf of the endangered ether of public radio.

He had sparkled some across the pleadings of his four-hour stint Wednesday on
the municipal airwaves of WNYC-FM. He gibed easily at the "Newtists" in the
Republican Congress who aim to starve public radio of all Federal subsidy. "I
love Ah-Muhrrica," he said, trumping imagined Newtists by playing "The Battle
Hymn of the Republic" and a Woody Guthrie protest song before the usual
Schubert.

His voice oozing patriotism, Mr. Post proposed his own "Contract on America"
savings in the war on crime: loosing the trigger fingers of law-abiding society
in a program termed "pre-emptive capital punishment," and constructing national
orphanages adjacent to penitentiaries to save on transport expense.

"What a sweet concept," Mr. Post enthused, his baritone weary but plucky as he
sought contributions for the embattled noncommercial station where he survives
as radio's subversive classical music disk jockey.

IN truth, he was pleading urgently for nothing less than the life of public
radio in the city, since Congress's Republican majority may de-fund the station
even as the city administration wants to sell it. But he was using satire as
uninhibitedly as he first did a generation ago in the heyday of alternative
radio on private station WBAI, when the Vietnam War and the Nixon Administration
were coming unglued in a barrage of anti-establishment doubt and wit that was
his starting point in radio.

How lonely Steve Post sounds these days, holding forth for the liberal impulse
as the rest of the radio dial is aflood with a far greater number of more
popular voices demanding a conservative sweep not just of politics but of
popular culture.

At age 50, still living his Bronx fantasy of a career on the radio (he first
practiced at a tape recorder as Luke Warm, boy announcer), Mr. Post will not
yield to Rush Limbaugh in depth of contumely. His personally edited 9 A.M.
newscast, an arch, sly, slanted antidote to each day's mass media coverage, is
awaited by the city's nostalgic old protest generation the way their children
listen for the Letterman top-10 list by night.

He's not everyone's taste; his wife listens to Howard Stern. But Jonathan Swift
might have tuned in if the opportunity had existed. "If we don't reach our
fund-raising goal I'm going to have to set fire to your homes," he told
listeners calmly as the marathon fund appeal wound down. "I just love screaming
and yelling and hocking people."

AT his beggar's mike, Mr. Post has come full cycle from WBAI, where he stumbled
into fund raising in the industry's pioneer charity marathon 30 years ago. After
high school and some work in social protest organizing, the young Mr. Post
pretended he knew bookkeeping to get a job at WBAI, and finally got to face an
open mike.

"I came here looking for an absolutely safe, noncontroversial classical music
shift," he said of the quietude he anticipated at the WNYC job after his beloved
but raucous WBAI roots. But in 14 years at WNYC, fund-raising drives became a
necessity, three times a year. Last week, Mr. Post's heart seemed deeply in it
as he sought enough money for the WNYC Foundation to buy the station from the
city in competitive bidding and keep it alive.

The foundation's goal is to spare New York's last full public radio outlet from
the looming threat of being silenced, to remove it from the political control
and 5 percent financing that gives City Hall a dominant management voice.

"These are times of rampant Republicanism, and I wouldn't even call it
conservatism," Mr. Post told listeners dependent on his refusal to pull punches.
"I'll call it reactionaryism," he said, his voice mellow as he summoned public
radio's resistance to political meddling.

Listeners ask Mr. Post how he gets away with his views, particularly with a city
administration that clearly prefers right-wing commercial talk radio over public
radio. He says the answer thus far is that he has become artful at getting the
public's help and raising an extra large share of the station budget.

"How do I get away with it? It's because you have given money to this program
disproportionately," he said, pleading with contributors to recognize that only
they have the power to maintain his iconoclasm. "It's not what I get away with;
it's what you get away with."

LOAD-DATE: March 5, 1995

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1995 The New York Times Company

                              148 of 211 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                  March 5, 1995, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

Foreign Affairs;
Global Mandate

BYLINE: By THOMAS L. FRIEDMAN

SECTION: Section 4;   Page 15;   Column 5;   Editorial Desk

LENGTH: 725 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON


Bob Dole remarked the other day that voters sent Washington a "loud and clear"
message last November but no one is quite sure "what the precise message was."
That is particularly true in foreign policy. Yet, despite the absence of any
clear foreign policy mandate, the Republicans (and many Democrats) have simply
assumed that the public wants to shrink America's role in the world, along with
shrinking the Federal Government. They are wrong. The American people are not
nearly as isolationist as the moronic politicians who speak in their name.

The Chicago Council on Foreign Relations has been tracking American attitudes on
foreign policy since 1974. Its latest poll, conducted by Gallup and released
today, shows the following: 65 percent of those surveyed said the U.S. should
"take an active part" in world affairs rather than "stay out." That is up from
the 1980's. Although the poll shows that the public also wants to avoid
unnecessary entanglements abroad, approximately half the respondents believe the
U.S. plays a more important role in the world today than it did a decade earlier
-- the highest number ever recorded by these surveys.

Fifty-one percent said "strengthening the U.N." should be a "very important"
goal of American foreign policy -- up seven points since 1990 -- which suggests
that the U.S. public is still ready to shoulder burdens of internationalism but
doesn't want to do it alone.

There are some loud and clear messages in those numbers.

For Republicans, the message is that you have gotten lazy in foreign policy. For
two years all you had to say were three words, "Clinton foreign policy," and
everybody laughed, as if the joke were obvious (which at times it was). Now that
the Republicans are back in power in Congress, what's obvious is how little
fresh thinking they have actually done beyond those three words.

Mr. Gingrich and Mr. Dole have been playing a double game. They use "U.N." and
"Boutros Ghali" as four-letter words when they want to appeal to Republican
isolationists without high school degrees, and then call for Mexico bailouts
when they want to appeal to Republican internationalists with Wall Street
portfolios.

But the Mexico bailout failed in Congress because you can't summon a
constituency for internationalism with the snap of a finger. You need to nurture
it all the time, and that's hard to do when speaking out of both sides of your
mouth at once.

For President Clinton, the message is: You have a habit of going in and out of
hibernation on foreign policy, and for months now you have been in hibernation,
leaving your foreign policy team home alone.

Some Clinton political handlers believe that if he talks too much about the
Middle East, people will think he isn't working for the middle class. Nonsense.
His political authority would be enhanced by speaking out more on foreign
policy, because that is part of every American's intuitive definition of being
Presidential.

When Mr. Clinton comes out of hibernation, as he did last week in an address
against isolationism, he can be extremely effective. He has good instincts on
foreign policy, because foreign policy is just politics with a bigger map. But
too often Mr. Clinton won't trust those instincts, so others fill the vacuum and
tie his hands.

To both parties the message is: After the war against Iraq, President Bush
declared that the U.S. had finally "kicked" its Vietnam syndrome, a total
aversion to intervention abroad. Unfortunately, the Vietnam syndrome has been
replaced among politicians with the gulf war syndrome.

The gulf war syndrome says that the U.S. will engage in military operations
abroad only if they take place in a desert with nowhere for the enemy to hide,
if the fighting can be guaranteed to last no more than five days, if casualties
can be counted on one hand, if both oil and nuclear weapons are at stake, if the
enemy is a madman who will not accept any compromise and if the whole operation
will be paid for by Germany and Japan.

It's time to shake that syndrome as well. The gulf war is not a guide for the
future; it was a solar-lunar eclipse that comes along as often as Halley's
comet. Using it as the criterion for engagement abroad is a covert prescription
for isolationism. The people deserve better. They are ready to do more. But
someone has to lead them.

LOAD-DATE: March 5, 1995

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Op-Ed

                   Copyright 1995 The New York Times Company

                              149 of 211 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                  March 5, 1995, Sunday, Late Edition - Final
                              Correction Appended

Streetscapes/Readers' Questions;
The Old U.S. Army Building on Whitehall Street

BYLINE: By CHRISTOPHER GRAY

SECTION: Section 9;   Page 7;   Column 1;   Real Estate Desk

LENGTH: 998 words


This is another in a series of columns answering questions from readers about
New York's changing streetscapes.

Red, With a Dome

Q.  In our collection we have a painting by Colin Campbell Cooper, "Downtown New
York" (1917). It shows a large, red structure with a dome on top but I am unable
to identify it. Do you recognize the building? . . . Carol Lowrey, curator,
permanent collection, National Arts Club, Manhattan.

A.  This was the United States Army Building at 39 Whitehall Street, built in
1886 and designed by Stephen D. Hatch. The fortresslike structure, of red
granite at the base and red brick and Portage Lake sandstone above, housed the
Army's main departments in New York, and was familiar to young men of the
Vietnam War era as the location of Army induction and enlistment physicals.

In 1886, the Real Estate Record & Guide described the building as "modern in
design and somewhat composite in character." A stained-glass dome lit an
interior court rising from the fourth to the eighth floor.

The Army Building closed in 1972, a rare Victorian relic in an area that had
been rebuilt several times over. With its cast- iron fence decorated with
American shields, the building was almost completely intact in 1978 when Fraydun
Manocherian, a real estate developer, bought it for renovation as a branch of
his New York Health and Racquet Club. At first Mr. Manocherian indicated that he
was going to generally preserve the eight-story building and convert the upper
floors to apartments.

He did not immediately proceed, and in 1983 the Landmarks Preservation
Commission scheduled a hearing to consider designating the building a landmark.
Around the same time, Mr. Manocherian began demolishing the building without a
permit. The commission protested, but demolition had done so much damage that it
gave up. (No penalty was assessed; a Buildings Department spokesman said that in
those days only repeated infractions led to fines.) Apparently Mr. Manocherian
had changed his plans in the intervening years: his architect, Schuman,
Lichtenstein, Claman & Efron, gave the building a new, reflective glass skin and
an 11-story addition.

In 1986, when the new building was completed as 3 New York Plaza, Mr.
Manocherian told The New York Times that he had originally wanted to preserve
the exterior but that he "very reluctantly" decided to change the building
because its exterior was "extremely, hazardously loose." He blamed the problems
on bomb damage from Vietnam War protests in 1968 and 1969.

An exterior wall inspection report prepared in 1983 by his engineer, Harold J.
Dooley, did suggest sheet-metal coverings for the exterior sandstone ornament
but found the walls to be in fair condition and recommended only spot
repointing.


Signs of the Past

Q.  The three-story red-brick structure at 109 West 17th Street has fading signs
on the second floor that proclaim: "To Let/Carriages, Coupes, Hansoms,
Victorias/Horses Boarded." My mind immediately went back to Edith Wharton's
early reference in "The Age of Innocence" to the superiority of a "Brown Coupe"
to a family coach, at least in getting away from the Opera House, which then was
on 14th Street. Could this have been a Brown Livery stable? . . . Robert N.
Smith, East Williston, L.I.

A.  Edith Wharton, born in 1862 at 14 West 23d Street, must have passed this
structure at some point. Her reference to the livery company that supplied
carriages to upper-class New Yorkers is not absolutely clear, but she may have
been referring to a firm operated by Ira Brown. In 1873, Brown had stables at 54
and 73 University Place and at 128 West 32d Street, but a directory check for
other years indicates he never operated at this location.

This little building was originally built two stories high in 1870 as a private
stable by Thomas Lord and designed by Charles Mettam. Lord, a merchant, was
living at 35 West 17th Street and had fallen on hard times, but in that year had
inherited $3 million from his merchant brother Rufus.

When Lord died in 1879, his estate sold the stable to Jeremiah Dimick, a
well-known Canal Street carpet dealer. Dimick lived up at 6 East 41st Street; he
ultimately acquired more than 100 properties in Manhattan, and it is unlikely
that this was his private stable. Classified directories do not list any livery
or other public stables at this location until 1897.

In that year, Dimick's architect, Martin V. B. Ferdon, extensively altered the
building and added a third story. An 1897 directory lists Patrick Logan's
boarding and livery stable at this address. Perhaps the sign dates only from
Logan's occupancy. (The building now has a furniture store on the ground floor
and offices above.)

2 Connected Buildings

Q.  There are two buildings at the northwest corner of Hudson and Jay Streets
connected to each other by a pedestrian bridge over Staple Street. The smaller
structure, at 9 Jay Street, has a ceramic ornament with the initials "NYH," and
an old map labels it as "ambulance."

Could these buildings have some association with New York Hospital? . . .
Marilyn F. Sachs, Manhattan.

A.  New York Hospital bought the Hudson Street corner in 1893; the next year,
its architects, Cady, Berg & See, erected a five-story House of Relief on the
corner, with a distinctive twin stairway. According to Adele A. Lerner,
Archivist for New York Hospital-Cornell Medical Center, the House of Relief was
sponsored by New York Hospital and provided clinical and emergency services for
lower Manhattan. At the time the hospital was situated on the block bounded by
Madison and Park Avenues and 70th and 71st Streets.

In 1907 New York Hospital built the structure next door at 9 Jay Street for a
horse-drawn ambulance service. The second-floor connecting bridge was built at
the same time. New York Hospital sold the building to the Federal Government in
1919, and it was later used by the Public Health Service. It now houses medical
offices.

LOAD-DATE: March 5, 1995

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH ;

CORRECTION-DATE: March 19, 1995, Sunday

CORRECTION:

The Streetscapes column on March 5, consisting of questions and answers,
referred incorrectly to the institution located in the 1890's on the block from
70th to 71st Streets between Madison and Park Avenues. It was Presbyterian
Hospital, not New York Hospital. New York Hospital was then on 15th Street
between Fifth and Sixth Avenues.


GRAPHIC: Photos: The U.S. Army Building at 39 Whitehall Street, circa 1905
(New-York Historical Society); sign at 109 West 17th Street, built in 1870 as a
two-story stable. (Linda Rozier for The New York Times); House of Relief at the
corner of Jay and Hudson Streets in 1894. (New York Hospital-Cornell Medical
Center)

                   Copyright 1995 The New York Times Company

                              150 of 211 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                  March 5, 1995, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

IN SHORT: FICTION

BYLINE: By ERIK BURNS

SECTION: Section 7;  Page 14;  Column 1;  Book Review Desk

LENGTH: 248 words



THE SORROW OF WAR
A Novel of North Vietnam.
By Bao Ninh.
Pantheon, $21.

Most Americans think of the Vietnam War as a political and moral failure that
left a young generation scarred, shellshocked and stripped of its illusions.
From Bao Ninh's novel, it is clear that the North Vietnamese experience was
largely the same. The author, himself a veteran, traces the war-haunted life of
Kien, a former infantryman turned writer, as he struggles to overcome his
terrifying memories of combat and salvage the wreck that his life has become. It
is not easy: Kien's fallen comrades return as ghosts in alcohol-fueled visions;
his lover has also been irrevocably changed by the war; his ability to write,
once his path to salvation, has begun to sputter. "The Sorrow of War"
refreshingly avoids heavy philosophizing about combat and manhood. Instead it
focuses on Kien's personal ordeal. Indeed, the novel is best read as a diarylike
account of post-traumatic stress. As fiction, however, the book has many weak
spots, most notably its last-minute attempt to switch the reader's attention to
another main character. The prose, translated by Phan Thanh Hao and edited by
Frank Palmos, is often overwrought, but there are scenes of great emotional
power. In addition, the author works hard to make certain that Kien represents a
whole generation of North Vietnamese. Once again the reader learns that war is
hell -- even when your side is supposedly the winner.   ERIK BURNS

LOAD-DATE: March 5, 1995

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Review

                   Copyright 1995 The New York Times Company

                              151 of 211 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                  March 6, 1995, Monday, Late Edition - Final

Many in Japan Oppose Apology to Asians for War

BYLINE: By NICHOLAS D. KRISTOF

SECTION: Section A;  Page 9;  Column 3;  Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 1117 words

DATELINE: TOKYO, March 5


Half a century after World War II, the Japanese Parliament is considering
whether to apologize for invading other Asian countries and killing millions of
people. But after thinking about it, many members of Parliament are saying that
an apology is not really necessary after all.

Support for the resolution is foundering, as opponents gain ground and suggest
that Japan's aim in World War II was simply to liberate Asia from Western
colonialism.

"These countries had been colonized and oppressed by whites, so our purpose was
to free those nations and stabilize them," said Seisuke Okuno, 81, a former
Cabinet minister who leads a group of 161 lawmakers who oppose the resolution.
Mr. Okuno hints that if anybody owes someone an apology for World War II
conduct, it is the United States.

"Incendiary bombs fell on Japan like rain, and atomic bombs were dropped on
Hiroshima and Nagasaki," Mr. Okuno said. "And the Russian Army committed
mind-boggling atrocities against Japanese. So we think that there were war
crimes more serious than any committed by Japan."

The proposed apology has caused a furor because it goes to the heart of deeply
sensitive questions of Japanese history and identity. And the backlash against
the proposal is grist for the mill of those who argue that while Germans feel
guilty about World War II, the Japanese feel embarrassed.

Already opponents of the resolution have held a demonstration and gathered 4.5
million signatures on a petition against a resolution of apology. Twelve
prefectural assemblies have approved resolutions since late last year expressing
gratitude to Japan's war dead for their efforts, and more local assemblies are
expected to follow suit this year.

Americans sometimes accuse the Japanese of looking at the war as if it began by
accident in 1941, and of thus seeing themselves as its victims instead of its
perpetrators. But some Japanese do examine the causes of the war, and see the
United States as the one to blame.

"I think World War II was one in which Japan was cornered and forced to fight
for its self-defense," said Masao Horie, chairman of the Japan Veterans
Association, which is vigorously opposing the apology resolution.

The United States froze Japanese financial assets and imposed an oil embargo on
Japan in the summer of 1941, in response to Japan's occupation of Vietnam, and
Mr. Horie said the sanctions meant that "Japan had no choice but to stand up and
fight; otherwise, Japan would have perished."

The resolution's supporters acknowledge that they face a struggle, while
opponents express confidence that they can kill the resolution or deflect it by
changing its wording. Yet both sides agree on one thing: that the debate over
the resolution is a milestone in Japan's efforts to form a consensus on its
past.

"We are trying to change views toward the war," said Hirotake Yabe, the
executive director of the Japan Veterans Association. "But there's still a
strong camp that sees Japan as a villain and believes that Japan conducted a war
of aggression. They do this with the help of other countries such as China. So
this debate over the resolution is a critical point to determine which view will
prevail."

Kosuke Uehara, a senior member of the Parliament and a leading supporter of the
resolution of apology, referred to it as "a test of democracy in Japan." He
acknowledged the emotional force of the arguments that Japan must not forsake
its war dead but added, "We are giving a chance to the Japanese people to think
about why this resolution is necessary."

Prime Minister Tomiichi Murayama, a Socialist who improbably leads a Government
dominated by conservatives, has been a firm supporter of an apology.

When three parties created the coalition that formed the Murayama Government
last June, they agreed that they would work in Parliament to adopt a resolution
about World War II that would express "hansei" -- a word meaning reflection or
penitence.

Supporters of the resolution say there was an understanding back then that the
final language would not just call for reflection, but actually offer an
apology.

Yet the nation's dominant political party -- the Liberal Democrats, also a
member of the coalition -- decided on Thursday to weaken a reference in the
party platform to Japanese brutality during World War II. The platform retains a
call for "hansei" and a reference to the cruelties of the Japanese Army, but it
excised a specific assertion that "our country's invasions and colonization
caused unbearable suffering and misery to huge numbers of people."

The New Frontier Party, the main opposition group, is not accusing the
Government of backtracking, in part because the opposition itself is avoiding
taking a clear position one way or the other.

Opponents of the apology say the tide may have changed, so that Japan can feel
more pride in its role during World War II. Mr. Okuno, for example, contends
that the United States imposed its own version of history and, during the
postwar occupation of Japan, held war crimes trials for which there was little
basis.

"Through this process, the Japanese people were brainwashed," he said. "They
started to think that Japan had led a war of invasion and did many bad things."

But now, Mr. Okuno said, the trend is changing. "People are starting gradually
to understand the facts."

To be sure, others see the trend going in the opposite direction. Two years ago,
the Prime Minister at the time, Morihiro Hosokawa, gave the most explicit
apology for the war ever offered by a Japanese leader, and more information
about the country's army atrocities is becoming available within Japan. In
addition, in a poll last year Japanese indicated that they believe 4 to 1 that
their Government has not adequately compensated the people of countries that
Japan invaded or colonized.

In any case, Japan is not the only country that has difficulty saying it is
sorry. American officials have toppled governments over the last half-century,
and Americans do not lose much sleep over the American invasion of Canada during
the War of 1812 or the incursions into Mexico in 1914 and 1916.

Yet the violence and trauma of World War II are of a different order. Japan's
Army is blamed for the deaths of 20 million Chinese in the 1930's and 40's, not
to mention large numbers of Koreans, Filipinos and Americans.

While Japanese officials periodically express contrition, people in some
countries in Asia remain dissatisfied and worry that Japan may again become a
military threat. Chinese and Koreans in particular would like expressions of
remorse that seem more as if they came from the heart and not from a committee
in the Foreign Ministry.

LOAD-DATE: March 6, 1995

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo: Seisuke Okuno, who leads opponents of a resolution in Japan to
apologize for invading other Asian countries during World War II. (Fumiyo Asahi
for The New York Times)

                   Copyright 1995 The New York Times Company

                              152 of 211 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                  March 6, 1995, Monday, Late Edition - Final

Unilever in Vietnam

BYLINE: By Dow Jones

SECTION: Section D;  Page 3;  Column 3;  Business/Financial Desk

LENGTH: 58 words

DATELINE: LONDON, March 5


Unilever N.V. says it will form two joint ventures in Vietnam to make and sell
bathroom soaps, shampoos and detergents. The consumer products group will
contribute $33.3 million of the total $50 million investment in the companies,
which will employ 700 people. The ventures, announced on Friday, will be based
in Hanoi and Ho Chi Minh City.

LOAD-DATE: March 6, 1995

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1995 The New York Times Company

                              153 of 211 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                  March 7, 1995, Tuesday, Late Edition - Final

Clinton to Create a Panel to Look Into Gulf War Illnesses

BYLINE: By DOUGLAS JEHL

SECTION: Section A;  Page 14;  Column 3;  National Desk

LENGTH: 822 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, March 6


In response to more than two years of complaints, President Clinton today
announced the creation of an independent panel to help improve the Government's
treatment of veterans who say their illnesses are linked to service in the
Persian Gulf war.

The announcement amounted to tacit acknowledgment of criticism that the
Government has failed to investigate adequately the cause of the maladies and
that it has been slow to provide gulf war veterans with needed treatment.

Unveiling the plan in an address to the Veterans of Foreign Wars, Mr. Clinton
called attention to his Administration's record in pushing for changes that now
allow thousands of gulf war veterans to collect disability benefits even when
their illnesses are not diagnosed.

But Mr. Clinton made plain that he was not satisfied with efforts to determine
what might have caused unexplained symptoms, including fatigue, severe muscle
pain and memory loss, that have been reported by more than 40,000 gulf war
veterans, about 6 percent of the 697,000 veterans of the conflict, which ended
in 1991. "We must do more," the President said.

Administration officials described Mr. Clinton's decision as a response in part
to criticisms made in January by a group affiliated with the National Academy of
Sciences, which said that the Government's research on the health problems of
gulf war veterans had been badly organized and had failed to determine if a
syndrome existed.

The officials said the decision also reflected the influence of Hillary Rodham
Clinton, who has played an instrumental role in an Administration review of the
issue and has expressed concern about the gulf war veterans' plight. At the same
time, the officials acknowledged that the choice of audience for the
announcement and the prominence given to it reflected an effort to score
political points with veterans' organizations, whose leaders have criticized Mr.
Clinton's avoiding military service in the Vietnam War.

Indeed, Mr. Clinton devoted most of his address this morning to calling
attention to steps that his Administration has taken on veterans' behalf.
Suggesting that his Republican rivals were less sympathetic to veterans' needs,
the President denounced as "unwise and unnecessary" a proposal approved last
week by the House Appropriations Committee that would eliminate $200 million
from current spending on veterans' health.

By contrast, the White House has proposed a $1.3 billion increase in spending
over the next five years for the Department of Veterans Affairs, most of it for
health care. Urging the veterans' group to help him fight the cut, Mr. Clinton
said: "Caring for veterans is not a national option or a partisan program. It is
a national tradition and a national duty."

The new advisory panel on gulf war illnesses will be composed of a distinguished
group of scientists, doctors, veterans and other citizens, Mr. Clinton said. But
he did not identify any of its members, and White House officials said it would
probably be several weeks before an announcement was made.

The Administration has formed other, inter-agency panels to help coordinate the
Government's response to the gulf war veterans and their medical complaints.
Administration officials emphasized today that the new panel would be
independent, with authority to work closely with the secretaries of Defense,
Veterans Affairs, and Health and Human Services and to make recommendations to
Mr. Clinton himself.

"We want them to tell us what we're doing right and what we could be doing
better," a senior Administration official said.

Since 1993, when the Government began to keep track of gulf war veterans'
complaints, the Veterans Affairs and Defense Departments have together assembled
registries of the veterans who reported unexplained medical symptoms.

Preliminary reports concluded that most of those examined had ordinary,
diagnosable illnesses, while a small number had symptoms that were unexplained.
But a committee of the Institute of Medicine, an arm of the National Academy of
Sciences, criticized the research as unsystematic and unsuitable for drawing
conclusions about what symptoms might have been caused by service in the war.

The Administration already plans to spend about $13 million on new research this
year. Mr. Clinton said today that the new studies would examine possible causes
of the gulf war veterans' illnesses, including the potential effects of
pesticides and other environmental toxins, anti-tank ammunition that contained
depleted uranium, and drugs used to protect American troops against chemical and
biological weapons.

Mr. Clinton also pledged new efforts to provide medical care even for gulf
veterans whose maladies remained unexplained.

"Although in so many cases we do not know the causes of their symptoms," he
said, "we know their problems are real and cannot be ignored while we wait for
science to provide all the answers."

LOAD-DATE: March 7, 1995

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo: In an address yesterday to the Veterans of Foreign Wars,
President Clinton announced that he would set up an independent advisory panel
to investigate the illnesses of veterans of the Persian Gulf war, who say their
ailments are connected to their wartime service. Hillary Rodham Clinton, who has
expressed concern on the issue, accompanied her husband to the Washington hotel
where he gave his speech. (Karin Anderson for The New York Times)

                   Copyright 1995 The New York Times Company

                              154 of 211 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                  March 7, 1995, Tuesday, Late Edition - Final

Firefighter in Coma, and Medical Treatment Is Faulted

BYLINE: By JOE SEXTON

SECTION: Section B;  Page 1;  Column 2;  Metropolitan Desk

LENGTH: 1021 words


A firefighter who collapsed at a blaze in Brooklyn on Sunday suffered severe
brain damage and was in a coma last night. Fire officials said yesterday that an
oxygen tube had been improperly inserted by paramedics.

Lieut. Raymond F. Schiebel, a 25-year veteran of the Fire Department, was listed
in critical condition at Woodhull Medical and Mental Health Center, unconscious
and on life support after sustaining injuries to his brain, heart, lungs and
kidneys because of a "persistent lack of oxygen," said Dr. David Prezant, the
Fire Department's chief physician.

Mayor Rudolph W. Giuliani, who visited Lieutenant Schiebel at the hospital
yesterday morning, said he had ordered a full investigation, and the State
Department of Health announced that it would conduct its own inquiry. Fire
officials were taking statements last night from their own firefighters, members
of the Hatzoloh Volunteer Ambulance Corps and officials with the city's
Emergency Medical Services agency.

Dr. Prezant said an emergency room doctor found that the oxygen tube had been
inserted into Lieutenant Schiebel's stomach instead of his lungs. But he could
not say exactly when the mistake had been made or to what extent it had affected
his condition.

No one, from hospital officials to fire investigators, could offer an
explanation last night for the firefighter's initial collapse, which left the
49-year-old Vietnam veteran and father of three unable to breathe and on the
floor of a burning three-story brownstone in the Williamsburg section.

Officials with the Hatzoloh Ambulance Corps -- the Orthodox Jewish volunteer
group that operates 40 ambulances in the city -- confirmed yesterday that one of
their units had been first on the scene of the two-alarm fire and that their
technicians had inserted the oxygen tube. But they insisted that the technicians
had followed "applicable protocols" and that the procedure had been performed
properly.

Heshy Jacob, a spokesman for the volunteer corps, said that two firefighters who
insisted on riding in the ambulance and delays in treatment at the hospital
might have contributed to the lieutenant's grave condition. He also said that a
paramedic with the Emergency Medical Service who was in the ambulance with the
lieutenant had confirmed that the tube had been successfully inserted.

That claim was contradicted by David Bookstaver, a spokesman for the E.M.S. He
said that "full medical control" at the scene and en route to the hospital
belonged to Hatzoloh, that the medical service "had nothing to do with any of
this" and that no E.M.S. paramedic had confirmed anything about the insertion of
the tube to any Hatzoloh official.

"Since E.M.S. doesn't have medical control over volunteer ambulance corps, there
are instances when our hands are somewhat tied," Mr. Bookstaver said. "But
everyone's objective is always what's in the patient's best interests."

Last night, as the investigation went on, Lieutenant Schiebel's wife, Valerie,
kept a vigil at his bedside, together with their children, Carol, 19, Kristine,
15, and Gregory, 11.

The lieutenant, who lives in Bethpage, L.I., had been working overtime Sunday
night, filling in as the officer for Engine Company 216. His regular company is
Engine Company 221.

The fire, at a home at 128 Heyward Street, was termed quite ordinary by fire
officials yesterday, the result of an electrical problem.

"It was standard operating procedure," said Chief Richard Posavetz, who was
conducting the investigation of the operational procedures followed at the fire.
"Nothing should have gone wrong, and in fact everything went the way it was
supposed to. Except that a guy is in the hospital."

Fire officials and firefighters who were at the scene said Lieutenant Schiebel
collapsed as he tried to pick his way through one of the extremely cluttered
first-floor rooms of the house. Firefighters from Engine 216, who said the
lieutenant had been wearing his air mask as regulations require, carried him to
the street. He was not breathing. A person is considered in danger of
irreversible brain damage after four to six minutes without oxygen.

Hatzoloh officials said that a call for help had been received shortly after 11
P.M. and that an ambulance was dispatched from their garage, only two blocks
from the fire in the largely Orthodox neighborhood. Mr. Jacob said the 600
members of the corps, which has been in existence for 30 years and which is
licensed by the state, are all state-certified emergency medical technicians or
full paramedics.

An Emergency Medical Service ambulance also arrived, and an E.M.S. paramedic got
into the Hatzoloh ambulance that carried Lieutenant Schiebel to Woodhull. An
E.M.S. official said the firefighter had maintained a pulse until seconds before
the ambulance pulled into the emergency room.

Dr. Prezant, the Fire Department physician, said an emergency room doctor soon
discovered that the tube was running into Lieutenant Schiebel's stomach and not
his lungs.

Conflicting accounts of the firefighter's condition and the ambulance's trip to
the hospital were given yesterday. One Hatzoloh medical technician at the scene,
George Stern, told a colleague that he thought the lieutenant had not been
wearing his mask. But Marilyn Mode, a Fire Department spokeswoman, said her
information indicated that he had been wearing it.

Mr. Jacob said two firefighters in full gear had complicated the medical
treatment given to Lieutenant Schiebel by climbing into the ambulance for the
trip to Woodhull.

Vicki Ciampa, a spokeswoman for the hospital, said there had been no delay in
treating the firefighter once he arrived.

Standing outside the hospital, Howard Safir, the Fire Commissioner, said: "There
are questions that have to be answered: why it happened, how long he had been
deprived of oxygen. Anything pretending to be beyond speculation is just
speculation."

Mayor Giuliani said he had asked Maria K. Mitchell, his special adviser on
health policy, to oversee his office's investigation. "He's spent his life as a
hero," Mr. Giuliani said. "The city should pray for him."

LOAD-DATE: March 7, 1995

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo: Raymond F. Schiebel

                   Copyright 1995 The New York Times Company

                              155 of 211 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 March 8, 1995, Wednesday, Late Edition - Final

A Firefighter Dies, and With Him a Firehouse's Source of Strength

BYLINE: By N. R. KLEINFIELD

SECTION: Section B;  Page 1;  Column 2;  Metropolitan Desk

LENGTH: 867 words


For the firefighters of Engine Company No. 221 in Williamsburg, Brooklyn, it was
the sort of wrenching problem that begged to be talked over with a good
listener. A beloved member of the company died yesterday in the hospital. Yet,
it was a workday. So you had to bottle your grief and be ready and willing to
fight fires.

This was precisely the type of matter the firefighters would take to Lieut.
Raymond F. Schiebel, the resident father confessor, Mr. Advice and chief
sounding board of the firehouse. In fact, if you needed to talk over anything at
all, he was the willing ear.

The trouble was, it was Lieutenant Schiebel who died in that hospital bed.

And so, all the firefighters could do was pray on their own. In the firehouse
kitchen, the cluttered room with the stove and the sofa and the big table where
the firefighters liked to say they could be "human" rather than fearless
warriors, they had propped up a photograph of the lieutenant and his wife. They
had lit a candle next to it.

But the lieutenant died at Woodhull Medical and Mental Health Center last night,
the victim of a tragic accident.

It happened Sunday night. He collapsed at a blaze in a very old Brooklyn house
and then, fire officials said, he was deprived of oxygen for critical minutes
when an oxygen tube was improperly inserted by an ambulance crew. As it happens,
Lieutenant Schiebel was trained as an emergency medical technician himself.

At the time of the incident, he was on loan to nearby Engine Company 216. He had
volunteered because he wanted to save up a day off so that he could attend his
daughter's Sweet 16 party later this month.

As a firefighter, he was known for consummate courage. As a human being, he was
known as a rollicking, good-natured ham.

"He's like a father figure," Benjamin Suarez, a firefighter in his company, said
of the lieutenant, a 25-year veteran. "You would talk to him about domestic
problems or work problems. He would always have advice. He was a people's
person. He could get along with anybody. And when you went out with him, you
knew you had one of the best officers in front of you. When he led the way into
a fire, you knew all the men were going to come out of there."

The firefighters could tell when Lieutenant Schiebel, 49, was doing his
paperwork in his office. His stereo was on low, always tuned to 60's-vintage
golden oldies. They could tell when he was done with his work. The volume would
go up. They could tell when he was heading their way. They could hear him
singing the tunes. He loved his soft rock. So they called him Rockin' Ray.

"There's no question, he was the life of the firehouse," said Lieut. Gary
Wendell. "He was a happy-go-lucky person. That's why we're all numb."

Firefighters do not receive large salaries, and they seem appreciably smaller
when there are three children at home. Lieutenant Schiebel drove a 1975 Chevy
until it screamed to be driven no more. His colleagues pointed out that of the
50 firefighters who worked out of the firehouse, the lieutenant owned the oldest
car. He, in turn, would always tell the firefighters that an old car was more
reliable. Recently, though, he bought a new car -- from his vantage point, that
is. It was a 10-year-old Ford Bronco.

He lived in Bethpage, L.I., in a modest house bearing a shamrock for St.
Patrick's Day. He and his wife, Valerie, married shortly after he returned from
duty in Vietnam. They have three children: Carol, 19, Kristine, 15, and Gregory,
11.

The lieutenant knew more gossip than Suzy does -- though, to be sure, all of it
dealt with the inner tribulations of Bethpage. Everyone seemed to know him. He
liked to circle the neighborhood on his bicycle. Fond of the beach, he always
found space in his car to take extra children along on beach excursions. He also
relished Lionel model trains, and had built a collection.

You couldn't tell him something and expect him to forget it. He had a magpie
mind. Listen to John Rizzo, a firefighter in his company:

"We were sitting here the other night talking about a job and he says, 'That was
Sept. 23, 1979.' I look at him and say, 'Ray, you remember that?' He said,
'Well, we got a unit citation.' I said, 'Ray, I don't remember my own birthday.
You remember when we got a unit citation?' Anything that he heard, it was like
it was inputted into a computer."

He always wanted to fight fires, and never regretted it. "He loved being a
firefighter," Mr. Suarez said.

Mayor Rudolph W. Giuliani appeared at the hospital shortly after the lieutenant
died. He said the lieutenant's full and extended family, including members of
the department that he had served for a quarter-century, were present in the
room when the machines could do nothing more.

All day yesterday, people who live in the blocks surrounding Engine Company 221
dropped into the firehouse, seeking news. They, too, all knew the lieutenant.

Maria Camacho, who lives next door to the firehouse, said: "He's the best. He
always had a smile on his face, and was always singing. A month ago, one of the
neighbors was sick. He had taken the wrong pill. The lieutenant was the first
one up there, helping him. That was him -- the best."

LOAD-DATE: March 8, 1995

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photos: Lieut. Raymond F. Schiebel and his wife, Valerie, above, in a
recent family photograph. Chief George Eysser, top left, and an unidentified
fire official talked about Lieutenant Schiebel yesterday outside the firehouse
of Engine Company 221 in Williamsburg, Brooklyn. Lieutenant Schiebel, who
collapsed at a blaze, died last night. (Linda Rosier for The New York Times)

                   Copyright 1995 The New York Times Company

                              156 of 211 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 March 8, 1995, Wednesday, Late Edition - Final

Agendas Clash in Bid to Alter Law on Product Liability

BYLINE: By KATHARINE Q. SEELYE

SECTION: Section A;  Page 16;  Column 1;  National Desk

LENGTH: 1171 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, March 7


Lobbying over the high-stakes legal overhaul measure now in the House has become
so contentious that George McGovern, a liberal icon of the 1960's, says the
debate is even more heated than that over the Vietnam War.

Perhaps not. But the former anti-war Democrat has started a mini-war himself,
first by appearing in a commercial for the bill and then by saying he does not
really understand the legislation and does not fully support the "extreme"
measures favored by the House Republicans.

"I want some change, no question about that," the former Senator and Democratic
Presidential candidate said, "but I don't know at this stage whether these
remedies being offered are the right way to go."

His reaction to the legislation, which would protect manufacturers from
excessive liability claims and cap the amount a person could receive in damages,
shows how hard it is for even a well-informed person to navigate the current
debate.

Indeed, the legislation has drawn more lobbyists into the Capitol than any issue
since the attempt to overhaul health care last summer.

"It's a nightmare," said Ellen Miller, director of the Center for Responsive
Politics, a public interest group. "Everyone is there except real people."

On one side is corporate America, which says an explosion of lawsuits is
clogging the courts, insurance costs are strangling businesses and that
exorbitant awards are encouraging frivolous suits.

On the other side is a strange alliance of trial lawyers and consumer groups who
say they are trying to defend the rights of people to seek redress in the
courts.

The business side paints the trial lawyers as piranhas feeding off society for
their own financial gain.

"Their agenda is to protect the system in which they have an extraordinary
vested interest," said Frank Coleman, a spokesman for the United States Chamber
of Commerce. "The American public strongly feels that it is time to end abusive
lawsuits and the abuse of our court system and to bring back some sense of
reasonableness and fairness to our legal system."

The lawyers and consumer groups portray business as greedy fat cats who want to
enrich themselves at the expense of the American consumer. "They want to destroy
the best civil justice system in the world, where an ordinary consumer can blow
the lid off a massive defective-design scandal," said Ralph Nader, the consumer
advocate.

Linda Lipsen, a spokeswoman for the trial lawyers added: "Most every lobbying
firm in town has a piece of this." She said the biggest corporations in the
country were "working together to promote Congressional action for evasion of
responsibility when their products cause injury and death."

Almost daily, both sides traipse to Capitol Hill, not only to lobby members of
Congress but to stage press conferences in what has become a gruesome battle of
victims.

In one instance, both sides used the same victim to make their point.The victim,
Stella Liebeck, an 82-year-old resident of Albuquerque, N.M., was burned when
she spilled scalding coffee on herself from McDonald's and was awarded $2.7
million in damages.

The business side -- including theChamber of Commerce, the National Federation
of Independent Business and the National Association of Manufacturers -- is
broadcasting a radio commercial portraying such a huge award for such a minor
accident as the height of absurdity.

But the other side -- represented by the trial lawyers and various consumer
groups -- said the commercial is a perfect example of how big business is
distorting the debate. Public Citizen, a consumer-advocate group, brought the
woman to a Capitol Hill news conference to describe the details of the case.

The group said the woman had suffered third-degree burns and had had to get skin
grafts because McDonald's, which had already had 700 reports of severe burns
from their coffee, deliberately heated its coffee to 40 degrees higher than
normal because it thinks hotter coffee tastes better. Even so, a judge reduced
the jury's punitive damages to $480,000.

The case illustrates the tactics dominating this debate. The manufacturers are
trying to make their case through a television campaign designed to put a human
face on its agenda, much the way opponents of health-care reform used the "Harry
and Louise" commercials. The trial lawyers and consumer groups are depending on
free media to make their own case "on the merits," as Mr. Nader put it.

Beyond the short-term tactics, both sides have a larger strategy. Terry Hill, a
spokesman for the National Federation of Independent Businesses, which
represents small business owners, said of the trial lawyers and consumer groups:
"Our intelligence system tells us the trial lawyers aren't coming back against
our ads because they're saving up funds till the thing hits the Senate. They
know it will have pretty good momentum in the House."

Mr. Nader said the real motive of the business side was to brainwash citizens so
that when they serve on juries, they will believe that frivolous lawsuits are a
huge problem threatening the country and will not go along with such claims.

But Fred Wertheimer, president of Common Cause, another public interest group,
was more skeptical of both sides. He said the television campaign by the
manufacturers appeared to be based only in Washington. "This does not have the
feel to me of a major national grass-roots campaign to generate reactions from
citizens," he said. The various sponsors generally declined to reveal how
extensive their advertising campaigns were, but the Washington market has been
flooded with both radio and television commercials.

While the consumer groups are pleading poverty as their reason for not rebutting
the commercials, Mr. Wertheimer suggested that they and the trial lawyers, who
are not poor, are fighting the battle through their vast network of affiliates
in the states, who lobby their members of Congress as constituents.

In the media battle, one advertisement suggests that Little League baseball is
at risk of disappearing because of excessive lawsuits. Ed Rothschild, a
spokesman for Citizen Action, said he knew of no a flood of lawsuits against
Little League.

Mr. Rothschild said the advertisement was particularly cynical because it showed
a little girl locked out of playing. Most of the suits against Little League, he
said, have been brought by parents who want their daughters to be able to play,
and it has in fact been Little League itself shutting the gate against girls.

Dennis Sullivan, a spokesman for Little League Baseball Inc., based in
Williamsport, Pa., said "nothing was misrepresented" in the commercial. Asked
about the suits by girls to get into Little League, he said, "I have nothing to
say about that; that's absolutely preposterous."

Asked for the statistics to back up the advertisement's claims that "Nationally,
the teams spend more to protect themselves from lawsuits than on bats, balls and
uniforms," he said, "It's not incumbent on us to provide those numbers."

LOAD-DATE: March 8, 1995

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1995 The New York Times Company

                              157 of 211 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 March 8, 1995, Wednesday, Late Edition - Final

Six Communities Compete For a New Military Center

BYLINE: By ERIC SCHMITT

SECTION: Section A;  Page 14;  Column 5;  National Desk

LENGTH: 1094 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, March 7


Wanted: 140,000 square feet of secure office space. Good airline connections to
Latin America. Affordable family housing. Strategic site for nabbing drug lords
and running top-secret military missions.

With American forces scheduled to withdraw from Panama by 1999 under terms of
the Panama Canal Treaty, the Pentagon is looking for a new home for its Southern
Command, the headquarters responsible for United States military activities in
Latin America.

The selection of a new headquarters site is particularly rare at a time when
scores of American military bases are closing, and six communities are using
political ties and financial incentives to compete for it. Beyond bragging
rights to one of the military's five major regional commands, the prize, by one
estimate, will mean 1,500 new jobs and a five-year infusion of $100 million into
the local economy.

The Pentagon has narrowed the field to Miami, Tampa, New Orleans, Atlanta,
Washington and Puerto Rico, and is expected to announce its choice later this
month. Most of the competing communities have been spared base closings in the
past, although Miami's Homestead Air Force Base was ordered partly shut in 1993.

The Defense Department is trying to treat the move, in which Miami and Tampa
appear to be the front-runners, as a by-the-books real-estate deal that weighs
only affordability and military needs. But politics is playing a big role.

Florida, which will have 25 electoral votes in the 1996 Presidential election,
has a powerful Congressional delegation that is lobbying heavily for Miami or
Tampa, as is the Democratic Governor, Lawton Chiles. Louisiana legislators, led
by Representative Robert L. Livingston, a Republican who heads the House
Appropriations Committee, are pushing hard for New Orleans.

The communities are rushing to outbid one another. Miami has spent $100,000 on
an aggressive promotional campaign, including a helicopter tour of the city for
senior military officials. Puerto Rico is offering up to $100 million in
financing to build homes for officers and their families.

And officials in Atlanta, billing their city as one with an ideal management
climate, got right to the point when a Pentagon review team visited recently:
Saab, Holiday Inn and the United Parcel Service all recently moved their
corporate headquarters there. "The object wasn't to wine and dine them," said
William Hubbard, senior vice president for economic expansion at the Metro
Atlanta Chamber of Commerce. "These were numbers guys."

The Southern Command is responsible for United States military activities in 19
Latin American countries, excluding the Caribbean and Mexico. The command, which
now has 8,500 troops based in Panama, provides humanitarian aid to the region,
wages an aggressive counterdrug campaign there and protects the Panama Canal.

But even as the Pentagon looks for a new hub, some budget-cutters say the
military could save money by consolidating the Southern Command into some other
headquarters.  For example, Gen. John J. Sheehan, the head of the Atlantic
Command, based in Norfolk, Va., believes that the Southern Command would fit
naturally in his fief. Gen. Barry R. McCaffrey, the head of the Southern
Command, bristles at that idea and instead wants to seize the Caribbean from
General Sheehan's jurisdiction.

Turf wars like that one are important to an understanding of the debate. General
McCaffrey, a decorated veteran of the Vietnam and Persian Gulf wars, likes Miami
because, among other reasons, he would be the only four-star commander there. If
the Pentagon picked Tampa, the general would have to share the city with the
four-star generals who head the Central Command and the Special Operations
Command.

The military nearly picked a new Southern Command headquarters late last year,
when an assessment team recommended two sites in Miami and two in Puerto Rico.
But that first assessment failed to consider costs, and lawmakers from the
losing communities expressed outrage.  Mr. Livingston, along with Louisiana's
two Senators, J. Bennett Johnston and John B. Breaux, fired off an angry letter
to Deputy Defense Secretary John M. Deutch last Dec. 1. "There has been no
attempt," they wrote, "to inform the Congress as to how the Department of
Defense intends to specify criteria for a site selection or objectives for a
site evaluation."

Mr. Deutch then formed a team -- made up of Assistant Defense Secretary Edward
L. Warner; the principal deputy comptroller, Alice C. Maroni, and Lieut. Gen.
Wesley Clark, the Joint Staff's director of strategic plans and policy -- to
undertake a new search that would hold up to Congressional scrutiny.

A group of staff members headed by Mr. Warner's deputy, Thomas K. Longstreth,
has since narrowed the list of candidates to 12 from 112, and then to the final
6, all of which they have visited. Pentagon officials want a site that is near
Latin America (or at least one plane connection away), that is reasonably priced
and that offers good housing, schools and health care for about 700 military and
civilian employees. The military will either build a new headquarters or
renovate an existing center.

In its new headquarters, the Southern Command will have no permanently assigned
troops. Instead, like the Central Command, whose primary area of responsibility
is Southwest Asia, it will summon forces as needed from around the country.

Each location still in the running has given its own particular pitch to the
staff group. Atlanta promoted itself as a corporate center, Washington as the
center of government. Tampa said it had room for another command at MacDill Air
Force Base. New Orleans cited its deep port and naval air station. Puerto Rico
positioned itself as the site closest to Latin America, not only geographically
but also culturally.

But all competitors concede that Miami will be tough to beat. Officials in that
city, which bills itself as the cultural, business, transportation and
telecommunications hub of the Americas, estimate that the new headquarters would
bring more than 1,500 new jobs and inject $100 million into the economy over
five years through construction, wages of permanent new workers and
entertainment spending by the frequent visitors to a command that operates
largely through personal contacts.

Dan Tarman, the coordinator for Team Miami-U.S. Southcomm, a coalition of civic
and business leaders in the Miami area, said, "Miami is the best place for this
thing, because it enhances the command's ability to meet and greet."

LOAD-DATE: March 8, 1995

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1995 The New York Times Company

                              158 of 211 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 March 8, 1995, Wednesday, Late Edition - Final

Ernest Nukanen, 75, Documentary Maker

SECTION: Section B;  Page 9;  Column 6;  Cultural Desk

LENGTH: 184 words


Ernest Nukanen, a cameraman, documentary film maker and teacher, died on Feb. 26
at his home in Belfast, Me. He was 75.

He had been in failing health for some time, the University of Southern
California News Service reported.

Mr. Nukanen was born near Cardiff, Wales, grew up in New York City and attended
Black Mountain College in North Carolina. His first job in film was as an
assistant cameraman on "Dreams That Money Can Buy," a Surrealist film directed
by Hans Richter and featuring sequences by Fernand Leger, Alexander Calder, Max
Ernst and Marcel Duchamp.

He filmed an expedition to the North Pole in 1957 and made a film about the
forest tribes of Suriname. His documentaries also include film biographies of
Duke Ellington and Hubert H. Humphrey. As a combat cameraman, he covered the
fighting in Vietnam and Cambodia for ABC News.

Mr. Nukanen began teaching at the University of Southern California in 1979 and
helped create the documentary film program for the university's School of
Cinema-Television. He retired from teaching in 1991.

No immediate family members survive.

LOAD-DATE: March 8, 1995

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Obituary (Obit); Biography

                   Copyright 1995 The New York Times Company

                              159 of 211 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 March 8, 1995, Wednesday, Late Edition - Final

Sony Names Division Leader

BYLINE: By ALLAN KOZINN

SECTION: Section C;  Page 17;  Column 4;  Cultural Desk

LENGTH: 367 words


Peter Gelb, the president of Sony Classical U.S.A. since July 1993, has been put
in charge of the classical-record label's international operations, the company
said yesterday. He succeeds Gunther Breest, who resigned abruptly in December
after a six-year tenure during which he transformed the former CBS Masterworks
label into a company that rivaled its European competitors in terms of its
artist roster and the diversity of its repertory offerings.

The appointment puts Mr. Gelb, 41, in charge of a roster that includes the
Berlin Philharmonic, Claudio Abbado, Esa-Pekka Salonen and the Los Angeles
Philharmonic, Yo-Yo Ma, Emanuel Ax, Isaac Stern and Placido Domingo. His purview
also includes several subsidiary lines started or acquired by Mr. Breest,
including the Vivarte early-music series, the St. Petersburg Classics line,
which specializes in Russian music, and Arc of Light, a sacred-music label.

Mr. Gelb said he expected "to pursue a repertory policy of diversity and
eclecticism." This is to include a new focus on contemporary music, particularly
of an accessible kind.  He said his plans along those lines included the "
Vietnam War Oratorio," by Elliot Goldenthal, a composer best known for film
scores; symphonic compositions by John Williams; recordings of works performed
at the Bang on a Can Festival, and an album of vocal works by Geoff Smith, an
English composer.

Mr. Gelb also said he hoped to expand the company's efforts in vocal music and
opera. Matthew Epstein, a manager at Columbia Artists and the former director of
the Welsh National Opera, is to be a consultant for the label on vocal music.

Unlike Mr. Breest, who was based in Hamburg, Germany, Mr. Gelb is to run the
company from Manhattan.  Mr. Gelb said, however, that Hamburg would remain an
important center for the label. It will be the headquarters of his two principal
subordinates, Jean-Hugues Allard and Udo von Stein. Mr. Allard, the newly
appointed executive vice president for artists and repertory as well as
marketing, was lured to Sony from Erato, the French classical subsidiary of
Atlantic Records. Mr.  von Stein is the executive vice president in charge of
business affairs.

NAME: Peter Gelb

LOAD-DATE: March 8, 1995

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Biography

                   Copyright 1995 The New York Times Company

                              160 of 211 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 March 8, 1995, Wednesday, Late Edition - Final
                                  (New Jersey)

NEW JERSEY DAILY BRIEFING;
Money for Vietnam War Project

BYLINE: By PETER S. YOUNG

SECTION: Section B;   Page 1;   Column 1;   Metropolitan Desk

LENGTH: 70 words

DATELINE: HOLMDEL


The state authority that distributes casino revenue wrote a check yesterday for
$2.75 million to be spent on an education center next to the Vietnam Veterans
War Memorial. The center will try to tell the stories of the 1,525 New Jersey
residents killed or lost in Vietnam.

The memorial is to be unveiled May 7 -- the 20th anniversary of the departure of
the last American troops from Vietnam.   PETER S. YOUNG

LOAD-DATE: March 8, 1995

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1995 The New York Times Company

                              161 of 211 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 March 9, 1995, Thursday, Late Edition - Final
                              Correction Appended

DANCE REVIEW;
Baryshnikov And Feld Rejoin Forces

BYLINE: By ANNA KISSELGOFF

SECTION: Section C;  Page 13;  Column 4;  Cultural Desk

LENGTH: 796 words


Eliot Feld choreographed a solo for Mikhail Baryshnikov in 1977, the same year
that Mr. Feld established the New Ballet School, which continues to provide
thousands of children with tuition-free ballet training.

This link may seen tenuous but it came to mind on Tuesday night when 100 of the
school's pupils shared a gala program with a dream pair of role models, Gregory
Hines and Mr. Baryshnikov himself. The evening at the Joyce Theater (175 Eighth
Avenue, at 19th Street, Chelsea) opened a five-week season by Feld Ballets/NY
and was a benefit for the school, which is affiliated with Mr. Feld's troupe.

As in recent years, the evening was divided between a Feld premiere for the
company ("Gnossiennes") and a stage segment for the children. The fact that they
received more applause than Mr. Hines and Mr. Baryshnikov will surprise no one
who has seen a star share the spotlight with Shirley Temple.

Mr. Hines led off with a smashing tap-dance solo on a miked platform. Anyone who
has watched his superb virtuosity over the years would notice how the dancer's
weight-shifting style is now ornamented with a jaunty rhythmic filigree. Visual
elegance, as always, yields to aural power. The complexity of sound grows in
intensity and range. A new spurt of heel-tapping contrasts with flat-foot
stamping, combined with slides and a toe scratched across the floor.

Wonderfully, Mr. Hines drew the children who were seated onstage into his
performance. They giggled when he loped around, one foot on the platform, one on
the floor below. Some, wearing tights and ballet slippers, joined him in a very
soft shoe. The entire thing came off naturally, as did the children's classroom
demonstration, staged by Elizabeth Barrow and Daniel Levans, with Mary Ann Orbe.

Mr. Feld, in remarks during the program, noted rightly that ballet was "a
transforming thing" for such young people. Then, apparently referring to their
diverse cultural backgrounds, he declared that "new energy" and "the vernacular"
were needed to make ballet "truly American."

This kind of esthetic manifesto is not new for Mr. Feld. He has always
incorporated vernacular gesture into his choreography and often distills his
view of the spirit of our times. When he created "Variations on 'America,'" for
Mr. Baryshnikov, for a 1977 gala, the solo matched Charles Ives's music. A few
years after the Vietnam War, Mr. Feld did not question the idea of patriotic
fervor so much as its star-spangled attitudes. Mr. Baryshnikov, in a
stars-and-stripes outfit, shot up like a rocket into his flex-footed salutes.

Oddly, he and Mr. Feld did not collaborate again until "Tongue and Groove," the
solo Mr. Baryshnikov danced on this program and which he will perform with his
White Oak Dance Project. The title is a building term, referring to a way a
board can fit into another without nails. To say choreographer and dancer fit
hand in glove would also be true.

Mr. Feld, more than anyone, has Mr. Baryshnikov's number. The mix of purity and
cynicism in Mr. Baryshnikov's stage presence is translated into a forceful bit
of dramatic projection here. In 1977, Mr. Feld captured the essence of a Russian
superstar in peak classical form, transformed into an ironic American symbol.
Now, he gives us the savvy Americanized and mature dancer. He throws in a
classical leap to remind us why we are watching Mr. Baryshnikov in the first
place. But in this solo, the dancer's persona has changed. With his tank suit to
the knee, cinch belt, jazz shoes and hip-swiveling model's poses, Mr.
Baryshnikov could be voguing in any downtown club.

When Mr. Baryshnikov literally places his tongue in his cheek within a collage
of other grimaces, waddling steps, backward somersaults and quick footwork with
a raised shoulder, the spirit of the solo is more than defined and it seems to
have only a vague relationship to the structure of its Minimalist score. Steve
Reich, Mr. Feld's favorite composer, is represented here by his "Clapping
Music," with David J. Bursack and Roger Wagner as the uncredited clappers.

"Gnossiennes," the other Feld premiere, is set to the Satie score of the same
title, played by Peter Longiaru at the piano. Whatever the work has in
mysterious imagery, it lacks in sustained texture. Mr. Feld has interpreted the
music's limpid Orientalisms in a restricted way, treating it as a Minimalist
repetitive score rather than as a poetic flow. Ha-Chi Yu, a company apprentice,
is the reclining mermaidlike figure who rises to vie for dominance with Buffy
Miller, both backed up by Julie Stahl, Kathleen Vargyas and two other
apprentices, Patricia Tuthill and Margaux Zadikian.

Ms. Tuthill was also seen to impressive effect with advanced students in
excerpts from Mr. Feld's "Jig Is Up."

LOAD-DATE: March 9, 1995

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

CORRECTION-DATE: March 10, 1995, Friday

CORRECTION:

A dance review yesterday about a performance by Feld Ballets/NY at the Joyce
Theater on Tuesday night referred incorrectly to a 1977 Feld work, "Variations
on 'America.'" It is a pas de deux, not a solo.


GRAPHIC: Photo: Mikhail Baryshnikov in Eliot Feld's "Tongue and Groove" on
Tuesday night at the Joyce. (Sara Krulwich/The New York Times)

TYPE: Review

                   Copyright 1995 The New York Times Company

                              162 of 211 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                  March 10, 1995, Friday, Late Edition - Final
                              Correction Appended

Washington at Work;
Changeable Senator Faces Big Test

BYLINE: By EDMUND L. ANDREWS

SECTION: Section D;  Page 1;  Column 3;  Business/Financial Desk

LENGTH: 1480 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, March 9


Consistency has never been Senator Larry Pressler's strong suit.

Two years ago Mr. Pressler, the South Dakota Republican, broke ranks with
Republican leaders in Congress to help pass a law regulating cable television
prices. Today he is sponsoring a bill to eliminate those same price regulations.

Mr. Pressler, having now served 17 years in the Senate, is a proud co-sponsor of
legislation that would limit senators' careers to 12 years. But not for him. The
bill would only affect people elected in the future. "In our little state," he
said in a recent interview, "the only card we have to play is seniority."

But for all his changeability, Mr. Pressler is edging closer to the center stage
and one of the most serious undertakings of his career. As the new chairman of
the Senate Commerce Committee, he is taking the lead in overhauling the nation's
creaky communications laws.

It is an immense undertaking, one that would affect every corner of the $250
billion communications industry. And depending on the way the new legislation is
written, it could either help or hinder the construction of the so-called
information superhighway.

It is also politically treacherous territory, pitting powerful industry interest
groups against each other, in what is almost certain to be among the heaviest
lobbying battles of the year.

There is no doubt that Mr. Pressler is earnest about his mission, but not
everybody is sure that he is up to the job. His opposite number from South
Dakota, Senator Tom Daschle, a Democrat, once asserted that Mr. Pressler's seat
was "empty," and quipped that "a Senate seat is a terrible thing to waste."

Besides the telecommunications bill, Mr. Pressler's committee is also drafting
legislation that would make it more difficult to sue companies over defective
products, part of a broader effort in Congress to overhaul the nation's tort
laws. But Mr. Pressler has deferred to others on his committee about that
legislation, and endorsed a bipartisan bill drafted by Senator Jay Rockefeller,
Democrat of West Virginia, and Slade Gorton, Republican of Washington.

During the years Mr. Pressler has come under attack in South Dakota newspapers
as a lawmaker who put out thousands of news releases but accomplished little.
Sensing his vulnerability, Democratic leaders see his seat as one they will
fight to capture in 1996.

Indeed, Mr. Pressler got off to a rough start this year. While trying to attack
Federal financing for public broadcasting, he submitted a questionnaire to the
Corporation for Public Broadcasting, in which he asked to know about the sex and
ethnicity of the employees at National Public Radio as well as the number of
people there who had worked for either Christian fundamentalist stations or
Pacifica Radio, a left-leaning radio service.

After an uproar ensued, Mr. Pressler, insisting that he had been misunderstood,
said public broadcasters could ignore those questions.

But some industry officials warn that such distractions can sidetrack the bigger
issues. "He's losing valuable time," one Washington lobbyist said. "When you
embarrass your party, it diminishes your ability to lead on other issues."

But none of that will matter much if Mr. Pressler can push a successful
telecommunications bill through Congress. His proposal, similar to the one the
Democrats tried to pass last year, would let the regional Bell telephone
companies enter the long-distance industry and cable television, while forcing
them to open their own monopolies. It is more hawkish, though, about
deregulation, and would also eliminate price regulations for cable television
and rules that restrict the ownership of television and radio stations.

The turf battles in the industry are intense, particularly between the Bell
companies and long-distance carriers like the AT&T Corporation and the MCI
Communications Corporation.

Republican leaders say they are confident about passing a bill this year, and
Mr. Pressler has scheduled a committee "markup" session and vote for March 21.
But industry experts and many lawmakers say the chances of final passage this
year are at best about even.

"This is sort of playing a chess game with several senators, each of whom can
have a checkmate," Mr. Pressler said. "If Lyndon Johnson were alive in the
Senate today, I don't think he would be able to pass this by arm-twisting. If
this passes, it has got to be with a consensus."

For the moment the ball is in his hands. The Clinton Administration strongly
supports the telecommunication overhaul, but is too burdened by other problems
to take a strong role. House Republicans are also gearing up for their own bill,
but are moving more slowly in order to act on elements of the Contract with
America first.

No one doubts that Mr. Pressler, the youthful-looking, blue-eyed lawmaker, is
extremely serious about his agenda or acutely aware of the need to generate
support from both Democrats and Republicans. Born in Humboldt, S.D., he won a
Rhodes Scholarship to Oxford, served in Vietnam and then went on to earn both a
master's degree and a law degree from Harvard.

He was elected to Congress in 1974, one of only a handful of Republicans to
capture an open seat the year that Richard Nixon resigned as President. Mr.
Pressler won his Senate seat in 1978.

As a lawmaker, Mr. Pressler has certainly been eclectic. Originally positioning
himself as a moderate, today he boasts about his conservative voting record, at
least on issues about spending and taxes.

He has railed against Congressional pay increases and tweaked his own party for
the way it has spent money, breaking ranks last year with Republican Senate
leaders to support a bill to limit campaign contributions.

Not unlike most of the Democrats who pushed to clean up campaign finance laws,
though, Mr. Pressler continues to draw campaign contributions while they remain
legal. In the last six months of 1994, a year in which he was not up for
re-election, he raised $151,000 in contributions -- about $24,500 of those from
communications companies. Since the election, he has held several fund-raising
events in Washington that industry groups paid heavily to attend.

On technology and communications issues, Mr. Pressler has changed course, too.
In 1992 he provided a key swing vote to override President George Bush's veto of
price regulations for cable television. But now, following the Republican sweep
of Congress, Mr. Pressler's legislation would eliminate entirely the regulations
on cable prices after one year.

Mr. Pressler said he would preserve the parts of the law that forced cable
companies to license their programming to new rivals. But he said new
competition from telephone companies and satellites had ended the need for price
regulation.

"There were abuses by the cable companies," he said. "But we're now at the point
where we can deregulate."

Mr. Pressler's relatively new hard-line stance also reflects the views of the
Senate majority leader, Bob Dole, who fought cable television restrictions in
1992 and remains bitterly opposed to the rules today. In a speech in Washington
on Tuesday, Mr. Dole cited the cable regulations as a "prime example" of the way
the Clinton Administration continued to support "big government" in the
communications industry.

The real battles will be about the terms under which the local Baby Bell
companies will be allowed into long-distance service, an area that was made
off-limits by the antitrust decree that broke up the old Bell System. Hawkish
Republican leaders, including Senator Dole and Senator Bob Packwood of Oregon,
are pushing for a lifting of the ban automatically after three years, an idea
that is anathema to AT&T and its long-distance rivals.

Mr. Pressler supported the Democrats' more cautious bill last year, but
responding to the seismic shift on Capitol Hill this year, he inserted the
hard-line approach in his draft proposal last month.

Now Mr. Pressler is trying to mediate a new compromise with Senator Ernest F.
Hollings of South Carolina, the ranking Democrat on the Commerce Committee who
has drafted his own bill. But the talks, carried out almost daily between staff
members from both parties, are difficult and Mr. Pressler must retain the
support of his conservative colleagues.

Supporters of Mr. Pressler say he is bending over backward to be collegial and
develop a bipartisan bill, and they say he sincerely wants a strongly
deregulatory bill. But the gridlock in the industry could still get the better
of him.

Mr. Pressler "is not one to use sharp elbows to get what he wants," one industry
lobbyist said. "He may not even know how to use sharp elbows."

 The profile referred incorrectly to Mr. Pressler's first election to Congress,
in 1974. Mr. Pressler, a South Dakota Republican, defeated an incumbent
Democrat; he did not run for an open seat.

NAME: Larry Pressler

LOAD-DATE: March 10, 1995

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

CORRECTION-DATE: March 28, 1995, Tuesday

CORRECTION:

A profile in Business Day on March 10 about Senator Larry Pressler referred
imprecisely to his position on term limits. The Senator said he supported
legislation on term limits that would apply to himself and other incumbents. But
the legislation, which would limit senators to two terms or 12 years, would not
count the time already served by Mr. Pressler and other incumbents.

GRAPHIC: Photo: As the new chairman of the Senate Commerce Committee, Senator
Larry Pressler, a South Dakota Republican known for changing his opinions, is
taking the lead in overhauling communications laws. (David Scull/The New York
Times)

Chart: "Larry Pressler"

Born: March 29, 1942, Humboldt, S.D.

Hometown: Humboldt, S.D.

Education: Humboldt High School; B.A., University of South Dakota; M.A. and
J.D., Harvard University.

Career Highlights: 1971-73, Foreign Service officer; 1975-79, member, United
States House of Representatives; 1978, elected to the United States Senate.

Family: Married to Harriet Dent; one stepdaughter.

Hobbies: Tennis; running; driving a tractor.

(pg. D12)

TYPE: Biography

                   Copyright 1995 The New York Times Company

                              163 of 211 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 March 11, 1995, Saturday, Late Edition - Final

Man in the News: John Mark Deutch;
Reluctant Helmsman for a Troubled Agency

BYLINE: By TIM WEINER

SECTION: Section 1;  Page 8;  Column 3;  National Desk

LENGTH: 982 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, March 10


If intelligence were the sole prerequisite for the job of Director of Central
Intelligence, John M. Deutch, the Deputy Defense Secretary, would be
extraordinarily qualified.

His colleagues say he has a first-class mind, with an ego and energy to match
it. In two years at the Pentagon, Mr. Deutch has shaken up multibillion-dollar
programs, taken a leading role on foreign policy issues, confronted the problem
of the spread of nuclear weapons and represented the United States abroad.

He will need all the drive and determination he can muster to take on and
transform the nation's intelligence services, particularly the Central
Intelligence Agency, which is suffering through its worst stretch since its
creation in 1947. Many in Congress think the C.I.A. needs a radical
transformation, in light of the public embarrassment of the Aldrich Ames
espionage case and the privately expressed sense within the agency that it has
suffered from entropy since the collapse of its principal adversary, the Soviet
Union.

In addition to his intellect, Mr. Deutch possesses another important
qualification for the post: he is extremely close to the Secretary of Defense,
William J. Perry, and to Mr. Perry's predecessor, Les Aspin, who is in charge of
a commission that is supposed to weigh the restructuring of the C.I.A. and the
other national intelligence services.

In fact, Mr. Deutch was President Clinton's first choice to take over the
nation's intelligence agencies after R. James Woolsey resigned in December. But
he declined. He said he was satisfied in his present post, and aides said he was
worried that working as the nation's spymaster might affect his chances of
becoming president of the Massachusetts Institute of Technology, where he once
served as provost, since some academicians look askance at the C.I.A.

The difference this time appears to be the near emergency created by the
unexpected withdrawal of Mr. Clinton's nominee, Michael P. C. Carns, a retired
Air Force general.

John Mark Deutch has seen a few emergencies, political and personal, in his
time. He was born in Brussels on July 27, 1938, barely 13 months before the
beginning of World War II. (If he is confirmed, he would be the nation's first
foreign-born intelligence chief.) He and his family fled Belgium for France and
eventually came to the United States. His father, an electrical engineer, became
the deputy director of the Government's synthetic rubber program during the war.

Mr. Deutch attended Sidwell Friends, one of Washington's most prominent private
schools, Amherst College and M.I.T. He has rotated between posts at M.I.T. and
increasingly powerful positions in Democratic administrations since 1961.

He first came to the Pentagon as one of the "whiz kids," the young intellectuals
who worked under Defense Secretary Robert S. McNamara in the Kennedy and Johnson
Administrations as the conflict in Vietnam escalated into a full-bore war. He
left the Pentagon in 1966 and became a chemistry professor, first at Princeton
University, then at M.I.T.

In 1977, in the Carter Administration, he became director of research at the
newly created Department of Energy, which oversaw the nation's nuclear weapons
complex as well as new technologies for alternatives to oil. He rose to Under
Secretary of Energy and ran a study of the Government's nuclear installations
after the near-meltdown of a commercial reactor at Three Mile Island in
Pennsylvania in 1979.

He was the dean of science and then the provost at M.I.T. during the Reagan and
Bush Administrations. In 1993, he became the acquisition czar at the Pentagon,
in charge of buying tens of billions of dollars of weaponry.

Mr. Deutch has a third qualification for the job of Director of Central
Intelligence. Beyond his brainpower and friendships, his job as
second-in-command at the Pentagon gave him some authority over most of the
nation's intelligence community.

The nation's military services consume most of the classified,
$28-billion-a-year intelligence budget, and last year Mr. Deutch and Mr. Woolsey
led an extensive review of the structure and spending of the National Security
Agency and the National Reconnaissance Office, which run hugely expensive
programs for photo-reconnaissance and electronic eavesdropping. Together those
two agencies consume perhaps one-third of the nation's intelligence spending.
Coordinating the work and the cost of the agencies, both of which are far bigger
than the C.I.A., has been a major problem for directors of central intelligence.

Mr. Deutch may also have been reluctant to assume the post, which consumed and
exhausted Mr. Woolsey, because he has only recently remarried. In January, he
and Patricia Lyon Martin were married in a civil ceremony in Arlington, Va.

Ms. Martin was a high school sweetheart of Mr. Deutch. Each wed another, and
each was divorced about 10 years ago. He has three sons from his previous
marriage: Phillip, Paul and Zachery.

Then again, marriage may not interfere with Mr. Deutch's duties. Shortly after
the ceremony, he was back at his desk. There was no honeymoon.

If he is confirmed, none may be forthcoming in his new post.

Clinton's Choice

Born: July 27, 1938, in Brussels.

Education: Sidwell Friends School (Washington); B.A., Amherst College; B.S. and
Ph.D., Massachusetts Institute of Technology.

Career Highlights: 1961-65, Office of systems analysis, Defense Department;
1966-69, assistant professor of chemistry, Princeton University; 1970-present,
assistant professor and professor of chemistry, M.I.T.; 1977-79, director of
energy research, Energy Department; 1979-80, under secretary, Energy Department;
1982-85, dean of science, M.I.T; 1985-90, provost, M.I.T.; 1993, Under Secretary
of Defense for Acquisition and Technology; 1994, Deputy Secretary of Defense.

Interests: Tennis, squash, reading.

NAME: John Mark Deutch

LOAD-DATE: March 11, 1995

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Biography

                   Copyright 1995 The New York Times Company

                              164 of 211 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 March 11, 1995, Saturday, Late Edition - Final

Observer;
Dreamers, Axes in Hand

BYLINE: By RUSSELL BAKER;   Bob Herbert is on vacation.

SECTION: Section 1;  Page 23;  Column 6;  Editorial Desk

LENGTH: 697 words


After grousing about it for eternities, Republicans are finally making a sincere
effort to destroy the welfare state.

For the past 60 years Republicans have been saying the welfare state was
destroying us, or would destroy us, and we'd better destroy it first, or else.

When their chances came, though, Republicans as formidable as Dwight Eisenhower,
Richard Nixon and Ronald Reagan always decided it was wiser to go on living with
it.

Now the Newtites are at last doing their best to bring it down. This explains
all the Congressional activity aimed at afflicting the afflicted and comforting
the comfortable. Republicans have decided to quit talking the talk and start
walking the walk. Decided to bring down Ole Devil Welfare State.

Newt, lad! It's good to see somebody finally do more than talk, Newt, and
everybody knows you're smart enough to talk 300 words a minute, teach school and
make a monkey out of the Democratic Party all at the same time, but still --

Eisenhower, Nixon, Reagan -- those were serious men, as the guy told the punk
about the Mafia people the punk was fooling around with. "Serious men," the guy
said.

So were Ike, Nixon and Reagan. Serious men. When men like that decided to stay
with the welfare state regardless of what the Republican boilerplate said, they
didn't do it lightly.

The thing was younger too than it is now. When Eisenhower took over, it was
scarcely 20 years old. With Nixon, it was in its mid-30's; with Reagan, in its
late 40's.

Now it's over 60 years old. That's a lot older than you, Newt. And a lot older
than the flock of House Newtites so eager to afflict the afflicted.

The welfare state is now so old that most Americans now alive don't even know
what was here before it came along. It is almost old enough for Social Security,
and that's old.

Old, Newt. Old, you starry-eyed young right-wingers with dreams of the
triumphantly uninhibited total-market-world to come. And here's what old means:

Entrenched in life, that's what it means. Set in its ways. Some parts not
working too well. A pain in the neck, liver and lights to anybody who has to
live with it, but a pain not easily escaped, because it's your heritage and your
future.

It's what bore you and raised you, because it defined the world in which you
were born and raised and fitted out to become Speaker of the House or
brilliantly spoken conservative egghead, as the case may be.

But I am carried away into poetic delicacies inappropriate for political
screeds. I should be content to note that the United States has been a welfare
state for over a quarter of its entire existence. For so long that it might well
be renamed "The United Welfare State of America."

Trying to destroy it now is like trying to destroy the American system. When
planning to destroy government systems, sound practice suggests having something
ready to replace them. Even then it's a risky bet. Witness Lenin, who planned to
replace a destroyed system with Marx, police and prison.

The Newtites appear to be sentimental romantics. They seem to believe that once
the welfare state is in ruins the good old days will resume, the good old system
will cut in again, good old American human nature will prevail and the good old
liver bile will once again flow at the good old rate of four pints a day once
prescribed by Carter's good old Little Liver Pills.

Yes, I overstate the absurdity of the Republicans' optimism, but only because
the notion that time can be rolled back and mythical pasts restored belongs in
Ray Bradbury's science fiction, not in the governance of large, rich, powerful
and incredibly complex nations.

Actually the good old days were, as the book title says, terrible. Like them or
not, these are the good old days here and now.

Destroying the state without much idea of what might replace it was the program
of the so-called "New Left," which yearned to improve the world in the 1960's
and 1970's.

They were products of the anti-war passion of the Vietnam years. Their theory
was that the United States was so dreadful a place that whatever it became after
its destruction could only be better. Were you once a New Leftie, Newt?


LOAD-DATE: March 11, 1995

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Op-Ed

                   Copyright 1995 The New York Times Company

                              165 of 211 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                  March 12, 1995, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

The Nation;
To Vermont's Voters, What's Out Is In

BYLINE: By DAVID M. HERSZENHORN

SECTION: Section 4;  Page 16;  Column 4;  Week in Review Desk

LENGTH: 408 words


AS as Maine goes, so goes the nation, it was said. But what about Burlington,
Vt.?

On town meeting day last Tuesday, Burlington voters threw out their Republican
Mayor and restored a Progressive. Last fall, Vermont bucked a national
conservative tide by re-electing Representative Bernard Sanders, the only
self-described democratic socialist in Congress.

Yankee independence is a staple of Vermont's personality as much as white
steeple churches, rolling green hills, dairy cows and Ben & Jerry's. At the
height of the New Deal, most Vermonters were Republican and conservative. In the
1980's, when Republicans held the White House, Vermonters voted Democratic and
Progressive.

Depending on whom you ask, the state's political contrariness stems from an
inspired sense of liberty or a mulish refusal to conform.

"Vermont has been a very ornery, independent state for a couple hundred years,"
Mr. Sanders said. "We have never been impressed by what's politically in vogue
in Washington or California."

Vermont's liberalism has only escalated the rivalry with New Hampshire, its
arch-conservative neighbor.

"One might argue that Vermont ain't got the message yet," said Jere Daniell, a
professor of New England history at Dartmouth College in Hanover, N.H. "Vermont
has built into itself a model of progressivism which stands for everything the
Contract With America either directly or implicity attacks."

Modern Vermont progressivism began in the late 1960's with the Liberty Union
party, rooted in opposition to United States involvement in Vietnam. In the
1970's, Mr. Sanders ran unsuccessfully for Governor and for Senate on the
Liberty Union ticket. In 1981, as an independent, he was elected Mayor of
Vermont's biggest city, earning it the nickname "the People's Republic of
Burlington" and prompting Gary Trudeau to muse in a Doonesbury cartoon: "As goes
Burlington, so goes France."

When Mr. Sanders was elected to Congress in 1990, he was succeeded as Mayor by
his protege, Peter Clavelle. Shortly after a Democrat was returned to the White
House, Mr. Clavelle was unseated in 1993 by a Republican, Peter Brownell. And
now, with the national resurgence of Republicans, Mr. Brownell is out and Mr.
Clavelle has been restored to office.

"Vermont is just obstinate, I guess," said Frank Bryan, a political scientist at
the University of Vermont in Burlington. "We'll do anything to be on the wrong
side."

LOAD-DATE: March 12, 1995

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Graph: "Leaning Left on a Tide of Conservatism" Burlington, VT.,
recently elected another Progressive mayor. In 12 of the last 14 years, the
Mayor of Burlington has been a member of the Progressive Coalition. A
statistical loook at New England's political anomaly. (Source: Census Bureau;
1994 World Almanac)

                   Copyright 1995 The New York Times Company

                              166 of 211 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                  March 12, 1995, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

The World;
Cambodia Can't Shake The Legacy of Madness

BYLINE: By PHILIP SHENON

SECTION: Section 4;  Page 3;  Column 1;  Week in Review Desk

LENGTH: 1045 words

DATELINE: PHNOM PENH, Cambodia


WHAT passes for an insane asylum in the desolate Cambodian village of Banteay
Desk is one more squalid bit of evidence of this nation's agony. The village
clinic has set aside a small wooden shed with a dirt floor and three
urine-stained mattresses to house the mentally ill until they get better -- or
until it is clear that they will never get better.

Saung Bunly had to be chained to his bed for several weeks last year after he
kept trying to hurt himself, usually by slamming his head into the wall. "They
took the chains off because I am not violent anymore, but I am still crazy,"
said the 35-year-old patient, who was perched on the edge of his cot, rocking
frantically back and forth, his eyes ablaze. "And I am crazy because of the
Khmer Rouge." In this rare lucid moment, he recalled that "sometimes the Khmer
Rouge would hurt me, hit me again and again. There was no food. I still have
nightmares that Pol Pot will return."

Twenty years ago next month, the black-clad child soldiers of the Khmer Rouge
pulled their trademark checked scarves loosely around their necks and marched
into Phnom Penh, the Cambodian capital, and launched a Maoist-inspired peasant
revolution that would leave more than one million Cambodians dead, including
almost everyone who had the talent or training to run this small country.




An Asian Trusteeship

If the Khmer Rouge leader Pol Pot wanted a legacy, he surely has it: a nation
still so shattered by his crimes that Cambodia today seems incapable of
governing itself, so traumatized that much of the outside world wonders if
Cambodia can ever again succeed as a fully independent nation.

"As an Asian and as a humanitarian, I am embarrassed that we have allowed the
Cambodian problem to fester," said an Asian diplomat stationed in Phnom Penh. "I
think you will hear more and more about the possibility of Cambodia's neighbors
stepping in -- doing something -- if things deteriorate further."

After spending more than $2 billion on a peacekeeping operation that in 1993
produced the first free elections in Cambodia's history, the United Nations
clearly does not have the money or the inclination to return to Cambodia in
force.

But a small group of Asian diplomats has quietly proposed the creation of an
all-Asian trusteeship for Cambodia, in which friendly Southeast Asian nations
would dispatch advisers here to oversee Cambodia's economic and political
development, and possibly even take a role in commanding the country's military,
which is still locked in battle with the Khmer Rouge. After Pol Pot and his
forces were ousted in 1979 in a Vietnamese invasion, they returned to the jungle
as insurgents. The Vietnamese would likely be notable by their absence from the
trusteeship, given the fury felt by Cambodians over their country's occupation
by Vietnam from 1979 until 1989.

Cambodia is only one entry on the sorry list of nations -- Bosnia, Rwanda and
Somalia obvious among them -- that seem incapable of holding themselves together
peacefully without outside intervention.

But Cambodia has suffered in special ways. No country in the 20th century lost
such a sizable proportion of its population in such a short period -- depending
on the estimate, between one-eighth and one-third of Cambodians vanished -- and
perhaps no country has so suddenly been stripped of an entire generation of
people with education and ability.

Among the "enemies of the revolution" singled out for liquidation by Pol Pot in
the 1970's were educators and bankers, economists and engineers, writers and
monks -- the very people who might have been able to help rebuild the country
after Pol Pot's reign of terror was ended.

Many of the people left to run the Government are corrupt and uneducated, their
credentials consisting of their willingness to use violence unsparingly. Many of
Cambodia's senior leaders are Khmer Rouge defectors who, while they may have
renounced the ideology of Pol Pot, still make use of his savage tactics.

There is other evidence of Pol Pot's legacy, especially in the glazed eyes of so
many of the civilians who survived the Khmer Rouge years. Any visitor who spends
much time in Cambodia knows that a large portion of the population is
psychologically scarred from the Pol Pot era. Mental illness is rampant, and so
is the violence that it often produces.

"It's a traumatized country," said Chantal Rodier, a Canadian psychologist who
has been working here for two years for Children of Cambodia, a charity group.
"Because of the Khmer Rouge, these people became less than animals. They lost
the power to conduct their own lives. And it will take a long time to overcome
this -- several generations."

She said that Cambodian children born long after the Khmer Rouge were overthrown
were not spared the trauma of that era, since their parents -- whose own
childhoods were devastated by the Khmer Rouge -- seemed inept at raising the
next generation.

"I won't say that Cambodian parents don't love their children, but children
don't receive the affection they need," she said. "The parents have no role
models for how to raise children."

The mental illness she described is on grim display in the village clinic at
Banteay Dek, about 20 miles east of Phnom Penh, where attendants trained in
traditional Khmer medicine try as best they can to deal with mentally ill
patients who are often violent. The treatment, such as it is, involves extracts
of tree bark and plants -- and the use of shackles.

The clinic's administrator, Siem Vy, 58, said the troubles of virtually all of
her psychiatric patients could be traced back to the years of Pol Pot. "When
they come to the hospital, they usually cry, 'the Khmer Rouge killed all my
family,' and sometimes they will cry like that all night," she said. "One woman
knocked the wall with her head. She kept crying, 'Why do you kill my family?
Why, why?' "

Mrs. Siem Vy, who has worked in village hospitals for decades, said that mental
illness was rare in Cambodia before the Khmer Rouge era. "We were a peaceful
country then," she said. "But after Pol Pot tried to destroy Cambodia, these
terrible psychiatric problems are common. And we know that the Khmer Rouge are
completely responsible for this."

LOAD-DATE: March 12, 1995

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo: Cambodia inherits the wind: a resident of a Phnom Penh asylum.
(Leah Melnick/Impact Visuals)

                   Copyright 1995 The New York Times Company

                              167 of 211 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                  March 12, 1995, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

PAN AMERICAN GAMES;
Argentine Field Shapes Up, but St. John's Baseball Team Stumbles

BYLINE: By JERE LONGMAN

SECTION: Section 8;  Page 2;  Column 1;  Sports Desk

LENGTH: 1000 words

DATELINE: BUENOS AIRES, March 11


Until 10 days ago, the United States was holding to its threat to withdraw from
baseball competition at the Pan American Games. The problem was not replacement
players. It was a replacement field.

When Joe Russo, the longtime coach at St. John's University, came to survey
Ezeiza National Stadium last September, he found a diamond in the rough. The
very rough. Apparently no one had played on the field in four or five years.
Grass grew high. The dugouts were unusable. There were no lights or basepaths.
Where Russo might have expected to find players chewing tobacco, he found cows
chewing weeds.

"I was in total shock," Russo said. "There was manure all around. It was just a
pasture."

The Argentine approach to this field of screams appeared to be: Mow it and they
will come.

Paint was slapped on, lights were installed, the playing surface was smoothed
and dirt was trucked in for the basepaths. On March 1, the United States agreed
to play in this hemispheric version of the Summer Olympics. Except for one
thing. There was still no pitcher's mound.

"Maybe we should have brought our own dirt," Russo said on Friday.

A mound had been installed for today's opening game against Argentina, though
its height was more suited to softball than baseball. The field was a lush
green, but so was St. John's, which had practiced sparingly in cold weather at
home and gave up five runs in the first inning today before losing, 6-4.

Baseball tradition is embryonic here. The Argentine national team had not even
played a home game since 1988. So unexpected was the victory over the United
States that it ignited a celebration of drum beating, horn honking and fireworks
exploding.

"We're very happy," said Carlos Siffredi, the Argentine national coach. "We
spent five years preparing to get our best team to the Pan Am Games."

Previously, the United States has sent baseball teams of college all-stars to
the games, which are held every four years in the year preceding the Summer
Olympics. But this year's games are being held during the Southern Hemisphere's
summer, which coincides with the beginning of the season for many American
universities.

Professionals are not allowed in Pan Am baseball competition, "otherwise we had
a lot of players with nothing to do that we could have brought," said Sandra
Baldwin, who is the chief of the United States contingent. USA Baseball, the
sport's governing body, sent out 1,600 questionnaires, searching for a college
team that would not have yet entered conference play. St. John's, a regional
power that has produced the major league pitchers Frank Viola and John Franco,
was handed the ball out of the bullpen.

"Enjoy yourself," Charlie Alben of Kings Park, L.I., said he told his son,
Charles, a left-handed pitcher. "You are 18 and you're getting an
all-expense-paid trip to South America. When I was 18, I got an all-expense-paid
trip to South Vietnam."

The Red Storm hopes to win a medal in the 10-team tournament, in which Cuba is
favored, but Russo is not sure that is realistic.

His team has two disadvantages. One, it is young. Only three players are older
than 21. "The Cubans are walking around, drinking, smoking cigars," said pitcher
Anthony Sagnelli of Staten Island. "They look like they're 40 years old." Two,
before this week, St. John's had exactly two days of practice outdoors. The rest
of the time was spent hitting in indoor batting cages and fielding grounders on
the floor of Alumni Hall when the basketball team wasn't shooting free throws.

"We're undefeated in 22 years in the gym," Russo said. "Now let's see how we do
outdoors."

Mike Maerten, a fifth-year senior from Delran, N.J., drew the starting nod today
after a small scare on Thursday. While catching a few rays at the team's
headquarters, the National Military College, the pitcher leaned back and his
hand felt something metallic. It was a live bullet. Given the fact that this was
a military college, not a beach, he wondered what other obstacles might confront
unwary sunbathers.

"I was telling everybody, watch out for land mines," Maerten joked.

Gary Villacres, an infielder from Astoria, Queens, nearly missed the trip when
it was discovered that he was not a United States citizen. Having emigrated from
Ecuador when he was 7, Villacres had never applied for citizenship. A month ago,
he was finally naturalized.

The team will be away for three weeks, which means three weeks of missed
classes. Cecelia Russo, the coach's wife, an associate dean who is responsible
for university-wide tutoring at St. John's, has set up a study hall after
practice each day. She is also administering exams.  Each player was required to
have at least a 2.5 grade-point average in the fall to qualify for the trip.
This semester, though, baseball will be the main course of study.

"I'm a strict disciplinarian, but as a parent, you have to get real," Charlie
Alben said. "I wanted to tell my son, 'You better study hard,' but I couldn't
get the words out of my mouth. What they're going to experience here, they're
going to remember a lot longer than what they might be learning in history."

Conditions in South America have brought the usual culture shock. Newspapers
have been plastered across the windows at the military college barracks to serve
as curtains. Hot water and batting cages didn't arrive until Thursday. But at
least the baseball team has it better than the United States shooting team.

"They had to go somewhere else to practice," Joe Russo said. "There's no rifle
range here. How can you not have a rifle range at a military college?"

                             --------------------


A Gold Medal for U.S.

MAR DEL PLATA, Argentina, March 11 (AP) -- The opening ceremony tonight for the
Pan American games began with the 35,000-capacity Mar del Plata City Stadium
still half-empty, with ticket-holders stuck in traffic. Meanwhile, the United
States men's gymnastics team won the first gold medal of the games, edging Cuba.


LOAD-DATE: March 12, 1995

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo: Argentine pitcher Miguel Rodriguez and catcher Juan Calonico
celebrate victory over St. John's. (Agence France-Presse)

                   Copyright 1995 The New York Times Company

                              168 of 211 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                  March 12, 1995, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

BEST SELLERS: March 12, 1995

SECTION: Section 7; Page 26; Column 2; Book Review Desk

LENGTH: 1471 words



          Weeks
This Last    On
Week Week  List Fiction

 1      1  54   THE CELESTINE PROPHECY, by James Redfield. (Warner, $17.95.) An
                ancient manuscript, found in Peru, provides insights into
                achieving a fulfilling life.

 2      2   3   BORDER MUSIC, by Robert James Waller. (Warner, $17.95.) A Texas
                rancher, trying to erase his Vietnam trauma, takes to the road
                with an exotic dancer.

 3      3  38   POLITICALLY CORRECT BEDTIME STORIES, by James Finn Garner.
                (Macmillan, $8.95.) Classic tales respun to avoid offending
                current sensibilities.

 4      4   5   ORIGINAL SIN, by P.D. James. (Knopf, $24.) Adam Dalgliesh
                probes a case involving intrigue, malice and murder in a
                prestigious London publishing house.

 5      7   4   DAISY-HEAD MAYZIE, by Dr. Seuss. (Random House, $15.) A girl's
                head unexpectedly sprouts a daisy.

 6      5   8   KISS THE GIRLS, by James Patterson. (Little, Brown, $22.95.) A
                police detective pursues a serial killer.

 7      6   5   HOME SONG, by LaVyrle Spencer. (Putnam, $23.95.) The appearance
                of his unknown biological son threatens the serenity of a man's
                family life.

 8      8  135  THE BRIDGES OF MADISON COUNTY, by Robert James Waller. (Warner,
                $16.95.) A photographer and a farmer's lonely wife in Iowa.

 9     12   5   ALWAYS A RECKONING, by Jimmy Carter. (Times Books/Random House,
                $18.) A collection of poems.

 10    16   2   THE CUNNING MAN, by Robertson Davies. (Viking, $23.95.) A
                doctor uses shamanism and Platonism as well as scientific
                medicine in his practice.

 11        22   MUTANT MESSAGE DOWN UNDER, by Marlo Morgan. (HarperCollins,
                $18.) In Australia's outback, an American woman learns about
                aboriginal philosophy.

 12*   10   3   THE CAT WHO BLEW THE WHISTLE, by Lilian Jackson Braun. (Putnam,
                $21.95.) Aided by his two cats, Jim Qwilleran investigates
                embezzlement and a murder.

 13*    9   2   THE JUROR, by George Dawes Green. (Warner, $21.95.) A woman's
                life takes a fearful turn when she is chosen as a juror for a
                mob trial.

 14         1   THE GLASS LAKE, by Maeve Binchy. (Delacorte, $23.95.) The
                unspoken ties that bind a woman and her mother in a small Irish
                town.

 15    13   8   EYES OF A CHILD, by Richard North Patterson. (Knopf, $24.) The
                apparent suicide of a San Francisco man leads to courtroom
                encounters.

 16*   11   7   ACCEPTABLE RISK, by Robin Cook. (Putnam, $23.95.) A
                researcher's quest has devastating results.

          Weeks
This Last    On
Week Week  List Nonfiction

 1      1   5   I WANT TO TELL YOU, by O.J. Simpson. (Little, Brown, $17.95.)
                The former football star, now on trial for murder, responds to
                letters he has received.

 2      2  11   SISTERS, by Carol Saline. Photographs by Sharon J. Wohlmuth.
                (Running Press, $27.50.) The relationships of 36 sets of
                sisters, reported in words and pictures.

 3      3  22   THE HOT ZONE, by Richard Preston. (Random House, $23.) The
                discovery of a lethal virus, more infectious than H.I.V., and
                the efforts to keep it from spreading.

 4      6   4   THE DEATH OF COMMON SENSE, by Philip K. Howard. (Random House,
                $18.) How governmental rules and regulations are fettering the
                lives of all Americans.

 5      4   5   RAGING HEART, by Sheila Weller. (Pocket, $18.) An account of
                the marriage of O.J. and Nicole Brown Simpson.

 6      8   3   THE DISCIPLINE OF MARKET LEADERS, by Michael Treacy and Fred
                Wiersema. (Addison-Wesley, $25.) A discussion of marketing
                techniques.

 7      9   7   INSIDE THE WHITE HOUSE, by Ronald Kessler. (Pocket, $23.)
                Anecdotes about events at 1600 Pennsylvania Avenue during the
                past 30 years.

 8     12  15   THE WARREN BUFFETT WAY, by Robert G. Hagstrom Jr. (Wiley,
                $24.95.) An account of the career of the man said to be the
                world's most successful investor.

 9     10  53   MIDNIGHT IN THE GARDEN OF GOOD AND EVIL, by John Berendt.
                (Random House, $23.) The mysterious death of a young man in
                Savannah, Ga.

 10     5  27   COUPLEHOOD, by Paul Reiser. (Bantam, $19.95.) Essays on the ups
                and downs of marriage by the television star and stand-up
                comedian.

 11    15  64   THE BOOK OF VIRTUES, by William J. Bennett. (Simon & Schuster,
                $30.) Moral stories adapted from the Greeks, the Bible,
                folklore and elsewhere.

 12     7  23   DON'T STAND TOO CLOSE TO A NAKED MAN, by Tim Allen. (Hyperion,
                $19.95.) Meditations on life by the star of "Home Improvement."

 13*       23   JAMES HERRIOT'S CAT STORIES, by James Herriot. (St. Martin's,
                $16.95.) A collection of tales by the late Yorkshire
                veterinarian.

 14    11   7   ALL MY CHILDREN, by Gary Warner. (General Publishing, $25.) A
                scrapbook of photographs and mementos about the long-running
                television show.

 15    13  11   NICOLE BROWN SIMPSON, by Faye D. Resnick with Mike Walker.
                (Dove Books, $14.95.) The former wife of O.J. Simpson as
                remembered by a friend.

          Weeks
This Last    On
Week Week  List Advice, How-to and Miscellaneous

 1      2  94   MEN ARE FROM MARS, WOMEN ARE FROM VENUS, by John Gray.
                (HarperCollins, $23.) Communicating.

 2      3   4   THE BEARDSTOWN LADIES' COMMON-SENSE INVESTMENT GUIDE.
                (Godin/Hyperion, $19.95.) Tips for successful investing from 16
                Illinois women.

 3      1  46   IN THE KITCHEN WITH ROSIE, by Rosie Daley. (Knopf, $14.95.)
                Recipes by Oprah Winfrey's cook.

 4      4   8   FOOD, by Susan Powter. (Simon & Schuster, $24.) Information
                about recipes, nutritional menus and diets.


Rankings reflect sales figures, for the week ending Feb. 25, at 3,050 bookstores
plus wholesalers serving 28,000 other retailers (gift shops, department stores,
newsstands, supermarkets), statistically weighted to represent sales in all such
outlets nationwide. An asterisk indicates that a book's sales are barely
distinguishable from those of the book above.

And Bear in Mind
(Editor's Choices of other recent books of particular interest)

ANAIS NIN: A Biography, by Deirdre Bair. (Putnam, $39.95.) An engaging account
that presents the diarist as even more self-absorbed than her work suggests.

BETRAYALS, by Charles Palliser. (Ballantine, $23.) This clever novel spins out a
set of variations on the double-cross and such related themes as infidelity,
treason and revenge.

THE DIARY OF A YOUNG GIRL: The Definitive Edition, by Anne Frank. Edited by Otto
H. Frank and Mirjam Pressler. (Doubleday, $25.) An expanded version, restoring
entries from the original diary, gives more texture and nuance to this renowned
personal account of the Holocaust.

A DIVING ROCK ON THE HUDSON: Volume 2 of "Mercy of a Rude Stream," by Henry
Roth. (St. Martin's, $23.95.) When it rains it pours: 60 years after "Call It
Sleep," Mr. Roth, back at the keyboard, plunges on with a purposely garrulous
narration whose hero looks much like himself and whose life story centers on a
spectacular sin.

DREAMING: Hard Luck and Good Times in America, by Carolyn See. (Random House,
$23.) The novelist's memoir of her family revels in a woman's point of view as
it paints a portrait of drugs, drink and zany freedom set in California.

FRANCO: A Biography, by Paul Preston. (Basic Books, $37.50.) A huge,
all-inclusive life of the outright winner of Spain's civil war, the shrewd,
lucky dictator of his country for almost 40 years.

IN LOVE WITH DAYLIGHT: A Memoir of Recovery, by Wilfrid Sheed. (Simon &
Schuster, $23.) The writer's account of his battles with alcohol, drugs and
cancer is grim, but it's told with whimsical wisdom and good-natured resolve.

THE LIFE OF GRAHAM GREENE. Volume 2: 1939-1955, by Norman Sherry. (Viking,
$34.95.) Mr. Sherry brings to the grotesquely complicated life of Greene a
relentless passion for detail, resulting in a compulsively readable account.

MOVING HOUSE: Stories, by Pawel Huelle. (Helen and Kurt Wolff/Harcourt Brace,
$18.95.) These tales by a Polish writer, which turn on the longings and workings
of memory, are rooted in the highly idiosyncratic history of Gdansk.

TERRIBLE HONESTY: Mongrel Manhattan in the 1920s, by Ann Douglas. (Farrar,
Straus & Giroux, $25.) The great big city in the great good time, analyzed with
broad scope and minute complexity as the locus of the national psyche when
Americans attacked the conditioned responses of the pre-1914 world.

TOMORROW IS ANOTHER COUNTRY: The Inside Story of South Africa's Road to Change,
by Allister Sparks. (Hill & Wang, $22.) A South African journalist's fast-paced,
gripping account of the long, slow and often clandestine process that led to the
end of apartheid.

THE TUNNEL, by William H. Gass. (Knopf, $30.) This sprawling novel (652 pages)
by an American master comes out of the head of its monstrous protagonist, a
language-driven professor of fascist views who is as dreadful as he is
plausible.

LOAD-DATE: March 12, 1995

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: List

                   Copyright 1995 The New York Times Company

                              169 of 211 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                  March 12, 1995, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

[APPEARANCES];
Outsider Nails

BYLINE: By MARY TANNEN;   Mary Tannen, a regular contributor to the Magazine,
has a new novel, "Loving Edith," due out in May.

SECTION: Section 6;  Page 85;  Column 1;  Magazine Desk

LENGTH: 1143 words


Among the myriad, subtle, often unspoken and unwritten grooming rules you live
by is the one that says fingernails shall be short, neat and neutral of color.
Unwritten? No longer. Across your desk comes a book called "Chic Simple Body" by
a consortium of experts -- Kim Johnson Gross, Jeff Stone, Judith Newman --
prescribing nails "groomed to a modest half-inch long (or less), with slightly
rounded tips, and polished, if at all, with pale or clear lacquer."

For as long as you can remember (or at least since junior high), friends have
been keeping their manicures as modest and chaste as novitiates at a convent.
But sometimes there flashes across your vision a hand with nails the color of
cinnabar, nails gleaming with gold, sparkling with stones, soaring way beyond
the fingertips. Like a bright bird from a tropical paradise, it flutters through
the gritty landscape of the concrete jungle, leaving you transfixed, dreaming of
parties where the music plays all night and the food is redolent of spice.

As winter wears on, turning the city grayer by the day, you begin to wonder what
it would feel like to wear bird-of-paradise nails as you go about your daily
rounds. Would you be shunned? Laughed at? Or possibly admired as someone who has
had the courage to break the code? And where would you go to get such nails?

You make inquiries and someone mentions L., Grenadian by birth, a housekeeper by
profession, who somehow manages to maintain a constantly changing, highly
decorated manicure. L. invites you to meet her Saturday morning at Parkside
Nails, on Parkside Avenue in Brooklyn. At the appointed hour, walking up
Flatbush Avenue, where yams and yucca and callaloo spill from bins and bundles
of sugar cane stand seven feet tall, you realize that you have lighted upon a
hotbed of nail creativity. Manicure salons, all with fantastic samples in their
windows, compete to outdo one another in service and price.

Parkside Nails, shiny new and white, looks more clinical than the others. Loi
Pham and Fung Quach, a couple originally from Vietnam, opened the salon a month
ago, although Fung Quach says it took her 10 years, working two jobs to get the
money together to begin.

L. quickly asks to look at "the books," catalogues put out by the various
manicure supply houses, which have illustrations of suggested designs. She is
going to a Valentine's party and has her heart set on having a gold ring pierced
through her pinky nail. This ring would have a gold chain attached to the ring
on her finger. It looks very elegant when you hold a drink, she explains. But,
unfortunately, the jewelry is not available at Parkside. They will install
hardware, but you have to provide it yourself.

L. is disappointed, but she will settle for some decals of overlapping hearts
that she sees in the catalogue. There are no red hearts in stock -- another
blow. L. explains that holidays determine her design "motif." For Christmas she
had rhinestones, for the Fourth of July, American flags, for Labor Day, green
polish with a sunburst of sparkling stones. "Sweetheart, this is America," she
tells the proprietor. "You got to learn Valentine's Day."

L. has perfect inch-long nails of her own. Yours, however, will need serious
augmentation. The manicurist takes out a set of acrylic tips that match the
width of your fingers. One by one she lays them on, applies some powder with a
sable brush, wets it with a solution and expertly brushes it smooth, seamlessly
attaching tip to nail. (The nail is mounded slightly, giving it a clawlike
appearance, not exactly natural, but natural is not the effect you're seeking.)
A powerful chemical smell arises.

The tips are not pointed, but squared off, presumably to give the artist a
broader canvas on which to work -- but what to choose? Marbled, like the
endpaper on an expensively bound book? Chevrons? Stripes?  How about storm
clouds and lightning on a midnight blue field? Gold dollar signs on cool mint
green? Gems? L. says that in the summer when she wears open-toed sandals, she
likes a diamond on her big toe.

Today, L. decides on a single flame for the index finger on one hand, and two
intertwined gold roses for the thumbnail on the other. On her ring finger she
has three decals cut and combined to achieve a black to gold to silver flame.
Whereas the multicolored swirls you choose are merely decorative, L.'s appear to
have significance, to tell a story. Fire and roses.

You also note that the nail on the middle finger of L.'s right hand is cut to
the quick. No, she does not wish to have an extension. "That's my working
finger." She knows some who manage housework with all 10 nails long, but she
doesn't know how they do it, she says. Historically, grandees of either sex
affected long nails to distinguish themselves from commoners, who had to work
with their hands. L. keeps nine resplendent aristocrats and one humble peasant,
who labors for the rest.

On the subway going home, you experiment with your new nails -- alternately
flaunting and hiding them. In your building, a man carrying a package from L. L.
Bean watches you press the elevator button. "I like your nails," he says.
"They're nifty." But at a gathering of beauty writers and editors shortly
thereafter, you flash your hands in front of the editor from Town & Country, who
recoils as if you'd presented her with a coral snake. "I hope they're for an
article," she says.

As you go about your appointed rounds, everyone seems to overlook your hands, as
if they were an affliction you couldn't help -- like a nervous tic. You begin to
think that maybe your nails are not really that remarkable. But when you show up
at a lunch with friends, one shrieks from across the room, "You'll need a
blowtorch to get them off!" (In truth, your bionic nails do seem indestructible;
almost a week has gone by and there's nary a chip.)

The young waiter, keeping his distance, suggests that you could leave big
scratches on your husband's back for Valentine's Day. "He's leaving on a
business trip," you say. "Maybe you can still reach him," your friend says,
making a clawing gesture. Meaning that with those nails you could span
continents.

You don't take offense because you imagine that she's secretly envious, although
as you look at your friends, with their slicked-back hair and pin-striped suits,
it seems improbable that nails like yours will ever catch on in this crowd.
Then, again, high heels are sneaking back into style, and so are corsets. Mata
Hari nails spring from the same retro source, the same sexual fantasy of woman
as both vulnerable and dangerous. With nails like these, you can't pick up a
pencil without looking endearingly awkward, yet, if provoked, you could draw
blood.

You lift a glass of Evian, splaying your fingers provocatively. "It isn't you,"
someone says. "Or, maybe it is."

LOAD-DATE: March 12, 1995

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1995 The New York Times Company

                              170 of 211 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                  March 12, 1995, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

METHOD & MADNESS;
Bytes Make Might

BYLINE: By Nicholas Wade

SECTION: Section 6;  Page 28;  Column 3;  Magazine Desk

LENGTH: 1067 words


YOU'LL THEN BE able to pick up your telephone and call your son or daughter, who
you are watching in real time in a fire fight. They will pick up their cellular
telephone. You will chat with them about your view of how they are conducting
their squad operations. . . . A lot of this sounds far-fetched, but it's not.
This is literally the edge of the future."

This is Newt Gingrich, applying his fascination with technology and futurology
to the ancient art of war. Gingrich believes that a third-wave society, one
based largely on information instead of on agriculture or industry (the first
and second waves), will have its own distinctive kind of warfare. Or so he said
last month in a speech to the Armed Forces Communications and Electronics
Association.

"I mean," the Speaker said, "virtually every soldier in combat in 2010 will have
somewhere on their body a personal telephone linked by satellite to a world
telephone network. That telephone will probably be a P.C.S., a personal
communication system that will also have computer capability, faxing capability,
so during lulls they can arrange a date. . . ."

A politician risks no offense in assuring a group of military electronics buffs
that "information warfare," whatever that may be, is the wave of the martial
future. But Gingrich's happy vision of units of boys and girls armed with fax
machines to set up dates with each other sounds more like a summer camp frolic
than a battlefield. Would any commander want his soldiers to receive parental
advice in the midst of a fire fight? What if Dad disagrees with the officer on
the scene? As Napoleon said, one bad general is better than two good ones.

However absurd in its specifics, the Speaker's embrace of a futuristic
battlefield reflects a serious idea that has been brewing in the Pentagon for
several years: that a set of new technologies is about to usher in a revolution
in warfare. Just as the Germans combined the tank, the radio and air power to
create the blitzkrieg, so a new style of warfare is waiting to emerge from a mix
of smart sensors, telecommunications and computers. The new gospel, preached by
the Pentagon's Office of Net Assessment, includes the disquieting message that
many of the present weapons systems are headed for obsolescence.

Managing technological change is excruciatingly difficult for military
organizations. Unlike their civilian counterparts, they cannot thoroughly
test-market every product they design. A fighting force that resists change
risks catastrophe, yet one that innovates too fast will enter war with untried
and unreliable weapons, as the Navy did with its Mark-14 torpedoes early in the
war in the Pacific.

The Defense Department faces a particularly difficult form of this predicament.
There are strong arguments for sticking with its present arsenal. Was the gulf
war not a smashing success for American arms? What opponent poses any serious
political threat, let alone the technical capacity to produce a surprise weapon?
The tank has outlived repeated forecasts of its demise, managing to evolve in
parallel with antitank weapons. The bomber seemed due to be surpassed by the
cruise missile, but the success of laser-guided weapons may have given it a new
lease on life.

Yet the gulf's lessons may be deceptive, since the outstanding ineptness of
Saddam Hussein as a military leader made the war more of a desert exercise than
a contest of strategies.

"To some extent that war has given the military a false sense of security, that
they can confront a third-world country without having to change how they do
business," says Andrew F. Krepinevich Jr., a former Army lieutenant colonel who
now heads the Defense Budget Project in Washington. Iran, Krepinevich notes, is
investing in missiles and mines, the weapons that Washington found hardest to
counter.

The gulf aside, in an era when civilian technology is changing so rapidly and
spreading so fast, the Pentagon probably can't afford to let military technology
stagnate. Gingrich wants the Pentagon to commit its future to black boxes
bristling with electronics. Such weapons systems will be so decisive, he
believes, that combat will be scarcely necessary. "You can say one morning to an
opponent, 'You simply will not be able to communicate electronically in any
form,' and then bring them down for 20 minutes and bring them back up and say,
'Now, are you really serious about a fight?' "

The danger of growing dependent on electronic equipment is that it can be
jammed, or wrecked over wide areas by the electromagnetic pulse of a nuclear
weapon, posing a serious danger to an army that cannot march without its
computers. But Gingrich may be right that a future first strike could be a
hacker attack on information networks rather than a Pearl Harbor-style bombing
raid.

If there is a new revolution in warfare waiting in the wings, it's too bad the
Pentagon has such a poor record of fielding new weapons quickly.

Gingrich joins the critics of the Pentagon's baroque procurement practices,
which he argues are flawed beyond hope of reform. To maintain a "generation
technology leap," he has said, "my goal is to lower the length of time it takes
to field a system by 80 percent, and lower the cost of procuring a major system
by 40 percent. . . . What it requires is that we think through a replacement
model for the current mess."

Technology, of course, is rarely decisive in war, ranking behind intangible
factors like morale, tactics and training. New technology prepares an army to
perform known tasks better, but battles often go to whichever side copes better
with the unknown.

"There is no weapon but that has its limitations and no technology so perfect
that it cannot, in principle at any rate, be countered with the aid of the
appropriate organization, training and doctrine," the military historian Martin
van Creveld writes. The claim is neither welcome nor intuitively obvious, so has
to be learned again and again, whether by Americans in Vietnam or Russians in
Afghanistan.

Still, technology can't be ignored. Gingrich's belief that battles will be
decided by blips not bullets, and that black boxes offer a bloodless
technological superiority, may not be literally correct. But if his words are
taken as a metaphor for a pending revolution in warfare, the Speaker may have
pointed his sword in roughly the right direction.

LOAD-DATE: March 12, 1995

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Drawing

                   Copyright 1995 The New York Times Company

                              171 of 211 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                  March 12, 1995, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

Markets Rise and Fall, but He's Always Looking Up

BYLINE: By ANNE MATTHEWS;   Anne Matthews teaches journalism at New York
University's graduate program and writes frequently about contemporary social
issues.

SECTION: Section 3;  Page 12;  Column 4;  Business/Financial Desk

LENGTH: 1720 words


TO the Manhattan financial astrologer Arch Crawford, 1995 is slated to be a grim
untidy year: plenty of earthquakes and a stock market heading south.

"Prices will top the first week in April," he says firmly. "Then a good summer
rally. Mid-November brings a serious, serious correction." He pushes at his
wire-rimmed glasses, concentrating.

"I see at least a 1,000-point drop in late '95, with the Dow stabilizing at
2,600 to 2,800. But there'll be a sharp rally after Thanksgiving, back above
3,200," he says kindly, draining his decaffeinated cappuccino.

Archibald A. H. Crawford, 53, is a professional astrologer, a Merrill Lynch
alumnus and an Aries -- "a fine sign for investors," he adds, in a soft North
Carolina drawl. Mr. Crawford specializes in market timing -- the art of calling
portfolio switches in and out of the stock, bond and gold markets -- and his
recommendations appear in a monthly newsletter, Crawford Perspectives. Its motto
is "Market timing by planetary cycles and technical analysis since 1977"; a
year's subscription is $ 250.

Early last month, Mr. Crawford's forecast was "instability, big time" for March
5 and 6 -- the start of the currency crisis as it turned out. Two months ago, he
predicted earthquakes for the days that brought the Kobe tremor. He kind of
predicted the 1990 start of the Gulf war: "expect some major catastrophe Aug.
2-7," his newsletter warned, "Mars opposite Pluto suggests coercion, force." So
far, forecasting the October 1987 stock market crash is his biggest triumph. "Be
out of all stocks by Aug. 24," he warned clients late that summer. And -- win
some, lose some -- he has made a number of miscalls, like the market collapse he
envisioned in late '82 that turned instead into a record rally.

Mr. Crawford's view of the stars is severely statistical -- or tries to be.
"What I do is totally science," he insists, "but in the process some very
strange stuff, weird magic, comes to light." Believing that heavenly events
affect human events that sometimes affect financial markets, Mr. Crawford
calculates percentage changes in the Dow Jones back to 1897, relates that data
to astronomical events like sunspots or solar flares and, aided by 28
conventional market indicators, fits the whole into a cyclical prediction line.

He doesn't make specific portfolio recommendations. Instead, he advises his
clients on mutual fund switching (among money markets and gold, stock and bond
funds) and on the optimal moments to go to cash. Trading under his direction can
be brisk, even hyperactive: followers last year would have switched in and out
of the market, on average, every eight weeks.

What unnerves more conventional stock analysts is Mr. Crawford's latest ranking
by the Hulbert Financial Digest, based in Alexandria, Va., which is widely
considered the most rigorous national observer of financial-newsletter
performance. Of the 42 market timers assessed over the last year, Mr. Crawford
is No. 2.

"Numbers and track record are all I watch," says the publisher, Mark Hulbert, a
touch stiffly. "If tea leaves or sunspots or piles of dirty laundry in my
apartment prove significant, I have to take notice." He adds: " His three- and
five-year records have beaten a buy-and-hold strategy. And he did slightly
outperform the market in 1994."

Last Wednesday, Mr. Crawford was ranked No. 1 in stock and bond timing by the
Investment Newsletter Timer Digest published in Greenwich, Conn., by James H.
Schmidt, a former Wall Street brokerage house vice president.

New York has other financial astrologers, but Mr. Crawford is one of the few to
offer a newsletter and a hot line. (In the fiercely competitive, ego-intensive
world of financial advising, the cooler players offer a "900" number with
twice-daily updates.) One longtime competitor, William Meridian, currently
manages investments in Abu Dhabi. Another, Henry Weingarten of the New York
School of Astrology, offers the Astrologers Fund, a mutual fund run on
astrological principles. The school is planning a May symposium on astrology and
the market.

There are, of course, those who question the Crawford strategy. "The random walk
theory allows for all kinds of people to have a good year occasionally," says
Howard A. Rubel, vice president of investment research at Goldman, Sachs. "But
most professional investors focus on fundamentals -- earnings, track record,
market share, cash flow. Their interests don't include the ethereal."

WHO consults an astrologer before making stock trades?

Mr. Crawford's approximately 1,000 current subscribers include heads of several
regional brokerage houses; executives from the Indian subcontinent who live in
the West yet retain a taste for astral authority; 4 of the 20 champion investors
profiled in Jack Schwager's recent book "The New Market Wizards," Mr. Crawford
claims (he declines to name them), and enough Zurich gnomes and Bonn bankers to
warrant a separate German edition.

"North Americans have no idea how seriously Europeans take mystical investing,"
says one Credit Suisse banker.

Although oracle investing is very much taboo on Wall Street, it has begun to
draw second looks, if not respect. Eighty percent of all mutual-fund buyers and
financial newsletter editors now fail to beat the markets, says Mr. Hulbert. "In
last year's bond rout," noted Institutional Investor in January, "more wealth
was wiped off balance sheets than in any other market debacle since the crash of
1929."

"The ultimate American fantasy has become security: social, emotional,
spiritual, financial," says Hayden White, a professor in the history of
consciousness program at the University of California at Santa Cruz. And
investors are reacting in very different ways to Wall Street's now-chronic
insecurity, a condition aggravated by industry layoffs and terrorist
checkpoints. Some redouble their herd instincts; others discover a lusty
appetite for the strange. At the same time, Wall Street is morphing into an
entertainment form rich in stars and sinners, cults and rites. And New Age
objets.

Traders once content with lucky socks can now soak in jinx-remover bath salts.
They can check the Internet's Divination Web before buying bonds. They can pay
for emergency sessions at the Wall Street Hypnosis Center with Mastercard's new
Horoscope Card, embossed with the user's name and zodiac sign. Thriving
astrological-software companies like Astrolabe let anyone try star-based trades.

Financial astrology is now part of the multibillion-dollar New Age movement --
disorganized, apolitical and growing. "Washington doesn't get it, but Wall
Street should be more nimble on this," observes David H. Thorne, a former real
estate developer who heads New Age Publishing in Watertown, Mass. "We're talking
many, many billions, a growing chunk of the new economy. One in three Americans
now pursues alternative forms of health care. Natural foods and products
annually top $ 6 billion. New-age music, another $ 1 billion. Self-help and
new-spirituality publishing? Billions there too. It's not just crystals any
more. Besides, a financial astrologer who can beat the markets is a guy to
watch."

As the nonrational turns ever-more marketable, all manner of seers are popping
up: chaos-theory visionaries, sunspot trackers, astrologers who work up natal
horoscopes for companies based on their hour of incorporation, mutual-fund
clairvoyants, feng shui consultants who free unlucky conference rooms from evil
spirits.

ARCH CRAWFORD, studied physics and math at the University of North Carolina, but
left without a degree to work as a research assistant to Robert Farrell, the
long-time Merrill Lynch technical research chief. In 1963, Mr. Crawford
discovered his metier when he read an article in The Wall Street Journal on
investors who used heavenly events to guide commodities buying. In his spare
time, Mr. Crawford began serious research into the subject, looking for
connections between astrological goings-on and the prices of stocks, copper and
gold.

After a three-year stint in the Army in the late 60's, including a year in
Vietnam, Mr. Crawford worked as a financial analyst and stockbroker and even
studied to become a psychologist. Then in 1975 he had a dream, he says, that he
should return to Wall Street trading. He bought options and made money. He
combined astrological methods and technical indicators; he made more money.

Today, Mr. Crawford is joined in his newsletter venture by his wife, Carolyn
Snedden, whom he met in 1988 at an astrology convention in Las Vegas, Nev. Ms.
Snedden -- who casts $ 150 personalized horoscopes for investors who want to
know which days are good for clear-headed trading -- has spiffed up Crawford
Perspectives, taming her husband's idiosyncratic page layouts, if not his
staccato prose ("Dec. 2: Jupiter conjunct Pluto. Perigee new moon. Powerful. Low
in bonds!" "Dec. 6: Mars square Pluto = More about war, fires, murder.").

Nonetheless, financial astrologers like Henry Weingarten, of the Astrologers
Fund, are bullish about their brand of financial forecasting. "Getting fund
managers out of the closet is really our goal," says Mr. Weingarten. "We had $ 4
billion in funds represented at our last conference. Financial astrologers are
everywhere. You know them only as investment bankers with terrific records. Let
a pension fund announce it's run by astrologers, and 20 percent of the clients
vanish. The other 80 percent, of course, say, Great, fine. But there's
tremendous prejudice -- tremendous!"

In the unruly world of alternative finance, Mr. Crawford is as buttoned-down as
they come, meeting fellow market-cycle enthusiasts for cocktails and forecasting
at the Princeton Club, delivering painstaking addresses on astrological
methodology to the Market Technicians Association. "But there's always a bunch
in the back of the room," he acknowledges, "growling that I'm a travesty of
justice."

Mr. Crawford's newsletter's recommendations to dive for cover when Jupiter,
Uranus, Saturn and Venus conjunct are likely to continue to circulate through
research departments and executive suites, if only in brown paper bags. Asked if
they would ever consult his hot line, a dozen traders and analysts had the same
firm reply. Yes, all agreed -- but from a pay phone.

LOAD-DATE: March 12, 1995

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo: Arch Crawford's motto: "Market timing by planetary cycles and
technical analysis." (Ed Quinn for The New York Times)

                   Copyright 1995 The New York Times Company

                              172 of 211 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                  March 12, 1995, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

Return to Saigon, Tet 1995

BYLINE: By Robert Stone;   Robert Stone, whose novel about the Vietnam War, "Dog
Soldiers," won a National Book Award in 1975, is author, most recently, of
"Outerbridge Reach."

SECTION: Section 4;  Page 15;  Column 1;  Editorial Desk

LENGTH: 1175 words

DATELINE: KEY WEST, Fla.


On the night of Jan. 31, 1968, a young Vietnamese peasant named Nguyen Van Sau
sat with about 20 companions in a garage not far from the center of Saigon. It
was the first night after Tet, the lunar new year, and although Communist
attacks the night before had caused the official annual Tet cease-fire to be
canceled, the city was full of visitors celebrating the holiday. Like the rest,
Sau and his friends had come to town by bus or on foot, carrying holiday
packages. But Nguyen Van Sau and the others were not in Saigon to celebrate.
They were members of Sapper Battalion C-10 of the Vietcong and their packages
were weapons.

Sau had grown up illiterate in Cu Chi Province, just outside the capital. In the
National Liberation Front, he had learned to read and write, and had been
instructed in the front's version of exalted patriotism. As a special honor, he
was invited to join the Communist Party. And now he had been singled out again.
The men and women of Sapper Battalion C-10 were going to attack the United
States Embassy.

At around 2:45 A.M., their little convoy set out. It consisted of two vehicles:
an old Peugeot van and a taxi of the same make, both familiar vehicles on Saigon
streets. The embassy was a fortress, nearly new, a $2.5 million complex that
fairly dominated downtown Saigon. Its key buildings featured shatterproof
plexiglass, and the entire compound was surrounded by an eight-foot wall.

Shortly before 3 A.M., the guerrillas in the taxi opened fire on the military
police post at the main entrance. The M.P.'s returned fire and slammed shut and
padlocked the steel gate. The Vietcong in the van, which stopped around the
corner, used an antitank explosive to breach the wall. In seconds a commando
squad of about two dozen was pouring through it. The two M.P.'s turned to face
them. The first American to die was Specialist 4 Charles L. Daniel of Durham,
N.C. He and his partner, Pfc. William Sebast of Albany, fell defending their
positions, and their refusal to yield or withdraw probably spoiled the attack.

U.S. reinforcements were soon brought to bear, and the battle for the embassy
grounds went on through the night. By around 9 A.M., all of the attackers had
been killed or captured. The American dead consisted of the two M.P.'s and one
marine. The Communists had failed to gain entrance to a single building.

Up until that point in the war, nearly 20,000 Americans had died along with
hundreds of thousands of Vietnamese. More than 58,000 Americans and an estimated
four million Vietnamese -- soldiers and civilians -- would die before it was
over.

During the early hours of Jan. 31, 1968, there was fierce fighting in Saigon and
all over Vietnam. But the attack on the embassy, in its quixotic effrontery, was
perhaps the engagement that most fascinated the world.


In January, I spent a few days in Saigon, which is now called Ho Chi Minh City,
just as Sixth Avenue in New York is formally called the Avenue of the Americas.
It was coming up on Tet and everyone was buying presents; people were carrying
little potted tangerine trees and apricot flowers, and visitors from up north
were carrying peach boughs and blossoms, which don't grow in the southern part
of the country.

The town was booming as never before. Foreign businessmen, including plenty of
Americans, were everywhere. On the roof of the Rex, the hotel that once was the
American bachelor officers' quarters, tourists and local plutocrats were dining
on frogs' legs. The old gourmet restaurants are gone, but new ones seem to be
opening every day.

On what was the Rue Catinat before it was Tu Do Street, before it was Dong Khoi
Street, antique porcelain and jewelry are for sale to prosperous buyers.
Visitors can buy silk dresses, made to measure by shops whose employees will
gladly stitch through the night to have the garments ready first thing in the
morning.

Diners at the Rex can watch the streets below illuminated by Toshiba and Sony
neon signs that turn night into day. A few old billboards enjoin Marxist
morality -- one condemns bootlegging -- but the touts and the girls and the
transvestites are all back in the same old places.

What would it be like to take a walk around town with Specialist Daniel, Private
Sebast and Nguyen Van Sau and his comrades of C-10 one of these lovely holiday
evenings, 27 years after the attack that killed them? Would they guess who had
won the war in which they died? Surely the Americans would have thought it was
their side. And Sau might be amazed at the fruits of the Communists' victory.

Vietnamese Communism was not going to threaten Durham, N.C., as the men who
recruited young Daniel doubtless assured him it was. It was not even going to
trouble Saigon all that long.

Nor was the earth about to rise on new foundations for Sau, although he might
take some comfort in the new name for the G.I.s' old haunt, Tu Do Street.

Dong Khoi, formerly Tu Do, the street where you get the antique jewelry and
porcelain, means Spontaneous Uprising -- presumably the one Sau and his friends
waited all night in vain for in 1968. Although the uprising never came, they
changed the street name anyhow. That's how politicians are.

Today, many a deal is in the making. In Hanoi and Ho Chi Minh City, new
factories will soon make Wisk liquid soap and Sunlight detergent for the
Vietnamese kitchen. And before long, there will be a new U.S. embassy in Hanoi.

How ironic it all is. Perhaps such a squandering of young lives ought to be
consigned to the realm of private grief, reflecting more shame than glory on the
causes served. Yet we find ourselves moved and inspired by the heroism of young
people who do their duty, who serve with all the vigor of their youth, strength
and courage. The political futility of their sacrifice gives it a poignancy that
is somehow ennobling. Even the Hemingway of "A Farewell to Arms," professing
revulsion at the rhetoric of heroism, movingly employed it and became the high
priest of martial virtue.

After a period of denial and ambiguity, the United States began erecting fitting
monuments to the Americans who died in our futile war. Somehow we can't keep
ourselves from honoring those who give their lives in the wars to which our
shortsightedness and folly consign them. Yet we know that in every war lives are
lost, meaninglessly, and that the cause behind their sacrifice is soon rendered
irrelevant.

We have never succeeded in replacing proper conduct on the field of battle as
the ultimate measure of courage and loyalty. We have not developed that "moral
equivalent of war" that William James so wisely and impossibly called for.
Knowing not a whit more than the ancient Greeks, we console ourselves as they
did in catharsis, in stoic acceptance and tragic ritual. Our celebration of
death in battle is, from a certain perspective, utterly irrational. Yet it is
our only means of imposing some degree of meaning on war's meaningless
destruction, the only way we have of facing the eternal ironies of history.

LOAD-DATE: March 12, 1995

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Op-Ed

                   Copyright 1995 The New York Times Company

                              173 of 211 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                  March 12, 1995, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

Clueless in Gotham

BYLINE: By Todd Gitlin;   Todd Gitlin is the author of a novel, "The Murder of
Albert Einstein," and a forthcoming book of social criticism, "The Twilight of
Common Dreams."

SECTION: Section 7;  Page 16;  Column 1;  Book Review Desk

LENGTH: 620 words



COCK-A-DOODLE-DOO
By Philip Weiss.
295 pp. New York:
Farrar, Straus & Giroux. $21.

JACK GOLD, the narrator of Philip Weiss's first novel, is a leftish lawyer up to
his neck in political and journalistic treachery. At one point he teases a New
York biweekly newspaper as "a hive of false values . . . arch and many-layered.
. . . It treated New York as a village made up of SoHo and TriBeCa and the Upper
East Side. . . . Also, it had a reputation for being quietly vicious in a way
that someone had to explain to you."

Much of the time, "Cock-a-Doodle-Doo" is arch in just such a manner. Gold, a
thirtyish naif ready for big career moves, would map the plot this way: Earnest
Jewish son of impersonal left-wing dad meets good-time WASP girl; girl is
delicious daughter of morally not-so-delicious former Secretary of State with a
bad Vietnam record but now running for Governor of New York against the
law-and-order candidate; various seductions take place; boy wonders where his
soul has gone. Surprises ensue, though lightly.

However, the plot is mostly a pretext. In a comic novel, tone is almost
everything, and the principal tone of Mr. Weiss's book is sketchy allusion. Most
of his characters, drawn from the worlds of political campaigns, public interest
law and journalistic chic, are themselves sketches of sketches. The physical
world of New York is not so much described as gestured toward. At times a
description drains away into "et cetera" -- as if to say, "Why go to the trouble
when language is only manipulative?"

References pass in a blur, often at cinematic speed, too fast for memorable
satire. It is almost as if the world of campaign operatives, hustlers and
paparazzi is so trivial, it will not repay close inspection. The reader is let
loose amid a buzz of coded implications. The author's subject is knowingness,
but so is his method. Politics, ambition and style are all of a piece, and that
piece is fluff. Mr. Weiss is frequently sly and crisp in evoking a corrupt world
of slyness and crispness, but he moves so breezily that at one point a joke is
actually alluded to rather than told. Balzac would not have made that mistake.

And yet "Cock-a-Doodle-Doo" has its rewards. Mr. Weiss, a contributing editor at
Harper's Magazine and Esquire, writes amusingly, with seeming artlessness, about
the way a lot of New Yorkers live now. Pornographic videos have
"how-to-mix-cement background music that makes you feel like a moron." New York
is full of "grown men lying about how little sleep they got, feeling proud of
that." A corrupt publisher's motto is "Live right, publish left." "At an art
opening only losers look at the actual show." "Her small feet were on high heels
that looked like a human-rights report about footbinding."

Finally, despite its minimalism and stand-up comic sketches, "Cock-a-Doodle-Doo"
seduces. This is not only because the humor hits just often enough, but also
because beneath the insider sketches there is a seriously funny, or funnily
serious, novel trying to emerge. There is a tension of which more might have
been made. The morally lost (or vacationing) Jack Gold wants to be found.
Finding himself embroiled with the irresistible love (or at least sex) interest,
he aches for his soul. He worries that "at any second I was going to be cast
down into a molten sea of triviality." Gold is troubled enough by the unbearable
lightness of the beings around him to suggest that something of value -- call it
honor -- has been lost amid the glitter and fraudulence.

In the end, a story that had seemed a minor excuse for a comedy of bad manners
turns out to be a morality tale. It is Mr. Weiss's achievement that the reader
feels some pain.

LOAD-DATE: March 12, 1995

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Review

                   Copyright 1995 The New York Times Company

                              174 of 211 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                  March 13, 1995, Monday, Late Edition - Final

Two Pedestrians Killed In Hit-and-Run Accidents

BYLINE: By CHUCK SUDETIC

SECTION: Section B;  Page 3;  Column 5;  Metropolitan Desk

LENGTH: 709 words


Drag racers and other careless drivers have long been a problem along Parsons
Boulevard in Whitestone, Queens, residents said yesterday. At the intersection
of Willets Point Boulevard, some would race to beat the light, and sometimes,
the speeding would lead to accidents.

On Saturday night, Melissa Tang, an honors student at Junior High School 185 who
was preparing to celebrate her 13th birthday the next day, was crossing the
intersection when she was killed in a hit-and-run. The police later charged a
man they said was driving while drunk and was speeding at the time of the
accident.

It was the second hit-and-run death over the weekend involving what the police
said was a drunken driver. Just five hours later, the police said, an
intoxicated driver ran down Donald Jameson, 67, of 4652 Manhattan College
Parkway in The Bronx as he crossed under a subway overpass at Broadway and West
236th Street. In both cases, the drivers were charged with vehicular
manslaughter and driving while intoxicated.

But for some residents of Whitestone, the death of Miss Tang was foreshadowed by
previous problems at the intersection.

"We have accidents all the time here," said Irene Zigis, 49, a bookkeeper who
has lived on Parsons Boulevard for 11 years. "The cars are racing up and down
the street all the time. Just stand here 10 minutes and you'll see it."

Miss Tang, whose family fled to the United States from Vietnam 20 years ago, was
walking home from a birthday pizza with her friend, Laurie Cedilnik, 12, when
the accident occurred.

"We were aiming to get to the divider," said Miss Cedilnik in describing how the
two girls tried to make it across Parsons Boulevard. "I saw this car coming
really, really fast. It came from the left.

"I heard a car screech, and I heard the car hitting something," she said. "When
I turned around Melissa wasn't there. She was all the way down the street, on
the other side of the road.

"I don't know whether she was too slow or got scared and couldn't move," she
said. "I ran over to her and talked to her, but she couldn't talk. Her eyes were
half-open, and blood was coming from her nose and mouth."

"The car just disappeared," she said.

The police said the car, a 1986 Nissan, was driven by Edgar Morales, 25, who
drove away from the scene and, about a block away, struck a van injuring two
children who were later treated at Jamaica Hospital. Witnesses said the car was
destroyed.

Mr. Morales was arrested at the scene of the collision with the van, and he and
two passengers in the Nissan were treated for injuries at New York Hospital
Medical Center in Queens, the police said. Melissa Tang died at New York
Hospital, the police said.

The girl's mother, Millie Tang, who works as a word processor at the American
Arbitration Association, cried yesterday as she hugged with her oldest daughter,
Gracie, 17, and other family members in the living room of their home.

"She was an excellent student, especially in science and math," Mrs. Tang said.
"She just wrote an essay that her teacher picked to enter in a contest."

"No matter what they do they cannot replace Melissa," Mrs. Tang said. "But they
should either have the death penalty or put these guys away for life just so it
doesn't happen to anybody else."

Ms. Zigis said the intersection has been a frequent trouble spot.

"We had another pedestrian hit four years ago, an elderly man was trying to
cross the street to the temple," she said. "They try to beat the light at
Willets Point. They use it also as a drag strip at night."

Sergeant Hugh Barry, a police spokesman, said Mr. Morales had no prior
suspensions on his driver's license.

The suspect in the Bronx incident, Willie Mack, 48, of 90 Ferric Street in White
Plains, was arrested on the same charges in the death of Mr. Jameson, and also
was charged with leaving the scene of an accident.

Mr. Mack's car was found on the corner of West 231st Street and Corlear Avenue,
a few blocks from the corner where Mr. Jameson was killed, the police said.

Mr. Jameson lived alone in an apartment on Manhattan College Parkway, said a
neighbor, George Millianos. The neighbor said he lived on Social Security and
had been living in the apartment for almost three decades.

LOAD-DATE: March 13, 1995

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Map of Queens showing locations of the accident sites.

                   Copyright 1995 The New York Times Company

                              175 of 211 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                March 15, 1995, Wednesday, Late Edition - Final

Man in the News: Norman Earl Thagard;
The Space Comrade From Florida

BYLINE: By WILLIAM J. BROAD

SECTION: Section A;  Page 10;  Column 4;  Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 647 words


Norman E. Thagard was trained to kill Communists. In the Marine Corps, he
labored in one of the hottest theaters of the cold war, flying 163 combat
missions in Vietnam, winning awards for bravery and succeeding in coming home
alive to his family.

Now, 25 years later, he has become the first American to ride into space aboard
a Russian rocket, helping fashion a new era in which former foes work together
as partners in space.

"To me it's a great adventure," the 51-year-old astronaut said of his mission at
a news conference last month in Russia, surrounded on all sides by onetime
adversaries.

Dr. Thagard, who became a medical doctor after his Vietnam tour, was fired into
orbit and history early yesterday as he and two Russian astronauts flew up to
the Russian space station Mir. The three are to be picked up in June by an
American space shuttle, becoming the first astronauts to go up in one spaceship
and down in another.

If all goes as planned, Dr. Thagard will break the American record for
long-duration space flight and learn much during his three months aboard Mir
about how humans adapt to weightlessness. No other American has ever before
ventured aboard Mir, which for Dr. Thagard's benefit has been stocked with
provisions like peanut butter.

Norman Earl Thagard was born July 3, 1943, in the small town of Marianna in the
wilds of the Florida panhandle. Growing up in Jacksonville, smart, blue-eyed and
self-disciplined, he showed a talent for technical subjects and graduated with
bachelor and master of science degrees in engineering from Florida State
University.

In 1966, he entered active duty with the United States Marine Corps, became a
pilot, and soon found himself flying F-4 Phantom jets in Vietnam. He won 11 air
medals for actions above and beyond the call of duty as well as the Navy
Commendation Medal for valor in combat.

After his tour, he briefly served as a weapons officer with a Marine fighter
squadron in Beaufort, S.C., before resigning from the military to teach and
resume his academic studies. In 1977 he received a doctor of medicine degree
from the University of Texas Southwest Medical School, and then interned at the
Medical University of South Carolina.

The National Aeronautics and Space Administration snapped him up in 1978 as an
astronaut candidate. On his first shuttle mission in June 1983 he conducted
medical tests and collected data on physiological changes in astronauts. He also
flew shuttle missions in 1985, 1989 and 1992.

Dr. Thagard's current assignment grew out of a move by the Clinton
Administration in 1993 to engage Moscow in constructive space work in return for
ending practices that upset Washington, such as exporting advanced rocket gear
to developing countries.

At least seven times in the next three years, the winged American spaceships and
Mir are to dock, swap crews and hold work sessions as warmups for building an
international space station in which Americans, Russians, Japanese, Europeans
and Canadians are to do scientific experiments and observe the heavens and the
Earth.

Since February 1994, Dr. Thagard has been living in Star City, Russia, the
training center for astronauts outside Moscow, with his wife, Rex, the youngest
of his three sons and a Russian cat.

A workaholic by nature, thin and athletic, Dr. Thagard studied, swam, jogged and
practiced emergency procedures in the Soyuz simulator, which mimics the craft he
blasted off in yesterday. He did it all in Russian, albeit with a slight
Southern accent.

The launch "will be a real thrill for me," he told reporters at Baikonur Space
Center on the eve of the mission, seated next to his Russian crewmates and
clearly at ease with them.

"If nothing else," the former cold warrior added, "we have demonstrated that we
can work together in a very complex area, accomplish much and be very
successful."

NAME: Norman Earl Thagard

LOAD-DATE: March 15, 1995

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Biography

                   Copyright 1995 The New York Times Company

                              176 of 211 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                March 15, 1995, Wednesday, Late Edition - Final

OIL CONCERN ENDS A DEAL WITH IRAN AS PRESIDENT ACTS

BYLINE: By DOUGLAS JEHL

SECTION: Section A;  Page 1;  Column 6;  National Desk

LENGTH: 1252 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, March 14


A big American oil company said today that it would not proceed with its
agreement to develop two large offshore oilfields for Iran after the White House
announced that President Clinton would issue a directive barring all such
transactions.

The step by Conoco Inc. ended an energy deal that would have been the first
involving Iran and the United States since Washington severed relations with
Teheran in 1980. It came after eight days of debate within the Administration
about how and whether to block an agreement that top deputies to Mr. Clinton
acknowledged was legal but said could undermine American efforts to isolate
Iran.

In announcing Mr. Clinton's decision this morning to block such oil-development
agreements, the White House said the President was trying to set an example for
American allies and was also trying to prevent Iran from accumulating wealth
that could make it more dangerous to its neighbors.

"We need to send a clear and unequivocal message," Michael D. McCurry, the White
House spokesman, said. "There cannot be normal relations until Iran's
unacceptable behavior changes."

One reason, perhaps, that Conoco misjudged the suitability of its Iranian deal
was that the Administration had been sending American business a clear message:
Join the age of "economic engagement," by helping the United States win over
governments through greater access to American capital and investment. That was
the case in China, North Korea and Vietnam. But in pursuing a policy of economic
containment in Iran, one Administration official said, "We draw the line in
countries with policies that are beyond the pale." [News analysis, page D5.]

The Administration was surprised by the deal between Conoco and Iran, which some
analysts valued at $1 billion, and its initial complaints were dismissed by the
company, a Houston-based subsidiary of E. I. du Pont de Nemours & Company.
Conoco emphasized that it was operating within the law.

But after senior Administration officials objected strongly in meetings with top
Conoco executives, the company's chief executive, Constantine Nicandros,
indicated that he would end the controversial deal if the President made clear
that it violated United States policy, aides to Mr. Clinton said today.

At the same time, three powerful members of the Du Pont board, members of the
Bronfman family, had been expected to vote against the accord, and a statement
issued by Conoco today suggested that their opposition played an important role
in the company's decision. Edgar M. Bronfman, Charles R. Bronfman and Edgar
Bronfman Jr. are top officers of the Seagram Company, which owns 24.2 percent of
Du Pont. They are also active in Jewish organizations that support the
Administration's policy on Iran.

"Conoco's agreement with the National Iranian Oil Company was contingent on Du
Pont board approval," the company said. "Du Pont's board of directors' approval
would not be given if the U.S. Government opposed the agreement."

In prohibiting Americans from developing oil and gas for Iran, the White House
said that Mr. Clinton was using the authority given to him under the
International Emergency Economic Powers Act, which allows him to block commerce
for national security reasons.

Even under Mr. Clinton's directive, American companies would still be permitted
to buy oil from Iran and to resell it to third countries, a practice that
accounts for one-fourth of the oil sold by Iran. The White House said that it
was reviewing whether to close those and other exceptions to its policy of
isolating Iran, which is being criticized as too weak by Senator Alfonse M.
D'Amato, the New York Republican who heads the Senate Banking Committee, and by
others on Capitol Hill.

But Administration officials said that by blocking the Conoco deal the
Administration had taken an important step. They said that to allow the
agreement to stand would have invited Russia, China and the European allies to
proceed with nuclear and commercial accords with Iran that the Administration
was determined to prevent.

To allow Conoco to develop the vast oilfields in the Persian Gulf, Mr. McCurry
said, would have "dangerously added to the Iranian capacity to do the things
that we regard as most dangerous in the international community."

As examples, the White House pointed specifically today to what it said was the
continued support of terrorism by Iran, its efforts to undermine the Middle East
peace process and its quest to obtain weapons of mass destruction.

But in shaping a decision on the proposed oil deal, Administration officials
said they wanted most immediately to send a signal to Russia, which the United
States is trying to persuade to break off an agreement to complete construction
of two nuclear reactors for Iran. The Administration has said the deal could
help Iran build nuclear weapons, and officials said today that they hoped Moscow
would see an example in American forbearance.

"We're giving up something for a greater good," one Administration official said
of Mr. Clinton's decision to block an accord that could have produced millions
of dollars in revenues for an American company. "We're hoping that others will
be willing to do the same."

Under the deal, Conoco Iran N.V., a Netherlands-based affiliate of Conoco, was
to have been the contractor to develop two offshore fields close to Sirri Island
in the Persian Gulf about 80 miles from Iran. A Conoco spokesman had said that
the two fields were expected to produce more than 120,000 barrels a day in two
years.

Among the European oil companies that competed with Conoco for the project were
Elf Aquitaine S.A. and Total, both of France. Administration officials said
today that they hoped that France would prevent those companies from taking part
in the deal, but indicated they were not optimistic that Paris would agree.

Even the White House was initially tepid in its criticism of the Conoco
agreement, saying as it became public last week that the accord "was not a
helpful development." But the Administration's stance grew harder in large part
at the urging of Secretary of State Warren Christopher, who has led the
Administration's drive to isolate Iran and who criticized the oil deal from the
Middle East last week as "inconsistent with the containment policy that we have
carried forward."

Mr. Christopher later withdrew from policy discussions about the oil deal
because his former law firm represented Conoco. But Administration officials
said today that a group including Samuel R. Berger, the deputy national security
adviser; Bill White, the Deputy Energy Secretary, and Peter Tarnoff, an Under
Secretary of State, had worked intensively in recent days to settle on the
course that Mr. Clinton embraced today.

A senior Administration official said that Mr. White raised strong objections to
the deal in a preliminary meeting with senior Conoco executives last Thursday,
and that both he and Mr. Tarnoff repeated those objections the next day in
discussions here with Mr. Nicandros of Conoco.

After Conoco released its statement today, the company's chief spokesman did not
return a telephone call to his Houston office. But Mr. White said in an
interview that Mr. Nicandros had indicated with some reluctance even on Friday
that the company would not resist if the Administration scuttled the deal.

Mr. White said that Mr. Nicandros told him in response to a question that Conoco
"would be willing to comply with a clear Administration policy."

LOAD-DATE: March 15, 1995

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1995 The New York Times Company

                              177 of 211 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                March 15, 1995, Wednesday, Late Edition - Final

The Iran Exception;
U.S. Will Deal With Other Old Foes But Still Sees Teheran as an Outlaw

BYLINE: By DAVID E. SANGER

SECTION: Section D;  Page 5;  Column 1;  Business/Financial Desk

LENGTH: 998 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, March 14


If American business has received a single clear message from the Clinton
Administration during the last year, here it is: Join the age of "economic
engagement," by helping the United States win over the souls of authoritarian
regimes through greater access to American capital and investment.

That has been the logic with China, ever since the Clinton Administration
dramatically reversed gears a year ago and argued that investing in China would
change Beijing's attitude on human rights and the export of missiles. It has
been the logic with North Korea, where American business executives are already
exploring investment opportunities. And it has applied in Vietnam, where the
Administration decided to take considerable political heat from veterans groups
so that American companies would not miss out on economic openings.

Perhaps then it is understandable how Conoco, the oil company subsidiary of the
Du Pont Company, missed the signals on Iran, and ended up losing a huge oil
exploration deal. After all, President Clinton appeared to be reversing course
again today in using an executive order to bar the transaction.

The Administration is still struggling to explain how it has become such a
vociferous advocate of "economic diplomacy" in dealing with some authoritarian
regimes, while preaching the need for economic containment in places like Iran,
Iraq and Cuba. "We draw the line in countries with policies that are beyond the
pale," one senior Administration official said today, ticking off Iran's
sponsorship of terrorism, its violation of human rights, its nuclear ambitions.

But the market reality is this: While turning investment on and off may be the
primary weapon Washington has left in its foreign policy arsenal these days, it
is only powerful if the rest of America's allies go along. In Iran's case, that
rarely happens. So the Iranians know that if Conoco is prohibited from spending
$1 billion developing its offshore oilfields, someone else -- in this case the
French companies Elf Aquitaine S.A. and Total -- will be standing in the wings.

Nor has the United States had much success getting others to join its
half-hearted ban on Iranian oil exports. For years, Japanese and American
diplomats have professed the same goals in their attempts to change the behavior
of the Iranian regime. Yet in 1993 Japan brought in 370,000 barrels a day,
making it Iran's biggest export market.

Washington has rarely been in a position to complain publicly about all this,
because its sanctions on Iran have never been as tough as its oratory. Three
successive Administrations have reviewed Iran policy, and last year Secretary of
State Warren Christopher said the Administration's policy was one of "active
containment." But the Government has all along permitted American companies to
buy, refine and sell Iranian oil, as long as they do it off American shores and
through subsidiaries. And once refined, it is impossible to tell the source of
the oil. At least some of it undoubtedly flows back through American gas pumps.

It was through this loophole that Conoco tried to leap. None of the oil in the
deal it signed earlier this month was to be sold directly in the United States.
No prohibition existed -- until today -- against the financing and service
agreement Conoco planned to sign. As one Administration official acknowledged
today, the deal was legal -- but "flagrantly in the cracks" of the law.

The President acted, his spokesman, Michael D. McCurry, said, because the deal
would "represent a substantial new capacity for oil production by Iran."

He continued, "And that is, among other reasons, why the President felt it would
dangerously add to their economic capacity to do the things that we find
objectionable in the world community."

Of course, that is exactly the argument that the Administration's critics have
used in attacking its policy elsewhere in the world. Presumably economic
engagement with North Korea, however limited, frees resources for that insular
country to develop its missile arsenal, one of its biggest exports. Dealings
with China inevitably enrich the People's Liberation Army, which holds big
stakes in many of the busiest factories in Shanghai and Shenzen. China is
periodically accused of shipping its missiles to Iran, another of the Chinese
Army's main industries.

So why is what is right in China wrong in Iran? It's not entirely clear. If Mr.
McCurry's comments are taken to their logical conclusion, allowing American
companies to buy upward of 25 percent of Iran's oil production is contributing
to the regime's health and longevity. Indeed, that is the argument put forth by
Senator Alfonse M. D'Amato, the New York Republican who is now the chairman of
the Senate Banking Committee. He has introduced legislation to prohibit American
companies or their foreign subsidiaries from doing business with Iran.

"We are subsidizing Iranian terrorism by purchasing their oil, and it has to
stop," Senator D'Amato said recently. He is soon to hold hearings on the policy,
hoping to embarrass the Administration into taking a harder line by exposing its
internal inconsistencies.

Perhaps the real reason that the Administration was able to act so strongly
today is simple politics. After all, what Iran lacks in the United States, for
understandable reasons, is any constituency in Congress. The Administration was
under tremendous pressure from the business community last year to separate
human rights from the issue of trade preferences for China. There is an active
Vietnam business lobby, led by companies that realize that the country may be
the last source of well-educated, well-disciplined and very inexpensive labor in
Southeast Asia. But by and large, American companies are not clamoring for a
chance to work in a country that still routinely calls the United States the
"great Satan."

The result is that Conoco finds itself where no business ever wants to be in
Washington: all alone.

LOAD-DATE: March 15, 1995

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: News Analysis

                   Copyright 1995 The New York Times Company

                              178 of 211 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                March 15, 1995, Wednesday, Late Edition - Final

Gulf War General Is Named as Senior Marine

BYLINE: By ERIC SCHMITT

SECTION: Section A;  Page 23;  Column 4;  National Desk

LENGTH: 425 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, March 14


President Clinton today nominated a veteran of the Persian Gulf war and son of a
Marine Corps general to be the next Commandant of the Marines.

The officer, Lieut. Gen. Charles C. Krulak, 53, would succeed Gen. Carl E. Mundy
Jr., who is retiring on July 1, as the senior marine in a 174,000-member corps
that has been increasingly taxed by operations in Somalia, Haiti and Rwanda. As
Commandant, General Krulak would serve on the Joint Chiefs of Staff.

The general, whose promotion to four-star rank would require Senate
confirmation, now commands 82,000 marines and 600 combat aircraft in the Pacific
from Camp H. M. Smith in Hawaii. In the event of war in Korea or the Persian
Gulf, he would command all marines there.

His father, Lieut. Gen. Victor H. (Brute) Krulak, held the same job in the
Vietnam War and wrote "First to Fight," a popular political history of the
Marine Corps. In the early 1960's, Defense Secretary Robert S. McNamara
dispatched the elder General Krulak, who was a special assistant for
counterinsurgency on the military's Joint Staff, on several fact-finding
missions to Vietnam for President John F. Kennedy.

The announcement of General Krulak's nomination was timed to coincide with the
commemoration today of the 50th anniversary of the ending of combat operations
on Iwo Jima.

General Krulak attended the ceremony on the Pacific island with General Mundy
and Navy Secretary John H. Dalton, who was a classmate of General Krulak's at
the United States Naval Academy at Annapolis and recommended him to Mr. Clinton
for the Commandant's post.

General Krulak, a diminutive dynamo of a man, enhanced his reputation as a field
commander in the gulf war by overseeing logistics for the marines who helped
drive Iraqi forces out of Kuwait.

Returning to Washington, he became the Marines' personnel czar. Later, when he
was commanding officer of the Marine Corps Combat Development Command in
Quantico, Va., General Krulak was in charge of reviewing about 20 Marine cases
in connection with the Tailhook sexual harassment scandal.

He was a platoon leader and company commander during two tours of duty in the
Vietnam War, and later served as commander of the counterguerrilla warfare
school on Okinawa.

General Krulak's academic record is somewhat atypical of Marine Corps officers.
After graduating from Phillips Exeter Academy in New Hampshire, he received an
engineering degree from the United States Naval Academy. He later received a
master's degree in labor relations from George Washington University.


NAME: Charles C. Krulak

LOAD-DATE: March 15, 1995

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo: Lieut. Gen. Charles C. Krulak. (Defense Department)

TYPE: Biography

                   Copyright 1995 The New York Times Company

                              179 of 211 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                March 15, 1995, Wednesday, Late Edition - Final

AT WORK WITH: Alexander C. Sanger;
In His Grandmother's Footsteps

BYLINE: By ALEX WITCHEL

SECTION: Section C;  Page 1;  Column 4;  Living Desk

LENGTH: 1937 words


WHEN her son Grant had six children, Margaret Sanger should not have been
surprised. In the annals of passive aggression, it is a classic.

"It sure is," agrees her grandson Alexander. "My grandmother very strongly
believed that two, at the outside three, was the right number of children to
have. So when my mother was pregnant with me, No. 4, she and my father flipped a
coin over who would call Margaret Sanger to tell her. You know what she said?
'You've disgraced me. I'm going to Europe.' "

Calling his grandmother by her full name is business as usual for Alexander C.
Sanger, the president and chief executive of Planned Parenthood of New York
City. In 1916, Margaret Sanger, a former nurse, opened the first birth control
clinic in America, in the Brownsville section of Brooklyn, defying the laws that
prohibited the distribution of contraception information. In 1923, she
established the Margaret Sanger Research Bureau, the first legal clinic. She
also founded the International Planned Parenthood Federation, which today has
family planning programs in more than 100 countries.

It might have pleased her to know that this excess grandchild has taken her
cause, the movement, as he calls it, so to heart. Though he had been a volunteer
for Planned Parenthood before, Mr. Sanger, 47, has only had his current job for
four years. Previously, he was a partner at the law firm of White & Case in
trusts and estates, and ran a plastics manufacturing company. A midlife crisis,
he says, steered him back to the family business of planning families.

"I think being able to decide when or whether to have children is fundamental to
human existence," he says in his bright modern office at Planned Parenthood
headquarters at Bleecker and Mott streets, which is named Margaret Sanger
Square. "What the opposition hates is that we stand for women to be equal to
men, to be moral decision makers on their own, without parental consent, or a
husband's. This movement is fundamental in breaking down what remains, and far
too much does, of the male control of society."

It is jarring to hear these words from a man -- in spite of his genes. "I think
the fact that the leader of this affiliate is a man shows the strength and
maturity of the movement and its diversity," he says. "We can't win this battle
without men. They are half the problem and half the solution."

"I have to credit my mother even more than my grandmother," he continues. "My
mother is a very strong woman. Like my father, she was a doctor, and she raised
six children. She's 85 now and still going strong. One day a week she volunteers
at a hospital as a nurse's aide in an AIDS ward, and no one there knows she's a
doctor. Just to keep contributing."

He leans back in his chair. "I have seen in my life what strong women can do. I
was brought up with a very strong ethic to give something back to society. The
fight here was never about the wealthy or the middle class, who have always
gotten birth control or abortions from private doctors. It's about people
without money having equal opportunity to education and information."

Mr. Sanger is a compelling speaker, not only because his sex is at odds with his
feminist stance, but also because his appearance is. Though dressed for success
in a pin-stripe suit, red tie, suspenders and wing tips, he sounds like a man
with a ponytail and an earring. His dark, classic good looks undoubtedly go even
further to further the cause of women than most who deal with him would like to
admit.

And though he is soft-spoken and a practiced listener, he is no wimp,
particularly when speaking of the organization's goals. "If we can get every
woman the right method of birth control that is safe and 100 percent effective,
the opportunity for access to family planning and abortion and the motive to use
it, then I will have finished my grandmother's work."

In whose lifetime? It is still easier for most girls today to learn about
hellfire and brimstone than how to use a diaphragm.

"Well, I have to be an optimist," he amends. With a vengeance. Advocating birth
control and abortion rights has become a perilous line of work, since the
killings of doctors and clinic workers began two years ago.

"We legalized birth control and abortion without a shot being fired," Mr. Sanger
says regretfully, "but the era of civil debate in this country ended in
Brookline, if not before." Since those shootings and the last election, he adds,
donations to the organization have been "way ahead" of last year.

Planned Parenthood of New York City, the largest local affiliate in the country,
has an annual budget of $20 million. It has just spent an additional quarter of
a million dollars on security for its three New York City clinics, in Manhattan,
the South Bronx and downtown Brooklyn, and for Mr. Sanger personally. In all,
240 paid employees and 250 volunteers work on a number of projects under Mr.
Sanger's leadership (he visits each clinic at least once a week), including
outreach programs for teen-agers.

"Having a baby gives them a sense of accomplishment," he says. "We were asking a
focus group what kind of house they wanted to live in. And someone said 'one
with a yard.' We kept asking for more details, like ranch or Colonial, and a
13-year-old girl answered 'a house with food in it.' These are teens with
minimal hopes, minimal futures."

Of equal concern is AIDS. Planned Parenthood now requires every patient to be
counseled on H.I.V., no matter why she has come. There is also a mobile medical
van, for street prostitutes.

The program of which Mr. Sanger is proudest is the Clinician Training
Initiative, which he started in 1992. "I found out that city and national
programs were not training ob-gyn residents in abortion," Mr. Sanger says.
"Nationwide, only 12 percent of the programs were requiring it be taught. I
decided to launch this initiative to train residents of the city so we and other
providers would have access. And I wanted to embarrass medical administrators by
having Planned Parenthood do their job for them. We've graduated 30 so far."

But, he emphasizes, Planned Parenthood does not advocate abortion as a method of
birth control. "It is first and foremost about prevention of pregnancy, as it
was in my grandmother's day," he says. "I've witnessed 30 to 40 abortions, in
the room with patients, and it's not something you'd want to go through, like
any surgery. Our core belief is still in the access to educational messages
about prevention and new methods of birth control development."

Though Margaret Sanger has been a fashionable subject in Hollywood over the last
15 years (in addition to last week's television movie starring Dana Delany, both
Bonnie Franklin and Piper Laurie have played her, and HBO plans to star Demi
Moore in the role next year), for a time she was forgotten.

"At Princeton, in 1968, I took a course in modern American history, with all men
in the class," Mr. Sanger says. "I said I was doing my thesis on Margaret
Sanger, and 11 faces turned to me and said, 'Who?' I read through the textbooks
and my grandmother's name was not mentioned. She had died only two years
previously, and her obituary was on the front page of The New York Times. I
thought then, as I do now, that society has never been comfortable with sex and
sexuality and talking about it. And women then were not in a position to be
reporters, editors and publishers, so stories about her were not being
published."

When it came to Sanger's mothering skills, perhaps it was just as well. Her
eldest son, Stuart, was not even enrolled in school until he was 11. Though
Grant (Mr. Sanger's father) became a surgeon, he suffered from depression his
entire adult life. And her only daughter, Peggy, died of pneumonia as a child,
following a bout with polio and a year of separation from her mother, who was in
Europe.

"With my father, it was awful," Mr. Sanger says, his hands trembling slightly.
"She sent him away to boarding school at 7. I have letters to her from him that
said: 'I went to the 8 o'clock train, like you said, but you were not on it. So
I waited for the 9 o'clock and you weren't on that one, either. Can I come home
for Thanksgiving?' They were the most pathetic letters. I don't know how my
father and uncle survived. As an adult he used to call her every Sunday, when
the rates were cheaper. But he was never forthcoming about his childhood. I
really learned about her through her obituaries."

She had divorced his grandfather William Sanger, a painter and architect, when
her children were very young. "When she died, in her safe deposit box was a
letter she had written to my grandfather in case he outlived her, which he
didn't, saying, 'You were the love of my life and I regret we had to part ways,'
" Mr. Sanger says. "My father burned it."

"But," he adds, "it's hard for me to paint her as a demon. She lived in Tucson
when I was growing up; we lived in Mount Kisco, N.Y. She would come for what my
mother would call a state visit. She played baseball and badminton and cards
with us. And she would paint in bed. Every morning she would destroy another set
of sheets. But always in the middle of those visits she would take a train to
New York for a meeting. She didn't sit still for long. She was always on the
move."

Her motivation, famously, for starting the birth control movement was her
mother's death at the age of 50, after bearing 11 children, which aggravated her
chronic tuberculosis. What has been his?

"Probably a number of things," he answers. "One of my most formative and
devastating experiences was when my brother Steve, who was a year older than me,
was killed in Vietnam. I felt an enormous sense of guilt. Why am I living and
he's not? What have I accomplished in life? Then, in 1986, my brother Peter was
killed in a plane crash, which was also a factor. Along with the upbringing I
had -- to contribute to society -- combined with the innate passion for this
movement, my 40th birthday and midlife crisis, which all came together." He
smiles. "My father died a year before I took this job. He would have been undone
and thrilled at the same time."

Mr. Sanger lives in Manhattan with his wife, Jeannette Watson, whose grandfather
founded I.B.M. and who owns Books and Company on Madison Avenue. She has a son
from a previous marriage, and together they have two more, whose artwork in
crayon and watercolor is prominently displayed behind Mr. Sanger's desk.

It is time for a meeting about the Brooklyn clinic, the honorary flagship of the
organization, although it is no longer in Brownsville. Seven women take seats at
a conference table in his office and Mr. Sanger gives his padded leather chair
to one who is pregnant. He buys them sodas and juice from a vending machine, and
passes a box of Teuscher truffles. They beam. You can't beat a boss who brings
his own chocolate.

They are here to brief him on the teen-age outreach program and on how Medicaid
managed care is affecting teen-agers whose families are on the plan. The news is
not good.

"With managed care, there is no confidentiality when a teen needs an abortion,"
one staffer says. "We're seeing a higher suicide rate, botched self-induced
abortions and babies thrown in the garbage."

"And the Mayor is ready to close the hospitals," another adds. "The question we
have to ask now is, Who is going to take care of the disenfranchised of New
York?"

The room falls silent. And almost eight decades after the country's first birth
control clinic opened, Mr. Sanger sighs and says, "That is what my grandmother
was dealing with."


NAME: Alexander C. Sanger

LOAD-DATE: March 15, 1995

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo: Alexander Sanger, a grandson of Margaret Sanger, is Planned
Parenthood of New York's president. (Fred R. Conrad/The New York Times) (pg.
C1); Alexander C. Sanger, far left, and his siblings Anne, Stephen and Morgan,
with their grandmother Margaret Sanger in Mount Kisco, N.Y., circa 1953. (pg.
C6)

TYPE: Biography

                   Copyright 1995 The New York Times Company

                              180 of 211 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 March 16, 1995, Thursday, Late Edition - Final

'Boat People' Prefer Death To Homeland

BYLINE: By PHILIP SHENON

SECTION: Section A;  Page 1;  Column 1;  Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 1663 words

DATELINE: MORONG, Philippines


Tran Ba is so desperate to avoid being forced back home to Vietnam that in a
protest this month he doused himself with kerosene in front of horrified
Philippine guards and threatened to set himself afire.

"Next time I will light the match," said Mr. Ba, who left Vietnam four years ago
believing that he had been promised a new life in the United States.

Ta Thi Ngoan, a 53-year-old tailor who has been detained here since 1988, has
told the guards that she is prepared to kill herself and her 10 children if they
are returned to Vietnam. "If I go back to Vietnam, I will go straight to
prison," she said. Her neighbor, Kim Thi Ng, said several families in the
detention camp here had stored rat poison. "People are very serious about
suicide," Mrs. Ng said.

Two decades after the first boatloads of Vietnamese pushed off the shores of
their homeland into the treacherous waters of the South China Sea, the final
chapter of their exodus is being written in detention camps like the one here
along the mountainous western coast of the Philippines.

For many of these Vietnamese, who have spent years in these camps only to face a
forced return to Vietnam, the final chapter will in many ways be tragic. The
question is whether it will be violent as well.

In February, Southeast Asian governments announced final plans to close the
camps, which have housed the more than 800,000 Vietnamese who fled their
homeland after 1975. The closings mean that the 46,306 Vietnamese left in the
camps today -- those who have been unable to find third countries willing to
accept them -- will soon be compelled to return to Vietnam.

Forcing them home will be an ugly, possibly dangerous business, as tens of
thousands of people are pushed or dragged onto planes headed for Vietnam, which
many of them had hoped never to see again.

As the clock ticks down, violent outbursts are becoming common in the detention
camps.

In Indonesia last June, two Vietnamese boat people set themselves on fire and
died in a protest over plans for their forced return to Vietnam.

Hundreds of Vietnamese in camps in Hong Kong have announced suicide pacts, and
more than 200 were injured last April in a clash with the police after refusing
to move to another camp in preparation for their forced return. There have been
scores of cases of self-mutilation by Vietnamese who have insisted that they
would rather die than return home.

"Many of these incidents were carried out more with a view toward attracting
attention than causing real harm," said Jahanshah Assadi, director of the Hong
Kong mission of the United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees. "But we've
had attempts at hanging, attempts at self-immolation, people taking a knife or
sharp-edged instrument and puncturing their arms, legs, stomachs."

A New Vietnam Can't Allay Old Fears

If they are forced back, many of the Vietnamese will return to a country
different from the one they left years ago. Vietnam has abandoned Marxist
economics and embraced the free market. The economy is booming, with job
opportunities unimaginable in the 1980's.

Vietnam remains an authoritarian country that imprisons political dissidents.
But United Nations investigators who visited there say they found no credible
evidence that any of the 68,000 asylum-seekers who have already returned have
faced harassment from the Government. The Hanoi Government has vowed to treat
the returning Vietnamese humanely.

While Vietnam's economic boom and the assurances of the United Nations should
give comfort to those Vietnamese still in the camps, many are clearly still
terrified about what they will confront if they are forced to go back home.

Hiram A. Ruiz, an analyst of the U.S. Committee for Refugees, a private group
based in Washington, has visited the detention camps and said the threats of
suicide and other violence were not surprising. "They have lost years of their
lives, risked everything, given up everything in hopes of living in a different
country," he said.

Of the Vietnamese left in camps in Southeast Asia, more than half -- about
24,300 -- are in Hong Kong, held in overcrowded barbed-wire compounds that have
long been an expensive embarrassment to the Hong Kong Government. The others are
scattered throughout Southeast Asia, with about 3,300 still held in the
Philippines.

Western Sympathy Finally Runs Dry

When the boat people began pouring out of Vietnam after Communist forces toppled
the American-backed Government of South Vietnam in 1975, they were met with
sympathy, especially from the United States, which took in more than a million
Vietnamese over the last 20 years.

But the West's sympathy has run out. Virtually all of the Vietnamese who made it
to Hong Kong and other Southeast Asian way stations in the 1990's have been
labeled economic migrants -- not refugees, a label that requires substantiated
proof of fear of persecution in Vietnam -- and were refused entrance to the
United States and other countries.

In 1989 Vietnam and its neighbors reached agreement on a plan that was supposed
to have all of the remaining asylum-seekers back in Vietnam by the end of this
year.

The December 1995 deadline is almost certain to pass with tens of thousands of
Vietnamese still held in the camps, but governments in the region vow to
complete the returns within a few months of the original schedule, probably by
the middle of next year. Vietnam has agreed to take back 3,600 boat people each
month.

Refugee groups and human rights campaigners have long praised the Philippines
for having run some of the most humane detention camps. But the Manila
Government is eager to see the last of the Vietnamese go home and to close its
last two camps -- one here on the central Philippine island of Luzon and the
other on the remote southern island of Palawan.

"This has already dragged on so long," said Rodolfo Severino, under secretary of
the Department of Foreign Affairs. "But we're caught in a real dilemma. We're
not the kind of people who would deliberately harm other people. We're trying to
persuade the Vietnamese to go home voluntarily. That would be best."

For most of the Vietnamese still in the Philippines, persuasion has not worked,
particularly for the 270 left behind here in the Philippine Refugee Processing
Center, about 50 miles west of Manila, in the coastal province of Bataan.

If Nothing to Lose, It's a 'Paradise' Lost

The center was opened in 1980 with money from the United States and the United
Nations to house Vietnamese who had been approved for asylum and were waiting to
move to the United States and other countries.

Once, the camp's airy wooden barracks along a pleasant stretch of the coast -- a
paradise compared with the camps in Hong Kong -- held as many as 18,000 refugees
at a time.

Today it is empty except for the 270, who have been threatening since late last
year to join in mass suicide if the Government tries to remove them. The camp is
covered with handwritten signs that state the threat bluntly: "We'd Rather Die"
and "We Are Prepared to Die Here, Even Under Force."

The administrator of the camp, Jose Busco, has worked here periodically since
1986 and said he regarded many of the Vietnamese as friends. "Basically
everybody is peaceful," he said.

But the concern about violence is evident in a map of the camp posted at one end
of Mr. Busco's conference room. The map's legend marks out the individual
bunkers in the camp and notes the threat posed by people living in each of them.

A Vietnamese-American priest who ministers to the Vietnamese here, the Rev.
Joseph Trong, says many are serious about killing themselves. "These people have
nothing to lose," he said.

No Asylum in U.S., So Where to Go?

The Vietnamese here arrived not by boat but by plane, after they had been
approved by the United States Government for a program known as Orderly
Departure. The program was set up under the Carter Administration to offer
asylum to Vietnamese affiliated with the former South Vietnamese Government and
to Amerasian children and their families.

But after arriving in the Philippines, the 270 Vietnamese remaining here were
thrown out of the program, most after American officials determined that they
had falsified their immigration papers.

In many cases, the Americans asserted that the Amerasians, most of them children
of American soldiers, were traveling with Vietnamese who were only pretending to
be family members in hopes of getting to the United States.

"There have been a very small number of people who were found to be ineligible,"
said James Nealon, the spokesman for the United States Embassy in Manila. "The
United States is acknowledging our level of responsibility in this issue. We're
working very closely with the Vietnamese Government to repatriate those
concerned."

Repatriation is what the people here say they fear.

Mrs. Ng, an English-language interpreter from Ho Chi Minh City, the southern
capital formerly known as Saigon, has a 25-year-old Amerasian daughter whose
father, Mrs. Ng said, was an American soldier.

After leaving Vietnam in 1992 under the Orderly Departure Program, they arrived
in the Philippines to be told that their application to continue to the United
States had been denied, and that they would have to find some other country to
accept them, or return to Vietnam.

"They said that we falsified the documents," she said. "But nobody told us in
detail what we had done wrong. I still do not know."

Mrs. Ng, who insisted that she did not falsify her documents, said she feared
that she and her daughter would be labeled spies if they returned to Vietnam.

"We know the mentality of the Vietnamese Communists," she said. "They would
think that we have stayed in the Philippines all these years to be trained by
the Americans, by the C.I.A., and we would be put in prison as soon as we go
back. This is why people would rather die here than go home to Vietnam."

LOAD-DATE: March 16, 1995

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo: Twenty years after they began fleeing their homeland, thousands
of Vietnamese remain in detention in Southeast Asia. Many at this Philippine
camp say they would rather die than be forced to return home. (The New York
Times)

Map/Diagram: "Stranded Boat People"

Vietnamese asylum-seekers detained in Asia, as of December 1994. (Source: United
Nations High Commissioner for Refugees) (pg. A8)

                   Copyright 1995 The New York Times Company

                              181 of 211 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 March 16, 1995, Thursday, Late Edition - Final

NEWS SUMMARY

SECTION: Section A; Page 2; Column 5; National Desk

LENGTH: 1028 words



International A3-12

VIETNAM'S ADAMANT BOAT EXILES
Two decades after the first vessels pushed off the shores, the tragic final
chapter of Vietnam's boat people is being written in detention camps across
Southeast Asia. More than anything, the boat people fear a return to their
country, so forcing them home will be an ugly, possibly dangerous business.  A1



HELMS SEEKS AGENCY MERGER
Senator Jesse Helms proposed that half a dozen agencies be merged with the State
Department in a radical restructuring of the nation's foreign policy apparatus.
A3

BURKINO FASO, SUPER-ENVOY
The President of Burkino Faso has turned his hardscrabble country into an
unlikely diplomatic powerhouse. Involved in policy affairs from Libya to
Liberia, Blaise Compaore seems the busiest diplomat on the African continent.
A7

PEACEKEEPERS FRET IN CROATIA
Commanders of United Nations troops in Croatia worry that diplomats will give
them a new mandate they cannot fulfill.  A6

FRENCH PREMIER DROPS LOFTY AIR
Now an underdog in the race for the presidency, Prime Minister Balladur is
trying to replace his aloof, stiff image with something a little more
hot-blooded.  A6

The President met Morocco's King and called for Mideast peace.  A3

Cornered on the budget, Italy's leader seeks a confidence vote.  A5

Asians pressed Singapore not to execute a Philippine maid.  A8

Venezuela has arrested 40 leftists, saying they plotted a revolt.  A12

Berlin Journal: A film helps Germans face the wall's legacy.  A4

National A18-23, B11-13

AFFIRMATIVE ACTION DISPUTES
Senator Bob Dole of Kansas said he would seek the end of preference programs for
minority groups, as the debate over such programs boiled up on other fronts.  A1


COMMISSION FINDS BARRIERS
After three decades of affirmative action programs to aid women and members of
minority groups, they are not proportionately represented in top management, a
bipartisan Federal commission found.  A22

BREAK IN G.O.P. RANKS
After 70 days of marching through the Republican program in lockstep and with 30
days still to go in their plan to enact the Contract With America, cracks are
beginning to show in the party's ranks in the House.A1
DEMOCRATS SHOW STRENGTH
For the second time in 10 days, Democrats in the Senate have shown that they can
block action in the Senate as they turned back a Republican effort to overturn a
directive by President Clinton intended to stop the use of replacement worker by
companies with Federal contracts.  A1
FARM AID TO CITY DWELLERS
Federal payments that are intended to save family farms have wound up in mail
boxes in Marco Island, Fla., and Beverly Hills, Calif., not to rural areas where
the farms are, a study showed. But critics dismissed the study as unfair and
irrelevant.  A1

UNCERTAINTY OVER SURGERY
A surgical treatment of Parkinson's disease has dramatically helped some people,
but others have been left paralyzed or comatose.  A1

SIMPSON LAWYERS DETAIL THEORY
O. J. Simpson defense lawyers told the court how they thought a police detective
picked up a bloody glove near the bodies of Mr. Simpson's former wife and a
friend and put it outside Mr. Simpson's house to implicate him.  A18

TEAMS LEAVING LANDOVER
A Maryland suburb that has been home to the Bullets of the National Basketball
Association and the Capitals of the National Hockey League since 1973 is losing
them to a new arena in Washington.  A18

ALABAMA ELECTION RULING
The Alabama Supreme Court ruled that 1,700 absentee ballots should be counted in
determining the outcome of the election of the courts Chief Justice, meaning the
incumbent is likely to be returned.  A23

Metro Digest B1

WHEN A PHYSICIAN ERRS
The American Medical Association is arguing that the criminal prosecution of a
doctor in a patient's death represents a threatening departure from the
established way in which society deals with doctors who make mistakes.  A1

Business Digest D1

Home Section C1-13

It's playtime at the dentist.  C1

Amid the follies, Jefferson dallied.  C1

At home with Evangeline Bruce: The improbable author C1

Taking the Pentium for a test drive.  C2

Currents C3

In Los Angeles, a time for planting.  C4

Garden Q. & A.  C5

House Proud C6

Turmoil after fire at design center.  C8

Calendar of Events C9

To thy house be true.  C11

Fashion: In Paris, clothes that look tough and masculine.  C13

Learning from two masters.  C13

Arts/Entertainment C15-22

Lincoln Center debates plans for new summer arts festival.  C15

Compromise plan on New York and its radio and TV stations.  C15

Theater: "Trust." C16

Music: Yuri Bashmet debut.  C15

The Pop Life C16

Bang on a Can festival.  C19

Dance: Ballets de San Juan.  C18

Books: Two about tough guys.  C20

TV:Of churches, souls and show-biz methods.  C20

Bonnie Raitt speaks out.  C22

Obituaries B13-14

Henry R. Lieberman, correspondent and editor for The Times.  B13

Dr. William A. Fowler, astrophysicist and Nobel laureate.  B14

John Ellis, worked on behalf of mentally ill children.  B14

Sports B15-22

Baseball: Mattingly is resolute.  B18

Boxing: Bowe-Tyson at Garden?  B18

Columns: Araton on Knicks.  B15

Anderson on replacement baseball.  B18

Basketball: Internal Knick problems.  B15

Nets defeat Magic.  B15

UConn remembers '94 reverse.  B15

Does Manhattan belong?  B17

Top-seeded women have much to prove.  B17

Football: N.F.L. rejects Rams' move.  B15

Hockey: Flyers edge Rangers.  B21

Editorials/Op-Ed A24-25

Editorials

The right time to visit Moscow.

Peering into N.Y.'s glass house.

Colgate, to the big dance.

Smoking sickness.

Letters

Frank Rich: Dropping the N-bomb.

William Safire: The greatest auction ever.

Misha Glenny: A fragile hope in Croatia?

Bridge C18

Chronicle D22

Crossword C16

LOAD-DATE: March 16, 1995

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Summary

                   Copyright 1995 The New York Times Company

                              182 of 211 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                  March 17, 1995, Friday, Late Edition - Final

Vietnamese in Philippines Fight Returning

BYLINE: By PHILIP SHENON

SECTION: Section A;  Page 12;  Column 1;  Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 480 words

DATELINE: MANILA, March 16


A group of Vietnamese at a detention camp slashed themselves and another tried
to set himself on fire today as the Philippine Government evicted them in
preparation for sending them home to Vietnam.

Witnesses at the camp in Morong, about 50 miles east of Manila, said they saw at
least three men and an elderly woman bleeding from self-inflected wounds to
their hands or stomach after they scrambled to the rooftops and threatened
suicide.

While the Philippine Government did succeed today in uprooting the 272
Vietnamese migrants from the camp, it may face the same sort of violent protest
if it moves to the next step -- forcing the Vietnamese onto planes or boats
bound for their homeland.

It could not be learned tonight if any of Vietnamese who injured themselves were
wounded seriously. The Vietnamese man who doused himself with gasoline was
stopped by the police before he could strike a match.

With fire trucks spraying them with water, the Vietnamese were dragged from the
rooftops of their wooden barracks by police officers carrying truncheons and
crowbars.

The Vietnamese are being transported by bus and boat to a larger camp on the
southern Philippine island of Palawan, which is expected to be their final stop
before they are returned to Vietnam under an agreement between Manila and Hanoi.

The disturbing scene today at the Morong camp could be repeated across Southeast
Asia over the next several months as the governments of the region prepare to
shut camps that now hold more than 46,000 Vietnamese and to force the occupants
home. Almost half of the Vietnamese are detained in camps in Hong Kong.

The United States and other Western countries once willing to accept Vietnamese
fleeing their homeland have withdrawn the offer, saying that virtually all of
the remaining residents of camps in Southeast Asia are economic migrants, not
political refugees with a legitimate fear of persecution if returned home.

Most of the Vietnamese who were removed today from the Morong camp traveled to
the Philippines -- some up to eight years ago -- under an American program that
offered citizenship to the Amerasian children of American soldiers and their
Vietnamese families. After arriving here, they were dropped from the program
because of allegations by American immigration officers that they had falsified
documents.

After daylong negotiations on Wednesday with the Vietnamese, the Philippine
commander of the camp said he would delay their departure to Palawan for another
week. But police officials said the extension was canceled by the Department of
Interior in Manila and orders were sent from the capital to clear the Vietnamese
out today.

The United Nations-financed camp formally closed on Dec. 31, and water and
electricity were shut off to the Vietnamese who remained. They have survived
since then on handouts from local farmers.


LOAD-DATE: March 17, 1995

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo: Vietnamese at a detention camp in the Philippines climbed to the
roofs of their barracks, threatened suicide and slashed themselves yesterday in
an effort to forestall their forced return to Vietnam. (Associated Press)

                   Copyright 1995 The New York Times Company

                              183 of 211 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                  March 17, 1995, Friday, Late Edition - Final
                              Correction Appended

Pitching Camp Where the Old Soldiers Live On

BYLINE: By RALPH BLUMENTHAL

SECTION: Section C;  Page 1;  Column 1;  Weekend Desk

LENGTH: 2747 words


Here towered Patton, binoculars in hand, vigilant against an unseen enemy. Or
perhaps, as West Point lore has it, looking for the library. There stood bronzed
MacArthur, defiant, campaign jacket flung over an arm. And the five-star Ike,
businesslike, hands on his hips, gazing over the Plain.

We had come to the granite Army citadel some 60 miles up the Hudson from
Manhattan to rub shoulders with history and perhaps a future President and set
up base to reconnoiter the mid-Hudson Valley. Our contingent numbered four: two
generals and two recruits, gender female, ages 15 and 4.

We found no shortage of attractions, martial or pacific. Perched on a bluff on
the west bank of the Hudson estuary where plunging hills squeeze the water into
placid pools, the United States Military Academy occupies one of the more
spectacular pieces of real estate in the East, as George Washington recognized
when he ordered its fortification during the Revolution as "the Gibraltar of
America."

All around lie reminders of the republic's embattled past: statues to heroes and
martyrs, captured trophies of war and, in the bristling museum, weapons of every
murderous variety from caveman spears and medieval maces to models of a tactical
atomic cannon and the "Fat Man" nuclear bomb dropped on Nagasaki, Japan.

Beyond, the Hudson Valley beckoned with more side trips than we could ever hope
to make in a weekend: manor houses and historic mansions and restorations,
antique villages, Colonial churchyards, old inns and waterfront restaurants.

Although West Point can be reached from midtown Manhattan in an hour and a half,
for historical interest I mapped a midway stop at the Old Dutch Church in Sleepy
Hollow on Route 9 in North Tarrytown. Over the years, I had driven past it
countless times, always vowing someday to, well, tarry, just as I promised that
someday I would stop to read all historic markers I whiz by. Alas, the little
stone church built in 1697 was locked. I learned later that it was closed to
public tours until June. But the graveyard yawned open, ancient tombstones
pitched at grotesque angles.

We picked our way among them as I told the girls the story of Ichabod Crane and
the Headless Horseman, who in Washington Irving's picaresque tale carried his
severed head in his hands and began his nightly ride in the burying ground.

It got my 4-year-old's attention. "Headless Horseman?" Sophie repeated.

"It's just a story, honey," my wife said reassuringly.

"I smelled the gravy," Sophie said.

We looked at each other. Gravy? "From the graves," Sophie said.

At the Hotel Thayer

At Peekskill, Routes 6 and 202 veer west, hugging the cliffs over the Hudson for
a rollercoaster ride to the Bear Mountain Bridge. (Stop at the scenic overlook
before the bridge for a panoramic view.) From the bridge, it was only a few
minutes ride north on 9W to Highland Falls, the one-street village of small
restaurants and souvenir shops that abuts the academy. At Thayer Gate, one of
the three access points to the reservation, an M.P. sized us up and waved us
through to the Hotel Thayer, its Neo-Gothic turrets and crenellated roofline
looming just above us on the right.

The 200-room hotel, built in 1926 and named for Superintendent Sylvanus Thayer,
who arrived in 1817 to set the academy's rigorous standards, exuded baronial
grandeur. The lobby of pitted black and white marble and unit escutcheons
featured a large stone fireplace, rustic chandeliers and massive beams hung with
flags.

We had booked the $175-a-night "A" suite, the best regularly available unit,
comparable in layout if not decor to the Presidential Suite, which is not
ordinarily open to the public. (Smaller double rooms start at $70.) Our
fifth-floor suite, with three exposures overlooking the shimmering Hudson,
comprised a bedroom with a queen-size bed and adjoining bath, a large living
room with a pullout couch, a formal dining room and kitchenette and two
televisions. It took repeated calls to obtain the rollaway bed we needed.

There were other annoyances. When our 15-year-old, Anna, unfolded her
convertible couch for the night, a dozen Cheerios tumbled out. Whether they had
been in the bedding (an unappetizing thought, that) or (only slightly better) in
the cracks of the couch, it didn't speak of fastidious housecleaning. And Sophie
pulled something old and dried from under a bookcase. We didn't try to examine
it too closely.

A corner of the living room ceiling was peeling and spongy, apparently from a
leak. The bathroom badly needed updating. I've had stronger showers from buckets
in Vietnam. The walls were so thin that Sophie awoke to someone else's wake-up
call, and Anna overheard a couple conspiring to enter a room next door. "Is it
safe to come in?" whispered a female voice.

The waitress who brought up our Continental breakfast (the only kind delivered
to the rooms) forgot the hot water for cocoa. When she came back, she put the
boiling hot metal pot in my unsuspecting hand. Then we found we were missing the
milk for the coffee.

Learning that the Thayer in its time had housed Presidents Dwight D. Eisenhower,
Richard M. Nixon and Gerald R. Ford, the American hostages freed from Iran, Bob
Hope, Bill Cosby, Brooke Shields, Phyllis Diller and the Smothers Brothers,
among other luminaries, I wondered how this could be.

And then the answer presented itself: this was a Government hotel, the only such
enterprise, apparently, open to the public. Now under the privatization program,
the Thayer faces sale to commercial interests, along with renovation and,
presumably, a more competitive standard of service.

Feeling the Mystique

But the mystique of West Point soon overpowers such trivialities. At dusk, while
the rest of the squad bivouacked in the room, I drove down Thayer Road marveling
at the granite-hewn administration buildings and barracks. Continuing on foot to
the main parade field, called the Plain, I stopped at the stations of American
military piety: the larger-than-life statues of Washington, who had first laid
out the site and now sat stiffly on horseback outside his eponymous dining hall;
Eisenhower (class of 1915); Gen. Douglas MacArthur (1903), whose mother moved
into the since-demolished West Point Hotel while he was a cadet, and Gen. George
S. Patton Jr. (1909), whose borderline grades were only later traced to
undiagnosed dyslexia. Far from needing binoculars to find the library,
authorities now say, Patton in fact may have been one of West Point's brightest
graduates.

I was crossing the Plain when a distant bugler sounded "Retreat" and the Stars
and Stripes at Trophy Point began to inch down the pole. Two cadets heading home
for the weekend stopped midfield hand over heart and so, reflexively, did I.
Then came a puff of smoke and a beat later, a thunderous report from a blank
charge in a cannon by the flagpole.

At Trophy Point, where a soaring granite cylinder memorializes the Regular Army
dead in the "War of the Rebellion" and a ring of 150-pound links recalls the
immense chain the Colonists stretched across the river to stymie the British
navy, I watched a pink sunset glow settle over the fjordlike vista of snaking
river and mirrored mountains.

In case we didn't realize that the buffet dinner in the mullion-windowed dining
room was a good deal at $17.50 a person, our waitress was glad to tell us,
poking my shoulder for emphasis. "You can --" poke "-- go back as many times --"
poke "-- as you like," she said cheerily. And so we did, repeatedly filling our
plates with salad and shrimp, raw vegetables, seafood salad, chicken breast in
cream sauce, carved roast beef, lamb chops and breaded fish. Across the
candlelit chamber, several couples slow-danced to a pianist's repertory of
Chopin and Tchaikovsky.

Off on a Tour

We began the next day at the visitors' center and museum in Highland Falls on
the former site of Ladycliff College, which the military academy absorbed in
1984. The museum has a grisly enough collection of armaments to satisfy the
blood thirstiest little Power Ranger. Of particular interest are the early
firearms and this quote, which I thought had a lot to say about the direction of
civlization: "A man with a gun was capable of defeating a mounted knight who had
spent his whole life training for combat and whose weapons had cost a fortune."
Both the museum and visitors' center have gift shops well stocked with Army
sweatshirts, caps, books, tchotchkes and the like.

A commercial tour bus leaves from the visitors' center for an hour's excellent
tour of the military academy, at a cost of $4 for adults and $2 for children
under 12.

We learned, for example, that women, first admitted to the academy in 1976, now
account for 10 percent of the enrollment. That 13,000 applicants compete for the
1,100 plebe openings. That West Point boasts four Presidents: Eisenhower,
Ulysses S. Grant, Jefferson Davis of the Confederacy and Fidel V. Ramos of the
Philippines. That all 4,000 cadets dine together and that if they perform their
jobs properly they can all be served in 3 minutes and finish eating in 20. That
it's considered unlucky to catch your own hat after you fling it into the air at
graduation. And that if a cadet escorts his date to Kissing Rock overlooking the
Hudson, said date must kiss said cadet or said rock will crash into the water,
killing all of West Point.

We didn't do much mingling with the cadets we saw walking around in their
traditional gray tunics. Most were off for the weekend and others went about
their business in areas of the academy off limits to visitors.

A Notable Brunch

To explore more of the Hudson Valley, we drove through the reservation, north on
9W, over the Mid-Hudson Bridge and north on Route 9 to the village of Rhinebeck,
a nascent Hampton on the Hudson. I had made reservations for the restaurateur
Larry Forgione's storied Sunday brunch at the 1766 Tavern of the Beekman Arms,
which calls itself the oldest continuously operated inn in America.

Although the drive took well over an hour and we arrived after the ostensible
1:30 P.M. buffet cutoff, we were nonetheless graciously seated and loosed on the
tables groaning with Belgian waffles, cheese blintzes, salmon, pollock, pate,
bagels, bacon, sausages, salads, eggs of all kinds including omelettes to order,
fruit and fancy desserts, served to the tunes of a cool jazz combo, all for
$19.95 each for the grown-ups, $10.95 each for the kids. "Look," said Sophie,
spearing melon on a swizzle stick, "fruit-fa-bob."

Waddling out two hours later, we explored the stores and boutiques set along the
village's crossroads. Summer Moon had an ecological special, 20 percent off
jeans made with hemp. At the Antique Market and Gallery I bought a flaking issue
of The New-York Times, as it was then hyphenated, from 1868 for $7.

We were hoping to see some of the mansions we had passed south along Route 9 so
we pushed off. At Hyde Park, we drove into the Vanderbilt estate, just missing
the last tour, which had filled up at 3:30 P.M. But we were rewarded by views of
the colossal 1890's mansion, rearing up through the trees like Manderley.  The
visitors' center afforded some exhibits of the yachts and other accouterments of
the family called the richest in America in their time.

The Roosevelt Place

Next we tried the Franklin Delano Roosevelt homestead just to the south and here
we were in luck. There was still time to visit the house, grounds and museum.
After the palace of the Vanderbilts, the little 35-room granite house with green
shutters seemed almost quaint, but, as at West Point, history supplied the
drama.

We gazed at the simple bed where the future President first greeted the world on
Jan. 30, 1882, his wheelchair made of a kitchen chair with the legs sawed off,
the leash and blanket of his beloved Scottie Fala, the encoded black phone for
wartime calls to the White House, the strange sequence of bedrooms: Eleanor's
sandwiched between her husband's and her mother-in-law's.

Crossing the grounds past the garden where he and Eleanor now lie together under
a simple block of marble, we entered the museum, exclaiming at the girlish
frocks young Franklin wore, the accomplished letter he wrote his mother at the
age of 5, the drama of his 1932 acceptance speech: "I pledge you, I pledge
myself, to a new deal for the American people. . . ."

My favorite exhibit was Roosevelt's 1936 Ford Phaeton, a blue-green convertible
with brown leather seats and hand controls and an ingenious metal box on the
steering column that dispensed lighted cigarettes.

On the way home the next day we crossed the Bear Mountain Bridge and detoured
north to Garrison's Landing for a last view of West Point, perched on the
ramparts, glinting like gunpowder in the morning light.

Within an Easy March of West Point

To drive to the United States Military Academy, near Highland Falls, N.Y., use
the George Washington Bridge or the Tappan Zee Bridge to reach the Palisades
Parkway. Continue to the end of the parkway and there, at the Bear Mountain
traffic circle, take Route 9W north to Route 218, and continue to West Point.

Bus service to West Point is provided by Short Line buses from the Port
Authority Bus Terminal, Eighth Avenue and 41st Street, Manhattan. Weekend buses
run four times a day, beginning at 8:25 A.M. One-way fare: $12.20; roundtrip:
$23.20; half-fare for those 5 to 11 years old. Information: (914) 736-4700.

Here is information about the sites mentioned in the accompanying article.

WEST POINT VISITORS CENTER AND MUSEUM. The center operates daily, 9 A.M. to 4:45
P.M. Academy grounds are open daily, 9:30 A.M. to 4:30 P.M., and the museum is
open daily, 10:30 A.M. to 4:15 P.M. Admission is free. Because the Academy is on
spring break until March 26, there are fewer events than usual scheduled this
weekend. There will be a National Judo Tournament in Arvin Gymnasium tomorrow
from 10 A.M. to 6 P.M. and a classical recital by the United States Military
Band in the Jewish Chapel on Sunday at 3 P.M.; both events are free.
Information: (914) 938-2638. Daily bus tours of the Academy are offered by West
Point Tours. Through March, tours leave from the Visitors Center daily at 11
A.M. and 1 P.M. Beginning April 1, tours leave every half-hour from 10 A.M. to
3:30 P.M. Mondays through Saturdays and from 11 A.M. to 3:30 P.M. on Sundays.
Fare: $4; $2 for children under 12; free for those under 2. Information: (914)
446-4724.

HOTEL THAYER, on the grounds of the Academy. Weekend room rates: $65 to $105 for
a single room; $70 to $175 for a double room and $105 to $185 for suites;
children 17 and younger stay free with accompanying adult. "Murder Mystery
Weekends" are planned this weekend and the weekend of March 31 to April 2. Each
includes accommodations and meals and costs $235 per person; $72.70 for those
under 12. Information: (914) 446-4731 or (800) 247-5047.

BEEKMAN ARMS 1766 TAVERN, Route 9, Rhinebeck, N.Y., (914) 871-1766. Sunday
brunch, 10 A.M to 2 P.M. (last seating at 1:30 P.M.); $19.95 or $10.95 for those
10 and younger. Sunday dinner, 3:30 to 8:30 P.M.; a la carte, $12.95 to $23.95.
Other dining hours: Lunch Mondays through Saturdays, 11:30 A.M. to 3 P.M.; last
seating, 2:30 P.M.; $7.75 to $11.95. Dinner Mondays through Thursdays, 5:30 to 9
P.M., and Fridays and Saturdays, 5:30 to 10 P.M.; last seating, 9:30 P.M. $12.95
to $23.95

VANDERBILT MANSION, Route 9, Hyde Park, N.Y. Hours: Wednesdays through Sundays,
9 A.M. to 5 P.M.; closed Mondays and Tuesdays. Admission: $2; free for those
under 17. Information: (914) 229-7770.

FRANKLIN DELANO ROOSEVELT HOME, LIBRARY AND MUSEUM, Route 9, Hyde Park, N.Y.
Wednesdays through Sundays, 9 A.M. to 5 P.M.; closed Mondays and Tuesdays.
Admission: $5; $4 for the elderly; free for those under 17. Information: (914)
229-2501.

OLD DUTCH CHURCH OF SLEEPY HOLLOW, Route 9, North Tarrytown, N.Y. Graveyard is
open all the time; tours of the graveyard begin Memorial Day weekend. The
church, a branch of the Reformed Church of America, is closed to public tours
through the end of May; however, Easter morning services at 8 A.M. and a concert
by the church choir on Palm Sunday (April 9) at 4 P.M. are open to the public.
Beginning in June, hours are Tuesdays through Thursdays and Sundays, noon to 4
P.M. Admission to everything is free. Information: (914) 631-1123.


LOAD-DATE: March 17, 1995

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

CORRECTION-DATE: March 18, 1995, Saturday

CORRECTION:

An article in Weekend on Friday about sightseeing at West Point included an
erroneous figure supplied by West Point Tours for national presidents among the
military academy's graduates. There were five, not four, including Gen.
Anastasio Somoza Debayle, who graduated in 1946 and became the dictator of
Nicaragua. He was assassinated in Paraguay in 1980.


GRAPHIC: Photo: Gazing over the Plain: A statue of Gen. Dwight D. Eisenhower
(class of 1915) by the parade ground of the Military Academy at West Point.
(Nancy Siesel/The New York Times) (pg. C21)

Map shows the location of West Point. (pg. C21)

                   Copyright 1995 The New York Times Company

                              184 of 211 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 March 18, 1995, Saturday, Late Edition - Final

House Budget Chairman Cuts Deficit With Vigor

BYLINE: By MICHAEL WINES

SECTION: Section 1;  Page 8;  Column 1;  National Desk

LENGTH: 1132 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, March 17


Representative John R. Kasich, an Ohio Republican who is chairman of the House
Budget Committee, may or may not be the craziest politician ever entrusted with
the Federal treasury. But he is decidedly not stupid.

Watching him in his Capitol Hill office -- the one with the computer that ticks
off the national debt, the plastic hatchet that emits maniacal screams and the
oversized Three Stooges poster -- it is not always easy to tell. An interview
with Mr. Kasich (pronounced KAY-sick) is a monologue punctuated by placards
yanked from corners and scrolls unfurled across the carpet. His description of
the Federal budget process begins in a Jeep that roars down Syntax Road and gets
hopelessly lost.

"Now here's the way I explain it," he says, sprawled coat-and-tieless in his
chair, work boots scuffing the floor. "When you go to the auto dealership and
you know you're going to spend -- you rich reporters, you probably spend 20, but
I go 15, buy a Jeep, O.K.? You go in an auto dealership, you say -- tell me this
isn't the way it works. You go in, you say to the dealer, 'I got 15 grand' --
you don't tell them right off the bat, but you know you've got 15 grand in your
mind, and you say, you know. . . ."

So it may seem hard to believe that House Speaker Newt Gingrich assigned Mr.
Kasich this winter to fulfill the most daunting pledge in his party's campaign
platform: to balance the Federal budget in seven years, a task that looks to
require $700 billion in spending cuts by the year 2000.

But on Wednesday, Mr. Kasich plopped the first $190 billion in proposed spending
reductions before his committee, hailed his accomplishment as "remarkable" and
"amazing," grinned boyishly for the cameras and added, "You ain't seen nothing
yet."

Whether through pure earnestness or guile -- or more likely, both -- he has
people starting to believe it.

Mr. Kasich seems to believe it. At the age of 42, a mixture of anti-deficit
fervor and political shtick has vaulted him past more senior Republicans to
become the youngest committee chairman in Congress and a member of Mr.
Gingrich's inner circle. If the Speaker is the brooding tactician in the
Republican campaign to cut spending, Mr. Kasich is the eternally upbeat brains
of the operation -- the salesman who knows the territory.

Political supporters in his hometown of Columbus say he has always been this
way, although even they are not certain how much of Mr. Kasich's hyperactive
optimism is genuine and how much is for show.

"He gives you that boyish smile and it's disarming," said Victor Goodman, a
Columbus lawyer who has known Mr. Kasich since the Congressman was as a page in
the Ohio State Senate in the 1970's. "After so many years of doing it, how does
one know it's real? But I think it's real."

Real or not, it seems to work. While Democrats in general denounce the House
Republicans' budget proposals as cynical and heartless toward the poor and the
elderly, Mr. Kasich, an architect of those proposals, has escaped much of the
criticism.

A signal reason, and Mr. Kasich's greatest weapon in the budget battles to come,
is credibility. "He is intellectually honest," Representative Ronald V. Dellums,
a liberal Democrat from California, said of Mr. Kasich. "He is not an ideologue
like some people in his party. You can have a discussion with him."

Indeed, Mr. Kasich is famed here for teaming with Mr. Dellums during Ronald
Reagan's Presidency against the Pentagon's request to build the B-2 bomber. In
1993 Mr. Kasich joined a Minnesota Democrat, Representative Timothy Penny, to
propose a $90 billion list of spending cuts that came within six votes of
passing the House and throwing President Clinton's own budget into political
limbo.

Only last month, Mr. Kasich joined dissident Republicans to oppose a costly
version of the "Star Wars" antimissile defense that is part of his party's
Contract With America -- a vote he now says, somewhat unconvincingly, stemmed
from a misunderstanding.

Mr. Kasich says simply that he believes Congress is frittering away the
birthright of future generations because its members will not put the common
good above that of individual interests, however deserving. And he says no issue
is more important.

"I look at this almost like I look at the Vietnam War," he said last week. "The
people ended the Vietnam War; that's why it ended. And the people are demanding
that this be ended. And we're always behind where the public is."

Mr. Kasich may well be a devoted camp follower of public opinion on the deficit.
But even friends allow that it would be naive to regard him as anything but a
polished and ambitious politician who has practiced for this role for a very
long time.

The son of a mailman, he likes to say that he got his frugality from his
working-class upbringing in steel-mill country outside Pittsburgh. But his
electoral sensibilities matured at Ohio State University -- as a freshman, he
finagled a White House meeting with President Richard M. Nixon -- and in the
Ohio Senate, where he moved from page to elected legislator in four years.

Mr. Kasich did it the hard way, ousting a Democratic incumbent by campaigning on
a platform of budget-balancing and tax cuts. After his 1978 election, he
answered critics who doubted his conviction by preparing an alternative state
budget, with specific spending cuts.

After removing another Democratic incumbent and advancing to the House in 1982,
Mr. Kasich joined the Armed Services Committee and promptly did the same thing
with the Pentagon budget. And after coming to the Budget Committee in the late
1980's, Mr. Kasich began writing Federal budgets with a deficit-cutting bent,
eventually preparing one that won more votes than the version submitted by
President George Bush.

More than most politicians, Mr. Kasich tends to speak and act without much
regard to the consequences. His early pledges of massive cuts in the growth of
Federal spending have been followed by a series of missed deadlines and internal
political defeats, including a failed attempt to dictate the specific nature of
spending cuts to the House Appropriations Committee.

Last week he amazed and infuriated Democrats by proclaiming to reporters that
one legislative compromise struck with them was "a big game" that Republicans
would unravel in the Senate.

Friends attribute this to an overabundance of enthusiasm, not a lack of
substance.

"One of the things that's matured in John is that he's become much more willing
to work with those who disagree," said Representative David L. Hobson, an Ohio
Republican who acts as an adviser to Mr. Kasich on budget issues. "There were
some problems dealing with a couple of authorizers and appropriators. To all
their credit, they've been able to work through that."

NAME: John R. Kasich

LOAD-DATE: March 18, 1995

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo: "You ain't seen nothing yet," Representative John R. Kasich of
Ohio, chairman of the House Budget Committee, said after the committee approved
more than $190 billion in proposed spending reductions. During tense discussions
on the spending cuts bill, Mr. Kasich, left, responded to a committee member on
Thursday as Representative Martin Olav Sabo of Minnesota, right, the ranking
Democrat, listened. (Karin Anderson for The New York Times)

TYPE: Biography

                   Copyright 1995 The New York Times Company

                              185 of 211 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 March 18, 1995, Saturday, Late Edition - Final

World News Briefs;
30 Vietnam Refugees Escape Philippine Camp

BYLINE: AP

SECTION: Section 1;  Page 2;  Column 3;  Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 149 words

DATELINE: MANILA, Philippines, March 17


About 30 Vietnamese denied entry to the United States escaped from a refugee
camp rather than be forced back to their homeland, the police said today.

The police said they discovered the people were missing when they evicted the
remaining 272 Vietnamese refugees from the camp on Thursday and sent them to
another. From there, they are to be returned to Vietnam later this year.

Master Sgt. Ellen Caraan, of the Bataan police, said the missing refugees might
have started slipping out of the camp in December.

When the police came to transfer the Vietnamese out of the camp on Thursday, the
refugees resisted and were dragged out. But they did not carry out their threat
to commit suicide, and were placed on a navy ship that sailed for the camp in
Palawan today, Sergeant Caraan said.

The 272 refugees, who arrived here four years ago, have been denied entry to the
United States.

LOAD-DATE: March 18, 1995

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1995 The New York Times Company

                              186 of 211 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                  March 19, 1995, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

FILM;
Wrestling a Virus to the Screen

BYLINE: By BERNARD WEINRAUB

SECTION: Section 2;  Page 15;  Column 1;  Arts and Leisure Desk

LENGTH: 1948 words

DATELINE: LOS ANGELES


HIS 15TH-FLOOR OFFICE ON Wilshire Boulevard offers a panoramic view of Los
Angeles. Fresh tulips, lilies and irises are placed daily in vases beside his
desk. There's a silver bowl of such immaculate, ripened strawberries that it
seems criminal to actually eat one.

Everything in the office symbolizes Hollywood-style power and luxury -- the
blood-red and ebony walls and matching carpet, the leather chairs, the Oscar on
the desk. Then, of course, there are the personally inscribed photographs on the
wall, of movie stars like Harrison Ford, Michael Douglas and Tommy Lee Jones,
taken by the producer himself.

"I'm still star-struck," said Arnold Kopelson, the 60-year-old producer of
"Outbreak," the new, and instantly popular, thriller about a killer virus. He
smiled. "Coming from Brooklyn, where my parents used to deposit me in a movie
theater every Saturday at 12 noon, I grew up with movies. When I'm with a
well-known star, I get highly charged. I think this is why I make movies."

After years of hustling on the edges of the movie business, Mr. Kopelson leaped
to prominence when he won the 1986 Oscar for producing Oliver Stone's "Platoon."
Last year he received new acclaim when he made "The Fugitive," a blockbuster
action film starring Mr. Ford. Now, in "Outbreak," Mr. Kopelson has another
success.

Despite somewhat unfriendly reviews, the movie, starring Dustin Hoffman, Rene
Russo and Morgan Freeman, climbed immediately to No. 1 at the box office when it
opened last weekend. The fortuitous timing of the opening -- when there are few
other studio movies around for anyone over the age of 16 -- helped make a hit of
"Outbreak," a fictional drama about Motaba, a lethal monkey virus from Africa
that threatens the United States.

If the plot sounds familiar, that is because Richard Preston's nonfiction book
"The Hot Zone," about Ebola, a lethal monkey virus from Africa that threatened
the nation, has been a best seller for five months. Mr. Kopelson first read
about the virus in an article by Mr. Preston in The New Yorker in October 1992.
The article became the basis for the book. "I was reading this New Yorker
piece," Mr. Kopelson said, "and I thought, 'Wow! This is something.' I wanted to
buy it."

Bidding for the movie rights began almost instantly. Mr. Preston said he
received at least 30 calls from producers and others in the industry. Through
his literary agent in New York, the writer hired Robert Bookman, an agent at
Creative Artists Agency.

The bidding war reached its finale the weekend of Jan. 15, 1993. The most
serious bidders telephoned Mr. Preston at his home in Princeton, N.J. The first
call came shortly before 9 P.M. from Bruce Berman, head of production at Warner
Brothers, who termed the article "sensational." Mr. Kopelson, working with
Warner Brothers, followed with his own call.

At this point the recollections of Mr. Preston and Mr. Kopelson diverge. Mr.
Preston said Mr. Kopelson had talked about how expensive the film would be and
implicitly threatened to make a film about a virus anyway. Mr. Kopelson said he
had made no threats but simply stated his intentions.

Finally, Mr. Preston said, he received a call from Lynda Obst, representing 20th
Century Fox, who identified herself as a one-time journalist.  She (and Fox)
offered a $100,000 option, against $450,000 to be paid if the movie was actually
made. Mr. Preston took Ms. Obst's offer over similar offers from Mr. Kopelson
and others.

"The money was essentially the same," Mr. Preston said. "I went with Lynda
because of her journalistic background."

"Crisis in the Hot Zone," Ms. Obst's $55 million film, was to star Robert
Redford and Jodie Foster and be directed by Ridley Scott. But that project was
stalled, mostly because of squabbling over the script.

Meanwhile, Mr. Kopelson would not give up. "For years I had wanted to do a film
about a virus out of control," Mr. Kopelson said. "I had seen 'Andromeda Strain'
and 'Panic in the Streets.' But there hadn't been one in a long time."

And so, irony of ironies, Mr. Kopelson, the man who had been attracted to a
science-laden, factual article in The New Yorker, says he told Mr. Preston that
Warners Brothers regarded the real-life story as too scientific and not grist
for a dramatic film. In an interview, Mr. Preston denied having had this
conversation with the producer and referred to Mr. Kopelson's negotiating style
throughout as "hardball."

"Maybe he wasn't used to the truth and straightforwardness," Mr. Kopelson said.
"That's not hardball. It's being honest."

SO MR. KOPELSON proceeded with "Outbreak," his $60 million virus movie. Unable
to buy the rights to Mr. Preston's article, he and Warner Brothers hired
Laurence Dworet, a doctor, and Robert Roy Pool to write an original script that
covered similar material. He hoped for Harrison Ford in the lead, but when Mr.
Ford turned down "Outbreak," he turned to Mr. Hoffman. Then he pushed his film
into production, with Wolfgang Petersen as director, even when it looked as if
the Redford project would proceed.

Just before "Crisis in the Hot Zone" was to begin filming last August, Ms.
Foster quit the project; eventually, Mr. Redford did, too. That left Mr.
Kopelson's movie the only virus film in town.

Mr. Hoffman was cast as an Army doctor trying to stop the virus before it
spreads. Ms. Russo played his ex-wife, a doctor at the Centers for Disease
Control and Prevention. Morgan Freeman was cast as Mr. Hoffman's supervisor, and
Donald Sutherland was given the role of the Strangelovian general intent on
using the Motaba virus for biological warfare.

But triumph was fleeting. Mr. Hoffman is notorious for seeking script revisions.
At one point, he called Peter Jahrling, a senior research scientist at the
United States Army's Medical Research Institute of Infectious Diseases. Mr.
Jahrling, the researcher who first identified the Ebola-Reston virus, gave
scientific advice to the film makers early during production of "Outbreak."

As Mr. Jahrling recalled, "Dustin Hoffman said, 'This script isn't making any
sense to me. Could you explain it?' And I said to him, 'Don't ask me. Ask the
fool who wrote it.' " Five more writers, earning at least $100,000 a week,
flowed onto the set as the film was in production. They turned Mr. Sutherland's
character more sinister and gave him an appropriate comeuppance.

They also wrote in action sequences, which led to the matter of the aerial
dogfights between Army helicopters. "The Deparment of Defense absolutely and
categorically had nothing to do with the making of this movie after reading the
script that was going to present the whole biological warfare situation in a
negative light," Mr. Jahrling said. "Kopelson wanted to use Army airplanes. They
couldn't get Department of Defense assistance."

"Outbreak" depicts a lone worker who, in less than 24 hours, can identify and
synthesize enough antibodies to treat an entire town full of people. "If you can
make antibodies that worked," Mr. Preston said, "you might be able to clone up a
lot of them to save a town. But it would take six months to a year.

"Not only is the movie a scientific mess," he added, "it's not even scary.
They've taken a frightening subject and turned it into a charming potboiler."

Turning scientific rigamarole into a potboiler is part of a producer's job,
along with negotiating with cranky Department of Defense officials and finicky
superstars. Mr. Kopelson speaks carefully about the strains of making
"Outbreak." "I am very pragmatic," he said. "The movie is the most important
thing. It cannot come down to personalities. It has to do with what is best for
the movie. I am representing the studio. My function is to protect the interests
of the studio."

There was a time when Mr. Kopelson's only contact with studios was as a lawyer
who specialized in motion picture financing. In the 1960's and 70's, he traveled
to the third world, where he met independent distributors hungry for American
movies. In the early 70's, working on his own, he bought the foreign rights,
sight unseen, to a forgettable Columbia film called "The Last Rebel," which
starred Joe Namath and Woody Strode.

"I was so happy to get a film, I didn't even look at it," he recalled. "When I
saw the movie I said, 'This is terrible.' But then the checks starting coming
in, and all of a sudden I was making more money on this deal than I ever made in
a single year practicing law."

With his longtime legal assistant and future wife, Anne Feinberg (his first
wife, Joy, with whom he has three grown children, died in 1975 of cancer), Mr.
Kopelson established Inter-Ocean Film Sales in 1972. This company represented a
combination of good and bad films abroad, including the works of John
Cassavetes. (Anne Kopelson, a savvy and forthright co-chairwoman of her
husband's company, now oversees his business affairs.)

By the late 1970's, Mr. Kopelson had forged a deal with General Cinema
Corporation to produce films. "I didn't know what a good script was," he said.
"I didn't know how to put together a cast and crew." But he found a small gold
mine in "Porky," a film he helped create, which was targeted to the adolescent
market. "Porky" grossed $105 million domestically in 1982.

A GAMBLER, MR. KOPELSON, along with his wife, took a major risk in the early
1980's and moved into banking and gold-mining ventures, which ultimately failed.
They lost millions. Shaken and facing financial problems, the couple sat down
and decided to focus entirely on gaining a foothold in the movie business. They
read the script for Mr. Stone's "Platoon," the scorching Vietnam War drama that
had been turned down by most studios, and took it to Hemdale, a small British
studio. Money was raised through bank loans and foreign sales.

"With 'Platoon' I realized the enormous impact that a movie can make," he said.
"It was then that I took producing very seriously."

Mr. Kopelson followed the success of "Platoon" with the 1989 Holocaust drama
"Triumph of the Spirit," starring Willem Dafoe. The film performed weakly at the
box office. But then in rapid order he made "Out for Justice," with Steven
Seagal, "Falling Down," with Michael Douglas, and "The Fugitive," the film that
placed him in the top tier of producers. Last year he was named producer of the
year by the nation's theater owners. He has a lucrative deal at Warner Brothers,
an office staff of 15 and a roster of forthcoming films with stars like Brad
Pitt and Arnold Schwarzenegger.

Not only does Mr. Kopelson's lush office bespeak his success; so does his home
in Beverly Hills, an enclave replete with a state-of-the-art screening room in
which the producer, an insomniac, often watches movies alone in the middle of
the night. On Sundays, the man who thinks of himself as an old-time movie mogul
holds catered screenings there. "Sometimes I can't quite believe that I'm doing
this," he said. "It's a dream."

Most of the stars he has cast speak of him warmly. "What makes Arnold such a
good producer is his hard work, dedication, focus and more hard work," said Mr.
Ford. "He showed me the script of 'The Fugitive,' and it was only 50 percent
there. But he got me involved and stayed involved. He never overwhelmed the
so-called artists like myself and the director and the writers. He understood
our ambitions. And he never held us back. Arnold's a mensch and more."

Morgan Freeman, who will be seen both in "Outbreak" and in a new Kopelson
thriller, "Seven," with Brad Pitt, added with a laugh: "Arnold is really like a
big, warm mother. He has a real nurturing sense with actors. He just gives you
this real sense of security."

NAME: Arnold Kopelson

LOAD-DATE: March 19, 1995

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photos: Dustin Hoffman in "Outbreak" -- He was cast as an Army doctor
after Harrison Ford refused the part. (Peter Sorel/Warner Brothers)(pg. 22); Mr.
Kopelson in his office in Los Angeles -- His Oscar for "Platoon" has a prominent
spot on his desk. (Mojgan B. Azimi for The New York Times)(pg. 15)

TYPE: Biography

                   Copyright 1995 The New York Times Company

                              187 of 211 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                  March 19, 1995, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

In the Region/Connecticut;
Historic Brass Mill Giving Way to a Waterbury Mall

BYLINE: By ELEANOR CHARLES

SECTION: Section 9;  Page 13;  Column 1;  Real Estate Desk

LENGTH: 1201 words

DATELINE: WATERBURY


THE Scovill Brass Works in Waterbury, a 200-year-old icon of the Naugatuck
Valley's glory days as the industrial engine of Connecticut's economy, is being
dismantled to make way for a $120 million shopping mall that will be built by
the Homart Company of Chicago.

Occupying 87 acres off Interstate 84 adjacent to the business district,
Scovill's 63 deteriorated, empty buildings are being turned into recyclable
piles of steel, brick, wood and concrete.

Once the site has been cleared, some 118,000 tons of soil, contaminated with
PCB's, lead paint, oils and asbestos will be carted off, leaving the land
environmentally clean and scraped bare of its history.

When the mall opens in the fall of 1997, anchored by Sears, Lechmere's, J.C.
Penney and Filene's department stores, it will be called Brass Mill Center. In
addition to the anchors, 120 stores and restaurants will fill a
900,000-square-foot building, joined by landscaped walkways to a
220,000-square-foot open shopping plaza.

Filene's and Sears will move from the 25-year-old, 500,000-square-foot Naugatuck
Valley Mall on the other side of town. The stores will be replaced, according to
Anne Marie Powers, spokeswoman for the Naugatuck mall, possibly by outlet
stores. "There is no rivalry," she said. "Homart is regional, we are very
local."

The Homart project will include 5,445 parking spaces and a linear park along the
Mad River, an 800-foot stretch of which will be moved closer to East Main
Street, consolidating land for the park. Mall construction is expected to begin
in the spring of 1996.

Homart, builders of nearly 79 million square feet of retail space nationwide,
almost all of it in malls, has optioned the land and received the enthusiastic
support of the city, which rezoned the tract from industrial to commercial use.

But Homart will not take title until the state's Department of Environmental
Protection certifies that a $36 million demolition and decontamination process
financed by state and Federal money has been successfully completed.

"We have agreed to pay back $31 million to the state if we do not build the
mall," said Cathy Shields, spokeswoman for Homart. The $5 million in Federal
funds does not have to be repaid.

Dismantling the 2.2 million square feet of buildings started last month and will
take almost a year of manipulating wrecking balls and bulldozers. "We cannot
dynamite," explained Jack Barlow, head of Brass Center Ltd., the demolition
company. "Most of these buildings were constructed in the 1800's and during
World War I and some, we understand, were bombproof. Construction methods were
secret and are unknown. You can't implode a building without detailed drawings."

From the War of 1812 through the Vietnam War, Scovill, which shut down its plant
in the late 70's, fabricated brass buttons, time fuses, cartridge casings and
vehicle and aircraft parts for the military. It also made kerosene and whale-oil
lamps, buckles, hinges, paper clips, zippers, photographic equipment, small
appliances under the Hamilton Beach trade name and blanks for coins.

Totally self-sufficient, it had its own fire and police squads, a
water-treatment plant, forges, and a power plant paid for during World War I by
Czar Nicholas II of Russia in return for munitions that he could not produce at
home.

Only two mid-1800's German Romanesque buildings are to be preserved for as yet
undetermined uses. The whistle that signaled shifts for 12,000 workers and an
extensive collection of photographs dating back more than a century will be
housed in the Mattatuck Museum of the Mattatuck Historical Society on West Main
Street.

"IT would have been nice to have saved more buildings," said Jack Shannahan,
executive director of the Connecticut Historical Commission in Hartford. "But
Homart could not have done that and had the space it wanted, and Waterbury
didn't want to lose this project."

Indeed, the mall proposal breezed through public hearings with hardly a
dissenting word. Even downtown retailers, whose counterparts in other cities
complain bitterly about the loss of customers to malls, rallied to the cause.

"Our downtown retail has been tremendously weakened over the years," said Henry
R. Paine, president of Howland-Hughes, a 105-year-old department store on Bank
Street that is the only such establishment remaining in any Connecticut downtown
outside a mall. "I will lose a large percentage of my customers and possibly
have to close, but the mall will accomplish a tremendous number of positives for
the city."

"This is a piece of an economic base that the city must develop to survive,"
said Mayor Edward D. Bergin. He recalled how the flight of industry to the South
during the energy crisis of the 70's was exacerbated in Waterbury by the
extensive use of plastics.

"Metal objects produced here by Scovill, Anaconda and Chase Brass were replaced
by plastic," said the Mayor, "and the companies couldn't or wouldn't retool."

Nonfarm jobs declined from 52,790 in 1985 to 44,620 in 1993, according to the
state's Department of Economic Development.

Today, 40 percent of downtown Waterbury's stores and offices are vacant,
according to Michael Pacowta, president of the Greater Waterbury Chamber of
Commerce. "We have become a city known for its desolation instead of its
thriving smokestack industries," he said. "We hope that the mall will produce a
more positive image to the commercial office sector and retailers that have been
passing us by."

On the theory that malls create satellite retail activity, as the Danbury Fair
Mall has done, Mayor Bergin has been a staunch advocate of the Homart project as
a catalyst for downtown redevelopment. He expects to reclaim even students who
drifted away from downtown during the 1970's when Waterbury's three high schools
were moved from the business center to the periphery of the city for
desegregation purposes. "Kids spend money in downtowns and malls," said the
Mayor. "They have cars and there are buses."

Unlike suburban malls, which draw taxes out of cities, Brass Mill Center is
expected to enrich Waterbury by $3 million to $5 million in tax revenues
annually. The higher figure reflects Connecticut's tax on business equipment.
"The shift of property taxes from commercial to residential will shift back to
commercial," the Mayor said, adding that the shift would ease the pain of tax
increases that will result from the revaluation that Waterbury is under state
order to complete by Oct. 1, 1996.

Like children with their noses pressed against the candy store window, many
small business owners like Joseph Begnal can't wait for the mall to begin
building. A former machinist at Scovill himself, he has owned Begnal's Brown
Derby bar opposite the plant on Main Street since 1956.

"I used to tell time by the 3, 4 and 5 o'clock shifts coming in for a shot and a
beer," he said. "I lost 80 percent of my business when the plant closed 15 years
ago. Downtown is so dead my son-in-law closed his sports shop on Grand Street
last month, after seven years."

But now Mr. Begnal plans to open for lunch for the first time in years, he said,
"for the construction workers and then for spillover from the mall."

LOAD-DATE: March 19, 1995

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photos: Scovill Brass (Steve Miller for The New York Times) Works in
Waterbury is being torn down to make room for a $120 million shopping mall
(rendering, left) scheduled to open in 1997. (Stanley Cairns/Cope Linder
Associates)

                   Copyright 1995 The New York Times Company

                              188 of 211 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                  March 19, 1995, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

The War in Bosnia as Told to Students by a U.N. Observer

BYLINE: By THOMAS STAUDTER

SECTION: Section 13WC;  Page 7;  Column 1;  Westchester Weekly Desk

LENGTH: 956 words

DATELINE: POCANTICO HILLS


FOLLOWING a three-month stay near the Bosnia-Serbia border, Doug Coffman, a
29-year-old public affairs specialist with the United States Mission to the
United Nations, returned to his home here, and within weeks accepted an
invitation to speak to the students and faculty of the Soundview Preparatory
School at the Union Church here on his experiences overseeing the United
Nations-sanctioned embargo on the Bosnian Serbs.

"I like explaining the role our country and individuals in our country can play
in foreign affairs," Mr. Coffman said. Having volunteered twice in two years to
assist with peace work around the world, Mr. Coffman can amply expound on the
subject.

He spent three weeks in May 1993 monitoring Cambodia's first democratic
elections, one of 50 Americans chosen to join an international team of 1,300
polling station officers. The elections were the culmination of an 18-month
effort by the United Nations to stabilize a country suffering from decades of
civil war.

United Nations personnel trained and briefed him for several days, and then he
was transported by helicopter to a remote polling station in Svay Rieng, a
province bordering Vietnam. "It was the most primitive place you could imagine,
way out in the country," Mr. Coffman said. "The people lived in bamboo huts with
dirt floors. It was like living on Gilligan's Island." For 18 meals straight he
ate chicken and rice.

Reflecting on this experience, Mr. Coffman said that he was "overwhelmingly
impressed with how important the elections seemed for the Cambodians." Despite
the threat of insurgent violence and intimidation, about 95 percent of the
country's voters cast ballots.

A little more than a year later, the International Conference on the Former
Yugoslavia, an agency reporting to the United Nations Security Council, sought
180 people to monitor Serbian consent with the arms embargo against the Bosnian
Serbs. When the United States State Department agreed to lend 40 of its
employees to the conference to work at the Bosnia-Serbia border, Mr. Coffman
again volunteered, and was soon asking his superiors, James Rubin, director of
communications for the United States Mission to the United Nations, and
Madeleine K. Albright, the chief United States delegate to the United Nations,
for a leave of absence.

Although a replacement had to be found for his position while he was away, Mr.
Coffman said "both Mr. Rubin and Ambassador Albright have strong feelings on the
situation in the former Yugoslavia, and I'm sure that made it easier for me to
be excused from my regular responsibilities for three months."

Joan Coffman, Doug's mother, said, however, that upon hearing that her only son
was traveling to yet another dangerous war-scarred part of the world: "My heart
just sank. I never expected it. He told me on a Sunday morning that he was
leaving the following Sunday."

Since the border monitors were expected to face rough, wintry conditions in the
Balkan mountains, Mrs. Coffman said she felt, in retrospect, that her son was
chosen for the assignment partly because of his infantry training, first as a
member of R.O.T.C. at Fordham University and later as a member of the Army
Reserves, where he is a captain and company commander of a basic-training unit.

Mrs. Coffman's fears lessened some "when I talked to Doug on the phone and he
told me that the area where he was located was very quiet." She added, "I
accepted the situation, but I still worried about him."

While in Serbia, Mr. Coffman stayed in Priboj, a small industrial city near the
Lim River 20 miles east of Gorazde, one of the six safe areas designated by the
United Nations and a scene of bitter fighting between Muslims and Serbs. He had
a room at a Communist-style hotel, which he said was distinguished by slow
service, cockroaches and bed linens changed only once every two weeks.

He traveled by car daily along with another border monitor, an interpreter and a
Serbian driver to one of the 24-hour border posts on the roads between the two
countries. In shifts of up to 12 hours, Mr. Coffman and his co-monitor -- first
a Dane, then a Russian -- watched Serbian policemen and customs officers who
guarded the border. No contraband or embargoed arms were discovered passing
through the border, and for the most part he simply made sure that no uniformed
Serbian military personnel crossed the border.

"Traffic through the border was limited, and winter made road conditions
horrible anyway," he said.

After a historical overview of the regional unrest, Mr. Coffman offered
impressions of the people and cultures he had come in contact with.

"Out in the country, the inhabitants were self-sufficient and quite rugged," he
said. "I had never seen before a minuscule, aged, bent-over woman pulling a bull
by its nose ring out from a pasture."

The more personal his anecdotes, the more the students appeared captivated by
the youthful, All-American State Department representative whose spare time
includes deacon's duties at the Union Church of Pocantico Hills and working as a
volunteer fireman and a part-time fitness instructor. Mr. Coffman recalled the
risks he had faced, like being stopped at gunpoint by drunken soldiers in
Cambodia and being chased by a small mob in Serbia.

"I am certainly a proud, patriotic American, but many of the Serbians hated us,"
he said. "Sometimes you took the easy way out and lied and said you were a
Canadian."

He also stimulated comments from students on hearing about world events
firsthand. Jamel Sweeney, 18, a postgraduate student at Soundview, said: "There
is a big difference between reading the paper and hearing someone tell you about
their experiences. It means a lot more."

LOAD-DATE: March 19, 1995

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1995 The New York Times Company

                              189 of 211 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                  March 19, 1995, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

The World;
Do Fickle Markets Now Make Policy?

BYLINE: By DAVID E. SANGER

SECTION: Section 4;  Page 3;  Column 1;  Week in Review Desk

LENGTH: 1086 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON


THE domino theory is alive and worried about in Washington.

A generation ago, the fear was over Vietnam and whether its fall to Communism
would inevitably take Thailand or Malaysia or Indonesia with it. The Vietnam of
the economic age is Mexico, and the insurgents are brandishing not AK-47's and
ideology but "hot money." That is what Wall Street calls the billions of dollars
that investors move in and out of countries in minutes. And suddenly the task of
trying to direct or at least contain that flow before it topples the next domino
is remaking the conduct of American foreign policy.

To a degree rarely seen before, bond traders and the currency markets are
driving policy, rather than reacting to it. For the evidence, just look at the
faxes that that have been exchanged in recent weeks between officials at the
Treasury Department and the leaders of Mexico, Argentina and Brazil. In Mexico's
case, Treasury officials led President Ernesto Zedillo to the unhappy conclusion
that he had to spark a deep recession -- sending interest rates on credit cards
to upwards of 100 percent, bringing imports to a near halt -- if he had any hope
of luring scared investors back into the country. Drastic measures have also
been prescribed in Argentina, which just swallowed hard, accepted a $7 billion
bailout package from the International Monetary Fund, and prayed that investors
would stop fleeing the country in herds.

In short, these days countries are often finding that they have to destroy
prosperity in order to save it. In Mexico, that means laying off hundreds of
thousands of people in the name of paying off the short-term bonds that the
country sold with abandon last year. "It is a whole new set of priorities," said
a Clinton Administration official. "Forget everything you learned about how to
help developing nations. Now it's Fidelity first."




Can We Talk?

Is this really the message America wants to send around the world? "It's a good
question, and one we discuss a lot," said Treasury Secretary Robert E. Rubin,
the onetime co-chairman of Goldman Sachs, who has played this game from both
sides of the table. "It is tempting to say that markets don't care about the
social considerations, about schools or income disparities. But I think the
truth is a little different. Don't get me wrong, we're not talking about
investors with a conscience. But they want to get their money back, so they are
interested in all the financial pieces, but also in what this will do to social
and political stability. And in the end, I'm not sure the priorities are so
different."

Whether Mr. Rubin is right or not, ever since the Mexico debacle you cannot walk
through Wall Street without tripping over Latin American leaders trying to
convince investors to bring their billions back, or at least not suck away what
little is left. Several made the trip last week; Peru's President, Alberto
Fujimori, came just to make the case that his country is not like Mexico.

But the fact that they come at all reveals how much has changed. When the Latin
debt crisis struck a decade ago, all the lenders, representing the world's
biggest banks, got into a room, negotiated austerity measures and reluctantly
granted the countries time to work things out.

In the '90's, bankers don't matter; markets do. "This isn't a situation where
you can sit down and reason with someone, because there is no one to talk to,"
said Joan Spero, the Under Secretary of State for Economic Affairs. "Have you
ever tried to get a market into a hotel room?"

But the harsh truth, as the Mexicans are learning, is that almost no amount of
austerity will convince most investors to return. What fund manager will risk
his job on the bet that Mexico is getting its act together -- especially when
Indonesia is hot, India looks like a cheap Silicon Valley and Germany has become
a safe haven of strong currency? As one fund manager said, "No one is going to
get fired for staying out of Mexico."

That is the price the country is paying for decisions made in the last days of
President Carlos Salinas de Gortari. He bet that he could keep the peso
artificially high by hiding bad but complex news about the economy. He is now in
self-imposed exile in the United States, sounding defensive.

His biggest mistake was relying on hot money rather than following the example
set by countries like China, Malaysia and Thailand -- who have urged foreign
investors to invest in factories and other assets that cannot be swept out the
country with a few strokes of the keyboard. A senior European finance official,
however, blames not only the Mexicans but the industrialized nations that bailed
the country out in the 1980's. "It is like being a doctor, and giving the
patient a heart transplant, which is what we did a decade ago," he said. "You
would expect that the doctor should be checking things out every year or so. But
we were all so enthralled by the success of the operation that no one did a
check-up."




Keeping Secrets

Even when the doctors dropped by, Mexico set the rules: no X-rays, no blood
tests. The Salinas Government carefully kept key statistics out of the public
domain -- how much its foreign reserves had been depleted to prop up the peso,
how dependent it had become on short-term money from abroad. The shell game
deceived even the I.M.F.

"The whole surveillance process did not work the way it should have," Karin
Lissakers, the chief United States representative to the I.M.F., said last week.
"We were too tolerant" of Mexico's reluctance to turn over vital numbers.

Someone did see and understand many of the warning signs -- the United States
Treasury. It has turned over hundreds of pages of documents to Congress,
detailing warning after warning to the Salinas Government. Yet no one dared
utter a word in public. In fact, President Clinton lauded Mexico's economic
reforms at the Latin summit meeting in November.

The case for silence is simple: Public warnings may trigger the rush for the
exits that everyone is trying to prevent. But by keeping Mexico's secrets, the
United States likely contributed to the ferocity of the ensuing panic.

Mr. Rubin hopes that Mexico's extraordinary pain is sending a message. "I think
there is no question that people who govern other countries, when they see what
Mexico is having to do, are going to feel an enormous incentive to maintain
sound policies," he said. Otherwise, he will be left to pick up the dominoes.

LOAD-DATE: March 19, 1995

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo: Investors are driving U.S. foreign policy. Austerity measures
backed by Washington make it hard for these Mexicans to find work. (Stephanie
Berger)

                   Copyright 1995 The New York Times Company

                              190 of 211 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                  March 19, 1995, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

Novel Cafe: A Deadbeat Poets Society

BYLINE: By KIT R. ROANE

SECTION: Section 1;  Page 22;  Column 4;  National Desk

LENGTH: 911 words

DATELINE: SANTA MONICA, Calif.


In the four-and-a-half years that Diana Birchall and her kin have warmed seats
at The Novel Cafe, she has produced five novels, none published. Her son, Paul,
has written one play, to no avail. And her husband, Peter, has scribbled several
volumes of poetry, without any intention of showing them to anyone.

Upstairs, David Carver is on his 23d year writing a memoir about being a
homeless Vietnam veteran. And across from the fiction section, a place where
books find their own uneasy order, Doug -- nicknamed "Dogfood" Doug because of
an earlier failed script, not the cafe's food -- worries over his latest attempt
at screenwriting, "Banana Rose." The title recently appeared in hardcover,
written by someone else.

"You could skip a rock off the heads of at least 20 screenwriters any time of
day in this place," said Bill F. Kelman, the author of several B-movie scripts,
paraphrasing a line from "Barton Fink." "This place is kind of a microcosm of
Los Angeles; anybody who buys a ream of paper calls himself a writer."

These are the heirs to Ernest Hemingway, Henry Miller and Anais Nin, a set of
scribblers and laptop-toting typists who dream of big breaks rising from small
ruminations and have so far failed. Some are unemployed, many are in debt, and a
few live in their cars. There is not a Hollywood Player among them.

"We thought about plastering the first page of everybody's work on the front
wall when it was published," said Richard Karno, the cafe's owner. "But there
was the obvious problem -- it might be a pretty blank wall."

From 7 A.M. to 1 A.M., this cafe just off Santa Monica's Main Street is a hostel
to Los Angeles's disenfranchised intelligentsia, a mix of aging Hollywood
hopefuls, Generation X beatniks and local students, all crowded into an eclectic
selection of odd seats on a worn parquet floor.

Outside, smokers line the sidewalk, puffing on hand-rolled cigarettes or
stroking their Vandykes, or both. Others rush upstairs to the balcony
overlooking the espresso machine where tattooed youths dispense bitter coffee
and wry wit to the wails of Patsy Cline.

The Novel crowd still prefers caffeine to decaf, and in a town not known for its
literature, likes to read -- a distraction well-provided for at The Novel, where
books on everything from canoeing to crystal healing line hundreds of wooden
shelves.

All are for sale, as are the works of interminably undiscovered artists. The
paintings, stillborn like many of the manuscripts written below them, hang in
every open space, collecting little more than dust and cobwebs.

"There are a lot of dysfunctional characters engaged in a lot of fantasy here,"
said Jerry Prager, a friend of many, as he nursed a cup of coffee at his window
seat near the front of the cafe. "This is Santa Monica hip, bohemian cool,"
added Mr. Prager, an actor and telemarketer. "It's a lot of people in their 40's
who like to hit on young women and have been working on the same script for
years."

Diana and Paul Birchall may have achieved the closest thing to fame among the
cafe regulars; they not only have agents, but real jobs. Both are employed as
script readers in the entertainment industry, an occupation with only one hazard
-- they are frequently harassed by fellow Novel customers.

"We get approached at least once a week by some screenwriter asking us to look
at his stuff," Mrs. Birchall confided from her usual perch in an overstuffed
armchair at the center of the cafe. "As a rule they are the weirder ones, about
space aliens or lonely writers who hang out in coffee shops.

"And," she whispered, grabbing a chunk of brownie, then washing it down with a
16-ounce iced cappuccino, "they are all awful."

Mr. Karno opened The Novel in the summer of 1990. The characters began to show
up shortly thereafter, and few have ever strayed to trendier establishments like
Starbucks Coffee a mere six blocks away, where, they complain, the stools are
uncomfortable, the cappuccino expensive.

At The Novel the first refill is free, and regulars like Mr. Carver are allowed
behind the counter to fetch as much as they want. On Sunday, when the meter
maids stay home, the few writers who live in their cars sometimes pull up and
use The Novel's restroom to bathe.

Few customers have been banished from the cafe, and some have nowhere else to go
anyway. When they are tossed out, it is usually because they have been caught
stuffing costly volumes into their backpacks without paying for them, or because
they have skipped out on weighty tabs that Mr. Karno was kind enough to let them
run up during lean times.

Sometimes Mr. Karno longs for the well-heeled clients that frequent Il Fornaio,
a cafe just a block away, where -- like the few stars who visit The Novel --
people buy coffee, tip well, then leave. But Mr. Karno's lot appears to have
been decided soon after his cafe opened, when the first customer discovered his
lax loitering policy and the abundance of electrical outlets scattered
throughout the building. Since then, laptops have sprouted like mushrooms on his
many tables, and customers have rooted like trees.

"I got more Powerbooks in here than in a school cafeteria," he complained while
calculating their drain on his electric bill. "But the last thing I want to do
is run around collecting a buck-fifty for electricity every hour from a bunch of
starving writers. Besides, they would just switch to pens and pads and still sit
there all day anyway."


LOAD-DATE: March 19, 1995

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo: The Novel Cafe off Main Street in Santa Monica, Calif., is home
to the disenfranchised literati of Los Angeles, a crowd of hopes, not contracts.
(Jan Sonnenmair for The New York Times)

                   Copyright 1995 The New York Times Company

                              191 of 211 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                  March 19, 1995, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

David Livingston, 80, Labor Advocate, Dies

BYLINE: By DENNIS HEVESI

SECTION: Section 1;  Page 47;  Column 1;  Metropolitan Desk

LENGTH: 493 words


David Livingston, former president of District 65 of the United Auto Workers and
a longtime proponent of civil rights, died yesterday at St. Francis Hospital in
Roslyn, L.I. He was 80 and lived in Manhasset, L.I.

The cause was lymphoma, said his son Daniel.

A native of Bensonshurst, Brooklyn, Mr. Livingston graduated from New Utrecht
High School, and became active in the labor movement as a prelaw student at
Columbia University in the 1930's.

He was working part time as a shipping clerk for a wholesale textile
distributorship when the company's eight employees went on strike to form a
union. Mr. Livingston, who had already organized anti-Hitler demonstrations on
the Columbia campus, took a leadership role in the struggle, and after the union
was formed became its president.

Soon afterward, his local merged with another led by Arthur Osman to form
District 65 of the Distributive Workers of America. District 65 eventually grew
to a membership of more than 40,000 workers, with the members coming from beyond
just the textile industry.

Over the years, the District 65 umbrella covered clerical workers at half a
dozen universities, graduate teaching assistants at the University of California
and the University of Massachusetts, factory workers for Revlon, writers for The
Village Voice, lawyers for the Legal Services Corporation and clerical and
technical workers at publishing houses.

"District 65 became particularly active in organizing women and minorities,"
said his son Daniel, a lawyer who used to work as an organizer for the union.

"I think he would be particularly proud of the union being one of the earliest
supporters of the civil rights movement," Daniel Livingston added. "He was a
confidant of Dr. Martin Luther King, among other civil rights leaders, and in
1960, right before the election, he arranged a meeting between Dr. King and John
F. Kennedy."

Under Mr. Livingston's leadership, District 65 forged a strong relationship with
the women's movement, dealing particularly with issues like equal pay, sexual
harassment and the need for day care. The union was also a leader in labor's
participation in efforts to end the Vietnam War, particularly through an
organization called Labor for Peace, which Mr. Livingston formed. At several
large peace demonstrations in New York and Washington, Mr. Livingston acted as
master of ceremonies.

"All the kids in the family grew up with the union," Daniel Livingston said. "We
were on picket lines before we could walk, and that's not a joke."

District 65 merged with the U.A.W. in 1981. Eleven years later, the relationship
with the U.A.W. changed so that each local received a direct charter from the
parent union. At that point, Mr. Livingston retired.

Besides his son, who lives in Hartford, Mr. Livingston is survived by his wife,
Beatrice; another son, Peter, of Madison, Wis.; a daughter, Julie, of Manhasset,
five grandchildren and one great-grandson.

NAME: David Livingston

LOAD-DATE: March 19, 1995

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Obituary (Obit); Biography

                   Copyright 1995 The New York Times Company

                              192 of 211 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                  March 19, 1995, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

BEST SELLERS: March 19, 1995

SECTION: Section 7; Page 34; Column 2; Book Review Desk

LENGTH: 1486 words



          Weeks
This Last    On
Week Week  List Fiction

 1      1  55   THE CELESTINE PROPHECY, by James Redfield. (Warner, $17.95.) An
                ancient manuscript, found in Peru, provides insights into
                achieving a fulfilling life.

 2      2   4   BORDER MUSIC, by Robert James Waller. (Warner, $17.95.) A Texas
                rancher, trying to erase his Vietnam trauma, takes to the road
                with an exotic dancer.

 3      3  39   POLITICALLY CORRECT BEDTIME STORIES, by James Finn Garner.
                (Macmillan, $8.95.) Classic tales respun to avoid offending
                current sensibilities.

 4      4   6   ORIGINAL SIN, by P.D. James. (Knopf, $24.) Adam Dalgliesh
                probes a case involving intrigue, malice and murder in a
                prestigious London publishing house.

 5          1   OUR GAME, by John le Carre. (Knopf, $24.) Espionage, larceny
                and murder in Eastern and Western Europe in the post-cold war
                era.

 6      5   5   DAISY-HEAD MAYZIE, by Dr. Seuss. (Random House, $15.) In words
                and pictures, the story of a girl whose head unexpectedly
                sprouts a daisy.

 7     14   2   THE GLASS LAKE, by Maeve Binchy. (Delacorte, $23.95.) The
                unspoken ties that bind a woman and her mother in a small Irish
                town.

 8     12   4   THE CAT WHO BLEW THE WHISTLE, by Lilian Jackson Braun. (Putnam,
                $21.95.) Aided by his two cats, Jim Qwilleran investigates
                embezzlement and a murder.

 9      7   6   HOME SONG, by LaVyrle Spencer. (Putnam, $23.95.) The appearance
                of his unknown biological son threatens the serenity of a man's
                family life.

 10     8  136  THE BRIDGES OF MADISON COUNTY, by Robert James Waller. (Warner,
                $16.95.) A photographer and a farmer's lonely wife in Iowa.

 11     9   6   ALWAYS A RECKONING, by Jimmy Carter. (Times Books/Random House,
                $18.) A collection of poems by the former President.

 12    11  23   MUTANT MESSAGE DOWN UNDER, by Marlo Morgan. (HarperCollins,
                $18.) In Australia's outback, an American woman learns about
                aboriginal philosophy.

 13*        2   ROGUE WARRIOR: GREEN TEAM, by Richard Marcinko and John
                Weisman. (Pocket, $23.) Navy Seals contend with a violent
                religious movement.

 14     6   9   KISS THE GIRLS, by James Patterson. (Little, Brown, $22.95.)
                The police detective Alex Cross pursues a serial killer and the
                kidnapper of his niece.

 15    10   3   THE CUNNING MAN, by Robertson Davies. (Viking, $23.95.) A
                doctor uses shamanism and Platonism as well as scientific
                medicine in his practice.

          Weeks
This Last    On
Week Week  List Nonfiction

 1          1   BREAKING THE SURFACE, by Greg Louganis with Eric Marcus.
                (Random House, $23.) The memoirs of the former Olympic diving
                champion.

 2      3  23   THE HOT ZONE, by Richard Preston. (Random House, $23.) The
                discovery of a lethal virus, more infectious than H.I.V., and
                the efforts to keep it from spreading.

 3      2  12   SISTERS, by Carol Saline. Photographs by Sharon J. Wohlmuth.
                (Running Press, $27.50.) The relationships of 36 sets of
                sisters, reported in words and pictures.

 4      4   5   THE DEATH OF COMMON SENSE, by Philip K. Howard. (Random House,
                $18.) How governmental rules and regulations are fettering the
                lives of all Americans.

 5      1   6   I WANT TO TELL YOU, by O.J. Simpson. (Little, Brown, $17.95.)
                The former football star, now on trial for murder, responds to
                letters he has received.

 6          1   AN ANTHROPOLOGIST ON MARS, by Oliver Sacks. (Knopf, $24.) Seven
                tales about people who compensated for their neurological
                afflictions by constructing worlds of their own.

 7*     9  54   MIDNIGHT IN THE GARDEN OF GOOD AND EVIL, by John Berendt.
                (Random House, $23.) The mysterious death of a young man in
                Savannah, Ga.

 8     10  28   COUPLEHOOD, by Paul Reiser. (Bantam, $19.95.) Essays on the ups
                and downs of marriage by the television star and stand-up
                comedian.

 9      6   4   THE DISCIPLINE OF MARKET LEADERS, by Michael Treacy and Fred
                Wiersema. (Addison-Wesley, $25.) A discussion of marketing
                techniques.

 10     5   6   RAGING HEART, by Sheila Weller. (Pocket, $18.) An account of
                the marriage of O.J. and Nicole Simpson.

 11     7   8   INSIDE THE WHITE HOUSE, by Ronald Kessler. (Pocket, $23.)
                Anecdotes about events at 1600 Pennsylvania Avenue during the
                past 30 years.

 12     8  16   THE WARREN BUFFETT WAY, by Robert G. Hagstrom Jr. (Wiley,
                $24.95.) An account of the career of the man said to be the
                world's most successful investor.

 13    11  65   THE BOOK OF VIRTUES, by William J. Bennett. (Simon & Schuster,
                $30.) Moral stories adapted from the Greeks, the Bible,
                folklore and elsewhere.

 14    13  24   JAMES HERRIOT'S CAT STORIES, by James Herriot. (St. Martin's,
                $16.95.) A collection of tales by the late Yorkshire
                veterinarian.

 15         1   BEING DIGITAL, by Nicholas Negroponte. (Knopf, $23.) A
                discussion of ways computers will change our lives in the
                future.

          Weeks
This Last    On
Week Week  List Advice, How-to and Miscellaneous

 1      1  95   MEN ARE FROM MARS, WOMEN ARE FROM VENUS, by John Gray.
                (HarperCollins, $23.) Communicating.

 2      2   5   THE BEARDSTOWN LADIES' COMMON-SENSE INVESTMENT GUIDE.
                (Godin/Hyperion, $19.95.) Tips for successful investing from 16
                Illinois women.

 3      3  47   IN THE KITCHEN WITH ROSIE, by Rosie Daley. (Knopf, $14.95.)
                Recipes by Oprah Winfrey's cook.

 4          1   THE SEVEN SPIRITUAL LAWS OF SUCCESS, by Deepak Chopra.
                (Amber-Allen/New World Library, $12.95.) How to "generate
                wealth in all its forms."


Rankings reflect sales figures, for the week ending March 4, at 3,050 bookstores
plus wholesalers serving 28,000 other retailers (gift shops, department stores,
newsstands, supermarkets), statistically weighted to represent sales in all such
outlets nationwide. An asterisk indicates that a book's sales are barely
distinguishable from those of the book above.
And Bear in Mind
(Editor's Choices of other recent books of particular interest)

THE DIARY OF A YOUNG GIRL: The Definitive Edition, by Anne Frank. Edited by Otto
H. Frank and Mirjam Pressler. (Doubleday, $25.) An expanded version that
restores entries from the original diary, giving more texture and nuance to this
renowned personal account of the Holocaust.

DREAMING: Hard Luck and Good Times in America, by Carolyn See. (Random House,
$23.) The novelist's memoir of her family revels in a woman's point of view as
it paints a portrait of drugs, drink and zany freedom set in California.

THE END OF REFORM: New Deal Liberalism in Recession and War, by Alan Brinkley.
(Knopf, $27.50.) In the late 1930's, a distinguished historian argues, liberal
interventionism lost its nerve and settled for underwriting consumer demand,
with the results we now see around us.

FRANCO: A Biography, by Paul Preston. (Basic Books, $37.50.) A huge,
all-inclusive life of the outright winner of Spain's civil war, the shrewd,
lucky dictator of his country for almost 40 years.

IN LOVE WITH DAYLIGHT: A Memoir of Recovery, by Wilfrid Sheed. (Simon &
Schuster, $23.) This writer's account of his battles with alcohol, drugs and
cancer is grim, but it's told with whimsical wisdom and good-natured resolve.

MOVING HOUSE: Stories, by Pawel Huelle. (Helen and Kurt Wolff/Harcourt Brace,
$18.95.) These tales by a Polish writer, which turn on the longings and workings
of memory, are rooted in the highly idiosyncratic history of Gdansk.

SIX MYTHS OF OUR TIME: Little Angels, Little Monsters, Beautiful Beasts, and
More, by Marina Warner. (Vintage, paper, $10.) Humorous, urgent essays on how
myth and fiction enshrine and fix categories like the moral condition of
children.

TERRIBLE HONESTY: Mongrel Manhattan in the 1920s, by Ann Douglas. (Farrar,
Straus & Giroux, $25.) New York analyzed with broad scope and minute complexity
as the locus of the national psyche when Americans attacked the conditioned
responses of the pre-1914 world.

TOMORROW IS ANOTHER COUNTRY: The Inside Story of South Africa's Road to Change,
by Allister Sparks. (Hill & Wang, $22.) A South African journalist's fast-paced,
gripping account of the process that led to the end of apartheid.

TOM PAINE: A Political Life, by John Keane. (Little, Brown, $27.95.) A good
introduction to a difficult, often unlovable character, an effective
propagandist of revolution (and, on the whole, liberty) in America, France and
even England.

THE TUNNEL, by William H. Gass. (Knopf, $30.) This sprawling novel (652 pages)
by an American master is all spun out of the head of its monstrous protagonist,
a language-driven professor of fascist views who is as dreadful as he is
plausible.

A VOID, by Georges Perec. (Harvill/HarperCollins, $24.) The letter E never
occurs in this 1969 French novel or in its translation by Gilbert Adair; what
does occur is a wildly amusing feast of puzzles, mind games and rules broken
just to exhibit their latent existence.

LOAD-DATE: March 19, 1995

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: List

                   Copyright 1995 The New York Times Company

                              193 of 211 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                  March 19, 1995, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

WORD & IMAGE;
Beyond the Shroud

BYLINE: By MAX FRANKEL

SECTION: Section 6;  Page 30;  Column 1;  Magazine Desk

LENGTH: 1222 words


LAST AUTUMN, IN A FLIGHT OF ANGRY rhetoric, I accused the three main television
networks of drawing a great shroud across the mind of America and leading the
public back toward isolationism. I observed that the dwindling TV staffs abroad
still report an occasional massacre or famine but that most evenings the
newscasts and magazine shows treat the five billion folks beyond our borders as
inconsequential and irrelevant. That conclusion now requires well, not
correction but, as the old, incorrigible New Yorker magazine would say,
amplification.

Many readers reported similar resentment of television's withdrawal from the
world and also of the meager diet of international news in most newspapers. An
energetic demurral, however, came from NBC's Tom Brokaw, a frequent foreign
flier and student of both the world and its treatment on the tube. He cited some
recent television reports that defied the trend I was bemoaning. More
insistently, he argued that television and journalism are not so much the causes
of a new American isolationism as its victims.

Brokaw observed, for example, that when Bryant Gumbel at long last persuaded his
network to send the "Today" show to Africa for one week of fascinating
reportage, that program's normally large audience faded rapidly from day to day.
Brokaw pointed out that if one network scheduled a foreign-affairs documentary
for prime time, the predators at Fox would swiftly counter in the same hour with
sex and song; indeed, even the American Movie Channel would leap in to bash the
perpetrators of journalism with some popular golden oldie.

And there's more than Nielsen ratings to prove that Brokaw is right: speak of
world affairs and most eyes glaze over. Americans are again withdrawing into
their shell, trying to hide from the strange and the distant. In the bitter
words of one reader, Joan Sapon, who reported her family's failure at publishing
a weekly compendium of European news, "Americans just don't give a damn about
what is happening outside their borders unless Di and Charles are involved."

The news from Washington demonstrates that the politicians have caught the
drift. I had thought that after many journalists decided to ignore the world,
politicians would, too. But no, the politicians have found opportunity in
isolationism. They perceive profit not in ignoring the world but in trashing it.

The Republican contractors, led by Newt Gingrich, for example, dig for votes by
proclaiming that "the nation has gone too far in the direction of globalism."
With Communism in ruins, they are desperate to find a new foreign enemy that
might justify their nativism. And so to replace the Kremlin, they've chosen the
United Nations. No more support for international peacekeeping in fevered places
like Mozambique or Macedonia; no more cooperation with foreigners in ugly places
like Rwanda or Somalia. Billions for defensive shields in outer space, but not
even pennies for pursuing peace on earth.

Whereas Americans once found inspiration in grand admonitions like "No More
Munichs" and "No More Vietnams," they are now asked to march to the petty slogan
of "No More Somalias" -- no more policing in the desperate alleys of Mogadishu
if foreigners are involved.

Yet another Washington posse, led by Senator Jesse Helms, rides against foreign
aid, as if the $13 billion America spends annually for friendly armies and the
world's poorest economies contributes nothing to averting war, or famine or
disease. Of all the advanced nations, America invests the least, per capita, in
foreign aid. But the demagogues in Congress, who rarely neglect to denounce aid
in their newsletters home, have misled Americans into believing that they give
away 15 times as much as they actually do.

And at the fringes, left and right, stand the guardians of an illusory American
"sovereignty," railing against the new World Trade Organization because it will
not give any nation a veto in the resolution of disputes. Ralph Nader guards
this barricade, afraid that some of America's laws on safety or the environment
might be challenged as impediments to trade. And beside him stands Pat Buchanan,
demanding higher trade barriers to protect Americans against the competition of
lower-paid foreign workers.

There are good reasons to worry about our competitiveness in the world. But
there's no way to lock the world out. Just consider the major American
corporations, the ones that make our cars and refine our oil, transmit our
telephone calls, bank our deposits and design our computers. They are truly
citizens of the world, not of any single country. They take their capital,
resources and talent where they find them and make a single product with parts
from many lands. If not subjected to international rules and supervision, they
would heed no one's. There's no way to nail a modern corporation to any piece of
soil or make it salute a single flag. Nor is there any way to immunize the
dollar against the daily speculations of foreign traders or, as Russia and China
learned to their dismay, to seal a nation's borders against alien ideas.

There is nothing "sovereign" about an economy that must adjust to the tides of
foreign inflations and recessions. There is nothing "sovereign" about a society
that is routinely dependent on transnational information. There is no safety in
isolation when a dozen crazies can smuggle a nuclear warhead into any airport.

If anything, Brother Brokaw, these realities require all of us in the media to
resist the Babbitts that would have us pander to America's small-town nostalgia.
The country needs more correspondents in Moscow and Mogadishu, not fewer -- not
just to cover government coups and warlord rivalries but to explain the
mechanics of modern life. Americans need instruction in trade and in terrorism,
in international banking and global drug-running. They may not be ready for
lessons every night, but the media had better be ready for the night that
hijackers strike, banks collapse or CBS is bought by Radio Riyadh.

It's true that even the savagery of Bosnia or Rwanda does not directly damage
America's security or standard of living. But surely the threat of tens of
thousands of nuclear weapons is greater now that they lie scattered in
unfamiliar hands than when their masters could be addressed by phone or hot
line. The foreign threat to American jobs and incomes would be greater, not
less, if there were no international civil servants to settle arguments about
trade. And the American environment cannot be protected only by American laws;
polluted clouds and acid rains know no frontier.

All this should be good news for the media, because so long as the world remains
a mysterious and dangerous place, there will be exciting stories to report. The
parochial competitions of other networks and newspapers must not be allowed to
gut this essential work.

But yes, Brokaw, there is another side to the problem. Those competitive
pressures spring from a deep yearning in American hearts, a yearning for relief
from alien concerns. As a former publisher of The Times, Arthur Hays Sulzberger,
once remarked, "Along with responsible newspapers we must have responsible
readers" because "the fountain serves no useful purpose if the horse refuses to
drink." Just don't turn off the water.

LOAD-DATE: March 19, 1995

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1995 The New York Times Company

                              194 of 211 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                  March 19, 1995, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

Classes in English Drawing Large Numbers

BYLINE: By LINDA SASLOW

SECTION: Section 13LI;  Page 1;  Column 1;  Long Island Weekly Desk

LENGTH: 1445 words


THERE was not an empty seat in the windowless classroom. On the walls were an
American flag, maps and posters with the Pledge of Allegiance and messages like,
"Celebrate America!" and, "Here we speak English only!"

At the Adult Learning Center at Nassau Tech in Carle Place in a building that
used to house a Korvettes Department Store, 30 adults listened as Lynn Fain, the
teacher of their class in English as a Second Language, explained what she
called "time words."

"If we say, 'Children learn to walk after they learn to crawl,' " Ms. Fain
asked, "which came first, walking or crawling?"

Several hands shot up.

"What is the clue that is a time word?" Ms. Fain asked.

Several students answered in unison in a variety of foreign accents. The
students, all 21 or older, were from Colombia, Estonia, Finland, Haiti, Japan,
Korea, Poland, Portugal, Russia and Vietnam. The advanced class was one of 20
literacy classes at Carle Place that morning. On any given day, an additional 40
satellite classes, at libraries, churches and the county jail, have a total of
1,200 students, said Lillian Schneider, coordinator of the Adult Learning
Center, a Boces program.

The changing population of Long Island has spurred major growth in
adult-literacy programs. The biggest growth has been in English as a second
language, reflecting the rise in immigration to the Island.  Two other growing
programs are Adult Basic Education and General Educational Development, which
are for English-speaking adults seeking high-school diplomas.

Boces has three areas on Long Island. In Nassau, 70 percent of adult students in
literacy programs are in English as a Second Language classes. They are from 42
countries, mostly from Latin America, Ms. Schneider said. In western Suffolk the
English as a Second Language classes have 909 students this year, double the
number in 1990. Eastern Suffolk Boces had more than 2,500 foreign-born adults
last year, up from 740 in 1989.

"This tells us that we're getting a large population of immigrants who are
leaving New York City and continuing to move further east," said Judy Cahn,
assistant administrator of the Eastern Suffolk program. "They are coming to
school to learn English because they need it for employment, to communicate with
their children's schools and to survive in their communities."

Eastern Suffolk has day and evening programs, as well as a Saturday class. For
non-English-speaking adults, the literacy program has become a circular
educational path, said Louise Baxter, director of the Eastern Suffolk Boces
literacy program.

The adults move from the English program through Adult Basic Education and
eventually reach the General Education Development level of proficiency.

"As these adults become more educated in the English language," Ms. Baxter said,
"many vocational training opportunities become available for them."

In the class at Nassau Tech, which meets five mornings a week from 8:30 to
11:30., several students excused themselves to leave for work. Others arrived
directly from their night jobs to join the class in session.

Pedro Galvez, from Peru, enrolled two months ago. "I came to the United States
for a better life," he said. "First I had to learn to speak English. Now I'm
studying to get my high-school degree."

Guillermo Lopez of El Salvador has been taking courses in E.S.L. and computers
at Nassau Tech for one and a half years, he said, striving for a high-school
equivalency diploma and a computer job.

The sequencing lesson was interrupted when a student complained about a test
that he had failed.

"If you got a 50 on the test," Ms. Fain said, "and you mastered half of the
material, then you can master the other half."

She asked the class, "What does a test tell you?"

"How much you know," a student at the back said.

"But you feel down because you failed," a young woman said.

"Then you're judging yourself," Ms. Fain said. "If you learn to take the
judgment out of the way, then whatever you try to achieve will go easier. What's
the message here?"

"I need to work more hard," the first student said.

"I need more practice," another added.

"We should look at mistakes as something good," Ms. Fain said. "The only time we
learn is by our mistakes. Don't hit yourself in the head and say, 'I can't learn
English.' But say, 'Maybe I need more work on pronouns.' It's important to look
at a problem not as a negative obstacle, but as a challenge."

A discussion of self-esteem had not been part of the lesson plan, Ms. Fain said
after class. "But," she added, "life-management skills are continually
integrated into classroom teaching. This is what these people face every day.
With better coping skills they can learn faster and succeed more easily."

To the class she said: "Let's see how one preposition can change the whole
meaning of a sentence. If I say, 'Why is this happening to me?' what does that
mean?"

"That you're putting yourself down," a student answered.

"That you're a loser," another said.

A third added, "You're a victim."

"How much hope are you feeling?" Ms. Fain asked.

"Not too much," he said.

"Now if I change one little word and ask, 'Why is this happening for me?' how is
that different?" Ms. Fain asked.

"You feel responsible for what's happening," a young man in the corner said.

"You see something positive," said the woman next to him.

"What if it's not something positive, like you failed a test?" continued Ms.
Fain.

"You see it as a challenge and you'll work harder," answered the student who had
complained about failing.

"You're more in control," another said.

"Are you a victim?" Ms. Fain asked.

In unison, the students answered, "No!"

Literacy programs for English-speaking adults have also grown. In eastern
Suffolk enrollment jumped, from 2,302 in 1989-90 to 5,700 in 1993-94. In western
Suffolk, Adult Basic Education and General Educational Development have
increased enrollments 30 percent, to total 465.

Nassau literacy programs reports a total of 6,000 adults.

The literacy programs are financed by state and Federal grants, as Employment
Preparation Education. Students pay no tuition.

Adult Basic Education and General Educational Development classes emphasize
reading, mathematics, science, social studies, literature, the arts and writing,
with instruction geared toward preparation for the state's high school
equivalency exam.

Entering students are assigned to classes according to test results.  Basic
Education is for adults with reading and mathematics below ninth-grade levels.
Students above the ninth grade in reading and math go to G.E.D. classes. When
they reach 11th-grade level or above, they are encouraged to register for the
G.E.D. examination.

Several years ago Boces added an External Diploma Program for adults 21 and
older to earn high school diplomas from local school districts through the State
External Diploma Program. Participants work at home and have weekly appointments
with advisers.

Other programs have been developed for adults, Ms. Schneider said. Home study
has become especially popular, because many adults have less time available to
go to school, she added.

Grasp, which stands for Giving Rural Adults Study Programs, had started for
people on farms who could not go to classes, Ms. Schneider said. It has changed
its focus to enroll people who are homebound, who do not drive, mothers at home
with young children and others unable to attend classes and want to prepare for
the General Educational Development examination.

Grasp provides a home-study programs in reading, math and English.  Students
return their work to a library or Boces center to be corrected and evaluated.

Boces also has citizenship classes. "We expect to see a big growth in these
programs as the pressure grows for foreign born adults to get U.S. citizenship,"
Ms. Schneider said.

The Superintendent of Eastern Suffolk Boces, Dr. Edward Milliken, said, "In
order for adults to sustain their place in the workplace and in society they
need language and writing skills that we are trying to provide for them,
allowing them to move ahead with competence and confidence."

For Ricardo Martinez, who is from El Salvador, hopes of becoming a doctor ended
when he dropped out of college and left that country 23 years ago because of
political turmoil, he said. "Now, for the first time, I'm back in school, taking
courses in E.S.L., computers and G.E.D.," Mr. Martinez, a student at Nassau
Tech, said. "My goal is to stay in school and continue right on to college."

"These are motivated students," Ms. Fain said. "They want to learn and they
can't get enough."

LOAD-DATE: March 19, 1995

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photos: Lynn Fain, teacher of English, with students, from left, Nicole
Tassy (Haiti), Maria Roberts (Colombia) and Patricia Lagos (Peru). (Pg. 1); In
English class at Nassau Tech, Guillermo Lopez, left; Carlos Aragones, and Alla
Granina. (Pg. 16) (Rebecca Cooney for The New York Times)

                   Copyright 1995 The New York Times Company

                              195 of 211 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                  March 19, 1995, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

Overachiever

BYLINE: By John B. Judis;   John B. Judis is the author of "William F. Buckley
Jr.: Patron Saint of the Conservatives" and "Grand Illusion: Critics and
Champions of the American Century."

SECTION: Section 7;  Page 8;  Column 1;  Book Review Desk

LENGTH: 1658 words



FIRST IN HIS CLASS
A Biography of Bill Clinton.
By David Maraniss.
Illustrated. 512 pp. New York:
Simon & Schuster. $25.

DAVID MARANISS, a reporter at The Washington Post, has written a useful
biography of a President still in office. It is fair, fun to read and extremely
well researched, despite its subject's unwillingness to cooperate. I have
misgivings about some of Mr. Maraniss's opinions and the way the book's
narrative appears to be dictated by current controversies, but I wouldn't
hesitate to recommend "First in His Class" to anyone interested in Mr. Clinton's
life before he became President.

As the book's title indicates, Mr. Maraniss portrays Mr. Clinton as the leading
member of the generation that came of age during the 1960's. He shows how Mr.
Clinton stood out in each setting -- high school in Hot Springs, college at
Georgetown, Oxford University, Yale Law School and then the Governor's mansion
in Arkansas -- creating a sense of inevitability about his accession to the
White House. In light of his current difficulties, this view of his life gives
Mr. Maraniss's book a certain pathos, as if one were reading the story of a star
college athlete who flopped in the pros.

The book ends with Mr. Clinton's announcement in October 1991 that he was
running for President, and Mr. Maraniss takes no position on what kind of leader
Mr. Clinton has been. But he does advance some interpretations of Mr. Clinton's
character and beliefs that bear on the Clinton Presidency.

Throughout "First in His Class," Mr. Maraniss presents vivid evidence of Mr.
Clinton's ability to engage other people, to listen to them and to sympathize
with them regardless of their background or beliefs. Take the trip to Moscow in
January 1970, the subject of much Republican rumor during the 1992 campaign. As
Mr. Maraniss tells it, Mr. Clinton spent his weeks there schmoozing with Charlie
Daniels, a Virginia plumbing contractor, and Henry Fors, a chicken farmer, who
were trying to get information on Mr. Fors's son, who had been lost in North
Vietnam. Mr. Daniels, a Republican, became a friend of Mr. Clinton and a
contributor to his political campaigns.

Or shift to Yale Law School in the late 1960's, when racial tensions were
surfacing and black students sat defiantly by themselves in the school
cafeteria. Mr. Clinton, who was friendly with one of the blacks, decided to join
them and was eventually accepted.

Yet Mr. Clinton's charm, as Mr. Maraniss shows, was based on an enormous desire
for love and affection, and a willingness to test different opinions, even
different personalities, to find out which one was most effective in gaining
people's esteem. Mr. Maraniss quotes a friend as saying that Mr. Clinton "would
try out different versions of what he thought and bounce them off you while
looking at your eyes."

Is Mr. Clinton simply a born opportunist? Mr. Maraniss does accede sometimes to
what seems to be the conventional view of a politician without principles, but
more often he balances Mr. Clinton's inner convictions against his charm. He
says that in Mr. Clinton's 1969 antiwar letter to Col. Eugene J. Holmes, the
head of the R.O.T.C. at the University of Arkansas, he was "sincere and
deceptive at the same time." He notes the ambivalence of one of Mr. Clinton's
classmates at Yale, who said, "There were moments that were so genuine that
there was no doubt about it, and moments when you wondered -- is this posture?"
This interplay between posture and principle is an essential part of any
successful politician. But it has bedeviled Mr. Clinton.

Now for my misgivings: Although Mr. Maraniss's assessment of Mr. Clinton's
political character seems fair, some of his other judgments appear overly harsh,
reflecting, perhaps, the current negative take on the Clinton White House. While
at one point crediting the sincerity of Mr. Clinton's moral anguish in
confronting the draft, Mr. Maraniss lapses at other points into unjustified
cynicism.

He quotes with approval a soldier who did not know Mr. Clinton but who was in
the same platoon in Vietnam with one of Mr. Clinton's high school classmates.
Students, the man said, "were protesting the war because they were deathly
afraid of dying" and because they "would get enormous approval from peers." Yet
Mr. Maraniss presents no evidence that Mr. Clinton was moved out of fear of
combat or a desire for approval. He might have put the issue in sharper
perspective had he compared Mr. Clinton not with those who went to war but with
Phil Gramm, Newt Gingrich and other members of Mr. Clinton's generation who
avoided combat without any apparent sign of moral anguish.

Mr. Maraniss also takes a harsh view of Mr. Clinton as a husband and of his
marriage to Hillary Rodham, eagerly interjecting any note of marital discord
into his narrative. As proof of heightened tension in the Clintons' marriage, he
reports how in the early 1980's a friend (not identified, despite the extensive
footnotes) heard Mr. Clinton singing in front of his wife and daughter, "I want
a div-or-or-or-orce." As many married men (including this one) could attest,
such episodes, especially when played out in front of guests and children, are
most often the aftershocks of a spat. The Clintons clearly did have marital
problems, but this anecdote doesn't illustrate them.

In addition, Mr. Maraniss's judgments about his subject's convictions don't
always ring true. He describes Mr. Clinton in college as a "cautious defender of
the establishment." That may be accurate if the comparison is with student
protesters at Columbia or Berkeley, but not if it is with the voters of
Arkansas, where Mr. Clinton returned each summer to participate in politics.
Indeed, it wasn't even true with regard to national politics at a time when his
hero, Senator J. William Fulbright, was being spurned by the White House.

Then, in the chapters on Mr. Clinton's career as Governor, Mr. Maraniss recounts
Mr. Clinton's decision to let the Arkansas National Guard participate in
training missions in Central America when six other governors refused. Mr.
Maraniss concludes, "In the full context of his political life, his letter to
Colonel Holmes was the aberration, his decision on the National Guard the norm."
That's wrong. Mr. Clinton was the Governor of Arkansas, not Massachusetts. If he
had joined the other governors who protested National Guard participation, he
would have been the only Southerner to do so. He was obviously being politically
cautious. As Mr. Clinton showed during his first months as President, when the
hubris of victory temporarily overcame his political caution, his own
convictions remained very much those of his Oxford and Yale years. Not to
understand that is to miss the drama and much of the confusion of his first year
in office.

These reservations, of course, are generally a matter of nuance and certainly do
not discredit Mr. Maraniss's research. But I also have to introduce a larger
misgiving about this book. Any biographer faces a difficult task in writing
about a living person who is still in the eye of controversy. It is particularly
difficult in the case of a President like Mr. Clinton or Richard Nixon, whose
critics have attempted to use the details of their lives to discredit their
programs and party. There are two strategies that biographers can use to get
around this.

The first is to frame the subject with a clear, bold and particular view of the
person and his or her era. In this strategy, the author assumes tight control
over the material and what it means. Garry Wills did this brilliantly in "Nixon
Agonistes," which appeared in 1970 and remains one of the best books about Nixon
and his times. But it is very hard to succeed at this kind of book, and the
discard bins outside used-book stores are filled with forgettable hatchet jobs
and hagiographies.

The second, and much safer, strategy is to stick very close to the facts in the
manner of a newspaper reporter and to offer only micro-interpretations, on an
event-by-event basis, of what those facts mean. The virtue of this approach is
that the facts are not overwhelmed by transient interpretations, but the danger
is that the biographer can lose control of the subject: what is deemed relevant
will often be determined by what is currently controversial.

MR. MARANISS has followed this second strategy, and his book is certainly one of
the better examples of this genre, comparable with Lou Cannon's 1982 biography,
"Reagan." But he also falls prey to the strategy's pitfalls. Mr. Maraniss
devotes three chapters out of 24 to Mr. Clinton's Vietnam draft woes, with
numbing detail about his draft board negotiations, but he devotes barely two
pages to Mr. Clinton's involvement with the Democratic Leadership Council in the
1980's. Yet if one wants to understand how Mr. Clinton finally became President,
and what his political views are, the D.L.C. connection is far more important.

Mr. Maraniss also provides considerable detail on Mr. Clinton's reputed sexual
adventures. Gennifer Flowers and Paula C. Jones both make appearances; Senator
Charles S. Robb, who was Bill Clinton's patron in Washington during the 1980's,
does not. And while Mr. Maraniss speculates in several places about where Mr.
Clinton's sexual attitudes originated, he makes only passing reference to the
origin of his extraordinarily liberal views on race.

My own preference would have been for a book like Mr. Wills's, one that
attempted to frame the President's early life within an explicit estimate of his
Presidency. Sure, it is almost impossible to do that, but Mr. Maraniss, who
seems to know more about the President than virtually anyone except Mr. Clinton
himself, was certainly the person from the press to make the effort. He might
have written a quiet failure for the discard bins, but he might also have
produced a lasting contribution to our political understanding.

NAME: Bill Clinton

LOAD-DATE: March 19, 1995

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo: Bill Clinton as a student at Oxford University. (BROOKE
SHEARER/FROM "FIRST IN HIS CLASS")

TYPE: Biography; Review

                   Copyright 1995 The New York Times Company

                              196 of 211 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                  March 20, 1995, Monday, Late Edition - Final

INTERNATIONAL BUSINESS;
Colombia Becoming an Oil Power in Spite of Itself

BYLINE: By JAMES BROOKE

SECTION: Section D;  Page 2;  Column 1;  Business/Financial Desk

LENGTH: 1021 words

DATELINE: TAURAMENA, Colombia


Once defined by creeks and cow paths, the arid landscape of the Andean foothills
here is now marked by helicopters, drilling rigs and the cowboy boots of
American oilmen.

Foreign oil companies are drilling three miles down, tapping into a sea of
low-sulfur crude oil capable of making Colombia a major oil supplier to the
United States.

"The U.S. could import 10 percent of its oil from Colombia by the end of this
decade," said Thomas G. Finck, president of the Triton Energy Corporation of
Dallas, who flew here last month for the inauguration of a $300 million
oil-processing operation. The tanker trip from Colombia's Caribbean oil port to
refineries in Texas and Louisiana takes four days.

With production in the United States at its lowest level in four decades, the
emergence of a nearby source of clean-burning oil is increasingly important for
Americans. Last year, imports accounted for more than half of American oil
consumption. And United States oil companies now account for 11 of the 18
largest foreign oil concerns operating in this country.

Only a decade ago, Colombia was an importer of oil. Today, it is Latin America's
third-largest exporter to the United States, after Venezuela and Mexico. With
most of Colombia's known oil reserves having been discovered by private
companies, private investment will be essential both to maintain future exports
and to explore the two-thirds of the country not yet explored for oil.

But in recent years, foreign oil companies have shied away from Colombia because
of heavy taxes. The Government has therefore begun to bear more of the cost of
oil exploration and development. At the same time, it is planning a series of
tax breaks.

And it has attracted the largest oil investment in the country's history. The
British Petroleum Exploration Company, with financial assistance from three
partners -- Triton of Texas, Total of France and Ecopetrol, Colombia's state oil
company -- is undertaking a $7 billion development in Cusiana and Cupiagua, two
huge fields near here, about 90 miles northeast of Bogota, the capital.

The oilfields, which cover a thinly populated area the size of Connecticut, hold
2.1 billion barrels in proven oil and gas reserves. Ecopetrol announced late
last month that probable and possible oil and gas reserves in the area totaled a
further 3.9 billion barrels.

Helped by the oil investments, Colombia's economy is expected to grow 5 percent
this year, the same rate as in the last two years. At the fields here, the
largest confirmed in Colombia, oil production is expected to increase to 185,000
barrels a day by the end of this year from 90,000 barrels a day at present, and
to 500,000 barrels a day by the end of 1997.

Colombia also offers other energy opportunities to Western companies. After
British Petroleum announced the discovery of five trillion cubic feet of gas
near the oilfields here last August, the Government began a $3 billion program
to pipe gas to all urban households by 1997. The new find, equivalent to a
billion barrels of oil, doubled Colombia's proven gas reserves.

Centragas, an affiliate of the Enron Corporation of Houston, is building a $217
million, 357-mile natural gas pipeline. Fluor Daniel, another United States
company, is part of an international consortium that has won a $310 million
contract to build a second 215-mile-long branch of a national gas-pipeline
network.

Still, the high cost of doing business in Colombia dampens interest in oil
exploration. According to Byron E. Grote, Latin America director for British
Petroleum, the Colombian Government takes up to 90 percent of the value of each
barrel pumped here by his company. The Government's revenue comes from
Ecopetrol's production-sharing agreements and from corporate-income and other
taxes.

The Colombian Oil Association, which represents 18 major Western companies, in a
recent study of foreign investments, concluded that Colombia "is not
internationally competitive to attract risk investments."

Since 1988, seismic studies conducted by private oil companies in Colombia have
dropped by about two-thirds. The number of wildcat exploratory wells drilled has
also dropped, to about a dozen last year from 52 in 1988.

The disillusion of many foreigners with Colombia's oil conditions became clear
last July when Colombia held its first auction of exploration lots. The Mines
and Energy Ministry invited 150 companies to take part. Only three companies,
all of them already operating in Colombia, submitted bids. Nowadays, the
republics of the former Soviet Union as well as China, Vietnam and Cuba are all
open to foreign oil exploration.

Colombia's President, Ernesto Samper Pizano, seems to be listening to the oil
companies' complaints. He plans to submit to the nation's Congress a bill that
would exempt new oil operations from a so-called war tax of $1 a barrel on
production. The tax, enacted in 1992, helps pay for the army's defense of oil
operations -- favorite targets of Colombia's leftist rural guerrillas, who
demand nationalization of the oil industry and more spending for social programs
in areas where oil is produced.

Last month, the Government announced that Ecopetrol would also pay more of the
exploration costs incurred by its private partners. Ismael Enrique Arenas, an
Ecopetrol vice president, said foreign companies are now negotiating for about
10 exploration and production lots.

The test of the new operating environment will come this summer, when Ecopetrol
is to hold Colombia's second international auction of exploration lots.

Oil executives who visited the remote processing facility here were divided
about the effects of the new measures.

"It is definitely a move in the right direction," said Steven Sparks, general
manager of the Colombian subsidiary of Helmerich & Payne, an Oklahoma drilling
company.

But the president of a major Western oil company operating here was cautious,
saying: "The Government wants the oil money for social development. The war tax
is being eliminated, but a new finance minister could come along with something
new."

LOAD-DATE: March 20, 1995

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo: Workers monitoring operations at the Cusiana oil complex in
Colombia, one of two northeast of Bogota, where British Petroleum, with the aid
of three partners, is undertaking a $7 billion development. (Timothy Ross for
The New York Times)

Map of Colombia showing location of Tauramena.

                   Copyright 1995 The New York Times Company

                              197 of 211 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                  March 20, 1995, Monday, Late Edition - Final

Essay;
Clinton Ups Welfare

BYLINE: By WILLIAM SAFIRE

SECTION: Section A;  Page 17;  Column 5;  Editorial Desk

LENGTH: 706 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON


With veterans' hospitals emptying and the vet population declining;

With V.A. nursing homes costing the taxpayer twice as much as comparable
community facilities;

With V.A. disability payments going to drug addicts to help them continue to buy
illicit drugs;

With a V.A. surgeon providing a penile implant, at a taxpayer cost of $5,800, to
a convicted child molester;

With all this, a few courageous Republicans out to save taxpayers $17 billion
this year dared to hold back $200 million for veterans-only clinics.

What happened? Bill Clinton, famous avoider of military service, went all out
enlisting in the legion of panderers to the veterans lobby.

"The White House doors have been open to veterans as never before," he assured
the Veterans of Foreign Wars, though 96 percent of the males on his White House
staff have never worn a uniform.

That hypocrisy bothers John Wheeler, who was for a decade chairman of the
Vietnam Veterans Memorial Fund: "Clinton wants the vets to be victims, not
partners, and is trying to make money equal acceptance and respect."

To buy the lobby's support, Mr. Clinton told the V.F.W.: "Our Administration is
pushing for 1.3 billion more for the Department of Veterans Affairs over the
next five years."

"We have consistently looked to veterans," Clinton said, "to help shape our
policy for veterans." His confessed sellout to a pressure group, made as a
boast, was true: his Vet Secretary is a former vet lobbyist.

Secretary Jesse Brown told the same audience: "Just last month, William Safire
called for the elimination of V.A. hospitals. He calls veterans' programs a
'sacred cow.' Excuse me, Mr. Safire, but you have got a cow mixed up with a lot
of bull." Big laugh.

"Mr. Safire refers to me as a 'lobby fox in the hen house.' . . . I say to you,
the head of V.A. should always be an advocate! He should be a lobby fox. I am
your lobby fox. And I am proud of it!"

Then this combat hero blazed away with suppressing fire: "Who are these people
attacking veterans programs? Have they served in the military?" Mr. Clinton and
96 percent of his profoundly civilian male staff might have winced at that, but
Secretary Brown charged ahead at critics: "I do not think they have the right to
pass judgment . . . they should do the right thing and simply step aside."

Under this new credential requirement, only welfare mothers can criticize
welfare. Only educrats can suggest ending free lunches to children of the rich.
And only veterans can call for replacement of a third-rate Federal hospital
bureaucracy with a voucher system to enable deserving vets to buy private care.

Applying Clinton's criterion, I have standing: a draftee in 1952, two years in
the U.S. Army. Rose to corporal; never heard a shot fired in anger.

Most of us veterans never claimed that every ailment we suffered since was
"service-connected"; nor did we rip off our fellow taxpayers for "disability"
checks while able to work full time; nor did we take advantage of the Federal
largess and job preference that the pressure groupies won. We're citizens first
and veterans second, not professional lobbyists whipping up victimhood.

Brandishing this unheroic credential now deemed essential, let me return to Mr.
Clinton's pandering:

House Republicans, spooked by the President's vote-purchasing speech, refused to
be out-veteraned. They coughed up all the money demanded by the vet-lobby's
highwaymen.

But then, to get even, G.O.P. budget-cutters took the same $200 million out of
Americorps, the subsidized voluntarism that is the Clintonites' favorite
boondoggle. Mr. Clinton countered by threatening to veto the whole rescission
bill.

The upshot: of the $17 billion that the Republicans want to save this year,
Clinton will block the rescission of all but $6 billion.

Why will he permit that $6 billion to be saved? Because that is how much
additional spending is needed for earthquake relief in California. Combined
saving: zero. With Gov. Pete Wilson's competition looming, Mr. Clinton will cut
almost anything to come up with money for California.

But not welfare for veterans. That most sacred cow causes politicians to tremble
and dulls the impetus to prick the balloon of spending.

LOAD-DATE: March 20, 1995

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Op-Ed

                   Copyright 1995 The New York Times Company

                              198 of 211 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 March 21, 1995, Tuesday, Late Edition - Final

Cambodia Asks U.N. to Close Office Protecting Human Rights

BYLINE: By BARBARA CROSSETTE

SECTION: Section A;  Page 7;  Column 1;  Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 573 words

DATELINE: UNITED NATIONS, March 20


The Cambodian Government is asking the United Nations to close its human rights
center in Phnom Penh, one of the first field offices of its kind.

Cambodia said that constitutional guarantees to insure human rights are now in
place, and that United Nations monitors would be welcome to visit the country at
any time. International human rights organizations call the decision premature
in a country where a weakened coalition Government has been accused of
retreating on democratic pledges and a fledgling free press is under growing
pressure.

"There is a fear that if the U.N. office is removed, that will clear the way for
the Government to continue to crack down on the press and possibly the
indigenous Cambodian human rights groups," said David Hawke, director of the
independent Cambodia Documentation Center in New York.

In addition, little progress has been made in accounting for responsibility in
the deaths of hundreds of thousands of Cambodians during the Pol Pot era from
1975 to 1978. The Khmer Rouge, still believed to be led by Pol Pot, remain a
force on the fringes of the country.

Mr. Hawke, who recently returned from Cambodia, said that the human rights
center in Phnom Penh had been doing "a terrific job" and was seen as a protector
of Cambodian organizations. Mr. Hawke said that the request to close the office
came just as Cambodia's Parliament is debating laws regarding the press and the
right of association.

The Cambodian request, first made in a letter to Secretary General Boutros
Boutros-Ghali last month, was discussed today in a meeting between the Secretary
General and Hun Sen, the junior of two Prime Ministers who jointly head the
Cambodian Government. Mr. Hun Sen was a member of the Khmer Rouge until he
defected to the Vietnamese and returned in 1978 to head a Hanoi-backed Communist
Government that also was charged with abuses.

After the meeting with Mr. Hun Sen, the Secretary General said that he would
send an envoy to Cambodia to discuss the closing of the center.

Cambodia's senior Prime Minister, Prince Norodom Ranariddh, a son of King
Norodom Sihanouk and the head of the royalist party, also signed the February
letter, which said that the Government had made significant progress in
protecting rights and that the presence of a United Nations center makes the
world think "that the situation in Cambodia is still in crisis."

The Phnom Penh center, linked to the United Nations Center for Human Rights in
Geneva, was established by a General Assembly resolution in 1993 not only to
support new local watchdog groups but also to train government officials in
drafting laws on human and civil rights.

"The request by the Kingdom of Cambodia reflects its discomfiture with
international attention to abuses by its own officials," Sidney Jones, the
executive director of Human Rights Watch/Asia, said in a statement today.

The organization published a report on March 13 documenting secret Government
detention centers and instances of reprisal against the press. In general, the
human rights situation in Cambodia is deteriorating, Human Rights Watch said.

Mr. Hawke said that the Phnom Penh center should be kept open as a model for
United Nations democracy-building experiments. He said that the new Constitution
says that human rights should defer to the laws of the land and that laws now
being written stray from Cambodia's international human rights commitments.

LOAD-DATE: March 21, 1995

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1995 The New York Times Company

                              199 of 211 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                March 22, 1995, Wednesday, Late Edition - Final

Conservatives Revive Bill on Protecting Flag

BYLINE: By KATHARINE Q. SEELYE

SECTION: Section A;  Page 16;  Column 4;  National Desk

LENGTH: 504 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, March 21


With new-found confidence, some of the staunchest conservatives on Capitol Hill
today reintroduced a proposal to amend the Constitution to protect the American
flag from desecration and said they expected the measure to pass.

A similar effort failed five years ago, but the measure now enjoys broader
bipartisan support, including that of some Senate Democrats known for their more
liberal stances. Among them is Dianne Feinstein of California, who was not in
the Senate when the measure was first considered.

At a bipartisan news conference here today, Senators Orrin G. Hatch, Republican
of Utah; Strom Thurmond, Republican of South Carolina, and Howell Heflin,
Democrat of Alabama, said the atmosphere on Capitol Hill had changed enough
since 1990 that a flag-protection measure could probably pass.

"We want to ban offensive conduct," Mr. Hatch said.

The Senators said the flag was a unique symbol of American freedom that unified
the country. And as long as it was illegal to desecrate Federal currency and
Federal property, they said, it should also be a crime to desecrate the flag.
Under the proposed amendment, the states would set the penalties.

Senators Hatch and Heflin, who introduced the amendment, said they had 43
co-sponsors in the Senate, including 7 Democrats. They need 67 votes, or
two-thirds of the Senate, to pass a Constitutional amendment.

A similar proposal was introduced today in the House by Representatives Gerald
B. H. Solomon, Republican of upstate New York, and G. V. (Sonny) Montgomery,
Democrat of Mississippi, with 247 co-sponsors. They need 290 votes to pass the
measure.

If approved in both houses, the proposed amendment would go to the states for
ratification. Forty-six state legislatures, more than the 38 needed for
ratification, have already passed resolutions urging Congress to pass a measure
protecting the flag.

Although the amendment was introduced today, Mr. Hatch said that it might not
come up for a vote until the 1996 elections draw nearer, when lawmakers might
feel more pressure from voting blocs like veterans' groups to support it.

The amendment is certain to prompt a fierce debate in both houses. Senator Bob
Kerrey, a Nebraska Democrat who won the Medal of Honor in Vietnam, led the
opposition five years ago and vowed today to repeat that role. He said there was
even less reason to pass such an amendment now than in 1990, when a flag-burning
incident inspired the push.

"The fabric of America is not threatened by flag burners," Mr. Kerrey said.
"There's such a strong natural condemnation of people who burn flags that people
don't burn flags."

Nonetheless, he conceded, supporters "may have a better chance of passing it
today."

"It saddens me that that is the case," Mr. Kerrey said. "It's a serious
constitutional error, and I regret it's being pushed."

Senator Feinstein supported a flag-protection amendment during her unsuccessful
campaign for California governor in 1990, and in a statement today, she restated
that support.


LOAD-DATE: March 22, 1995

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo: Citing a new political atmosphere, conservatives announced
yesterday their revival of a bill to protect the flag. Attending the news
conference in Washington were, from left, Representative Gerald B. H. Solomon of
New York; Senator Orrin G. Hatch of Utah; Representative G. V. (Sonny)
Montgomery of Mississippi, and Senator Strom Thurmond of South Carolina. Mr.
Montgomery was the only Democrat. (Stephen Crowley/The New York Times)

                   Copyright 1995 The New York Times Company

                              200 of 211 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                  March 24, 1995, Friday, Late Edition - Final

Art in Review

BYLINE: By CHARLES HAGEN

SECTION: Section C;  Page 27;  Column 4;  Weekend Desk

LENGTH: 245 words



Lois Conner
 Laurence Miller Gallery
 138 Spring Street
 SoHo
 Through April 15

Scenes in Vietnam and Cambodia, photographed with a panoramic camera and
painstakingly printed in the pale tones of the platinum process, take on an
antique air in Lois Conner's elegant images. Ms. Conner demonstrates once again
her ability to make graceful compositions with a distinctive approach.

But the pictures take on greater interest when she ups the ante. In several
works here she prints together as many as seven vertical panoramas of a single
view, making a composite image that seems to encompass an entire scene. One such
tour de force shows a street in Hanoi, seen from a second-story vantage point.
Tangled wires meander toward a telephone pole on the opposite side of the
street, echoing tree limbs that twist above street vendors.

Photographs of ruined temples in Cambodia, both single panoramic images and
composites, are particularly commanding. In a five-part composite of Angkor Wat,
the mottled texture of giant stone heads and the jagged space of a desolate
temple combine to suggest the eerie beauty of the place.

Closeups of worn bas relief sculptures have the eloquent evocativeness of
19th-century survey photographs. By relying on old-fashioned equipment and
antique processes, Ms. Conner runs the risk of having her pictures seem precious
or nostalgic. But here she manages more often than not to avoid that danger.
CHARLES HAGEN

LOAD-DATE: March 24, 1995

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Review

                   Copyright 1995 The New York Times Company

                              201 of 211 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 March 25, 1995, Saturday, Late Edition - Final

No Dearth of Bombers

SECTION: Section 1;  Page 22;  Column 1;  Editorial Desk

LENGTH: 384 words


While most of Congress is looking for ways to shrink the budget deficit, some
members have uncovered a bomber gap and prefer to close that instead. They want
to build as many as 40 more B-2 stealth bombers -- at over $1 billion a plane --
bringing the total number of B-2's to 60.

The Pentagon is right to halt production after 20 B-2's. It has an unlikely ally
in Senator John McCain, a combat pilot in Vietnam, who is trying to stop this
bomber raid on the treasury.

The Pentagon already has enough planes to wage two regional wars at once, the
excessive requirement it has set itself. In addition to B-2's, it already has at
least 47 B-52 and 95 B-1 bombers. It also has over 3,000 fighter planes, like
the F-117, the F-111 and the F-15E, which can bomb airfields, air defenses,
communication nodes and other fixed targets on the ground and are better able to
attack tank columns on the move.

The B-2 was once sold as a way to launch nuclear strikes against the Soviet
Union. Now it is being billed as a conventional bomber. Its devotees say that
the B-2 can carry a large payload, allowing it to deliver a knockout blow in the
opening round of a war. They also say its long range allows it to reach targets
from bases far from the battlefield.

But the Pentagon can, at a fraction of the B-2's cost, equip its fighter-bombers
with precision-guided bombs whose accuracy compensates for any loss in
firepower. Of course the B-2 can also be armed with precision-guided bombs or
cruise missiles, allowing it to attack at a distance. Yet turning on its radars
to pinpoint targets could reveal its position, nullifying its stealthiness.

Fighter-bombers can be refueled in midair, increasing their range and allowing
them to respond rapidly to distant dangers. Buying more tanker planes, at $150
million apiece, could assure the needed number of sorties.

The critical bottleneck in sustaining rapid rates of bombing against urgent
targets is not the size of a plane's payload but reloading and refueling
capacity. Spending a few billion dollars to buy more transport planes to
position supplies of bombs and fuel near likely trouble spots would be a lot
cheaper than buying more B-2's. If the Pentagon suffers from any gap, it is in
supplies to make bombing effective, not bombers.



LOAD-DATE: March 25, 1995

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Editorial

                   Copyright 1995 The New York Times Company

                              202 of 211 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                  March 26, 1995, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

BEST SELLERS: March 26, 1995

SECTION: Section 7; Page 30; Column 2; Book Review Desk

LENGTH: 1477 words



          Weeks
This Last    On
Week Week  List Fiction

 1      1  56   THE CELESTINE PROPHECY, by James Redfield. (Warner, $17.95.) An
                ancient manuscript, found in Peru, provides insights into
                achieving a fulfilling life.

 2      2   5   BORDER MUSIC, by Robert James Waller. (Warner, $17.95.) A Texas
                rancher, trying to erase his Vietnam trauma, takes to the road
                with an exotic dancer.

 3      3  40   POLITICALLY CORRECT BEDTIME STORIES, by James Finn Garner.
                (Macmillan, $8.95.) Classic tales respun to avoid offending
                current sensibilities.

 4      5   2   OUR GAME, by John le Carre. (Knopf, $24.) Espionage, larceny
                and murder in Eastern and Western Europe in the post-cold war
                era.

 5      4   7   ORIGINAL SIN, by P.D. James. (Knopf, $24.) Adam Dalgliesh
                probes a case involving intrigue, malice and murder in a
                prestigious London publishing house.

 6      6   6   DAISY-HEAD MAYZIE, by Dr. Seuss. (Random House, $15.) In words
                and pictures, the story of a girl whose head unexpectedly
                sprouts a daisy.

 7     11  137  THE BRIDGES OF MADISON COUNTY, by Robert James Waller. (Warner,
                $16.95.) A photographer and a farmer's lonely wife in Iowa.

 8          3   THE JUROR, by George Dawes Green. (Warner, $21.95.) A woman's
                life takes a fearful turn when she is chosen as a juror for a
                mob trial.

 9          1   PHENOMENAL WOMAN, by Maya Angelou. (Random House, $10.) Four
                poems celebrating women.

 10*    7   3   THE GLASS LAKE, by Maeve Binchy. (Delacorte, $23.95.) The
                unspoken ties that bind a woman and her mother in a small Irish
                town.

 11     8  10   KISS THE GIRLS, by James Patterson. (Little, Brown, $22.95.)
                The police detective Alex Cross pursues a serial killer and the
                kidnapper of his niece.

 12         1   MCNALLY'S TRIAL, by Lawrence Sanders. (Putnam, $23.95.) Archy
                McNally uncovers the criminal operation responsible for
                extraordinary profits made by a Palm Beach funeral home.

 13     9   5   THE CAT WHO BLEW THE WHISTLE, by Lilian Jackson Braun. (Putnam,
                $21.95.) Aided by his two cats, Jim Qwilleran investigates
                embezzlement and a murder.

 14    14   3   ROGUE WARRIOR: GREEN TEAM, by Richard Marcinko and John
                Weisman. (Pocket, $23.) Navy Seals contend with a violent
                religious movement.

 15    15   4   THE CUNNING MAN, by Robertson Davies. (Viking, $23.95.) A
                doctor uses shamanism and Platonism as well as scientific
                medicine in his practice.

          Weeks
This Last    On
Week Week  List Nonfiction

 1      1   2   BREAKING THE SURFACE, by Greg Louganis with Eric Marcus.
                (Random House, $23.) The memoirs of the former Olympic diving
                champion.

 2      2  24   THE HOT ZONE, by Richard Preston. (Random House, $23.) The
                discovery of a lethal virus, more infectious than H.I.V., and
                the efforts to keep it from spreading.

 3      3  13   SISTERS, by Carol Saline. Photographs by Sharon J. Wohlmuth.
                (Running Press, $27.50.) The relationships of 36 sets of
                sisters, reported in words and pictures.

 4      4   6   THE DEATH OF COMMON SENSE, by Philip K. Howard. (Random House,
                $18.) How governmental rules and regulations are fettering the
                lives of all Americans.

 5      5   7   I WANT TO TELL YOU, by O.J. Simpson. (Little, Brown, $17.95.)
                The former football star, now on trial for murder, responds to
                letters he has received.

 6      6   2   AN ANTHROPOLOGIST ON MARS, by Oliver Sacks. (Knopf, $24.) Seven
                tales about people who compensated for their neurological
                afflictions by constructing worlds of their own.

 7      7  55   MIDNIGHT IN THE GARDEN OF GOOD AND EVIL, by John Berendt.
                (Random House, $23.) The mysterious death of a young man in
                Savannah, Ga.

 8      9   5   THE DISCIPLINE OF MARKET LEADERS, by Michael Treacy and Fred
                Wiersema. (Addison-Wesley, $25.) A discussion of competitive
                business strategies.

 9      8  29   COUPLEHOOD, by Paul Reiser. (Bantam, $19.95.) Essays on the ups
                and downs of marriage by the television star and stand-up
                comedian.

 10    11   9   INSIDE THE WHITE HOUSE, by Ronald Kessler. (Pocket, $23.)
                Anecdotes about events at 1600 Pennsylvania Avenue during the
                past 30 years.

 11        12   NICOLE BROWN SIMPSON, by Faye D. Resnick with Mike Walker.
                (Dove Books, $14.95.) The former wife of O.J. Simpson as
                remembered by a friend.

 12    10   7   RAGING HEART, by Sheila Weller. (Pocket, $18.) An account of
                the marriage of O.J. and Nicole Simpson.

 13    13  66   THE BOOK OF VIRTUES, by William J. Bennett. (Simon & Schuster,
                $30.) Moral stories adapted from the Greeks, the Bible,
                folklore and elsewhere.

 14    12  17   THE WARREN BUFFETT WAY, by Robert G. Hagstrom Jr. (Wiley,
                $24.95.) An account of the career of the man said to be the
                world's most successful investor.

 15    15   2   BEING DIGITAL, by Nicholas Negroponte. (Knopf, $23.) A
                discussion of ways computers will change our lives in the
                future.

          Weeks
This Last    On
Week Week  List Advice, How-to and Miscellaneous

 1      1  96   MEN ARE FROM MARS, WOMEN ARE FROM VENUS, by John Gray.
                (HarperCollins, $23.) Communicating.

 2      2   6   THE BEARDSTOWN LADIES' COMMON-SENSE INVESTMENT GUIDE.
                (Godin/Hyperion, $19.95.) Tips for successful investing from 16
                Illinois women.

 3      3  48   IN THE KITCHEN WITH ROSIE, by Rosie Daley. (Knopf, $14.95.)
                Recipes by Oprah Winfrey's cook.

 4      4   2   THE SEVEN SPIRITUAL LAWS OF SUCCESS, by Deepak Chopra.
                (Amber-Allen/New World Library, $12.95.) How to "generate
                wealth in all its forms."


Rankings reflect sales figures, for the week ending March 11, at 3,050
bookstores plus wholesalers serving 28,000 other retailers (gift shops,
department stores, newsstands, supermarkets), statistically weighted to
represent sales in all such outlets nationwide. An asterisk indicates that a
book's sales are barely distinguishable from those of the book above.
And Bear in Mind
(Editor's Choices of other recent books of particular interest)

DREAMING: Hard Luck and Good Times in America, by Carolyn See. (Random House,
$23.) The novelist's memoir of her family revels in a woman's point of view as
it paints a portrait of drugs, drink and freedom set in California.

IN LOVE WITH DAYLIGHT: A Memoir of Recovery, by Wilfrid Sheed. (Simon &
Schuster, $23.) This writer's account of his battles with alcohol, drugs and
cancer is grim, but it's told with whimsical wisdom and good-natured resolve.

MOVING HOUSE: Stories, by Pawel Huelle. (Helen and Kurt Wolff/Harcourt Brace,
$18.95.) These tales by a Polish writer turn on the longings and workings of
memory in Gdansk.

THE NEW VICTORIANS: A Young Woman's Challenge to the Old Feminist Order, by Rene
Denfeld. (Warner, $21.95.) The author, who is 28, contends that established
feminism, like its suffragist predecessor, has abandoned the quest for equal
status and turned to bashing male vices.

NEW YORK 1960: Architecture and Urbanism Between the Second World War and the
Bicentennial, by Robert A.M. Stern, Thomas Mellins and David Fishman.
(Monacelli/Penguin, $125.) A huge book that examines the city's development as
the world capital of finance and art, and the disputes and decisions that
directed it; with extensive local descriptions.

SEEING THE UNSEEN: Dr. Harold E. Edgerton and the Wonders of Strobe Alley,
edited by Roger R. Bruce. (George Eastman House/MIT, $39.95.) Edgerton's amazing
work in high-speed photography; a CD-ROM comes with it.

SIX MYTHS OF OUR TIME: Little Angels, Little Monsters, Beautiful Beasts, and
More, by Marina Warner. (Vintage, paper, $10.) Humorous, urgent essays on how
myth and fiction enshrine and fix categories like the moral condition of
children.

TERRIBLE HONESTY: Mongrel Manhattan in the 1920s, by Ann Douglas. (Farrar,
Straus & Giroux, $25.) New York analyzed as the locus of the national psyche
when Americans attacked the conditioned responses of the pre-1914 world.

TOMORROW IS ANOTHER COUNTRY: The Inside Story of South Africa's Road to Change,
by Allister Sparks. (Hill & Wang, $22.) A South African journalist's fast-paced,
gripping account of the process that led to the end of apartheid.

TOM PAINE: A Political Life, by John Keane. (Little, Brown, $27.95.) A good
introduction to a difficult, often unlovable character and a highly effective
propagandist of revolution.

THE TUNNEL, by William H. Gass. (Knopf, $30.) This sprawling novel (652 pages)
by an American master is all spun out of the head of its monstrous protagonist,
a language-driven professor of fascist views who is as dreadful as he is
plausible.

A VOID, by Georges Perec. (Harvill/HarperCollins, $24.) The letter E never
occurs in this 1969 French novel or in its translation by Gilbert Adair; what
does occur is a wildly amusing feast of puzzles, mind games and rules broken
just to exhibit their latent existence.

LOAD-DATE: March 26, 1995

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: List

                   Copyright 1995 The New York Times Company

                              203 of 211 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                  March 26, 1995, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

Spies & Thrillers

BYLINE: By Newgate Callendar

SECTION: Section 7;  Page 27;  Column 2;  Book Review Desk

LENGTH: 798 words


The hero of James Thayer's absorbing new novel, WHITE STAR (Simon & Schuster,
$22), is a former Marine sniper named Owen Gray. Gray was America's best shot in
Vietnam. Now he is an assistant district attorney in New York. He is divorced
and lives with three adopted children, twin Korean girls and a Vietnamese boy.

He loses a big case against a gangster. Immediately after the trial, the
gangster, with Gray standing near him, is talking to the press when he is killed
by a sniper's bullet. The police ask Gray to help in the investigation. He is
able to pinpoint the room that the sniper used. But there are no other clues.

The sniper's rampage continues. Anyone standing near Gray has a chance of being
assassinated. The carnage is a message meant for Gray: the sniper is challenging
him to a duel. He thinks he is better than Gray, and he is going to keep killing
unless his demand is met. And so the duel eventually takes place, in the Idaho
wilds where Owen Gray grew up.

The gripping story is complemented by Mr. Thayer's interesting analysis of the
reflexes and instincts required for long-range shooting. More important, his
writing is smooth and clear. Deceptively simple, it wastes no words, and it has
a rhythm that only confident stylists achieve. As a writer, James Thayer has
come an astonishingly long way since his 1988 novel, "Ringer."

The difference between "White Star" and your run-of-the-mill thriller is
highlighted by a novel like STORME FRONT, by W. L. Ripley (Holt, $22.50). It is
professional enough, but it displays a more conventional mind at work. Like so
many other books in the genre, it seems like a clone.

Wyatt Storme, a Vietnam veteran and a former professional football star, is
hired as a bodyguard for a sleazy operator who is part of an illegal gun deal.
Storme takes the assignment because he is worried that his best friend may be
involved. He enlists the aid of an old Army buddy named Chick Easton. Robert B.
Parker's Spenser and his sidekick, Hawk, come to mind. Those two know how to get
things done. So do Storme and Chick.

There is plenty of action, but the writing is heavy and mannered. Storme and
Chick are great kidders, and the dialogue is on the same level as the repartee
between Hawkeye and B. J. in "M*A*S*H." Mr. Ripley, whose first Wyatt Storme
novel was entitled "Dreamsicle," comes up with passages like this one: "The
residue of death clings to you long after the fact. I could still see the man
reaching for his gun. Still feel the triggers tripping on the sawed-off. The
sudden stillness, the finality of death. It reaches into your nostrils, into the
back of your brain. Invades your dreams. Your peace."

ROGUE WARRIOR: GREEN TEAM, by Richard Marcinko and John Weisman (Pocket Books,
$23), is another thriller with so much action that the reader scarcely has time
to breathe. It is a sequel to Mr. Marcinko's best-selling autobiography, "Rogue
Warrior," and the novel "Rogue Warrior II: Red Cell," which describe his
exploits as the commander of a group of Navy Seals.

The fictional Dick Marcinko is indeed a rogue -- big, tough and lethal. He
breaks every rule in the book, ignoring his superiors in the process. Marcinko
has nothing but contempt for the Navy brass, especially desk-jockey admirals.
The plot of the new novel concerns terrorists and an Arab threat to the Western
world. The difference between this book and "Storme Front" is that "Rogue
Warrior: Green Team" doesn't take itself seriously. In its bloody way, it is all
innocent fun.

James W. Hall's GONE WILD (Delacorte, $21.95) is an intriguing and rather
unusual book. It deals with endangered species. Studying orangutans in the
jungles of Borneo, an American woman sees her daughter shot to death by
poachers. She resolves to avenge her child's death and seeks help from Thorn,
the hero of Mr. Hall's novels "Mean High Tide," "Tropical Freeze" and "Under
Cover of Daylight."

Thus "Gone Wild" is a fervent plea for the preservation of all endangered
species, as well as a pretty good suspense novel. It features two vile,
memorable killers, and the plotting is carefully organized, with a few surprises
along the way.

Mr. Hall also presents a searing view of scientists who use torture in research
work with primates. Here is a professor who is studying pain levels: "Using the
jackhammer, he would slam the piston at very precisely controlled impact levels
against joints, soft tissues, cranial pressure points. Strike the animals,
measure damage, short- and long-term recuperation, measure biological reactions.
. . . Try to keep the strikes just below lethal pounds-per-square-inch dosages.
Barring accidents, there was every likelihood that the professor could keep his
primates alive for several more years of useful research."

LOAD-DATE: March 26, 1995

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Review

                   Copyright 1995 The New York Times Company

                              204 of 211 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                  March 26, 1995, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

The World;
Call It Aid or a Bribe, It's the Price of Peace

BYLINE: By ELAINE SCIOLINO

SECTION: Section 4;  Page 3;  Column 1;  Week in Review Desk

LENGTH: 1245 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON


AT the height of the cold war, Hans Morgenthau, the political theorist and
champion of Realpolitik, identified the three tools of the statesman as logic,
bribes and threats.

Those may have been the power tools of his time, but no more. And the
consequences are enormous. The United States has been left with immense power,
but it doesn't quite know how to use it. Again and again, it seems unable to
focus its authority and lead others toward a solution for the problems of the
day.

Logic is not an easy tool to use in foreign policy now, because a shared
ideology no longer unites the United States and its allies against a common
adversary. Even a realist like former Secretary of State Henry A. Kissinger is
at a loss to describe the world in a comprehensive way. He told a conference in
Washington recently: "It's probably not possible to have one overarching
concept."

Threats of military intervention are less meaningful, too, because Americans
have no stomach to sacrifice lives for what they think are lost causes rather
than vital interests. And because the Pentagon resists mounting any military
operation except with massive force, the price is usually too high.

The 1991 gulf war aside (price tag: $61 billion), other figures prove the point.
Saddam Hussein cost the United States and its Persian Gulf allies $500 million
in a military buildup simply by moving some of his remaining troops and tanks to
southern Iraq last fall. The Pentagon estimates that a NATO operation to protect
a withdrawal of the 40,000 United Nations peacekeepers from Bosnia and Croatia
would cost more than $1.5 billion, with the United States footing one-third to
one-half of the bill.




Easy Bribes

That leaves bribes as the easiest and most cost-effective way to change behavior
and make peace. The irony is that at a time when peace is a bargain and a little
money goes quite a long way, there is a global disinclination to spend. Budget
constraints and the absence of a clearly identifiable threat make it harder to
argue that investing in peace -- grants, loans and credits -- is an investment
in security at a fraction of the price of war. Secretary of State Warren
Christopher made that point in briefing President Clinton on this year's foreign
aid budget request. His slide show included graphs that pointed out that it cost
$215 million in 1993 to help pay for peacekeepers, elections and economic
development in Cambodia, compared to $940 million for one week of war in Vietnam
in 1968.




Bad Investments

Of course, investing money in a place in hopes of peace doesn't always work. The
United States spent $390 million in development investments in Somalia over
three decades, only to be faced with almost $2 billion in costs for a 16-month
emergency operation.

Still, countries and movements that have taken risks for peace want the answer
to a basic question: If peace is so much cheaper than war, where's the payoff?

"There are neither the threats nor the ideology to mobilize people," said
Stanley Hoffmann, chairman of the Center for European Studies at Harvard
University. "So there are some bribes, but with very little money. That means
there is no way you can assure a foreign leader, 'I have it in my pocket.' It
limits your room for maneuver considerably."

Take the case of Jordan. Had King Hussein followed Egypt's lead and made peace
with Israel in 1979, he would not be in the humiliating position he finds
himself in today. He is keenly aware that the United States, as part of the deal
struck at Camp David, has since spent well over $75 billion in aid on Egypt and
Israel; and even in today's slash-and-burn climate, their annual $5.1 billion in
American aid -- nearly 40 percent of the entire aid budget -- is considered
politically untouchable by the Congress (at least for now).

So the King didn't seem to be asking for much in exchange for a peace treaty,
just $488 million to pay off Jordan's debt from the United States. President
Clinton promised he would, and delivered almost half last year. ("I'm not going
to offer something that I can't deliver on," he told the King.) But Mr. Clinton
did not push Congress to approve the remaining $275 million needed, and Congress
approved only $50 million. Now the Administration may have to cut most other
countries' aid by 20 percent if the President's promise to the Jordanians is to
be fulfilled.

Yasir Arafat is having similar money woes. The United States spent $100 million
in 1994 and will spend another $100 million this year, hardly enough to build
the housing, public service installations and administration that are sorely
needed in Palestinian-run areas. Still, Washington has done better than many of
its Arab allies. As punishment for Palestinian support for Iraq in the gulf war,
Kuwait has paid Mr. Arafat only $10 million for his fledgling government. The
United Arab Emirates has paid only $5 million and Qatar nothing. The result is
that the World Bank-administered fund to cover Mr. Arafat's operating expenses
is flat broke.




Who Cares?

So what, say many of the Republicans who dominate Congress, where resistance to
underwriting peace in the absence of a threat of war runs deep. Case in point:
the recent decision in the House of Representatives to slash $110 million from
the $160 million the Administration pledged for building housing for Russian
soldiers in exchange for Moscow's troop withdrawal from the Baltics last year.
Since $40 million has already been spent, it would end up costing the United
States more than the remaining $10 million to break the contracts, pay the
lawyers and come home.

"I would invite you to come back to my district in Cincinnati some time, and
perhaps justify paying for housing for former Soviet officers," Representative
Steve Chabot, a freshman Republican from Ohio, snapped at Assistant Secretary
Richard C. Holbrooke when he criticized the move during a recent hearing.

Mr. Holbrooke replied that he would be happy to talk to the people of
Cincinnati, wondering aloud why the Congressman could not understand that, after
spending hundreds of billions of dollars during the cold war, $110 million was a
small investment in peace.

"We say that about everything, do we not?" Mr. Chabot replied. " 'It is only
$110 million, you know.' "

Granted, there are the exceptions. North Korea behaved badly by developing
nuclear weapons; it was paid off with an American-brokered agreement creating an
international consortium to give its government $4 billion in energy aid and
light-water reactors in exchange for freezing and dismantling its nuclear
weapons program. The agreement is in jeopardy not for lack of money, but because
of North Korea's refusal to allow South Korea to build the reactors.

But in most cases, the United States finds itself frustrated in trying to change
the behavior of intractable leaders or reward those who take risks for peace
when there is no possibility of a payoff.

"For most of the postwar period the United States felt it had an obligation to
create a system, and then to insure that it survives," said Charles William
Maynes, the editor of Foreign Policy magazine, who predicted a decade ago that
the ability to use logic, bribes and threats would diminish. "There was a sense
of stewardship, that we had an obligation to protect the system, not just
exploit it. Increasingly, we are exploiting it, and there is no steward left."

LOAD-DATE: March 26, 1995

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo: An American-financed sewer project in Cairo is part of aid Egypt
has received since Camp David. (Associated Press)

                   Copyright 1995 The New York Times Company

                              205 of 211 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                  March 26, 1995, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

Who Put the Lid on gp120?

BYLINE: By Jesse Green;   Jesse Green is a frequent contributor to the Magazine.

SECTION: Section 6;  Page 50;  Column 1;  Magazine Desk

LENGTH: 9276 words


Some 15,000 vials of a colorless, odorless, waterlike liquid are lined up in
trays in a room so cold, so remorselessly quiet, you can't help thinking of it
as a tomb. In a way, it is. Each vial contains a one-milliliter dose of a
product known as gp120, which has cost its manufacturer, Genentech, $100 million
and untold grief. Is gp120, as some scientists believe, a crucial first
approximation of the desperately needed vaccine to prevent AIDS? Or is it, as
others say, nothing more than expensive dishwater? No one knows. Neither
Genentech's product nor a similar vaccine made by Chiron Biocine has yet been
tested enough to tell. So far, no vials have passed through the enormous steel
doors to the loading dock beyond and from there into syringes and into the arms
of the 10,000 volunteers whose bodies alone can answer the question. Instead,
the vials sit and wait, with nothing to interrupt their silence but a workman's
boom box, which suddenly sings out from the loading dock: "Who'll Stop the
Rain?"

The Eureka Moment

"I was in Nigeria for cholera in 1970," Don Francis says fondly, as if recalling
a world's fair. "The Sudan for Ebola virus, Phoenix for hepatitis B, just about
everywhere for smallpox." The resume of his long career with the Centers for
Disease Control reads like an itinerary of miracles. In Africa, India,
Bangladesh, Francis helped eradicate terrible illnesses by the bold application
of vaccine programs. But here in the United States, in his disheveled office at
Genentech's headquarters on San Francisco Bay, miracles keep getting derailed.
To Francis, the company's vaccine evangelist, gp120 represents the best hope yet
of beating AIDS, and he is determined to test it and see. An equally determined
army of opponents is arrayed against him. Perhaps that's why a ceramic figure of
Sheetala Mata, the Indian goddess of smallpox, is sitting on his window ledge,
embracing and supposedly blessing three vials of gp120. "They'll need all the
help they can get," he says.

Francis has been at work on AIDS since before it had a name. In 1981, as the
head of the C.D.C.'s successful vaccine effort against hepatitis B -- which
relied on the cooperation of the gay community -- he was on hand when
inexplicable outbreaks of Kaposi's sarcoma were first reported in the same
population. What happened during the next 11 years still brings the bile of
indignation to his voice. Scraping for money, pounding on tables, writing memos
that were never answered, Francis spent as much time doing politics as science.
Since he surmised that AIDS would prove to be transmissible through blood
products, he begged the blood banks to screen donations; they did not believe
him and infected thousands. Since he saw that gay bathhouses were a major route
of sexual transmission, he begged local boards of health to shut them; an
unlikely alliance of owners and activists kept them open. Francis's enemy, it
turned out, wasn't so much the virus itself as the perverse intransigence of
human nature that gave it room, and time, to maneuver.

Francis's fervor made him the most vivid character in Randy Shilts's book "And
the Band Played On," but it also exaggerated the split in the public's
perception of him. Some called him St. Francis for what they saw as his selfless
crusade; others called him Don Quixote for what they saw as his demented
arrogance. In fact he was becoming an AIDS Cassandra: doomed to be unheeded. In
1985, after his $37 million proposal to control the epidemic through education
and blood testing was ignored in Washington, he transferred to California. In
California, it seemed that scientists were doing something more about AIDS than
just counting bodies. Francis worked briefly with Jonas Salk, who was developing
an AIDS treatment vaccine in San Diego. Unlike traditional vaccines, which
protect healthy people from becoming infected, a treatment vaccine would bolster
the immune systems of people who are already infected, in hopes of slowing the
course of their illness. But as exciting and important as such treatments were,
Francis kept returning to his first love: prevention.

Francis had grown up in Marin County, the dyslexic, hippie child of two doctors;
now, at 52, sitting behind a desk that's angled to catch a glimpse of the
glittering bay, he seems to have come home. Sandy-haired and lanky, with a kind
of rumpled charisma, he bears a very slight resemblance to Matthew Modine, the
actor who played him in the television adaptation of Shilts's book. But the
frivolity of Hollywood is nowhere in evidence. Even a bracelet on his left wrist
turns out to be a moral statement: it has a tiny silver AIDS ribbon on it and is
meant to be worn, like Vietnam bracelets, until the war is over. His face has
arranged itself around his blue eyes in a permanent squint, like a driver
looking for hours for the exit from a superhighway at night.

"It occurred to me to not do it any more," he says. "The family" -- he is
married and has two sons -- "certainly would have said 'enough already.' But
there's something about these dangerous viruses. . . ." He trails off, smiling.
"I'd call it an addiction. On top of that there's the incredible joy that comes
from defeating something -- a joy that I felt in a small way with hepatitis B.
But with AIDS there's something else as well." He chooses his words carefully.
"Almost everything I predicted all the way through has been correct, except for
one manuscript from 1985 on how to use gp120 to make a prevention vaccine for
AIDS. That one has yet to come to fruition."

By the time Francis joined Genentech in 1992 to run its vaccine clinical trials,
gp120 had already suffered so many disasters -- and unlikely resuscitations --
that Phil Berman and Tim Gregory, the pair who led the team that developed the
product, had chosen Indiana Jones as their mascot. The complete failure of their
first attempt in 1986 had pushed the vaccine "out of development" and into the
corporate equivalent of Siberia. To rescue the project, Berman and Gregory kept
working, sub rosa and on their own time. Finally, on Jan. 3, 1989, in a Texas
lab, Berman watched as two chimps were injected with a revamped version of
gp120, two with a different product, called gp160, and two with a placebo to
serve as controls. Nine months and three injections later, the "challenge" took
place: all six were given intravenous injections of live H.I.V. -- the virus
that causes AIDS in humans. By December, blood tests showed that the two control
animals and the two given gp160 had been infected. The two chimps given gp120,
though, were completely clear. "We waited longer and longer and longer and they
still didn't break," Berman says. "Finally we knew it was true."

Chimpanzees are not an ideal model for AIDS in human beings. Though they get
infected, they never show clinical signs of disease. And humans do not get
"challenged" with H.I.V. through single massive injections in laboratories: they
have sex without condoms repeatedly or share dirty needles. But the team had
demonstrated, for the first time, that such a vaccine at least was possible --
changing the mood among scientists from bleak to hopeful. It would prove to be
the high point in the strange life of gp120.

"Ah yes, the eureka moment," Francis says wistfully. "In science, you sit for a
long time above the fog. You know the landing strip's down there somewhere, but
you don't know where and you want to keep all your options open. Then suddenly
the fog clears, the sun blazes through, you see the landing strip and you know
your direction. And that's what I knew when the chimps were protected: we were
on our way to an AIDS vaccine."

The events of the intervening years haven't diminished his certainty. "It's very
unscientific to say," he says, without a trace of irony, "but I know this
vaccine will work. It will protect humans. What I don't know is: how long and
how broad is the protection? If a person has sex four months -- or four years --
after vaccination, will he be protected? And will it protect against all strains
of H.I.V.?" He shrugs and leans forward, twisting himself into the symbol of his
profession, a question mark.

"But science isn't about knowing -- it's about not knowing," he says. "If you
have the answer, then why do a trial? The story of gp120 is not a story of good
and evil. It's the story of status quo versus movement, of doing nothing instead
of something." He revises himself. "This is the story of learning not to be
afraid to fail."

What the Milkmaids Knew

"If you have the cowpox, you cannot take the smallpox" -- that's what
18th-century milkmaids said. When Edward Jenner set out to test the hypothesis,
he did not appeal to government grant panels before exposing an 8-year-old boy
named James Phipps to one disease and then the other. Two centuries later,
Jenner's arrogance shocks our sensibilities, but arrogance can be effective:
except for two frozen keepsakes, one in Atlanta and one in Moscow, smallpox no
longer exists on earth. The milkmaids were right. Jenner's vaccine worked
because the cowpox virus is similar enough to smallpox that Phipps's immune
system learned from one how to fight off the other. Modern vaccines employ the
same trick but are all man-made. Some (like vaccines for measles, mumps and
rubella) are made from live virus that's been artificially weakened; some (like
Pasteur's for rabies and Salk's for polio) use virus that's been killed but left
whole.

The advent of genetic engineering in the late 1970's opened up a new avenue for
vaccine development; Francis's 1985 paper on gp120 outlined how that technique
could be used to make an AIDS vaccine. Completely avoiding the core of the
virus, where the disease-causing genetic instructions lurk, scientists could now
synthesize only those portions of the virus's coat that would stimulate an
immune response. In the case of H.I.V., the most promising portion was the
"subunit" called gp120: a snaking chain of protein that sticks out from the
virus like a fist. (The gp stands for glycoprotein; the 120, for its molecular
weight.) Francis knew that a similar technique had proved successful in the new
hepatitis B vaccine, which worked because the immune system recognized the
copied proteins as if they were natural and responded with long-term protection.
The key advantage to this approach was safety: like a toy gun with no bullets,
the vaccine could scare you into defending yourself but it could not actually
shoot.

It was the Genentech team that first strung together, in the right order, the
511 amino acids that form the protein and who figured out how to produce
billions of copies in Chinese hamster ovary cells. For this work, Francis calls
his colleagues "wizards" -- but Berman and Gregory deflect the praise. "It's not
particularly cutting edge," says Gregory. Says Berman, "Compared to the space
program, it's a lot easier." The three men, sitting around a conference table
with a plate of M & M brownies, play off each other like college roommates:
Berman the teddy bear, Gregory the ski bum, Francis the firebrand. "Phil and Tim
say it's simple because they did it," Francis says. "It's done. It's very
complicated, no doubt, but the obstructions to vaccine development -- assuming
this is a vaccine that will have some success -- are not science."

Francis is announcing his leitmotif: the subversion of public health by
politics. But others aren't as quick to gloss over the scientific challenges.
H.I.V. has seven subtypes, mutates quickly, floats free in the blood but also
infects immune system cells -- on and on. Quibbling with some of these,
admitting others, Francis is nevertheless unfazed. "This is science. This is
what you do! You develop the protein. You put it in rabbits. If they don't keel
over, you try it in chimps. If it works there, you try it in humans." Berman and
Gregory nod approvingly.

Genentech's version of gp120 was first injected into a human in March 1992.
"Because of the way these vaccines are made, we didn't expect any problems in
Phase I," Francis says. "And we didn't get any, except for a few sore arms here
and there." The phased-trial process Francis is referring to was developed as a
way to standardize the testing of treatment drugs like decongestants: Phase I to
see if they're safe; Phase II to see if they might work; Phase III to see how
well. In vaccine development, the phases overlap and safety is always the
paramount concern. With H.I.V. especially, there were some serious unknowns.
Could gp120 speed up the process of deterioration in those people whom it failed
to protect? Could it cause nerve damage at the site of injection? "Happily,"
Francis says, "Phase I showed that gp120 appears to be as safe as any vaccine on
the market. Also, we began to see very strong immunogenicity: almost 100 percent
of volunteers produced antibodies to H.I.V. And, even better, the antibodies
neutralized lab isolates" -- which means that when mixed in a test tube with
H.I.V. that had been cultured in labs, the antibodies rendered the H.I.V.
harmless.

For any product, promotion from one trial phase to the next is a major
milestone; manufacturers proudly note the event in annual reports. But it's not
entirely a scientific decision. The National Institute for Allergy and
Infectious Diseases, or Niaid, which was financing the trials of gp120, could
essentially terminate further testing by withholding funds. But Niaid's decision
to promote gp120 to Phase II was enthusiastic. Of the 14 experimental vaccines
tested since 1988 at Niaid's six AIDS vaccine evaluation units around the
country, the two gp120 candidates were by far the most promising.

Soon after Phase II began, however, in December 1992, gp120 hit a snag.
Volunteers continued to produce strong H.I.V. antibodies and those antibodies
continued to knock out lab-cultured virus. But when put in a test tube with
"field isolates" -- H.I.V. nearly fresh from the arms of infected people -- it
looked as if the antibodies did nothing at all. Scientists still debate the
implications: was the test inadequate or were the antibodies? Many think it may
not matter. Few vaccines have ever been shown to work this way in a test tube;
to public health scientists, the proof of a vaccine is in the testing. "I don't
know how smallpox vaccine works," Francis says, "I just know it does." As if to
vindicate him, gp120, in a new set of experiments performed by Genentech and
Chiron Biocine, protected five chimps from "whopping doses" of H.I.V. (A year
later, the animals remain healthy.) At least in chimps, under specific
conditions, gp120 worked.

Would it now become the first AIDS vaccine to reach Phase III? On April 22,
1994, after a day and a half of presentations and arguments, a panel convened by
Niaid made its recommendation. Some members favored a definitive trial with
10,000 volunteers; others a smaller version that would be easier to mount but
less conclusive. Still others felt they'd been pushed into making a rash
decision between doing nothing and doing too much. In the end, despite being
unsure whether gp120 would work, they agreed overwhelmingly that expansion of
the trials was the only way to find out. This being a bureaucracy, however,
theirs was not the final word. Another panel, the AIDS Research Advisory
Committee, scheduled to convene that June 17, would offer an official
recommendation to Anthony Fauci, Niaid's director, who would then make the
binding decision. But with this much going for gp120, and nothing going for
anything else, it seemed that, nine years after Francis's paper, the United
States was about to find out if it was on the path to a vaccine for AIDS.

Panic Time

Three weeks before the advisory committee meeting, on Sunday, May 29, 1994, The
Chicago Tribune ran a front-page story by a staff writer, John Crewdson, under
the headline "New Doubts on AIDS Vaccine; 5 Study Volunteers Infected; U.S.
Debates Future of Trials." The article accurately reported that volunteers had
become H.I.V.-positive during the first two phases of testing. But by the time
the news wires and television networks picked up the story, Crewdson's narrow
language had been hopelessly garbled. Even people who should have known better
ended up drawing the wrong conclusion: a fund-raiser for a major AIDS
organization told friends that gp120 had "made people sick" because it was "made
of live H.I.V." In fact, gp120 contains no live H.I.V. and cannot cause
infection -- a point Niaid tried to make. But by Monday, the vaccines, to the
extent the public knew of them at all, were thought of as killers.

Few AIDS activists had been paying attention to the vaccine trials. These were
people, mostly gay men, who had in many cases been fighting since the mid-1980's
on behalf of their dying friends. But many were amazingly up to date on
treatment advances, like protease inhibitors and combination therapies; to them,
vaccines were irrelevant or worse. Every dollar spent on the "innocent,"
uninfected masses, they believed, would be a dollar less spent on treatments for
the sick. The world had changed since then -- for one thing, the activists had
finally fought their way into the system. But the habit of outsiderness dies
hard: though no longer hostile to vaccines, they were ignorant of them. Soon the
infected volunteers were transformed into martyrs and out came the boilerplate
analogies: the Tuskegee syphilis experiments, performed on black sharecroppers;
the Willowbrook hepatitis experiments, performed on institutionalized children.

These comparisons were far from apt, but they did express deep-seated fears --
fears not ameliorated by the Government's silence. Niaid, appropriately, had
kept details of the infections confidential, for the sake of the volunteers
themselves. But the silence reflected a deeper problem: the suspicion among many
scientists that laymen cannot properly handle inside information. Indeed, a kind
of paranoid mutism has become epidemic. Researchers who fear they may lose their
grants if they say something critical, or who have manuscripts pending at
prestigious journals, have learned that it's often safer to shut up than to
share their knowledge. As a result, at vaccine meetings or in interviews with
Government scientists, half the things said -- sometimes momentous things -- are
said off the record. But can public science be off the record? And if it can, is
it so surprising that the affected communities cannot process difficult news
when it arises?

In fact, according to Niaid, the volunteers had all contracted H.I.V. as a
result of "high-risk behaviors" -- that is, through unsafe sex or injection-drug
use. The infections had long since been reported at conferences and scientists
were hardly surprised. Indeed, there were more than five. Of the more than 1,600
volunteers who have participated in trials of gp120 and the other vaccine
candidates through Niaid's evaluation units, 19 have now become infected, though
only 4 are known to have done so after a full course of inoculations. If that
small number proves anything, it's that the vaccines are less than 100 percent
effective -- but no one expected them to be 100 percent effective anyway. Some
said 60 percent, some said 30 percent, but these were just hunches. Until a
vaccine enters Phase III, there's no way to know.

Designers of the vaccine trials are thus confronted with a paradox unique to
AIDS: if safe-sex and safe-needle practices are not taught, volunteers who
believe they are protected by the unproven vaccine (which may actually be a
placebo) could take more risks and increase their chances of becoming infected.
If such practices are taught -- and by modern ethical standards, they must be --
volunteers could cut their risk so effectively that they are never exposed to
H.I.V., leaving the vaccine with nothing to fight. In a way, the trial depends
on the failure of education: without what scientists unfortunately call
"breakthrough" infections, there cannot be breakthroughs of the more desirable
variety. To get around this potential conflict of interest, Phase III trials of
an AIDS vaccine will have to rely on populations in which the number of
infections remains high regardless of education, like young, high-risk gay men
and injection-drug users -- precisely the groups most scared by the news.

For the people running the vaccine evaluation units, it was a nightmare. New
recruits dried up; long-term volunteers needed calming; reporters were buzzing
everywhere. Months later, Barney Graham, one of the two principal investigators
at the Vanderbilt University unit, was still showing the strain of what he calls
public science. Tall, dour and so soft-spoken it's hard to hear him, Graham has
decorated his tiny office with a "No Whining" coffee mug and a 100-pack sample
of antacids. "Scientists are supposed to be threadbare and genteel, not TV
stars," he says. "And AIDS wears you out. Everything is done by faxes, Fed Ex
and conference calls. And then the fact that people got infected is a personal
tragedy, very upsetting to the investigators. The story of their infections is
just like the story of the 40,000 other infections in the U.S. this year. It's
the story of how hard it is to legislate behavior change -- even more difficult
on an individual basis. Why did they engage in risky behavior? Why does anyone?
Paul even refers to it. . . ."

Graham retrieves a slim, Wedgwood blue volume from between the massive
immunology texts on his bookshelf and underlines with his finger some words from
Chapter 7 of Romans:

Was then that which is good made death unto me? . . . For I delight in the law
of God after the inward man: But I see another law in my members, warring
against the law of my mind. . . . O wretched man that I am! who shall deliver me
from the body of this death?

"Vaccines don't even begin to touch the basic human problems," Graham says.

Though he favors expansion of the gp120 trials, Graham is addressing the same
paradox that troubles the activists, whose real concern, beneath the hysteria,
is that the current vaccines may cause more infections through false security
than they would prevent through immunity. But one group with few doubts about
the trials was the group of infected volunteers. Most agreed, despite their bad
news, to give what a researcher called "buckets of blood" for further testing;
one, a gay man known as BIS303, even flew to Washington for a lymph node biopsy
that scientists thought might be revealing. Altruism like that of BIS303 --
slides of whose lymph node are still studied in labs and screened at conferences
-- was the kind of community reaction Don Francis imagined when he thought of
how a trial would work. As a result, he had no idea what he was up against when
the fateful advisory committee meeting began.

In the Crystal Ballroom

It used to be that AIDS policy was made on the streets and in closed Government
meetings -- or from the conflict between them. Now it gets forged, more often
than not, in overcooled, chandeliered hotel conference centers like the
so-called "N.I.H." Hyatt near National Institutes of Health headquarters in
Bethesda, Md. The scene is always the same: hyperfloral carpets, gleaming urns
marked caf and decaf, presenters worrying over their carousels of slides while
eyeing the name tags of other participants. What has changed is who those
participants are. Here in the Hyatt's Crystal Ballroom, panelists sit around the
perimeter of four tables arranged in a large square with nothing in the middle.
Pitchers of water sweat at each of the 40 or so places. Surrounding the official
participants are supporters and contestants from the various camps. If you
regard Anthony Fauci, Niaid's director, as north -- and who doesn't? -- then
Government scientists are generally to the east; community activists are huddled
to the south; Genentech and Chiron Biocine representatives, including a
grimacing Don Francis, are stacked to the west. The media -- an extraordinary 55
reporters and 15 camera crews, hoping for scandal -- are kept to the back.

Try as they might to work together, the groups speak different languages. The
scientists "present" their information while the community representatives
"share" theirs. The basic researchers require "proof of concept" while the
manufacturers speak of "empirical results." But the language conflict is trivial
compared to the conflict of culture. Depending on who you talk to, the basic
researchers, usually affiliated with academic institutions, are ivory-tower
do-nothings, jealous of their paltry grants and remote from the world of
suffering; the manufacturers' scientists are sell-outs and cowboys, grubbing
after profit; Niaid staffers are cowardly paper-pushers who'd rather do nothing
than fail; the community representatives represent no one but themselves, which
they do at tiresome length. And everyone hates the press.

Still, it is no longer seemly to make decisions unilaterally. Fauci, in his
opening remarks, explains that the advisory committee's job is not so much to
evaluate the science -- the April panel has already done that -- as to evaluate
the context in which the science may be tested. Will it be possible to get
enough testing sites operational in time for a trial? Will gay men and
injection-drug users volunteer in adequate numbers? If not, Fauci warns, the
whole effort -- which would require the enthusiastic participation of all
parties concerned -- may collapse, and with it any hope of mobilizing
researchers and activists for a future trial. On the other hand, Fauci
continues, "if a recommendation is made not to expand, there may be a chilling
effect on our industrial partners, although this is, in and of itself, not an
acceptable rationale for proceeding." Going back and forth, he makes it hard to
imagine any satisfactory solution. In closing, he says merely, "Thank you and
good luck to all of us."

Neat and small and tight as a mouse, Fauci does not utter another word until
lunch, but watching the proceedings you can't help but feel he's somehow
controlling them anyway. Or that nobody is. On the sidelines, Don Francis senses
the "random, whipsaw motion" of the meeting and is reminded, unpleasantly, of
the blood bank fights 10 years earlier, during which he used to imagine the
thousands of people who would die from nothing more than inertia. In this
strange, relativistic stupor, no one seems to pay much attention to the
startlingly direct statement made by Ashley Haase, the meeting's chairman, that
the vaccines "will probably work to some extent." He might just as well have
said they will not.

Still, there is one subject that can always be relied on to get people's
attention: money. It has been made clear to the academic researchers, many of
whom depend on Niaid grants, that the funds for vaccine trials will have to come
from somewhere. (Probably from treatment research, as it turns out.) A
full-scale trial would cost between $9 million and $18 million per year for
three and a half years; the smaller version suggested in April would cost about
half that much per year, for two years only. What nobody says is that either
version is a drop in the bucket. Niaid's H.I.V. research budget for fiscal year
1995 totals $558 million. And with AIDS care costing the country something like
$13 million per day, according to Vanderbilt's Barney Graham, even the longer,
more expensive trial would be cheaper than five days of treatment.

Slides are shown, feeble jokes are uttered and ignorant questions from panelists
who should know better are answered politely. Hurriedly -- he's only been given
15 minutes -- Francis presents the latest chimp data, which, though promising,
gets no response. It isn't until the half-hour set aside for "public comments"
that things take a dramatic turn. One by one, community activists stand before
the microphone and, with anguish in their voices, lash out at gp120. David
Scondras, a former Boston city councilman, offers the baleful warning that
people won't want to volunteer for a test of a vaccine that is already
considered ineffective, especially since this would prohibit them from enrolling
in tests of better products later. A letter read by Luis Santiago of Act Up/New
York states that going ahead with the trials would be "extremely unethical"
because the products "are very unlikely to work at all." Only Bill Snow of Act
Up/Golden Gate takes a middle view, saying politely, "I don't envy you this
decision" -- surprising words from an activist. But then, the activists are the
most conservative voices in the room.

"Part of the negativism you hear is healthy scientific debate and part of it is
just people's willingness to say anything," remarks Derek Hodel, who as a member
of the April panel endorsed continued testing but was, and remains, ambivalent.
"It's a good example of a lot of people who know very little about vaccine
development carrying on at some length about what should happen -- both
scientists and community representatives. But I don't want to blame the
representatives, because if somebody puts you on a podium and sticks a
microphone in your face and asks what you think, it's hard to say 'I don't
know,' especially when the people asking appear to know even less than you do.
To scientists, one community activist is as good as another; it's the worst kind
of tokenism. But you have to realize that the dynamics of prevention and
treatment are completely different."

Hodel's own background is in treatment: for four years he headed a group that
helped get unapproved therapeutic drugs into the country; he is now director of
Federal affairs for Gay Men's Health Crisis in New York. But Hodel has
researched vaccines like a medical student and is quick to admit when he's
beyond his expertise. "I'm not scientifically qualified to make the judgment
whether gp120 will work," he says. "But I can make the judgment whether it's
worth the risk to find out. And to me, it's ironic that the same community" --
he puts the word in finger-quotes -- "that supposedly won't accept the risk of a
vaccine trial doesn't blink at accepting a huge amount of risk for treatment:
huge, horrible unknowns. The drugs that people are willing to try if they're
sick! But people don't experience risk as real until it touches them. Most of
the public has no fear of AIDS. Those of us who do, only do because we're
surrounded by it" -- five of Hodel's eight closest friends are sick. "Even then,
it's hard to appreciate a statistical risk. When everyone knows someone who's
sick, that will help. But that's a grim scenario."

Hodel is intense, compact and, in a suit, not so different looking from Fauci --
except for the two earrings in his left ear. He represents a new phenomenon: the
activist as deep insider. Everyone is elaborately careful to show that they've
heard him, and it isn't just pretense: he's the person most universally
respected among the leaders of the various camps. Perhaps that's because Hodel
doesn't get as ruffled by the day-to-day bumps in the road of science as most
community representatives do. He admits that the activists' presence at meetings
like this slows down progress. "Still, you couldn't do a clinical trial without
them -- and that would be very slow indeed. You can't just line people up and
inject them. It has to be a partnership. If it's time-consuming to get to the
point where the subjects understand what they're engaged in, so be it."

Late in the day, an intense, if hushed, discussion begins. Considering what's at
stake, some displays of antagonism -- or at least real debate -- might prove
useful, but the mood in the room is sullenly respectful. Everyone is allowed a
piece of the decision, and let the chips fall where they may. Everyone except
the manufacturers. During the discussion, Don Francis keeps raising his hand to
no avail, like the kid in class who knows too much; at one point he even hands
up a note that reads: I want to be called on. But he's out of order, which is
just as well. Some of the panelists are muttering curses about his
self-righteous badgering. Shades of St. Francis? Don Quixote?

"Remember, this is not the Virgin Mary proposing a vaccine," I'm told later by
Martin Delaney, a panelist who is also the founding director of Project Inform,
a San Francisco AIDS organization. "To some degree, this is about a couple of
companies who want to be the first to get their product to market. Don doesn't
want to see himself as someone representing a drug company, but in fact he is.
He's used to being seen as a public health official, on a mission by God, and
that has to be tempered. This should be about issues, not personalities."

Delaney says that Project Inform has always made vaccines a priority and that he
would volunteer for a trial himself, even if the risk were high, as long as the
potential rewards were too. But a 30 percent effective vaccine "doesn't make
sense" when the money could be spent more directly on education and other
preventions. "If your concern is purely public health, you have to ask: What are
we going to get out of a vaccine trial of a product that's a complete shot in
the dark, based on the most primitive understandings of the disease? And if you
blow your one chance on the wrong product, where does that leave you? Then come
the other issues. Like, does risky behavior increase because people think
they're protected? And the answer to that has to be yes."

Data from the testing sites suggest that, if anything, risky behavior among
volunteers decreases, but Delaney and many others discount it. "You can survey
and ask people all you want, but you're not going to get a straight answer,"
Delaney says. "As a gay man, I know this personally. In any case, add these all
together and you get your answer."

"But," I ask, "are you comfortable making such a big decision when you're not a
scientist?"

"I don't feel that science is magic," Delaney answers. "It's knowledge. It's
quantifiable and transferable. You do worry about any decision to not go ahead,
but the outcomes in AIDS research have been so disappointing that" -- he
chuckles ruefully -- "no, it doesn't give me any huge pause."

And that's how the meeting plays out. Apparently stunned by the passion of the
community representatives, the members one by one vote no or abstain -- even,
amazingly, four who in April had endorsed expansion. Almost at once, Fauci
announces that, since the recommendation is so strong, he will follow it. And
though the Niaid news release will later say that the panel voted for
"continuing but not expanding at this time," that's pure euphemism. Don Francis
looks as if he could strangle someone, but there's no one left to strangle.
Within three minutes of the decision, scientists are upstairs with drinks in
their hands, activists are on the subway and someone has turned off the
chandeliers in the Crystal Ballroom.

Safer Science

As it turns out, Fauci had already decided what he was going to do. "I was
convinced before the meeting even started that the science did not justify
expansion," he says. We are sitting, two months after the advisory committee
meeting, in Fauci's office at the National Institutes of Health in Bethesda. "I
had spent a lot more time than them looking at the data. It was comforting to me
that a large and diverse group of my peers came up with the same conclusion. But
I still would have made the same decision. Let me be perfectly honest, which I
always am: it would have been more difficult to say no to an expanded trial if
the community said, 'We're ready if you want to do it.' Because I know how
quickly community views can change. But I would have done it anyway."

Fauci's curriculum vitae says he's 54, but his nervous energy, his runner's
trim, his Rotarian attire and aviator glasses suggest a graduate student, circa
1966. To all appearances, he's pure science in a suit -- not unlikable, really,
but not really there to like. He talks fast, like a good Brooklyn native, and
whatever he's saying, you have the sense he's still got plenty of brain capacity
left over for other things. In the middle of a sentence, he stands abruptly,
goes to the door and barks at his secretary for a diet Coke; he then sits down
and resumes, quite calmly, the interrupted sentence.

Whether because of his manner or his power, Fauci stirs up a great deal of
anger. Anne-Marie Duliege, associate director of clinical research at Chiron
Biocine, which has been testing its gp120 product in tandem with Genentech's,
expresses openly what others say only in private: "The Niaid decision was a
purely political, manipulated decision." The advisory committee meeting was
stacked, she says, with people who knew little or "nothing at all" about
vaccines. And the presentation of scientific data was, she feels, unfairly
curtailed. "Besides, isn't it curious how the news of the seroconversions" --
the volunteers who became infected -- "got released to the Tribune reporter
between the two meetings?"

Several scientists who were advisory committee members or otherwise close to the
proceedings (but would not allow their names to be used) agree with Duliege. "I
think it was manipulated," one says. "If they had simply reworded the question,
they could have gotten a different answer. The sentiment of the group was to go
with a halfway measure, not to stop altogether." Another says: "It was the most
unintellectual discussion about a scientific issue that I have ever had the
unhappiness to witness." Yet another goes further: "What's more surprising than
the decision itself were the events that occurred immediately prior, which were
used as an indirect lobbying effort. I mean the leak of the seroconversions. No
one thought it was a coincidence."

Fauci says: "That's totally untrue. And if anyone felt pressured, it was coming
from within them, and they should question their own integrity about voting
against their belief."

You need not resort to Machiavellian scenarios to understand Fauci's decision.
He makes a reasonable case, almost in one breath. "Now I am a big advocate, as
you probably know, of early availability of drugs for people who are infected,"
he says. "But with a preventive vaccine, you're talking about an otherwise
normal person who does not have H.I.V. infection and you're saying you want to
inject that person with a product that, as a scientist, you can't in good
conscience say there is even a more than reasonable chance of it being
effective. And there is the possibility that there could be a deleterious
effect."

"None has turned up," I say.

"Yes, but it's a very important theoretical possibility. Which could be
overridden by the confidence you might have in a more effective vaccine. But
when you start out with 30 percent at best -- which is only a hunch -- then the
possibility of doing harm assumes a greater relative weight in the
decision-making process. When the science is uncertain, you start weighing other
issues, like whether volunteers really understand the risk. A film was made
showing how little some of the people know about vaccines and it was scary. They
had no understanding that they might not be protected completely. If you put all
of these things together -- understanding that people in good faith have
different opinions -- you decide you need to wait until you have a product you
have a little more confidence in."

It's hard to argue with such a careful weighing of subtleties. But some of
Fauci's premises are shakier than others. Although some activists go so far as
to predict that their constituents will boycott a gp120 trial, the constituents
in fact appear willing to cooperate. George Woody, who has recruited
injection-drug users for a feasibility study in Philadelphia, reports that 90
percent of them return for follow-up interviews and blood tests with only token
financial incentives. Cladd Stevens of the New York Blood Center, who endorses a
Phase III trial, says she's sure gay men can be recruited, too, though not
without a vaccine to test. "Building the tracks doesn't make the train come,"
she says. "But if a train's coming, the tracks will get laid."

Sten Vermund, formerly of Niaid, agrees: in April, he endorsed expansion of the
trials and has written an op-ed article urging a reconsideration of the June
decision. "If we have a partially effective vaccine and do not know it because
we are not testing it," he says, "that would be a public health tragedy." Still,
Vermund, now chairman of epidemiology at the University of Alabama at
Birmingham, appreciates his friend Fauci's predicament: balancing the scientific
imperative with the social realities. Duliege, as might be expected, does not.
"You can say that the various considerations put him in an impossible position,
but I have no sympathy for the position he was in. You need some courage to work
in this field -- and you need some leadership. Fauci was responding to fear that
the trial might fail, but from a scientific point of view, no trial fails."

And that may be the heart of the problem. From a scientific point of view, no
trial fails. But from a political point of view? In a perfect world, there would
be no difference, but in this world, where a Surgeon General can lose her
stripes for daring to discuss masturbation, Fauci may be right to fear. Is it
worth taking a fall for a vaccine that might not do much, that the activists
hate, that virtually no one but Don Francis speaks up for? Unvaccinated against
political fallout, Fauci may feel he has little choice but to practice "safer
science." Which in this case may mean no science at all.

But Fauci, to his credit, won't take that way out. "I have always gotten support
right up the line, from the director of the N.I.H. to Donna Shalala. The fact
is, it's a tough situation, but I have always -- and will always -- base my
decisions on what I think is scientifically best. As for the rest, it's just
part of the turf. And once I make that decision, I don't sit around and worry
about it."

Fauci has weathered such storms before; virtually hung in effigy one day by
activists, the next day he answers their medical questions. Does he regret
having brought them to the table? "There are times, more than you would think,
when they have a keen insight into a scientific problem," he says. "But
sometimes you are almost blinded by them, and they are almost blinded
themselves."

Still, Fauci considers himself an activist. "AIDS is my life. I have many, many
patients we've taken care of here; my social circle has evolved into an AIDS
social circle; my wife is an AIDS nurse. It's all around me. We're in the middle
of an era of incredibly sophisticated science and there's this goddamn virus
that has rapidly evolved to stay always a step ahead of us. You feel that you're
very smart and have a lot of smart people around you -- and it's sticking its
tongue out at you and saying: 'I don't care how smart you are. You don't have me
yet.' "

How Much Love?

"AIDS is eminently -- and imminently -- beatable," Don Francis says. Back in
California, completely unrepentant, he's still beating the gp120 drum. "If we
sat around with smallpox and said, 'I don't know, it's going to be awfully
hard,' it would still be raging today. So you just do it. What's failure? The
worst you're going to do is waste some needles and syringes and some people's
time. That's a small cost, given that we speak of this as an experiment
answering a question. Here's my baseball metaphor: The ball is in the air, but
in the Candlestick fog we can't see the trajectory. Will it be a home run? A pop
foul? Something in between? I hope we will be allowed to find out."

For Genentech and Chiron Biocine, that will have to be a business decision. It's
not just about the vaccines' merits; it's about priorities. Continuing to fund
gp120 may mean not funding a breast cancer product. Fauci's decision has indeed
had the chilling effect he predicted -- others call it "devastating" -- on the
very few companies around the world that had bothered with an AIDS vaccine in
the first place. Genentech is officially "re-evaluating" the situation, but
seems close to dropping the project. Chiron Biocine and another company, Therion
Biologics, have cut their efforts in half. "If you're the C.E.O. of a company
that has fiduciary responsibilities," Francis says, "yes, you'd love to make an
AIDS vaccine. But how much love can you afford?"

If you're Genentech or Chiron Biocine, Martin Delaney believes, you can afford a
lot. "Despite their whining," he says, "these are not poor companies without
means." (Genentech's 1994 revenue was nearly $800 million.) "I don't understand
what's keeping them, if they feel that strongly, from going ahead with trials.
Would we ask Merck or Abbott" -- major manufacturers of treatment drugs -- "to
wait for the Government to pay for their trials? I don't think so."

Delaney is glossing over the economic difference between preventions and cures.
Ours is a society that is loath to wear seat belts, quit smoking, ban handguns
or teach teen-agers about condoms; we are strangely unwilling to sacrifice
convenience, let alone money, for sensible preventions. "You don't have people
taking to the streets and demanding improved fluoridation of the water supply,"
Vermund says.

The familiarity of vaccines -- they just seem to be there, as if by magic --
makes the situation worse. Extremely expensive to develop and test, and riddled
with liability risks, vaccines are not nearly as profitable as people might
think. In any given year, the combined revenues of the 20 or so vaccines
currently available are dwarfed by the revenues of a single good ulcer drug. Add
to this the ethical uncertainties of a global epidemic -- how much can you
charge in Africa? -- and it's no wonder that the manufacturers, and Fauci too,
insist that the development of an AIDS prevention vaccine will depend on a
close, financial collaboration between industry and Government. Which means
collaborating with democracy.

Did democracy derail gp120? When Franklin D. Roosevelt marshaled the country to
defeat polio (which he, of course, suffered from), he did it without permission
from anyone. But the age of individual arrogance -- and with it, perhaps,
individual genius -- has been superseded by the age of consensus. Instead of
Roosevelt we have panels: panels that are destined to disagree and cause more
panels. Which isn't to say the process can't work. Even as Fauci announced his
decision, the Food and Drug Administration was permitting Phase III trials of an
experimental Lyme disease vaccine to go forward -- based on the same kind of
ambiguous evidence that sank gp120. And in January, the F.D.A. permitted Phase
III trials of Jonas Salk's AIDS treatment vaccine despite what it considered
shaky data.

But Salk's vaccine is beyond the mayhem of democracy. A treatment, not a
prevention, it could prove so profitable -- in the event it works -- that its
manufacturer, Immune Response Corporation, has been willing to foot the bills to
test it. And Lyme disease, typically transmitted by tick bites into the
bloodstreams of wealthy suburbanites, excites no controversy. Because AIDS is so
much more deadly than Lyme disease -- and because preventions are so much more
difficult to finance than cures -- the trial of a vaccine like gp120 becomes
almost impossibly political: everyone has expertise and everyone has a point.
Activists are right to question a vaccine that may be 30 percent effective,
because sex isn't calculus and people aren't wise. But public health scientists
are right, too: such a vaccine might save thousands of lives, and a nurse who
sticks her finger with a needle will be glad to have any chance -- even 30
percent -- of being protected.

The question, finally, is not who's right but what's most important, and science
as practiced in the United States today is not designed to answer that. Still,
despite all the maddening and interlocking paradoxes, what the panels have
devised is amazing in its way -- a blueprint for a truly ethical AIDS vaccine
trial. Only one thing's missing: a means of ever agreeing on how to start.

The Resurrection

But gp120 wasn't dead yet. At a vaccine conference last November in Reston, Va.,
one or two decorous fights broke out beneath the chandeliers of the Hyatt
Regency ballroom. At the end of a panel on AIDS in Africa, Kenrad Nelson, an
epidemiologist at Johns Hopkins, rose furiously and shouted: "To put up any
roadblocks in the face of this kind of data borders on the unethical. This is a
plague, and there won't be another vaccine to test for two years, minimum. We
should be testing the vaccine we have, if only to calm people down and prime the
pump, as AZT did in 1986. You can argue all you want, but if we don't do
something, it's a crime."

A few heads turned. Scientists working on different AIDS vaccine approaches --
from "naked DNA" to futuristic "gene guns" -- pricked up their ears: how will
anything come out of the pipeline, they began to wonder, if the pipeline is
capped? Also spooked were those who'd actually had a look at the products
supposed to be furthest along. "Certainly not better than gp120," said one
scientist who had seen the data. Another told me that, if I wanted to study the
early results, I could find them in his trash can.

But vaccines have an eerie way of rising from trash cans. Since many scientists
assume that gp120 will eventually be part of the cocktail of an effective AIDS
vaccine, the all-or-nothing mentality that halted testing may prove to have been
shortsighted. "People point to hepatitis B as a model -- it's not," says William
L. Heyward, an epidemiologist at the World Health Organization's Global Program
on AIDS. "That was a grand-slam home run in the bottom of the ninth. The better
model would be hemophilus influenza type B, recently licensed after a 17-year
development period from 1973 to 1990. There were nine efficacy trials with at
least five different vaccines, involving over 330,000 children. As a result, we
now have three licensed, highly effective vaccines and incidence of the disease
has been eliminated as a public health problem.

"I was on-site manager for a big N.I.H. contract in the process. Our
expectations were very high and the first versions of the product didn't meet
them. But they weren't 'failed' trials. They were part of the process. It's
going to be an evolution for the perfect H.I.V. vaccine as well. Maybe 40 to 50
years. In the meantime," he concludes tartly, "we've had to work very hard to
explain this decision to the rest of the world."

The rest of the world "thought we were crazy," as Derek Hodel puts it. At least
four countries sought permission from W.H.O. to host gp120 trials. Indeed, at
the conference, Natth Bhamarapravati, a pathologist from Thailand -- where AIDS,
he predicts, will soon kill 100,000 people a year -- pleaded eloquently for the
development of a vaccine Marshall Plan, in which American money and expertise
would be deployed to help such countries as his start testing something. He will
have a hard time convincing American activists, though. Martin Delaney even
wonders if the Thais were "misled" into wanting to host the trials. Heyward
understands the source of such disagreements. "I was director of Projet SIDA in
Zaire, where 250 people a day were dying. And I watched their families carry the
bodies away, day after day, wailing. In the U.S. we live in a bubble. In a lab
you may not see the cost of doing nothing. Like they say: You stand near where
you sit."

And so, after W.H.O. decided that vaccine trials "can go forward" and that "even
results showing low efficacy would be important," Genentech began making plans
with the Thai Government to conduct them. For those who had championed gp120,
this was at best a bittersweet victory. In order to prepare enough Thai
volunteers and to ensure that the vaccine will work in them the same way it did
in Americans, most of Phase I and Phase II must be repeated -- thus delaying
results by several years. But at least they're starting. On Feb. 6, 45 cartons
containing 270 vials of gp120 finally left Genentech's cold room, destined by
plane for Bangkok. They arrived at the vaccine testing center at Mahidol
University on the 10th. The first 14 volunteers, who are recovering drug users,
were injected on the 21st. Are they safer from AIDS than they would have been
without gp120? In a few years -- a few years longer than necessary -- we'll
know.

And the Band Plays On

"I know there are limits to our ability as humans to accomplish important
things," says Don Francis. A sign pinned to the wall by his desk reads "Joyful
participation in the sorrows of the world." But he doesn't look so much joyful
as resigned. "It drives me crazy. I'm weary. I yearn for logic and a way to make
good on all of this wasted time. But that's life. Well, that's the intellectual
answer. On the other hand. . . . "

He swivels toward his computer. "On the other hand, right now, behind me will be
things like this obituary. Or a piece of the AIDS quilt in the hall. Sometimes I
can look at it and sometimes I can't. I've been through incredible epidemics,
but I've never had one engulf me. Usually we come in at the downside of the
curve. We have tools. We do something. We beat smallpox out of existence and
move on. Here, your friends die right and left, colleagues you love! San
Francisco is losing 4 percent of its population! My Rolodex, I don't take
people's names out of it. I'm scared to. The frustration! I want to scream
sometimes: I've seen this meeting before and 10,000 more people have died! But
it doesn't help."

Has St. Francis finally been neutralized? In a frank and critical "Dear Don"
letter dated March 1, Martin Delaney seemed to hope so, objecting not only to
the "bad science" of gp120 but to Francis's passion as its advocate. "It pricks
my memory back to the mid 1980's," he wrote. "When things didn't go exactly the
way you wanted them, you began to see the players as either angels or demons,
rather than people who saw things in legitimately different ways from their
different vantage points. Seeing you begin to repeat this behavior over the
vaccine vote, I can only urge you to look inward and soften your rhetoric. This
time around, I think there is little likelihood that your version of events will
carry the day."

But Francis isn't chastened. He points to another sign near his desk: "A
scientist who is also a human being cannot rest while knowledge which might be
used to reduce suffering rests on the shelf." The quotation is from Albert
Sabin, who developed the oral polio vaccine. "I guess I keep doing it because
I'm an optimist," he says. "I think it'll break. Nothing can take your eyes off
that goal; if I possibly thought that I might fail, someone might stop me. It's
like a bulldozer: your top speed might not be very fast but you keep on moving.
And then you come to a slope and you'll move like crazy. That's the history of
all of our progress."

But why do people resist that progress?

"Did I tell you about the frog?" Francis asks. "I hope it's true. If you take a
pot of boiling water and dump a frog into it, he'll do all in his power to get
out. But if you put it in a pot of cold water and put the pot on the stove and
slowly bring up the heat" -- Francis looks over the top of his half-glasses --
"the frog will just sit there. And boil himself."

LOAD-DATE: March 26, 1995

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photos: In cold storage: Genentech has thousands of doses of vaccine --
in vats, bottles, vials -- ready to go. (pg. 51); The Genentech trio: Phil
Berman, above, and Tim Gregory, near right, were the original team leaders. Don
Francis, far right, joined in 1992 to run the clinical trials. (pg. 52-53);
Anne-Marie Duliege of Chiron Biocine, above, openly disagrees with Anthony
Fauci, right, of the National Institute of Allergy and Infectious Diseases. (pg.
54-55); Derek Hodel of New York, above, and Martin Delaney of San Francisco,
right, represent a new phenomenon: activist as deep insider. (pg.
56-57)(PHOTOGRAPHS BY LEON BORENSZTEIN FOR THE NEW YORK TIMES)

                   Copyright 1995 The New York Times Company

                              206 of 211 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 March 28, 1995, Tuesday, Late Edition - Final

Observer;
Big Capitol Giveaway

BYLINE: By RUSSELL BAKER

SECTION: Section A;  Page 19;  Column 1;  Editorial Desk

LENGTH: 695 words


There is an old Washington story about President Lyndon Johnson furious with
Senator Frank Church of Idaho for opposing him on Vietnam. "Who've you been
talking to on this?" Johnson asks Church. Church says Walter Lippmann, the
magisterial newspaper columnist. "Next time you want a dam in Idaho," Johnson
tells Church, "ask Walter Lippmann for it."

Probably never happened. Smart as he was about Congress, L.B.J. wasn't likely to
treat one of its princes cruelly for the small satisfaction of uttering a
crushing witticism. Congress was different then from now.

Then, insolent citizens whose disrespect irritated some Congressional committee
often risked jail on charges of contempt of Congress. How different then from
now. Now it is Congress itself that treats Congress with contempt.

For example, it is transferring its historic power of the purse to the White
House where Lyndon Johnsons of the future can use it to extract obedience from
any Frank Churches cheeky enough to vex their Presidents.

This will be the result of the so-called line-item-veto bill, which was quickly
whooped through the House by Speaker Gingrich's zealots and, more surprisingly,
passed in the Senate with the connivance of both parties.

"Historic" is not an abused word for describing this remarkable abdication of
Congressional power. It was rooted in the British Parliament's money quarrel
with kings over 350 years ago. This resulted in the Puritan Revolution and Civil
War of 1642-1648. Parliament prevailed, King Charles was executed and the power
of the purse was lodged ever afterward in Parliament.

A century and a half later the makers of the American Constitution adapted it by
giving Congress the power to authorize taxes and spending. In short, Messrs.
Gingrich and Dole have just chucked a lot of history overboard.

The explanation lies in the abovementioned self-loathing that now afflicts
Congress. Congressional members have lately taken to whining about their
weakness. They are simply too weak-kneed, they say, to resist doling out Federal
gravy.

Powerless, they say, to stop their admittedly craven and swinish behavior, they
now desperately seek drastic means that will force them to shape up.

A constitutional amendment was proposed. Messrs. Gingrich and Dole peddled it
like hot Gospel. Surely, surely these wretched sinful wastrels who wanted --
sincerely wanted -- to mend their ways, surely they could control their evil
habit if only it were proscribed by that sacred document, the Constitution.

In February the amendment failed by a hairbreadth, thanks to an astonishing
flare-up of old-fashioned Republican good sense and integrity from Senator
Hatfield of Oregon. Good sense and integrity infuriated many and terrified the
rest so thoroughly that there was no hope of stopping the line-item-veto bill.

The President, a Democrat, wanted it. What President would not want such a whip
to keep the herd in line.  A Democratic President's wanting it assured the
Republicans enough Democratic votes to pass it, even though its effect is to
increase President Clinton's power.

It is said that Republicans were glad to give Bill Clinton a brief glimpse of
the new power because they expect that Presidents after 1996 will forevermore be
Republicans. This is too cynical.

The evidence suggests that the new breed of Republicans has little use for
Congress but a rising passion for Presidential power. The rise of Newt Gingrich
began, after all, with his long and successful effort to discredit Congress
itself as ineffectual and corrupt.

The Speaker has made contempt for Congress so respectable that Congress now
glories in despising itself for being too flabby to deal with a budget deficit.

It would be naive to ask these people why they don't simply quit kowtowing to
their many publics and behave honorably by saying "No" to wasteful spending. The
answer -- "We would be defeated at the next election, stupid" -- is too obvious.

You might then ask, "But why do you want to be re-elected to an institution you
hold in contempt?"

Don't be dense. Unless people with contempt for the place stay in power, who
will keep it down?

LOAD-DATE: March 28, 1995

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Op-Ed

                   Copyright 1995 The New York Times Company

                              207 of 211 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 March 28, 1995, Tuesday, Late Edition - Final

'Forrest Gump' Triumphs With 6 Academy Awards

BYLINE: By WILLIAM GRIMES

SECTION: Section C;  Page 13;  Column 2;  Cultural Desk

LENGTH: 1159 words


"Forrest Gump," the runaway hit about a simple soul caught up in the most
turbulent events of postwar America, triumphed last night at the 67th Academy
Awards, sweeping all three major awards for which it was nominated, including
best picture. Robert Zemeckis won the Oscar for best director, and Tom Hanks was
named best actor for his performance in the title role.

The sweep represented a vote for traditional Hollywood values as the feel-good
film triumphed over the rawer, more experimental "Pulp Fiction," which won only
one award. The other nominees for best picture, "Four Weddings and a Funeral,"
"Quiz Show" and "The Shawshank Redemtion," were shut out.

"Gump" also won Oscars for film editing, visual effects and best adapted
screenplay, by Eric Roth, based on Winston Groom's novel.

Mr. Hanks, who won last year's Oscar for best actor for "Philadelphia," became
the first person to receive back-to-back Oscars in the category since Spencer
Tracy, who won in 1937 and 1938 for "Captains Courageous" and "Boys Town."

Accepting the award, Mr. Hanks, close to tears, said, "The power and the
pleasure of this moment are as constant as the speed of light; it will never be
diminished." The 13 nominations for "Forrest Gump" fell just one short of the
record, set by "All About Eve" in 1950, and equaled the number of nominations
for "Gone With the Wind."

The Oscar for best actress went to Jessica Lange for her performance as the
manic-depressive wife of an Army officer in "Blue Sky," a film that struggled to
make it to theaters after the studio distributing it, Orion Pictures, went
bankrupt. Ms. Lange won an Oscar as best supporting actress for "Tootsie" in
1982 and had previously been nominated four times as best actress.

Ms. Lange, in accepting the award, paid tribute to Tony Richardson, who died
soon after directing the film. "He kept nudging me over the edge," she said,
"and with a character like this, it's exactly what I needed."

Dianne Wiest was named best supporting actress for her performance as an aging
Broadway ham with delusions of grandeur in "Bullets Over Broadway." It was Ms.
Wiest's second Oscar and third nomination in the category. She won for "Hannah
and Her Sisters" in 1986 and was nominated for "Parenthood" in 1989.

Martin Landau was named best supporting actor for his performance as an aged
Bela Lugosi in "Ed Wood," the director Tim Burton's homage to the director of
50's mega-bombs like "Plan 9 From Outer Space" and "Bride of the Monster."

The Oscar for best foreign-language film went to "Burnt by the Sun," a Russian
film directed by Nikita Mikhalkov. Mr. Mikhalkov brought his young daughter
onstage, calling her the only actress with whom he had never experienced any
problems. He then lifted her up, slung her over his shoulder and marched toward
the wings.

Quentin Tarantino and Roger Avary, who wrote "Pulp Fiction," won the Oscar for
best original screenplay.

In a year remarkable for its lack of Oscar-caliber films, David Letterman,
making his first appearance as host of the event, held at the Los Angeles Shrine
Auditorium, was the subject of as much pre-Oscar talk as the nominees
themselves. In essence, Mr. Letterman transferred his television show, "Late
Show With David Letterman" to the Oscar stage, right down to the top-10 list and
stupid pet tricks. Judging by the audience reaction, a lot was lost in the
translation. A running gag about introducing "Uma" (Thurman) to "Oprah"
(Winfrey) died on the vine, and some others seemed to cut a little too close to
the Hollywood bone.

Referring to Dreamworks SKG, the company recently formed by Steven Spielberg,
Jeffrey Katzenberg and David Geffen, Mr. Letterman said: "I think that this
partnership is going to be really, really good for Hollywood. Now, instead of
hoping that they're not successful individually, you can hope that they're not
successful as a group." A taut silence ensued, punctuated by nervous laughter.

Hans Zimmer's score for "The Lion King" received the Oscar for musical score.
The Oscar for original song went to "Can You Feel the Love Tonight," one of
three nominated songs from "The Lion King," all of them composed by Elton John
with lyrics by Tim Rice.

The evening's official theme was comedy in the movies, and the musical numbers
were interspersed with clips of pratfalls taken by Charlie Chaplin, W. C.
Fields, Laurel and Hardy and other movie comedy teams. Arthur Hiller, the
president of the Academy of Motion Picture Arts and Sciences, which awards the
Oscars, also introduced a political note in his opening remarks, pleading
against proposed cuts in the budget of the National Endowment for the Arts. His
call was echoed by Mr. Landau and Quincy Jones, who was given the Jean Hersholt
Humanitarian Award.

Clint Eastwood received the Irving G. Thalberg Memorial Award in honor of his
work as a film producer. Malpaso, the film company he founded 25 years ago, has
produced 30 films, including "Unforgiven," "White Hunter, Black Heart,"
"Tightrope," "Bird," "Magnum Force" and "High Plains Drifter." The award was
presented by Arnold Schwarzenegger, who called Mr. Eastwood "a Hollywood
institution." In accepting the award, Mr. Eastwood turned to Mr. Schwarzenegger
and said, "Thank you, my son." He added, "If I were in Dirty Harry's sights and
he said, "Do you feel lucky?,' I'd say 'You're damn right I do.' '

A special Oscar for lifetime achievement was presented by Jack Nicholson to the
influential Italian director Michelangelo Antonioni, whose films include
"L'Avventura" "La Notte," "Blow-Up," and "The Passenger." Mr. Antonioni accepted
the award with a simple "grazie" after his wife, Enrica, delivered a short
speech thanking the academy.

The Oscar for costume design went to "The Adventures of Priscilla, Queen of the
Desert." In an evening notable for its lack of outrageous attire, Lizzy
Gardiner, who accepted the award with her co-winner, Tim Chappel, made a vivid
impression in a dress made of American Express gold cards.

"Ed Wood" won the Oscar for makeup, and "Speed" won for sound effects editing
and sound. John Toll received the Oscar for cinematography for "Legends of the
Fall." The Oscar for art direction went to "The Madness of King George."

Two films tied for the Oscar for live-action short: "Franz Kafka's It's a
Wonderful Life" and "Trevor." The Oscar for animated short film went to "Bob's
Birthday."

"A Time for Justice" won the Oscar for documentary short subject. The Oscar for
documentary features went to "Maya Lin: A Strong, Clear Vision," about the
architect who created the Vietnam Veterans Memorial in Washington. The academy
became the target of fierce criticism when it failed to nominate the widely
acclaimed "Hoop Dreams" in the documentary feature category.

The show ran a grueling three and a half hours, but Mr. Letterman offered hope.
"I know it's been a long night," he said, "but continental breakfast is
included."

LOAD-DATE: March 28, 1995

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photos: Three Oscar-winning performers: Dianne Wiest, left, in "Bullets
Over Broadway" (Brian Hamill/Miramax Films); Tom Hanks, center right, with Gary
Sinise in "Forrest Gump," (Phil Caruso/Paramount Pictures) and Martin Landau in
"Ed Wood." (Suzanne Tenner/Touchstone Pictures)

                   Copyright 1995 The New York Times Company

                              208 of 211 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                March 29, 1995, Wednesday, Late Edition - Final

Flag Symbolizes the Country We Share

SECTION: Section A;  Page 22;  Column 4;  Editorial Desk

LENGTH: 232 words


To the Editor:

I take issue with the Rev. George Campbell on the proper use of the word
"desecrate" (letter, March 27).  Webster's Third New International Dictionary
has this to say: "3: to treat (an object of veneration, reverent devotion, or
admiration) irreverently or contemptuously often in a way to provoke outrage on
the part of others." This would seem to cover the flag.

Moreover, the flag in churches alongside the denominational flag stands for the
country, not the Government. I am sure Mr. Campbell would agree that most
participants in civil rights and so-called antiwar demonstrations were
protesting against the policies of the Government, not against the country.

If the flag's presence in churches indicates "the state has come to be seen as
the embodiment of the heavenly kingdom," that is his particular (and, in my
opinion, extreme) view, and most Americans are intelligent enough to make the
distinction.

We all live in this country, for better or for worse (very few of the
demonstrators who waved Vietcong flags went to live in Vietnam), and the flag
symbolizes it.

This does not necessarily mean that those of us who oppose desecration of the
flag are infected with "the insidious germ of nationalism," any more than it
means we desecrate the flag by criticizing the policies of our Government.

ARTHUR J. DOMMEN
Bethesda, Md., March 27, 1995

LOAD-DATE: March 29, 1995

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Drawing.

TYPE: Letter

                   Copyright 1995 The New York Times Company

                              209 of 211 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 March 30, 1995, Thursday, Late Edition - Final

Turkey Moved on Iraq to Combat Terrorism;
In Iran, Who Dictates?

SECTION: Section A;  Page 22;  Column 5;  Editorial Desk

LENGTH: 458 words


To the Editor:

In "How to Trade With Iran" (column, March 24), A. M. Rosenthal has encouraged
the Administration to isolate Iran further as punishment for its many sins,
including that of dictatorship. Yet Mr. Rosenthal has consistently failed to
identify the present Iranian dictator.

Who indeed does rule Iran today with an iron fist? President Hashemi Rafsanjani?
The 270-seat Parliament? The supreme spiritual leader Ayatollah Ali Khamenei?
The National Consultative Assembly? Mr. Rosenthal, by his very omission, has
unwittingly underscored the reality of a nascent government by consensus and the
rule of law in Iran.

After a decade and a half, the post-revolutionary Constitution, which was framed
to avoid the concentration of power in one branch through a system of checks and
balances (sounds familiar?), is beginning to take hold. Public debate or even
protest no longer means an automatic jail sentence or social and professional
banishment.

Time and patience are required; Iran cannot simply shrug off several thousand
years of despotism and monarchy to become like Switzerland overnight. It is
vital for Washington to realize the importance of these trends to the long-range
security interests of the region and to encourage them, instead of continuing
its anachronistically punitive policy toward Teheran.

Iran's offer of a major contract to develop offshore oilfields to a subsidiary
of an American company was a sign of victory for those in Iran who want to put
an acrimonious past behind and get on with rebuilding the country and
re-establishing normal foreign relations. Perhaps, even after three years in
development, the offer was too early and unexpected. Future opportunities should
not be dismissed with the same quick anger.

If today normalization of relations with Vietnam, where thousands of Americans
lost their lives in combat, is possible, then surely similar possibilities in
regard to Iran exist. Iran's anger toward America, for its support of the Shah's
rule, became a matter which was ruthlessly exploited by politicians in both
countries. Today it is essentially a dead issue.

Iran's status in the eyes of Mr. Rosenthal, and those who agree with him, as a
"rogue nation" is owed in no small measure to the continuing isolation and
vilification of that country. By drawing Iran back into the international fold,
that country (with its ailing economy) will find it to its trade and diplomatic
advantages to comply further with international norms of conduct.

Seeing through the rhetoric of animosity between Iran and America now will
prevent grave problems in the geopolitically sensitive Persian Gulf region in
the future. Let the healing begin.

BEHROUS SABA
Los Angeles, March 26, 1995

LOAD-DATE: March 30, 1995

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Letter

                   Copyright 1995 The New York Times Company

                              210 of 211 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 March 30, 1995, Thursday, Late Edition - Final

Maj. Gen. John M. Dunn, 69, Military Aide to Vice Presidents

BYLINE: By J. MICHAEL ELLIOTT

SECTION: Section D;  Page 23;  Column 4;  National Desk

LENGTH: 409 words


John Michael Dunn, a veteran of three wars who rose to become a major general
and a military aide to two Vice Presidents, died on Friday at his home in
Arlington, Va. He was 69.

The cause was complications from pulmonary fibrosis, said his son Alan.

At the time of his death, General Dunn was president of the Can Manufacturers
Institute, a national trade association, a position he had held since 1976.

He was on the staff of Vice President Spiro T. Agnew in the second term of
President Richard M. Nixon. After Mr. Agnew's resignation in the fall of 1973,
General Dunn stayed on to serve his successor, Gerald R. Ford.

He began his stint on the Vice-Presidential staff as a military assistant and
rose to become an assistant in charge of foreign and economic affairs and
finally chief of staff. He handled relations with the National Security Council,
the Office of Management and Budget, the Council of Economic Advisers and the
Office of Science and Technology.

He stayed on the Vice-Presidential staff until early 1974, when he retired from
the military and became the principal assistant Secretary of Commerce for
domestic and international business. Later that year, he became executive
director of the Council on International Economic Policy, a Presidential
advisory group. He was also a liaison between the White House and Congress on
economic affairs.

Born in Los Angeles and reared in Natick, Mass., he needed his mother's
permission to enlist in the Army at age 17. After serving in World War II, he
entered Harvard University, graduating in 1949. He returned to the Army as an
officer and fought in the Korean War.

During his career, he received the Distinguished Service Medal, the Legion of
Merit, Silver and Bronze Stars, the Purple Heart with two oak-leaf clusters and
the Commendation Medal with oak-leaf cluster, among others.

From 1963 until 1965, he was personal assistant to Ambassador Henry Cabot Lodge
in South Vietnam and executive secretary at the American Embassy in Saigon, now
Ho Chi Minh City.

He earned master's degrees in public affairs and international affairs and a
doctorate in political science, all from Princeton University. He was also a
graduate of the Command and General Staff College and the National War College.

Besides his son Alan, of Alexandria, Va., he is survived by his wife of 44
years, Mary Frances Hobbs Dunn; another son, Neal, of Panama City, Fla., and
three grandchildren.

NAME: John Michael Dunn

LOAD-DATE: March 30, 1995

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Obituary (Obit); Biography

                   Copyright 1995 The New York Times Company

                              211 of 211 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                  March 31, 1995, Friday, Late Edition - Final

H. L. Stevenson, 65; Reporter at U.P.I. Became Top Editor

BYLINE: By PAM BELLUCK

SECTION: Section A;  Page 29;  Column 3;  Metropolitan Desk

LENGTH: 304 words


H. L. Stevenson, a former editor in chief of United Press International who
presided over the news service's coverage during the era of the Vietnam War and
Watergate, died yesterday. He was 65 and lived in Rye, N.Y.

Mr. Stevenson had been in poor health since suffering a heart attack in
November, a family friend told U.P.I. He died at St. Joseph's Medical Center in
Stamford, Conn.

Mr. Stevenson spent 31 years working for U.P.I., becoming managing editor in
1965 and editor in chief and vice president in 1972. He oversaw coverage of the
Apollo moon landings, the Middle East and the energy crisis.

In 1972 and 1978, Mr. Stevenson and other U.P.I. executives visited China to
press for the reopening of Western news bureaus there. He wrote widely published
accounts of Chinese life under communism, and wrote articles on life in Cuba
under Fidel Castro after similar visits there during the early 1980's.

Mr. Stevenson was a trustee of the William Allen White Foundation at the
University of Kansas, and a Pulitzer Prize juror. For more than 10 years, he
wrote the U.P.I. Reporter, a weekly newsletter.

In 1983, Mr. Stevenson was promoted to executive vice president. In 1984, he
left the company and later became corporate editor of Crain Communications for
six years.

Born Nov. 23, 1929 in New Orleans, Hubert L. Stevenson grew up in Picayune,
Miss., where his first job in journalism was with the Picayune Item. He was an
infantry platoon sergeant from 1950 to 1952, and in 1953 he joined United Press
as a reporter in Jackson, Miss. In 1963, he became Southern Division news
manager, responsible for much of the coverage of the civil rights movement.

Mr. Stevenson is survived by his wife, the former LaVerne Harris, and a
daughter, Jennifer, a reporter for The St. Petersburg Times in Florida.


NAME: H. L. Stevenson

LOAD-DATE: March 31, 1995

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo: H. L. Stevenson. (United Press International, 1983)

TYPE: Obituary (Obit); Biography

                   Copyright 1995 The New York Times Company
