



Download Request: All Documents: 1-255
Time Of Request: Thursday, November 23, 2017  12:59:24 EST
Send To:

MEGADEAL, ACADEMIC UNIVERSE
UNIVERSITY OF CHICAGO
LIBRARY
CHICAGO, IL


Terms: ((Vietnam OR Viet Nam) and Date(geq(01/01/1993) and leq(03/31/1993)))


Source: The New York Times
Project ID:



                               1 of 255 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 January 1, 1993, Friday, Late Edition - Final

Abroad at Home;
New Year Resolution

BYLINE: By ANTHONY LEWIS;  A. M. Rosenthal is on vacation.

SECTION: Section A; Page 27; Column 1; Editorial Desk

LENGTH: 713 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON


American policy toward Yugoslavia has taken a crucial turn. As reported this
week by David Binder of The New York Times, President Bush has warned Serbian
leaders that if they extend their Bosnian onslaught to the mainly Albanian
province of Kosovo, the United States will intervene.

"In the event of conflict in Kosovo caused by Serbian action," a message to
President Slobodan Milosevic of Serbia said, "the United States will be prepared
to employ military force against the Serbs in Kosovo and in Serbia proper."

The message means that, however belatedly, the Bush Administration has perceived
the geopolitical threat in Serbian aggression. By drawing the line at Kosovo, it
hopes to avoid a wider war that might bring in Greece, Turkey and others.

In more personal terms, it means that George Bush has emerged from a year of
weakness, evasion and wishful thinking on the Yugoslav question. As part of the
last burst of energy that has taken him this New Year's weekend to Arabia,
Africa and Russia, he has at last found the resolution -- the backbone -- to
confront the Serbian killers.

How much human disaster might have been avoided if Mr. Bush had been decisive
earlier: how many thousands of Bosnian lives saved, how many millions left
peacefully in their homes instead of becoming refugees.

Suppose that President Bush had sent a similar message when the Serbs bombarded
the ancient Croatian city of Dubrovnik 14 months ago. Suppose he had told Mr.
Milosevic, "If Serbian shelling of Dubrovnik continues, the United States is
prepared to use military force against the Serbs there and in Serbia proper."

I believe that Mr. Milosevic, like most tyrants, would have retreated before a
show of strength. The time to stop dictators is at the beginning of their
aggression, as we should have learned from the terrible example of Hitler.

Or suppose that Mr. Bush had shown such determination when the Serbs, 11 months
ago, began their siege of Sarajevo. Suppose he had told Mr. Milosevic and his
Serbian puppets in Bosnia to stop their assault or face American bombs. I think
that Bosnia's Muslims would have been spared the genocide that followed.

Those opposed to the threat of American military intervention warned that it
might lead us into another Vietnam. But the use of U.S. ground forces was never
desirable or necessary.

George Kenney, acting chief of Yugoslav affairs in the State Department until he
resigned in protest in August, argued cogently for the use of American air
power. As he explained in the last issue of World Policy Journal, U.S. planes
could easily have grounded Serbian aircraft, not just in Bosnia but in Serbia --
and knocked out many of the heavy weapons used against Sarajevo and other
cities.

Air power could indeed have done much more, and still could. Modern weapons
could quickly knock out Serbia's supplies of gasoline and gas. Munitions dumps
are easy targets.

Of course no one should want to make attacks of that kind on Serbia, attacks
that will cost lives. But it would never have been necessary to make them, in my
judgment, if the Serbian leaders had had to take the U.S. and its European
allies seriously.

Serbian leaders, however infected by the virus of nationalism, know
realistically enough what American and other NATO air power can do. That is why,
right now, they are crying so shrilly against the possibility of Western
intervention.

Perhaps, somehow, Cyrus Vance and Lord Owen can patch together a peace formula
for Bosnia in their meetings this weekend. If not, the only way to save the
remaining Bosnian Muslims from cold, starvation and massacre will be to use
Western muscle: to protect relief efforts and, when necessary, silence the
Serbian gunners.

More and more Americans, and Europeans, believe that the line of humanity must
be drawn before the ultimate tragedy in Bosnia, not after. But time is running
out.

George Bush has taken notably decisive actions as President. But on some of the
gravest issues, action has followed long delay and equivocation. He was numb to
the great changes in Russia until prodded to move. He wheedled Saddam Hussein
until the Kuwait invasion. And he has wasted a cruel year in Yugoslavia. Now is
his last chance to redeem that tragic mistake.

LOAD-DATE: January 1, 1993

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Op-Ed

                   Copyright 1993 The New York Times Company


                               2 of 255 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                January 2, 1993, Saturday, Late Edition - Final

Jean Mayer, 72, Nutritionist Who Led Tufts, Dies

BYLINE: By ROBERT D. McFADDEN

SECTION: Section 1; Page 9; Column 1; National Desk

LENGTH: 1372 words


Dr. Jean Mayer, the Chancellor and former president of Tufts University whose
work as a nutritionist helped clarify the nature of hunger and obesity and
expanded the Federal food stamp and school lunch programs, died yesterday in
Sarasota, Fla., where he was vacationing. He was 72 and lived in Boston.

Dr. Mayer, who was elevated to Chancellor on Sept. 1 after 16 years as the
university's president, died of a heart attack, said Gail Bambrick, associate
director of communications for Tufts, in Medford, Mass.

In a multifaceted career that spanned a half-century, the French-born Dr. Mayer
earned the highest academic honors, was a hero of the Free French forces in
World War II, became one of the world's leading nutritionists and directed
pioneering research into problems of poverty, malnutrition, aging and obesity.

He also served as an adviser to three Presidents, helped develop national
policies to combat hunger and improve nutrition among poor and elderly people,
wrote 750 scientific papers and 10 books, taught for 25 years at Harvard and
transformed Tufts from a small liberal arts college into a research university
of international reputation.

Blend of New and Old Worlds

A small, bespectacled man who became an American citizen after the war but never
lost his French accent or Gallic jauntiness, Dr. Mayer (pronounced my-YAIR), was
a perfect blend of European intellectual and American pragmatist: a charming,
talkative, often stubborn educator who pushed the frontiers of knowledge in the
laboratory and fought hunger and malnutrition wherever they flourished.

His personal philosophy -- that scholarship, research and teaching must be
dedicated to solving pressing world problems -- helped to establish Tufts as a
leader in interdisciplinary approaches to sustaining the environment, fostering
good nutrition and preventing famine.

"The goal of ending hunger requires involvement, and Jean Mayer is an example of
the rare breed of individual who has never hesitated to get involved when he saw
a need," President Bush said in presenting the Presidential End Hunger Award to
Dr. Mayer in 1989. Last year, he received another Presidential award from Mr.
Bush for his environmental and conservation work.

Senator Edward M. Kennedy, Democrat of Massachusetts, praised Dr. Mayer
yesterday, saying: "Jean Mayer made hunger unacceptable in America, and today
millions of healthy children have him to thank. All of us must continue his work
until hunger is completely eliminated in this country."

Advised Presidents

As an adviser to President Richard M. Nixon, Dr. Mayer organized the 1969 White
House Conference on Food, Nutrition and Health, which assembled medical and
nutritional experts, food producers, government officials and others and led to
the introduction of food stamps for the poor in 307 counties and an expansion of
the school lunch program for needy children.

Dr. Mayer had hoped for far more from the conference. His recommendations
included a nationwide extension of food-assistance programs for the poor, a
minimum annual income of $5,500 for a family of four, a national system for
health and disability insurance, increased nutrition education, a 50 percent
increase in Social Security benefits and mandatory enrichment of basic foods.

Also in 1969, Dr. Mayer led a mission to Biafra, in Nigeria, during the fighting
at the time. He and his colleagues assessed starvation and other problems amid
daily bombings that forced them to take cover in trenches, bunkers and ditches.
His report to the President led to increase shipments of food, drugs and other
relief supplies.

Many Relief Missions

He also took part in relief missions to India, Ghana, the Ivory Coast and other
impoverished nations, and in 1966 was among the country's first scientists to
speak out against the use of herbicides to kill crops and foliage cover used by
the enemy in the Vietnam war.

Many of his social ideas stemmed from his own pioneering research, notably his
studies on obesity and the regulation of hunger. As a researcher at Harvard in
the 1950's, he was credited with having discovered how hunger is regulated by
the amount of glucose in the blood.

Focusing on obesity, which he called a "disease of civilization," he discovered
how levels of phosphorus in the blood, the production of insulin and the
function of the hypothalamus -- the brain's center for hunger and satiation --
contribute to excess weight.

He was early to note that obesity, combined with smoking, high-cholesterol
foods, high blood pressure and lack of exercise, was a main cause of coronary
heart disease among middle-aged American men and he advocated exercise to
control weight and maintain health.

Accomplishments at Tufts

After more than 25 years of teaching and research at Harvard, Dr. Mayer was
named president of Tufts in 1976. In his 16-year tenure, he was credited with
giving the university a new sense of identity, bringing it out from under the
shadow of neighboring Harvard and the Massachusetts Institute of Technology.

He raised the endowment to $200 million from $30 million, completed a $145
million drive for capital construction, created a graduate school of nutrition,
built New England's only school of veterinary medicine and established a center
for environmental management.

Critics said that in his drive to raise money and the university's name, he
favored graduate schools and slighted the undergraduate programs. But others
noted that he had built new undergraduate centers for science, languages and the
arts, as well as a new dormitory, and had raised admissions standards and the
academic quality of the undergraduate student body.

When he assumed the new post of Chancellor of the 6,500-student university, he
planned to oversee development of new centers for biotechnology and
pharmaceutical research. He was succeeded as president by John DiBiaggio, the
president of Michigan State University.

Honors in Student Days

Jean Mayer was born in Paris on Feb. 19, 1920. His father was one of France's
most noted physiologists, and Jean won national prizes as a lycee student and at
the University of Paris, where he matriculated in 1936 and took degrees with
high honors in 1937, 1938 and 1939.

After the outbreak of World War II, Dr. Mayer was commissioned a second
lieutenant in the field artillery and was captured by German forces in 1940. He
escaped from a prison camp after shooting a guard, served with the French
underground and as an agent for British intelligence in Vichy and later was on
the staff of General Charles de Gaulle in London.

He fought with Free French and Allied forces in North Africa, Italy and France
and saw action in the Allied invasion of southern France and in the Battle of
the Bulge. He received 14 military decorations, including the Croix de Guerre.

After the war, he married an American, Elizabeth Van Huysen, and settled in the
United States. As a Rockefeller Foundation Fellow from 1946 to 1948, he studied
at Yale and obtained a doctorate in physiological chemistry. In 1950, he joined
the faculty at Harvard and combined teaching and research with work as a
lecturer, writer and consultant for many organizations.

Adviser to Many Groups

At various times, he was an adviser to the United Nations Economic and Social
Council and the Food and Agriculture Organization, the United States Public
Health Service and the National Academy of Sciences. He helped to found the
National Council on Hunger and Malnutrition in the United States.

As an adviser to President Nixon and to Presidents Gerald R. Ford and Jimmy
Carter, he often told the Federal Government that it was not doing enough, in
his view, to fight hunger. He also testified often before Congressional
committees and recommended improving nutrition for pregnant women, infants,
nursing mothers, American Indians, the aged and poor school children.

Besides his wife, Dr. Mayer is survived by four sons, Andre, of Cambridge,
Mass., John-Paul, of Chelsea, Mass., Theodore, of Larchmont, N.Y., and Pierre,
of North Reading, Mass.; a daughter, Laura Mayer of Cambridge; a sister, Dr.
Genevieve Masse of Rennes, France, and five grandchildren.

NAME: Jean Mayer

LOAD-DATE: January 2, 1993

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo: Dr. Jean Mayer (The New York Times, 1986)

TYPE: Biography

                   Copyright 1993 The New York Times Company


                               3 of 255 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                January 2, 1993, Saturday, Late Edition - Final

Let's Scrap the Council of Economic Advisers

SECTION: Section 1; Page 20; Column 4; Editorial Desk

LENGTH: 467 words


To the Editor:

In "Clintonomics Doesn't Need a Czar" (Op-Ed, Dec. 10), James Tobin and Robert
M. Solow urge the new Administration not to make the President's Council of
Economic Advisers a sideshow. What they ignore is that the council has, in fact,
become a sideshow, particularly under the Bush Administration.

Although the council at first, under the chairmanship of Leon Keiserling, kept a
low profile, under Prof. Walter Heller in the Kennedy-Johnson years, the council
became most effective and met its promise as visualized in the Employment Act of
1946.

Under the bold leadership of Professor Heller, the Kennedy-Johnson
Administrations cut personal and corporate income taxes substantially, with
liberalized depreciation rules and 7 percent investment tax credit for the
purchase of new plant and equipment. The immediate result was startling when the
inflation rate came down to around 2 percent, the unemployment rate was 3.6
percent, and the real gross national product grew more than 6 percent a year.

But the aftermath of the Vietnam War and the attendant inflation and high
unemployment, the so-called stagflation, led the council to decline in
influence. The council was swept by the events and tried anything to stem the
situation, such as wage-price control and the Nixon Administration's policy of
"phases," all of which ended in failure.

With President-elect Clinton's decision to establish a National Economic Council
to coordinate all economic policies, the Council of Economic Advisers will be
duplicative and relegated further to the sideline. It is time to think of
abolishing the council for a number of reasons.

The council has become redundant in economic information-gathering. The main
background research for policy discussions is done by economists at the Commerce
Department and the Office of Management and Budget, among others. They can carry
on the research for providing economic information to the public and for
formulating effective economic policy of the Administration.

Then, the Secretary of the Treasury, not the chairman of the council, has become
the Administration's chief economic spokesman. With the rise of power and
influence of the Office of Management and Budget in the Bush Administration, the
council has been weakened further to become ineffectual in making policy.

Finally, with the exceptions of Professors Tobin, Solow and a few others, the
council has rarely attracted the first-rate minds, mainly because they had
little access to the President or independent input in policy debate. It is time
for starting a bold and innovative policy-making apparatus, pragmatic and not
theory-bound, as the council has become.

ARVIN GHOSH
Assoc. Prof., Economics and Finance, William Paterson College
Wayne, N.J., Dec. 18, 1992

LOAD-DATE: January 2, 1993

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Drawing

TYPE: Letter

                   Copyright 1993 The New York Times Company


                               4 of 255 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 January 3, 1993, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

Choice for National Security Adviser Has a Long-Awaited Chance to Lead

BYLINE: By STEVEN A. HOLMES,  Special to The New York Times

SECTION: Section 1; Page 16; Column 1; National Desk

LENGTH: 1194 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, Jan. 2


As a youth working during the summer on a Connecticut farm, W. Anthony Lake
would walk behind tractors and toss bales of hay into a wagon. "One day," he
often promised himself, "I'm going to drive the tractor."

For several years, as a gentleman farmer raising 28 head of cattle on his
140-acre farm in Worthington, Mass., Mr. Lake has fulfilled his wish. Now, as
President-elect Bill Clinton's choice to become national security adviser, he is
about to climb into the driver's seat in his other field of endeavor: foreign
policy.

After two stints as a chief lieutenant to others who formulated the nation's
international policy, Mr. Lake is about the grasp the levers of power himself --
and hoping his new tour produces a happier ending than the last two.

Served Nixon and Carter

The first time around his conscience drove him away from the prestige and power
that came with being a trusted assistant to Henry A. Kissinger, then President
Richard M. Nixon's national security adviser. The second time it was the voters
who sent Mr. Lake packing when they turned out President Jimmy Carter -- a
defeat that was, in part, a rejection of policies that Mr. Lake, as director of
policy planning in the State Department, had helped devise.

"When the Carter Administration ended I thought he had been permanently tainted
for mistakes that were not his fault," said Jenonne Walker, who worked with Mr.
Lake in the State Department. "I'm really glad to have been proved wrong."

For Mr. Lake -- and thus for Mr. Clinton -- to avoid the fate of the last
Democratic Administration, they will have to chart a new foreign policy and
navigate a new bureaucratic landscape without the benefit of a map. The collapse
of the Soviet Union, the rise of ethnic conflicts and the use of military
intervention for humanitarian aims, as in Somalia, present nettlesome new
challenges that will require innovative solutions sustained by popular support
at home.

Career in Foreign Service

Mr. Lake brings with him a set of experiences and a personality that set him
apart from the men who have occupied the position in the past. Unlike Brent
Scowcroft, General Colin L. Powell, Robert C. MacFarlane and John M. Poindexter,
Mr. Lake is not a career military officer. Unlike Mr. Kissinger and Zbigniew
Brzezinski, he is not viewed as a self-promoter.

A career foreign-service officer, Mr. Lake has argued in books and articles that
the views of professional diplomats have not been given enough consideration in
recent years.

He supported the idea of self-determination for developing countries, but also
viewed "national liberation movements" with a jaundiced eye. During the 1992
campaign he was among the Clinton foreign-policy advisers who advocated a
hawkish stance on Bosnia.

"If you look at the people who have been around Clinton, for the most part, they
have had long-term relationships with him," said Richard Feinberg, who served
with Mr. Lake in the State Department. "But here's a guy who Clinton hardly
knows at all, and he makes him national security adviser. How how do you explain
that?

"I think the answer is that Tony is really an extraordinarily intelligent guy
who at the same time is self-effacing, not at all self-promoting and also very
loyal to the people he works with."

But Mr. Lake also carries the legacy of the Carter foreign policy, including its
successes and its shortcomings, especially its handling of the Iran hostage
crisis.

He was intimately involved in the formulation of Mr. Carter's policy toward
Rhodesia, where pressure by the United States and Britain finally forced the
white-minority government of Ian Smith to cede power in a peaceful transition to
majority rule.

On the other hand, Mr. Lake was part of the brain trust of Cyrus Vance, the
Secretary of State who advocated a more accommodating stance toward the Soviet
Union. That view took a beating from conservatives, and after the Soviet
invasion of Afghanistan, Mr. Carter himself adopted a tougher policy.

The basic tenets of Mr. Lake's view of foreign policy are that with the end of
the cold war, the terms "hawks" and "doves" are outmoded, and that with the
defeat in the primaries of isolationist candidates like Patrick J. Buchanan,
interventionism has won out.

The new foreign-policy debate, Mr. Lake has argued, is between those who, like
President Bush, see the world through a classic balance-of-power prism and those
who, like Mr. Clinton and himself, take a more "neo-Wilsonian" view in which the
United States uses its military and economic power to intervene in promoting
democracy.

Mr. Lake entered the foreign service in 1962 after completing post-graduate work
at Cambridge. A believer in President John F. Kennedy's anti-communist policy in
Southeast Asia, he volunteered to work in Vietnam.

In a revealing 1975 magazine article he wrote with his wife, Antonia, Mr. Lake
recalled his initial heady attraction to operating around powerful men who were
making important decisions -- for a time, he was a special assistant to Henry
Cabot Lodge, then the ambassador to South Vietnam -- and around military men of
action. In one passage he described his feelings when driving with soldiers in a
jeep and being handed a carbine in case of ambush:

"With the gun came the hope that someone would fire at us from the clumps of
trees lining the road, so I could fire back. Usually doubtful that I could shoot
another person, at that moment I was emotionally prepared to do so."

But gradually Mr. Lake became skeptical that the Vietnam War could be won and
more and more insecure about what prolonging the war was doing to the Vietnamese
people. In the same article he wrote of encountering the bodies of North
Vienamese soldiers who had been ripped apart by .50-caliber machine-gun fire.
Focusing on the corpse of one young soldier, Mr. Lake wrote: "His thin,
scholarly face seemed terribly out of place in the bloody mud of that ditch. He
seemed about my age."

The article stood out from the bloodless descriptions typical of former
foreign-service officers, especially since the Lakes wrote about how the war and
Mr. Lake's "loyalty to the Department of State in the face of inhuman working
hours and inhuman policies" had strained their marriage.

Top Kissinger Aide

During the early years of the Nixon Administration, Mr. Lake was a special
assistant to Mr. Kissinger, who he believed would end the war quickly.
Considered a favorite of Mr. Kissinger, Mr. Lake was one of the aides who
accompanied him to secret peace talks in Paris with North Vietnamese leaders.

But in 1970, Mr. Lake, along with two other security council staff members
resigned in protest over the invasion of Cambodia. They went to work for Senator
Edmund S. Muskie, a likely Democratic challenger to President Nixon in the 1972
election. Two weeks after he resigned, Mr. Kissinger authorized the tapping of
Mr. Lake's home telephone.

Mr. Lake later sued Mr. Kissinger over the wiretapping. The suit was settled in
1989 with Mr. Kissinger writing a letter that was not quite an apology, but in
which he admitted that the wiretap had been "unconstitutional."

NAME: W. Anthony Lake

LOAD-DATE: January 3, 1993

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo: W. Anthony Lake on his farm in Worthington, Mass. Mr. Lake, who
has taught international relations at Mount Holyoke College, was chosen by
President-elect Bill Clinton to be National Security Adviser. (Jon Crispin for
The New York Times)

TYPE: Biography

                   Copyright 1993 The New York Times Company


                               5 of 255 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 January 3, 1993, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

Hail to Chiefs Without Military Pasts

BYLINE: By HERBERT MITGANG

SECTION: Section 1; Page 20; Column 1; National Desk

LENGTH: 861 words


When President-elect Bill Clinton is sworn in Jan. 20, he becomes the
constitutional Commander in Chief of the Army and Navy of the United States.  He
inherits immediate military decisions wherever American armed forces are now
committed.

In the Presidential campaign, this constitutional duty was often cited as an
issue. After all, President Bush was a decorated Navy pilot in World War II; Mr.
Clinton clearly did not want any part of the Vietnam War except to oppose it.
But, historically, has previous military service mattered in the White House?

Mr. Clinton will join 12 Presidents -- several ranked great or near-great by
historians -- who were never in uniform: John Adams, Thomas Jefferson, John
Quincy Adams, Martin Van Buren, Millard Fillmore, Grover Cleveland, William
Howard Taft, Woodrow Wilson, Warren G. Harding, Calvin Coolidge, Herbert Hoover
and Franklin D. Roosevelt.

In the post-Revolutionary period, Jefferson and the two Adamses could hardly be
accused of lacking character or trust -- anti-Clinton phrases heard in 1992.
Although Taft did not wear brass, he did serve as a Secretary of War, and while
Franklin Roosevelt was neither a midshipman nor admiral, he had been an
Assistant Secretary of the Navy.

Cleveland Paid to Avoid War

If anyone could have been vulnerable on grounds of avoiding military service, it
was Cleveland. During the Civil War, he was drafted but instead of leaving his
law practice, he bought his way out by paying $150 to a substitute, a perfectly
legal option under the Conscription Act of 1863. Cleveland's "draft dodging" was
not an issue when he was elected the 22d and 24th President. As Allan Nevins
wrote, "He was completely lacking in martial spirit."

By far the President with the toughest role as Commander in Chief was Abraham
Lincoln. The breakup of the Union meant that the Confederacy's guns at times
were within shelling distance of the capital. Lincoln took charge boldly,
prodding his generals into action, dismissing one after another who were
incapable of commanding the Army of the Potomac. Halfway through the Civil War,
Lincoln's own leadership led to his choice of Gen. Ulysses S. Grant to lead the
Union forces.

What military experience did Lincoln bring to Commander in Chief? His own last
rank was private in the Illinois militia. He enlisted in a company of volunteers
to halt a tribe of Indians who were on the warpath in the state, was elected
captain and was reprimanded twice (for failing to stop his men from stealing
liquor and getting drunk, and for discharging a weapon in camp). Then, after 30
days, he re-enlisted as a private for 20 days in another company and, when his
time was up, again enlisted as a private for 30 days as an intelligence scout.
In less than three months of military service, for which he earned $125, the
only action he saw, as he later said, was against mosquitoes.

Lincoln's Antiwar Views

Furthermore, Lincoln's antimilitary views were delivered in the House of
Representatives when he was a Congressman strongly opposed to the war against
Mexico in 1848. He called military glory "that attractive rainbow, that rises in
showers of blood -- that serpent's eye, that charms to destroy."

Future Presidents had notable Civil War records, particularly Grant. In
addition, Rutherford B. Hayes, James A. Garfield, Chester A. Arthur and Benjamin
Harrison all had once held the rank of brigadier or major general. (Andrew
Johnson served as military governor of Tennessee before Lincoln chose him as his
running mate in 1864.) The last of the Civil War officers in the White House was
William McKinley, who had gone from private to brevet major and then, as
President, was Commander in Chief of the "splendid little war" against Spain --
an imperial American war that brought fame and the Presidency to Col. Theodore
Roosevelt.

Franklin Roosevelt's death near the end of World War II led a World War I Army
major, Vice President Harry S. Truman, into the Oval Office to complete the job
and make the controversial decision to drop nuclear bombs Hiroshima and
Nagasaki. Gen. Dwight D. Eisenhower, a professional soldier, became the
unbeatable war hero who made his reputation as an Allied commander in World War
II. But scholars do not place him in the top rank of peacetime Presidents.

The postwar Presidents -- John F. Kennedy, Lyndon B. Johnson, Richard M. Nixon,
Gerald R. Ford, Ronald Reagan and George Bush -- all were young officers in
World War II (Jimmy Carter served in the Navy after the war).  None held high
rank. Mr. Reagan served with a Hollywood movie unit, hardly preparation for a
real war room. Mr. Carter, an Annapolis graduate, was probably best trained to
be a modern Commander in Chief.

Most American Presidents never had to send armies into battle. With the end of
the cold war, Mr. Clinton's immediate challenge may well be different as
Commander in Chief: to wind down costly military programs and contribute to
international peacekeeping forces. Avoiding small wars in troubled corners of
the world may be as much of a test of leadership for the new Commander in Chief
as sending in the Marines.


LOAD-DATE: January 3, 1993

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1993 The New York Times Company


                               6 of 255 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 January 3, 1993, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

Khmer Rouge Say U.N. Is Backing Vietnam

BYLINE: AP

SECTION: Section 1; Page 9; Column 5; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 176 words

DATELINE: PHNOM PENH, Cambodia, Jan. 2


The Khmer Rouge guerrillas, who have refused to abide by a peace agreement,
accused United Nations peacekeeping troops today of siding with the Cambodian
Government.

The statement underlined the rebels' growing resistance to the pact, which was
signed last year. It was issued two days after the United Nations accused the
guerrillas of shelling a group of peacekeepers in northwestern Siem Reap
province; the Khmer Rouge denied that assertion today, saying news reports of
the attack were "deliberately distorted."

"Untac has not been neutral," the statement said. "Untac has been totally,
bluntly and shamelessly siding with Vietnam and its puppets." Untac, or the
United Nations Transitional Authority in Cambodia, has been overseeing
disarmament and voter registration for elections next year.

The Khmer Rouge ruled Cambodia for three years before Vietnam invaded in late
1978 and installed a new Government. The guerrillas have refused to give up
their weapons or to confine their troops to barracks, as required under the
peace pact.

LOAD-DATE: January 3, 1993

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1993 The New York Times Company


                               7 of 255 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 January 3, 1993, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

Methods Differ for Transporting Cash

BYLINE: By RAYMOND HERNANDEZ

SECTION: Section 1; Page 26; Column 1; Metropolitan Desk

LENGTH: 909 words


Their trade routes are similar; bustling highways and streets over which they
haul shipments of cash while guarding against thieves. But that is where most of
the similarities end between two of the city's longtime armored courier
services.

The Coin Devices Corporation dispatches hulking armored trucks from a gritty
industrial section of Brooklyn, while the Epic Security Corporation keeps a
fleet of sleek vans near its main office in Manhattan.

In the largely unregulated money-courier industry, the operations of these two
companies illustrate the wide range of methods used to protect shipments and
also underscore the disagreements within the industry as to what constitutes
security. The industry has come under scrutiny since last week's $8 million
robbery of the Hudson Armored Car and Courier Service in Brooklyn.

Cargoes of Cash

Each day, massive cash cargoes move through a terminal, a fortress-like
warehouse, in Williamsburg, Brooklyn. It is there that crews from Coin Devices
operate, depending largely on a fleet of armored trucks, each manned by a driver
and two guards, all armed with 9-millimeter semiautomatic handguns or
.38-caliber revolvers.

The company believes this sort of security is essential. "If a company accepts
less, frequently they get bit," said Kip Koehler, founder and chief operating
officer of the Coin Depot Corporation, the parent company of Coin Devices.

Inside the two-story structure, workers answer to Jim Land, a retired Marine
officer who manages the plant. Mr. Land likens his job to leading troops in
Vietnam, where he served for three years.

'Out on Patrol'

"In Vietnam, I'd send men out on patrol," said Mr. Land, who carries a
.45-caliber handgun. "It's the same thing here."

Mr. Land, who is known as "the major," says he runs a tight ship, and to get a
job with the company, an applicant must undergo an extensive evaluation:
interviews, lie-detector tests, drug screenings, credit checks, and
psychological evaluations. Coin Devices employs 350 armed couriers, cashiers and
supervisors. The average salary for a courier is about $30,000 a year.

Even after being hired, employees are under considerable scrutiny. When
returning from daily runs, the crews deposit cash from supermarkets, banks,
check-cashing outlets and other clients with tellers who meticulously record the
delivery. Then, in a room sealed by a steel doors, cashiers count out money
inside cubicles beneath the gaze of cameras. In another room monitored by
cameras, workers stuff stacks of cash into bags, which are sewn shut.

"Adherence to procedure is the key," said Mr. Land. "It's not much different
from being in the Marine Corps."

In recent years, armored trucks owned by Coin Devices have been the target of
one robbery, in which $50,000 was stolen, and two unsuccessful attempts in which
guards were able to stop the thieves. A guard was shot and killed during one of
the unsuccessful robberies.

Quickness Counts

For safety reasons, crews try to complete each pickup and delivery in three to
five minutes.

"Of course we're targets," said Carlos Rodriguez, a 26-year-old driver. "People
know who we are. They see us coming every day. They know we're coming back, too.
They got the upper hand. That's why you got to be alert all the time."

But despite those concerns, one criminology expert, Mark J. Lerner, questions
the practices of companies like Coin Devices.

His preoccupation is not simply academic. Mr. Lerner is the president of Epic
Security, an unusual courier service based in an office building on the Upper
West Side.

The company, gave up on armored trucks about five years ago because they were
too expensive to fuel and maintain. Instead, it uses vans, some armored, which
are operated by a driver and a guard, each armed with a handgun.

And while Mr. Lerner acknowledges that critics accuse him of skimping in an
industry where security is sometimes sacrificed to cut cost, he defends his
practice as sound.

The key to his operation, he says, is the fact that couriers will not deliver or
pick up more than $250,000 at a time. Other companies routinely transport
millions of dollars. In addition, Mr. Lerner is reluctant to store money inside
the office's vaults; the company's policy is for guards to deposit cash pickups
immediately at banks.

Limiting the Size of Pickups

The reason for these guidelines is simple, Mr. Lerner said. The chances for
robbery -- from outsiders or insiders -- increases as money piles up either in
vans or the office.

"I won't put all my eggs in one basket," Mr. Lerner said, adding that he was
able to keep costs such as insurance down and thereby provide competitive rates.
"Every time something like this Hudson job happens, I think, 'Mark, you were
smart.' "

In its 15 years in business, Mr. Lerner said, Epic has never had a robbery at
its offices. Last year, three couriers were robbed, he said, with a total loss
of about $48,000.

Epic would not disclose the number of couriers and vans it has, citing security
concerns. The average salary for couriers is $25,000 a year, according to the
company.

Mr. Lerner contends that Epic's courier system is particularly suited for many
businesses in the New York area that do not handle huge amounts of money daily.
"I provide a service more in line with the actual amounts of money that
government agencies and businesses need shipped and delivered," he said.

LOAD-DATE: January 3, 1993

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo: The Coin Devices Corporation competes in New York City's largely
unregulated money-courier industry. Coin Devices' fleet of armored trucks, each
manned by a driver and two well-armed guards, delivers clients' cash for
verification to a currency processing warehouse in Williamsburg, Brooklyn.
(Brian Palmer for The New York Times)

                   Copyright 1993 The New York Times Company


                               8 of 255 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 January 3, 1993, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

Auguring Well: 1968 Plus 25;
Abbie, Eldridge and RFK: Heavy Flashback, Man

BYLINE: By N.R. KLEINFIELD

SECTION: Section 4; Page 3; Column 2; Week in Review Desk

LENGTH: 542 words


Ouch. It is here already. The new year brings with it the 25th -- that's right,
25th -- anniversary of 1968, that surreal year of dissent that pulsated with
hedonism and turbulence. It can't have been that long ago, but it was, and for
the children of the sixties it doesn't ease their cholesterol count to know that
bell-bottoms and platform shoes are back.

Get ready for the maudlin recollections, for celebrators to exhume the frayed
and corroded images. So much to remember of those 365 days when it was vital to
be alienated. The Vietnam War raged and students wrested control of campuses.
Cities were torched. Dr. Martin Luther King Jr. loosed the Poor People's
Campaign. The New Left stormed into prominence, putting the world on notice that
the apocalypse was near. Timothy Leary was urging everyone to turn on to LSD and
drop out. President Johnson chose not to run for reelection. Dr. King and Robert
F. Kennedy were gunned down.

On and on the political impedimenta. Bobby Seale and fellow Black Panthers
behind bars. Eldridge Cleaver arrested during a shoot-out. Baby expert Benjamin
Spock on trial for opposing the draft. The Chicago 7 of Abbie Hoffman, Jerry
Rubin, Tom Hayden and cohorts rounded up for clashing with police during the
Democratic National Convention. The Catonsville 9 and the Milwaukee 14
destroying draft records.

As we now know, the apocalypse chose not to come. The New Left, torn asunder by
its violent impulses, appeared to crumble just two years later in the wake of
the Kent State shootings. Making sense of 1968 is ever so difficult, and many
who were in college at the time, drawing on hindsight, prefer to recoil from the
flashbacks of the self-indulgent excesses. Others wish they remained hippies .
It is easy to ridicule the year and easy to mythicize it, harder to admit that
it was a mixed bag not suitable for swift characterization.

Undoubtedly, this will be a year of considerable personal revisionism. For those
like myself who were students in 1968, it's going to be touchy going. It will be
necessary to respond to interminable questions about to where you were when, and
to formulate droll responses if the facts don't sound so good anymore. Many who
had a quiet year in Chicopee will proudly assert that, yes, they were Abbie
Hoffman's right-hand man in Chicago, absolutely they were gassed. Yes, it was
indeed they who took the admissions office. Free love? You better believe it. Or
for those embarrassed by it all: "I knew nothing would come of all those love
beads and Yippies. I was studying Macedonia and cramming for business school."

Pardon me, but I must commence my own rehearsals before the mirror of time. No,
I narrowly missed the Day-Glo bus. It was another 10 years before I first saw
Chicago; no sign of Abbie. The college halls I entered were for classes. I still
don't know quite how to produce a home-made bomb. But, hey, give me credit, I
did wear platform shoes, inhale and call the President rather belittling names.
You bet I saw Janis Joplin sing. And okay, for a while , I thought the
apocalypse was hovering somewhere out there. But I kept a level head. When I
read those radical leaflets urging, "Burn your money," I balked. I bought more
bell-bottoms.

LOAD-DATE: January 3, 1993

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo: Relaxed anti-war protesters at the 1968 Democratic Convention
(Burt Glinn/Magnum)

                   Copyright 1993 The New York Times Company


                               9 of 255 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 January 3, 1993, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

ART VIEW;
In Installation Art, a Bit of the Spoiled Brat

BYLINE: By Roberta Smith

SECTION: Section 2; Page 31; Column 1; Arts & Leisure Desk

LENGTH: 2105 words

DATELINE: CHICAGO


Installation Art, the love child of late 60's idealism, may be turning into the
spoiled brat of the 90's, consuming quantities of materials, museum space and
attention without giving much in return. This is not to say that good
installation work does not exist. It is simply to make a modest proposal: enough
already.

This proposal came to mind at "Art at the Armory: Occupied Territory," an
exhibition organized by the Museum of Contemporary Art in Chicago. Fourteen
artists, three collaborative groups and a two-artist team were set loose in the
Chicago Avenue National Guard Armory to create new installation works or present
existing ones.

The show is a kind of swan song for the building: after it closes in three
weeks, the armory will be demolished to make way for a new Museum of
Contemporary Art, designed by a German architect, Josef Paul Kleihues.

It's also a kind of disaster. A deadly fun-house atmosphere builds from floor to
floor, as you encounter artworks, often under conditions of darkness, involving
quantities of video equipment or wrecked cars, mica, hay or knotted forms that
suggest burned bodies. They're all here, arrayed in the former classrooms,
basement, stairwells, and towers of this doomed structure.

The installations are intended to address three done-to-death themes --
identity, politics and the environment -- and to relate to the building's
history. But their main achievement is to prod a viewer to consider the present
state of installation, review its history and ask some questions.

Installation, or the environmental artwork, became a contender in the late
1960's and early 70's. Those were the days when the death of painting was
bruited about, along with the coming obsolescence of the museum. The place for
new art was the street, the desert, billboards, books -- anywhere but on the
wall.

There was also talk of greater purity, of art that would be difficult to buy and
sell, thus resistant to the corruptions of the marketplace. For not only did
paintings and sculptures represent exhausted traditions, they were portable,
salable objects that artists could turn out almost endlessly. Installations,
tailored to particular locations -- site-specific is the word -- would rise
above such pettiness. They would also be more real, forging a new critical
attitude toward both the art world and the larger world.

These days installation art seems to be everybody's favorite medium. Sculptors
do it, painters do it, even graduate students in art school do it. Big shows
like Documenta and the Carnegie International are overrun with it. It is present
in unprecedented quantities in museums, the very places it was supposed to
render obsolete.

It's not all bad. The most multimedia of art forms is often at its best in
quirky, highly specific sites or in commercial galleries. And some artists, like
Robert Gober, continue to push its perimeters in outstanding fashion, often with
the use of carefully handmade objects.

But in many ways the art of installation has become a series of conventions as
worn and familiar as painting and sculpture were said to be. And it has turned
out to be surprisingly portable and repeatable. For example, the installation
that Ilya Kabokov created for "Dislocations" at the Museum of Modern Art last
fall was similar to one he orchestrated for the Carnegie International a month
later.

Indeed, for many installation artists the white box of the gallery is just a
bigger canvas on which to paint the same image again and again. Others seem to
have confused art with stage design or with movieland special effects.

Many of these issues are brought into focus by "Art at the Armory." In fact, the
show's contents often illustrate the present state of installation art so
vividly that they might almost be taken as a guide to the medium's conventions
and problem spots.

Delusions of High-Tech

A lot of artists are spending too much time with sophisticated equipment in
darkened rooms, recreating the most prevalent esthetic experience of our age --
watching television and movies -- without being very profound or even very
entertaining. It's a case of seduction and instant abandonment in which the
flickering screen does most of the work.

The focal point of Francesc Torres's "Entropy, Destiny and Junk" is a
continuously running newsreel medley on video (the Los Angeles riots, the
attempt on President Reagan's life, Palestinians and Israelis, boxers in a ring)
that captures the attention mainly because the images are projected extra large
on an expanse of carefully raked sand. It's so beautiful, in a
department-store-window sort of way, that you start ignoring the imagery and its
heavy-handed political symbolism -- and even the rest of the piece, which
includes seven automobiles that have been in violent front-end collisions.

Bill Viola's "Theater of Memory," a 1985 work lent by the La Jolla Museum, finds
a better balance between form and meaning. On one wall of a large darkened room
in the armory's basement is an enormous projection of nothing but video static.
Facing it are the branches of an equally enormous uprooted tree, hung with tiny
bells set in motion by small electric fans. The gently tinkling bells and the
hissing screen create a poignant confrontation, like two alien creatures trying
to communicate.

Tatsuo Miyajima's installation, a dark space illuminated only by the blinking of
tiny digital counters, is beautiful, as his work always is. But the sameness of
the beauty is the problem; Miyajima's pieces are so similar they are beginning
to blend together.

The worst argument for combining art and technology is Lynn Hershmann's
interactive video, which enables the viewer to choose between fantasies with
video strangers. Heavy-handedly titled "Deep Contact," it is one of the show's
most pathetic moments.

The Shock of the Real

As Torres's wrecked cars suggest, installation art can imitate life to unusual
degrees, often by simply commandeering it. Doug Hall's installation, "The
Terrible Uncertainty of the Thing Described," uses video to overbearing effect,
projecting natural disasters on six big screens to the accompaniment of
ear-splitting Dolby sound. But the real climax of the piece is actual lightning
that, at 30-minute intervals and thanks to a Tesla-coil transformer, leaps
dramatically between two steel chairs in a mesh cage. There must be a name for a
spectacle, apart from amusement park rides and certain horror movies, that
reduces the spectator to speechless fear -- but it may not be art.

Equally sensational in a vastly more low-key way is Elizabeth Newman's
"Histories of Human Flesh," which involves, among other things, plastic bags of
breast milk labeled with the names of different babies or different countries.

It's probably just a matter of luck that nothing in the show involves the
imprisonment of live animals.

The Shock of the Old

In opposition to the taste for technology, installation art often overemphasizes
eroded materials and objects redolent of natural decay or human use. These finds
are usually so full of associations that the artist doesn't have to add much.
Much of the work proves that the nostalgic art of assemblages has not faded
away; it has simply become bigger and more dispersed.

For example, Jin Soo Kim's three-room installation involves accumulations of
rusted window counterweights, a wounded tailor's dummy, bandaged chairs and
rusted wire wrapped in gauze dipped in plaster -- the overall effect being a
mournful, overly tasteful suggestion of human absence.

Elizabeth Newman uses similar devices in a more refined, interior-designerish
manner, juxtaposing found objects with subtly altered ones and placing them
artfully around three rooms in one of the armory's towers. Her props include a
large grid of tiny shelves, each compartment filled with a roll of gauze and
dusted with talcum powder; a rusted shelf displaying plaster baby's feet; dried
leaves; a rusted iron table with porcelain basins filled with water and
disintegrating bars of soap; a worn child's blanket hanging on a rusty towel
rack. Everything is pregnant with ambiguous meaning, a sense of unspecified
ritual and loss. But the main sensation is one of watching preciousness go off
the charts.

Going for the Jugular



Installation art can also provide a walk-in human interest story, by
sensationalizing inherently heart-rending topics in three-dimensional space. At
the armory, the Cleveland artists' collective known as Todt has reassembled
"Womb Wars," an inane and garish amalgam of steel catwalks, medical equipment,
and illuminated images of fetuses and dissected bodies -- each luridly charged
part contributing to a hectoring whole.

Even more shrill is "The Lazaretto," the work of an anonymous artists'
collective from New York. The piece uses poignant statements from people with
AIDS and a horrific tableau of a mummylike figure (resembling Norman Bates's
mother) in a cluttered room. No one needs to be convinced of the tragedy of
AIDS, much less in an offensively lazy style that crosses "Friday the 13th" with
Red Grooms.

The sound of plucked heartstrings is equally deafening in the rooms containing
the stretcher paintings of Toi Hoang, a Vietnamese artist. The crudely made
stretchers, stained to suggest filth, gore and burning, are positioned both
horizontally and vertically, conjuring painting, hospitals and crucifixes. The
artist's inspiration is valid enough -- he lived in Vietnam during the war. And
he is not without talent. But a memorable life experience -- especially one that
has to be explained in a text panel -- does not necessarily make memorable art.

When More Is Just More

Another installation-art tactic is to display a lot of just one thing. Any
material, isolated and in unexpected quantity, stands a good chance of eliciting
a mild and fleeting sense of awe. At the armory, for example, Eve Andree Laramee
filled a huge cavity beneath the bleachers in the arena with hundreds of cubic
feet of mica, creating a shimmering avalanche. Salt mines, stored grain and
gravel quarries, which inspired Robert Smithson to far greater effect 20 years
ago, have a similar power. Michael Shaughnessy brings slightly more order to a
great deal of hay by fashioning it into two 20-foot-high wheels.

When Less Is More

In the end, the best pieces are those that let you come to them. They aren't
great, but their modesty and sense of detail are engaging.

In the building's three stairwells, the architectural team of Diller & Scofidio
has created an unexpectedly successful update on Story Art, that minor strain of
Conceptualism. Their piece presents tales of people under surveillance, and
elaborates on texts and images with live cameras and monitors that enable
visitors to observe other visitors while they are looking at the piece.

And in the context of so much darkness, Dara Birnbaum gets points not just for
leaving the lights on but also for using video in a way that shuns the
mysterious and emphasizes the personal. "Tiananmen Square: Break in
Transmission" recycles images taken from television news coverage of the Chinese
students' protest, imaginatively mixed and edited. For example, the scene
showing Dan Rather being taken off the air is repeated at increasingly slow
speeds, magnifying the tension of the event. Images are played on several
monitors suspended on metal armatures in a deserted room. Seeing this drama,
which was watched by the whole world, close up on small screens gives it an odd
and terrible intimacy, as if one were an isolated witness, alone with history.

The Chicago-based collective Haha has made the quietest and subtlest use of the
site, furnishing the armory's former V.I.P. apartment with drab Salvation Army
furniture and visibly wiring and plugging it for demolition. The resulting
environment is unusually site-specific, a depressingly anonymous space that
touches on the building's past and its future without hamming it up.

The Only Way Is Up

These aren't the only pieces in "Art at the Armory," but they are the ones that
have the most to say about the present state of installation art. At this
juncture, too much installation art takes both the fun and the work out of
looking at art. Most of it is more "done" than "made" -- preaching,
manipulating, trotting out seductive special effects, enveloping and
overwhelming. In other words, its creators take shortcuts rather than facing the
difficult task of embedding ideas in materials, or even in a room, and letting
the results speak for themselves.

LOAD-DATE: January 3, 1993

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photos: "The Terrible Uncertainty of the Thing Described" by Doug Hall
-- A spectacle that reduces a viewer to speechless fear. Eve Andree Laramee's
"Eroded Terrain of Memory" -- A mound of mica. "Sentient Plexus" by Jin Soo Kim
-- Wire, gauze and human absence. "Stretcher Series" by the Vietnamese artist
Toi Hoang -- Plucked heartstrings do not necessarily make for memorable art.
(Photographs by the Museum of Contemporary Art, Chicago)

TYPE: Review

                   Copyright 1993 The New York Times Company


                              10 of 255 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 January 4, 1993, Monday, Late Edition - Final

Books of The Times;
3 Enduring Journalists and Why They Endured

BYLINE: By HERBERT MITGANG

SECTION: Section C; Page 14; Column 3; Cultural Desk

LENGTH: 1002 words



Theodore H. White at Large
The Best of His Magazine Writing, 1939-1986
Edited by Edward T. Thompson
681 pages. A Cornelia and Michael Bessie Book/Pantheon Books. $35.

Forward Positions
The War Correspondence of Homer Bigart
Edited by Betsy Wade
Illustrated. 240 pages. University of Arkansas Press. $24.95.

The Swamp Root Chronicle
Adventures in the Word Trade
By Robert Manning
Illustrated. 431 pages. W. W. Norton. $24.95.

"Literature is news that stays news," Ezra Pound wrote in "ABC of Reading."

The books under review are the work of three notable newsmen -- Theodore H.
White (1915-1986), Homer W. Bigart (1907-1991) and Robert Manning -- who earned
the respect of their readers and the admiration of their colleagues. In
different ways, their best work shows that this can sometimes be true in
journalism, too.

White was a reporter with a sense of history, which is why the articles in
"Theodore H. White at Large," written between 1939 and 1986, hold up so
beautifully. White is best known to readers for his "Making of the President"
books, but these 55 pieces, selected by Edward T. Thompson, a former editor in
chief of Reader's Digest, recall a time when celebrity, royalty and Madonna
didn't dominate the news arks. Reportage is a fancy word for reporting, but it's
what White produced.

He ranged the dangerous and quixotic corners of the world, covering China,
Europe, American and world politics. Early on he saw the legacy of hate left by
the French colonialists when the Americans replaced them in Vietnam. Probably
his major contribution to international understanding came from his articles
that thundered out of China and Southeast Asia.

It did not hurt that White gained access to important sources with his charm,
fairness and ability to see the good side of questionable political characters.
Like so many other journalists, he was beguiled by the exterior attractiveness
of President John F. Kennedy and his circle. This led to one of the few times
White faltered: in Life Magazine after the assassination, he created the legend
that the Kennedy White House was Camelot.

In "Theodore H. White at Large," he defines the profession he honored: "A good
reporter is a cross between a beggar and a detective, a wheedler and a
prosecutor. This is how he collects facts. But the essence of his trade is to
know how to sift out of rumor, gossip and hearsay the essential facts and then
to arrange these facts so that a story comes out as close to the truth as he can
make it."

To war correspondents who saw him in action at military briefings and on the
battlefields, and among journalists at The New York Herald Tribune and The New
York Times, the newspapers where he spent his entire career, Homer Bigart was
revered as an ideal reporter. "Forward Positions," a collection of his war
correspondence chosen and edited by Betsy Wade, a Times colleague, illustrates
why.

Mr. Bigart was no war lover, but he thought his place should be with the
fighting men up front rather than with the chair-borne commandos in the rear
echelon. The heated dispatches in this valuable book cover bombing raids over
Germany, the invasion of Sicily, the ordeal under fire on the Anzio beachhead in
southern Italy, the landing on Corregidor in the Pacific, air raids over Japan,
hot and cold wars in Greece, the Korean War, the Israeli wars and the Vietnam
War.

He won two Pulitzer Prizes for his combat reporting in World War II and Korea.
As quoted by Ms. Wade in "Forward Positions," other correspondents going into
action were forewarned: "Stay away from Homer. He's always trying to build his
reputation at the cannon's mouth."

Mr. Bigart did not allow public-relations officers to deceive him. He could
recognize a con job about body counts, number games or victories that never
occurred because he had been there himself. Commanding generals protested his
reports and tried to suppress him without success.

At home and abroad, Homer Bigart could make the truth hurt by telling it in a
straightforward writing style that seems deceptively simple, until you try to do
it.

First as a reporter and then as an editor, Robert Manning, the author of "The
Swamp Root Chronicle," tried to retain his own sense of purpose. When he
couldn't, he quit or was dismissed. In his lighthearted yet outspoken memoir of
a half-century in "the word trade," Mr. Manning makes his career sound more like
fun than anguish. In an era when group journalism and managed journalism were
growing, he strove to be himself.

Mr. Manning started out as a copy boy in 1937 on The Binghamton Press, his
hometown paper in New York, moved on to The Associated Press and then to Time
magazine as a writer, senior editor and London bureau chief. His best writing in
the book is about such personalities as Ernest Hemingway and Henry Moore; much
more ephemeral are his portraits of Presidents.

Seeking to free himself from "Henry Luce's golden shackles," Mr. Manning
resigned from Time in 1960. The publisher asked him to remain, but Mr. Manning
replied: "The individualist has a place in group journalism but for all but the
merest handful there is much inhibition . . . Even though one may be shouting at
the top of his lungs, or lecturing with Demosthenic eloquence, the sound does
not pierce the walls that enclose the group."

After a stint as Assistant Secretary of State for Public Affairs in the Kennedy
Administration, Mr. Manning was editor in chief of The Atlantic Monthly for 16
years until 1980. His civilized encounters with Mr. Luce contrast sharply with
his difficulties, in and out of court, with Mortimer B. Zuckerman, the Boston
real-estate mogul who bought The Atlantic. Immediately naming himself "chairman
of the board of editors," Mr. Zuckerman removed Mr. Manning, beginning a series
of legal actions. Mr. Manning's half-bitter, half-humorous description of
dealing with Mr. Zuckerman makes for lively reading and helps explain the
volatility in American magazines today.

NAME: Theodore H. White; Homer Bigart; Robert Manning

LOAD-DATE: January 4, 1993

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photos: Robert Manning (Lilian Kemp/W. W. Norton); Theodore H. White
(Gary Gunderson, 1984); Homer Bigart (The New York Times)

TYPE: BiographyReview

                   Copyright 1993 The New York Times Company


                              11 of 255 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 January 4, 1993, Monday, Late Edition - Final

Results plus

SECTION: Section C; Page 2; Column 2; Sports Desk

LENGTH: 572 words



GOLF

Brooks Wins Easily
Mark Brooks shot an even-par 72 yesterday and cruised to a five-stroke victory
over Bob May in the $250,000 Pebble Beach Invitational in Pebble Beach, Calif.
Brooks finished at eight-under-par 208 for the three-round event, which was
shortened from 72 holes to 54 when Friday's second round was rained out.
Defending champion Loren Roberts and Duffy Waldorf tied for third at two-under
214. (AP)

COLLEGE BASKETBALL

Milestone in Missouri
Missouri's Norm Stewart became the 14th Division I coach to reach the
600-victory mark as the Tigers beat North Carolina-Asheville, 99-56, at home
yesterday behind 24 points by guard Mark Atkins. Stewart beat Indiana's Bobby
Knight to the milestone as the Tigers (7-2) won while the Hoosiers lost to
Kentucky. Stewart became the fourth active coach to reach 600 career victories.
His record in 32 seasons is 600-294, including 503-252 in 25 seasons at
Missouri. The Tigers led, 52-43, early in the second half before blowing the
game open with a 42-5 run, putting them up, 94-48, with 3 minutes 30 seconds
remaining.  (AP)

California 84, Texas Southern 69: California now knows that basketball can be a
struggle on both coasts. Coming off back-to-back losses in the Seton
Hall-Meadowlands tournament, the No. 19 Bears returned home and beat Texas
Southern, 84-69, but the game was much closer than Cal wanted. Texas Southern
(2-7) trailed by just 49-47 with 10:07 to go before Cal regrouped in time to put
the game away. The Bears are now 6-2. (AP)

MARATHON

Kurtis Is First in Hanoi
The veteran American Doug Kurtis beat British runner Tim Soutar by more than 10
minutes in Hanoi's first international marathon yesterday, cheered by thousands
of Vietnamese. Kurtis, 40, of Northville, Mich., needed 2 hours 39 minutes 14
seconds on the 26-mile 385-yard course around the scenic Lake of the Restored
Sword, through the narrow streets of the old commercial district and past the
mausoleum of Ho Chi Minh. Soutar, 37, a lawyer based in Hong Kong, finished in
2:50:04. Soutar won last year's Ho Chi Minh City marathon in southern Vietnam.
(AP)

HORSE RACING

Wild Whirl Is Winner
R.D. Wild Whirl took the lead early under Robbie Davis and widened it to four
lengths to win Aqueduct's $87,600 Paumonok Handicap yesterday. The 5-year-old
son of Island Whirl-Naughty Rita covered six furlongs on a fast track in 1:093/5
to earn $52,560 for Robert W. Dommel with his sixth victory in his last 12
starts. Forty Something was second. R.D. Wild Whirl returned $7.20, $5.20 and
$4.40 for $2 across the board. (AP)

TENNIS

France Defeats Israel
Nathalie Tauziat and Guy Forget scored contrasting victories last night to lift
France to victory over Israel and a place in the quarterfinals of the $490,000
Hopman Cup team championships in Perth, Australia. Tauziat beat Anna Smashnova,
6-1, 6-0, in the opening women's singles match, but Forget had to rally to beat
Amos Mansdorf, 6-2, 6-7 (2-7), 7-6 (7-2), after being a service break down in
the final set. France then added a mixed-doubles victory. The French, seeded
fifth, will now meet the fourth-seeded Americans, MaliVai Washington and Mary
Joe Fernandez, who had a first-round bye. Earlier, brother-sister combination
Andrei Medvedev and Natalya Medvedeva made a spectacular debut in the
tournament, giving Ukraine a 2-1 victory over seventh-seeded Austria. (AP)

LOAD-DATE: January 4, 1993

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1993 The New York Times Company


                              12 of 255 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 January 4, 1993, Monday, Late Edition - Final

Books of The Times;
3 Enduring Journalists and Why They Endured

BYLINE: By HERBERT MITGANG

SECTION: Section C; Page 14; Column 3; Cultural Desk

LENGTH: 1009 words



Theodore H. White at Large The Best of His Magazine Writing, 1939-1986 Edited by
Edward T. Thompson 681 pages. A Cornelia and Michael Bessie Book/Pantheon Books.
$35.



Forward Positions
The War Correspondence of Homer Bigart
Edited by Betsy Wade
Illustrated. 240 pages. University of Arkansas Press. $24.95.



The Swamp Root Chronicle
Adventures in the Word Trade
By Robert Manning
Illustrated. 431 pages. W. W. Norton. $24.95.

"Literature is news that stays news," Ezra Pound wrote in "ABC of Reading."

The books under review are the work of three notable newsmen -- Theodore H.
White (1915-1986), Homer W. Bigart (1907-1991) and Robert Manning -- who earned
the respect of their readers and the admiration of their colleagues. In
different ways, their best work shows that this can sometimes be true in
journalism, too.

White was a reporter with a sense of history, which is why the articles in
"Theodore H. White at Large," written between 1939 and 1986, hold up so
beautifully. White is best known to readers for his "Making of the President"
books, but these 55 pieces, selected by Edward T. Thompson, a former editor in
chief of Reader's Digest, recall a time when celebrity, royalty and Madonna
didn't dominate the news arks. Reportage is a fancy word for reporting, but it's
what White produced.

He ranged the dangerous and quixotic corners of the world, covering China,
Europe, American and world politics. Early on he saw the legacy of hate left by
the French colonialists when the Americans replaced them in Vietnam. Probably
his major contribution to international understanding came from his articles
that thundered out of China and Southeast Asia.

It did not hurt that White gained access to important sources with his charm,
fairness and ability to see the good side of questionable political characters.
Like so many other journalists, he was beguiled by the exterior attractiveness
of President John F. Kennedy and his circle. This led to one of the few times
White faltered: in Life Magazine after the assassination, he created the legend
that the Kennedy White House was Camelot.

In "Theodore H. White at Large," he defines the profession he honored: "A good
reporter is a cross between a beggar and a detective, a wheedler and a
prosecutor. This is how he collects facts. But the essence of his trade is to
know how to sift out of rumor, gossip and hearsay the essential facts and then
to arrange these facts so that a story comes out as close to the truth as he can
make it."

To war correspondents who saw him in action at military briefings and on the
battlefields, and among journalists at The New York Herald Tribune and The New
York Times, the newspapers where he spent his entire career, Homer Bigart was
revered as an ideal reporter. "Forward Positions," a collection of his war
correspondence chosen and edited by Betsy Wade, a Times colleague, illustrates
why.

Mr. Bigart was no war lover, but he thought his place should be with the
fighting men up front rather than with the chair-borne commandos in the rear
echelon. The heated dispatches in this valuable book cover bombing raids over
Germany, the invasion of Sicily, the ordeal under fire on the Anzio beachhead in
southern Italy, the landing on Corregidor in the Pacific, air raids over Japan,
hot and cold wars in Greece, the Korean War, the Israeli wars and the Vietnam
War.

He won two Pulitzer Prizes for his combat reporting in World War II and Korea.
As quoted by Ms. Wade in "Forward Positions," other correspondents going into
action were forewarned: "Stay away from Homer. He's always trying to build his
reputation at the cannon's mouth."

Mr. Bigart did not allow public-relations officers to deceive him. He could
recognize a con job about body counts, number games or victories that never
occurred because he had been there himself. Commanding generals protested his
reports and tried to suppress him without success.

At home and abroad, Homer Bigart could make the truth hurt by telling it in a
straightforward writing style that seems deceptively simple, until you try to do
it.

First as a reporter and then as an editor, Robert Manning, the author of "The
Swamp Root Chronicle," tried to retain his own sense of purpose. When he
couldn't, he quit or was dismissed. In his lighthearted yet outspoken memoir of
a half-century in "the word trade," Mr. Manning makes his career sound more like
fun than anguish. In an era when group journalism and managed journalism were
growing, he strove to be himself.

Mr. Manning started out as a copy boy in 1937 on The Binghamton Press, his
hometown paper in New York, moved on to The Associated Press and then to Time
magazine as a writer, senior editor and London bureau chief. His best writing in
the book is about such personalities as Ernest Hemingway and Henry Moore; much
more ephemeral are his portraits of Presidents.

Seeking to free himself from "Henry Luce's golden shackles," Mr. Manning
resigned from Time in 1960. The publisher asked him to remain, but Mr. Manning
replied: "The individualist has a place in group journalism but for all but the
merest handful there is much inhibition . . . Even though one may be shouting at
the top of his lungs, or lecturing with Demosthenic eloquence, the sound does
not pierce the walls that enclose the group."

After a stint as Assistant Secretary of State for Public Affairs in the Kennedy
Administration, Mr. Manning was editor in chief of The Atlantic Monthly for 16
years until 1980. His civilized encounters with Mr. Luce contrast sharply with
his difficulties, in and out of court, with Mortimer B. Zuckerman, the Boston
real-estate mogul who bought The Atlantic. Immediately naming himself "chairman
of the board of editors," Mr. Zuckerman removed Mr. Manning, beginning a series
of legal actions. Mr. Manning's half-bitter, half-humorous description of
dealing with Mr. Zuckerman makes for lively reading and helps explain the
volatility in American magazines today.

LOAD-DATE: February 6, 1993

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photos: Robert Manning (Lilian Kemp/W. W. Norton); Theodore H. White
(Gary Gunderson, 1984); Homer Bigart (The New York Times)

TYPE: Biography; Review

                   Copyright 1993 The New York Times Company


                              13 of 255 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 January 5, 1993, Tuesday, Late Edition - Final

Vincent Gaughan Sr.; Truman Aide Was 73

BYLINE: AP

SECTION: Section A; Page 12; Column 6; National Desk

LENGTH: 200 words

DATELINE: BUFFALO, Jan. 4


Vincent Gaughan Sr., who worked on Harry S. Truman's and John F. Kennedy's
Presidential campaigns died Sunday at his winter home on Singer Island, Fla. He
was 73.

His family said he died of a heart attack.

Mr. Gaughan was a lawyer who lived in Buffalo. He was the first executive
director of the Young Democratic Clubs of America in 1948 and raised money and
rallied young voters to Truman. In 1952 he was vice chairman of the unsuccessful
Presidential campaign of Senator Estes Kefauver of Tennessee.

He was also chief of the advance team for Hubert H. Humphrey's Vice Presidential
campaign in 1964. Four years later, he turned down Humphrey's request to manage
his Presidential campaign because he said he could not support the Vietnam War.

Mr. Gaughan was an Army Air Force pilot in Europe during World War II. He earned
his law degree from the University of Buffalo.

He is survived by his wife, Margaret; two sons, Vincent Jr. and Kevin, both of
Hamburg, N.Y.; five daughters, Karen Scott of Hamburg, Judith Warren of Norfolk,
Mass., Colleen Walsh and Shannon Bowman of Pacific Palisades, Calif., and
Patricia Burke of Chevy Chase, Md.; a brother and sister and 10 grandchildren.

LOAD-DATE: January 5, 1993

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Obituary (Obit); Biography

                   Copyright 1993 The New York Times Company


                              14 of 255 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 January 5, 1993, Tuesday, Late Edition - Final

Observer;
Obedient to Peter Pan

BYLINE: By RUSSELL BAKER

SECTION: Section A; Page 15; Column 1; Editorial Desk

LENGTH: 714 words


There has been a run of boyish Presidents since Eisenhower, who was not boyish
by any stretch of the definition, even though he did care about golf. Neither
was Truman, who preceded him, nor Franklin Roosevelt, though Roosevelt could
pretend to be boyish when necessary.

Herbert Hoover? Not boyish. Nor Coolidge. Woodrow Wilson? Wilson wasn't even
boyish when he was a boy. Taft is harder. He certainly sulked boyishly when
Theodore Roosevelt tried to undo him in 1912. On the other hand, he also sired
Senator Robert A. Taft, who couldn't possibly have sprung from boyish genes.

We have to go back to Theodore Roosevelt for a Presidential old-timer who was
indisputably a boy-man. Now, however, boyish Presidents are the rule. Somebody
scholarly should do a monograph explaining this curiosity.

Of the seven Presidents since Eisenhower, only Jimmy Carter and Gerald Ford were
unboyish, and neither succeeded with the voters. Carter was tossed out after one
term, and Ford, probably the most unboyish President since Hoover, was never
even elected, just appointed.

To be sure, wanting people to call him Jimmy instead of James Earl was boyish of
Carter, but even the most adult men have their boyish idiosyncrasies. Truman,
for example, offered to punch out a music critic who wrote ungenerously about
his daughter's singing.

Boyishness takes many forms. Usually these reflect efforts to overcome fear of
not measuring up to adult responsibilities. For example: Lyndon Johnson
destroying his Presidency in Vietnam because he was afraid "to be the first
President to lose a war."

Nixon's enthusiasm for dirty-pool politics, like George Bush's, reflected a
boyish conviction that life is just a game writ large, and that in games so
grand, with stakes so high, losing is the only thing that is unforgivable.

Explaining Kennedy's adulteries can best be left for the psychiatrists, but
daydreams of beating Don Giovanni in the philandering Olympics -- ". . . and in
Spain, already, one thousand and three!" -- are familiar to most people who have
ever been boys.

Boyishness was more becoming to Reagan than to any of the others. He had the
boyish charm that enables an offending son to win parents' hearts despite
offenses for which an unboyish charmer would be cut out of the will.

With such a smile, a jest lifted from some old movie, a charming toss of the
head -- how could anyone be angry with a lad for breaking a law or two, and not
even very important laws? Even Reagan's hair, that eternally ungray 1937
pompadour, was styled as hair was styled when freckled boys wore knickers and
lop-sided grins on the covers of Saturday Evening Posts.

Bush's boyishness is reflected in his farewell tour of the foreign-policy front.
It gave him the opportunity to remind the congregation of why it loved him once
and, also, to have a last taste of the role he obviously relishes, the Commander
in Chief hailing his troops.

This sentimental journey had a boyishly theatrical quality, merging a chance to
dramatize the military might he had directed with a chance to remind the fickle
media that he had managed the ending of the cold war, that he, like tragic
Othello, had done the state some service.

It is easy to like this boyish-heroic Bush, as it was easy to dislike the
boyishly cruel game-player Bush of the political campaigns. At the end, for a
farewell, he was engaged in a boyishly grand gesture reminiscent of the
"Viking's funeral" which ends that wonderful old boy's adventure story, "Beau
Geste."

An unboyish President would have passed up this trip and contented himself with
packing for the move and putting his thoughts in order for a good, honest
memoir. An unboyish President, of course, would not have gone to war in Panama
to teach the abominable Noriega that gentlemen don't double-cross countries that
have been good to them. Boys don't let rats get away with stuff like that.

And now for someone completely different: Clinton is young enough to be a child
to a large percentage of the population. He won't have to behave boyishly to
please a national appetite for juvenilia. With so many now thinking: "Good Lord!
We're now being governed by the people we used to spank!" maybe he will be
tempted to leave boyhood stowed in Little Rock.

LOAD-DATE: January 5, 1993

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Op-Ed

                   Copyright 1993 The New York Times Company


                              15 of 255 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                January 6, 1993, Wednesday, Late Edition - Final

Bush, in West Point Valedictory, Offers Principles on Use of Force

BYLINE: By MICHAEL WINES,  Special to The New York Times

SECTION: Section A; Page 1; Column 5; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 925 words

DATELINE: WEST POINT, N.Y., Jan. 5


President Bush warned today that the United States must not be drawn by its new
dominant position into assuming a role as "the world's policeman."

In remarks to 4,000 cadets at the United States Military Academy, the President
said the United States must not ignore international problems. But his was a
message of caution, dwelling on the importance of prudence and long deliberation
in deciding where and when to use military force.

And harking back to George Washington's warning against foreign entanglement, he
declared that the fact that the United States is powerful enough to intervene in
crises "does not mean that it must." [Excerpts, page A6.]

No Rigid GuidelinesFormulas

Mr. Bush outlined several principles guiding the use of force, but said that
beyond common sense and moral imperatives, there were no real guidelines to
govern when American troops should intervene abroad.

"To adopt rigid criteria," he said, "would guarantee mistakes involving American
interests and American lives. It would give would-be troublemakers a blueprint
for determining their own actions; it could signal U.S. friends and allies that
our support was not to be counted on."

During the election campaign, Bill Clinton sharply criticized Mr. Bush for not
taking more aggressive action to limit Serbian attacks in Bosnia and
Herzegovina. Now that the President is supporting more active steps by the
United Nations to stem the Serbian attacks, there is little known difference
between their views.

Willingness to Commit Troops

No President since Lyndon B. Johnson has used military power as widely and as
often as Mr. Bush, and his address today could easily be read as the rationale
for that record -- including wars in the Persian Gulf and Panama, and the
current intervention on humanitarian grounds in Somalia.

Today, Mr. Bush offered his principles for the use of force. Some were common
sense, like admonitions to intervene only where the stakes warrant it, and when
no other policies work.

But others lay at the core of the President's decisions to commit troops or
aircraft to Panama, the Persian Gulf and Somalia, and to withhold them, so far,
from the Bosnian war.

He said force was justified only "where and when force can be effective," "where
its application can be limited in scope and time," and "where the potential
benefits justify the potential costs and sacrifice."

In recent weeks, Mr. Bush's foreign policy advisers have said that the situation
in Somalia merited American intervention, and Bosnia's did not, because the
first met those criteria and the second fell short.

Although many thousands are suffering in both places, they said, action in
Somalia could be limited in scope, performed with few casualties, and completed
with success all but assured.

Vietnam Remembered

Those who criticize such judgments as cold-hearted, his advisers have said, do
not recall the criticism Presidents have suffered after military ventures in
Vietnam and Lebanon.

Speaking of the current American-led intervention, Mr. Bush said:

"I determined that only the use of force could stem this human tragedy in
Somalia. The United States should not stand by with so many lives at stake, and
when a limited deployment of U.S. forces, buttressed by the forces of other
countries and acting under the full authority of the United Nations, could make
an immediate and dramatic difference -- and do so without excessive levels of
risk and cost."

At another point, the President's voice broke as he spoke of the compassion of
American troops in Somalia, recalling "the young marine, eyes filled with tears,
holding the fragile arm of an emaciated child."

Today's speech is the second and perhaps the last of his Presidential
valedictories. Marlin Fitzwater, the White House spokesman, said Mr. Bush had
been urged to make a broadcast farewell address to the nation, as have most
modern Presidents, but that the prospects for such a speech were only "50-50"
and that he did not expect one.

Other Bush aides have said that the President generally shuns the notion of
formal Oval Office addresses, and that he does not want to make another
substantive speech "unless he's certain he has something worth saying."

Cheers for the Chief

Mr. Bush was not interrupted by applause during the speech, but he did receive
two hearty rounds of applause from the Corps of Cadets, which had assembled for
his visit in West Point's stark stone and brick halls.

One came at lunch. A vast, X-shaped hall filled with cadets and officers erupted
into cheers, with thousands waving white napkins, as the President and his wife,
Barbara, appeared on a balcony overlooking the yardstick-straight rows of dining
tables.

Pleased by the welcome, the President joined the cadets for a lunch of meat and
cheese on a submarine roll, pasta salad, pretzels and soft drinks.

A second, riotous bout of applause came at the end of Mr. Bush's address, partly
in appreciation, and partly because of the nature of his farewell.

"I wish you godspeed," he said, adding, "And while I'm at it, as your Commander
in Chief, I hereby grant amnesty to the Corps of Cadets."

This amnesty -- as distinct from Mr. Bush's pardon of figures in the Iran-contra
affair last month -- excused the cadets from the hated punishment of walking the
campus on weekends and holidays in full-dress uniform. The marches are assigned
as penalties for minor infractions.

Visiting heads of state traditionally grant amnesty to cadets when they speak at
West Point.

LOAD-DATE: January 6, 1993

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo: President Bush arriving yesterday with his wife, Barbara, to
address cadets at the United States Military Academy in West Point, N.Y. (Jim
Estrin/The New York Times) (pg. A6)

                   Copyright 1993 The New York Times Company


                              16 of 255 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                January 6, 1993, Wednesday, Late Edition - Final
                              Correction Appended

W. G. McLoughlin, Professor of History At Brown, Dies at 70

BYLINE: By LEE A. DANIELS

SECTION: Section B; Page 6; Column 1; National Desk

LENGTH: 279 words


William G. McLoughlin, a professor emeritus of history and religion at Brown
University, died Monday at Rhode Island Hospital in Providence. He was 70.

Professor McLoughlin, who lived in Providence, died of liver cancer, his family
said.

A historian of American civilization, he wrote 17 books and voluminous articles
on religion in Colonial and modern times, the Cherokee Indian nation, the
antislavery movement, Rhode Island and other topics.

Among his books are "New England Dissent: The Baptists and the Separation of
Church and State" (Harvard University Press, 1971) and "Rhode Island: A
Bicentennial History" (Norton, 1978). His latest book, "After the Trail of
Tears: The Cherokees, 1839-1880," is to be published this year.

Civil Libertarian Causes

Professor McLoughlin was a former chairman and longtime member of the Rhode
Island chapter of the American Civil Liberties Union, and opposed United States
military intervention in Vietnam in the 1960's.

He was born in Maplewood, N.J., served as an Army officer in Europe in World War
II, graduated from Princeton University in 1947 and received a doctorate from
Harvard University in 1953. He joined the Brown faculty as an assistant
professor in 1954 and became a full professor in 1963.

Professor McLoughlin retired from the faculty last June, but in July he was
appointed a Chancellor's Fellow and resumed teaching full time last fall.

He is survived by his wife, the former Virginia Duffy; three daughters, Gail
McLoughlin-Elliott of Greenville, R.I., Martha, and Helen McLoughlin Duffy, both
of Providence; and two brothers, Quin, of Palatine, Ill., and Frank J., of
Hockessin, Del.

NAME: William G. McLoughlin

LOAD-DATE: January 6, 1993

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

CORRECTION-DATE: July 25, 2005

CORRECTION:
An obituary on Jan. 6, 1993, about William G. McLoughlin, an emeritus professor
of history and religion at Brown University, misstated the date and cause of his
death. Professor McLoughlin died on Dec. 28, 1992, not on Jan. 4, 1993; the
cause was colon cancer, not liver cancer. The article also misstated the
location of his World War II military service. It was at Fort Sill, Okla., not
in Europe. The Times learned of the errors through a recent e-mail message from
a family member.

TYPE: Biography; Obituary (Obit)

                   Copyright 1993 The New York Times Company


                              17 of 255 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                January 6, 1993, Wednesday, Late Edition - Final

New Congressman Picks Old Congressman for Aide

BYLINE: By JERRY GRAY,  Special to The New York Times

SECTION: Section B; Page 5; Column 1; Metropolitan Desk

LENGTH: 444 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, Jan. 5


Representative John M. McHugh was elected to Congress last November on the
pledge that he would fight as hard as his predecessor, the popular David O'B.
Martin, to keep three upstate New York military bases from closing.

Now, saying he couldn't find anyone better qualified to help him with that task,
Mr. McHugh has hired Mr. Martin as a $75,000-a-year staff aide.

Just last summer, saying he had tired of the life style, Mr. Martin announced
that he was retiring from his $129,500 job as a Congressman. He says he intends
to spend about a year counseling the freshman Congressman on how to spare the
three bases in his district -- Fort Drum in Watertown, Plattsburgh Air Force
Base and Griffiss Air Force Base, at Rome -- from the list of base closings to
be announced later this year.

Many Cuts Feared

On a day when Washington was occupied with the swearing-in of the 103d Congress,
scant attention was paid to the appointment of a staff aide, even one with the
stature of Mr. Martin.

But the hiring, which was announced without fanfare last month but became
official only today, represented the first step in what is expected to be fierce
maneuvering to protect military jobs and bases from anticipated cuts later this
year.

"I think it is a hell of an idea, frankly," Mr. Martin said today. "I would like
him to meet everybody it took me 12 years to know, starting with Colin Powell
and everybody else he will be dealing with on the Armed Services Committee."

Mr. McHugh, 42 years old, said his fellow Republican, who is 48, was an unusual
but easy choice for the job.

"The best person in America for that job is Dave Martin," Mr. McHugh said today
at a reception. "No one knows more about the legislative process, more about the
closure commission or more about creating legislation."

'A Very Wise Decision'

The House Defense Base Closure on Realignment Commission is to make
recommendations to the President by next summer on the future of dozens of
military installations.

Role in Legislation

Elected to the House of Representatives in 1980, Mr. Martin, who was a Marine
aviator in Vietnam, earned a reputation as a dogged and accomplished politician
when it came to protecting the military-related jobs in his district and as one
of the House's staunchest supporters of military spending on major projects
items like the F-14 fighter and the Marines' V-22 Osprey.

He also helped write the legislation that created the base closing commission.

As a senior member of the House Armed Services Committee he persuaded the Army
in 1985 to station a new light infantry division of more than 10,000 troops at
Fort Drum.

LOAD-DATE: January 6, 1993

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo: John M. McHugh, center, a newly elected House member, paused to
speak to visitors on his way to a reception in Washington for New York freshman
representatives. At left was his predecessor, David O'B. Martin, who has been
hired as a staff aide. (Michael Geissinger for The New York Times)

                   Copyright 1993 The New York Times Company


                              18 of 255 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                January 7, 1993, Thursday, Late Edition - Final

Aid Urged for Dislocated Workers in Arms Industry

BYLINE: By ERIC SCHMITT,  Special to The New York Times

SECTION: Section A; Page 20; Column 2; National Desk

LENGTH: 438 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, Jan. 6


Echoing themes endorsed by the Clinton team, a Federal commission today sharply
criticized Government programs meant to help thousands of dislocated employees
of military contractors.

The Defense Conversion Commission recommended that existing programs be
strengthened and better coordinated with local communities to cope with the
960,000 jobs in private industry that are expected to be lost from the weapons
makers from 1991 to 1997 as a result of military cutbacks.

But the seven-member panel, made up of senior officials from the Defense,
Commerce and Labor departments and the Council of Economic Advisers, also
concluded that current military cuts were less severe in size and pace than
those that followed World War II, the Korean War and the Vietnam War, although
their effects were pronounced "in a few states and some localities."

California, Connecticut and Texas have been particularly hard hit by the cuts in
military industry jobs, the 85-page report said.

Role Seen for U.S.

President-elect Bill Clinton and President Bush have diverged greatly in their
views of how to help these dislocated workers, as well as over what role the
Government should play in helping military contractors adjust to smaller
Pentagon budgets.


Mr. Clinton and his designated Secretary of Defense, Les Aspin, advocate a
greater government role in retraining laid-off workers and continued production
of several major weapons systems, like attack submarines and fighter aircraft,
to keep that technology readily available in times of crisis.

Many of the commission's recommendations mirrored principles that Mr. Clinton
has supported, including a closer integration between military technology and
the commercial marketplace and improved programs for laid-off workers.

"The Federal Government needs to do a much better job of integrating existing
programs with the local communities," David J. Berteau, the commission's
chairman, said in a telephone interview today.

Prospects of Contractors

Barring mergers or acquisitions, the commission said, the top 25 Pentagon
contractors should remain financially sound and should be able to manage the
military cutbacks successfully.

The commission recommended that savings from the military cuts be invested in
vital services and installations, like transportation, and other crucial
technologies.

The panel also proposed that the Government take steps to promote the use of
technology with both military and commercial applications. This would satisfy
military requirements at lower costs and maintain a technologically advanced
industrial sector.


LOAD-DATE: January 7, 1993

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1993 The New York Times Company


                              19 of 255 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                January 7, 1993, Thursday, Late Edition - Final

Books of The Times;
A Bizarre Past as Prologue to an Uneasy Future

BYLINE: By CHRISTOPHER LEHMANN-HAUPT

SECTION: Section C; Page 17; Column 3; Cultural Desk; Word and Image Page

LENGTH: 900 words



The Same River Twice
 A Memoir
 By Chris Offutt
 188 pages. Simon & Schuster. $18.

In one sense, Chris Offutt's unusual poetic memoir is the story of a man
contemplating in terror the impending birth of his first child.

At the beginning of "The Same River Twice," the author reports how he
reluctantly gave in to his wife's desire to conceive a baby before her
biological clock ran out. "I'm not afraid of much," he writes, "and it bothered
me that I was scared of something as basic as having a child. The subject
remained with us, floating like an ovum waiting for a sperm."

Eventually, after many visits to the doctor and much temperature-taking, an
illicit nighttime dip in a public swimming pool led to a rare session of
spontaneous lovemaking. "I felt like Zeus field-testing his swan suit before the
seduction of Leda. Gamete met zygote. DNA merged into the corkscrew that
resembled the Milky Way's spiral, Hermes' Staff, the swift helix of infant
birth."

As the pregnancy progresses, the couple wait in a small rented house by the Iowa
River, where the author has moved to attend the University of Iowa writing
program. In alternate chapters, he describes the present and the past. In the
present, he often wanders along the river, seeing in the violence of nature a
metaphor for the risk of birth. In a typical incident that he observes, a
kingfisher tries to catch a bluegill and drowns after accidentally stabbing the
palate of a larger fish that is simultaneously attacking the bluegill. "Routine
activity betrayed the kingfisher, just as pregnancy is a breach of sex," the
author writes. "I understand the bird's disbelief. I would trade my imagination
for its wings."

But it is Mr. Offutt's memories of his squandered past that lend the book its
bizarre, sometimes disturbing flavor. "While the rest of my generation had been
lodging themselves into careers, I'd pretty much run amok," he recalls. Starting
out from his Kentucky home in the foothills of southern Appalachia -- "My
hometown is a ZIP code with a creek" -- he had traveled to the far corners of
America and lived through "a sequence of halfhearted attempts at
self-destruction."

In New York City, he had tried to become an actor while dating a madcap woman
named Jahi who enjoyed creating public spectacles. Once she stole a ream of
paper and opened the bundle on a windy sidewalk. "Oh my God!" she shrieked. "My
manuscript!" In West Texas, he worked as a house painter for Bill, a Vietnam
veteran who could match the exhilaration of combat only by skydiving. Soon after
accompanying him on a terrifying jump, the author learned that Bill had drunk a
pint of kerosene and "Zippoed his mouth -- reversing the favored method of
Vietnamese monks protesting the war." He reports, "There was no note."

In the memoir's most arresting episode, Mr. Offutt recalls how he joined a
circus in Alabama and eventually rose to dressing up as a walrus in a
performing-animal act. He found the circus folk to be a rigidly stratified
society, at the top of which was the Parrot Lady, so named for body tattoos she
revealed in a striptease act that culminated with her sliding a lighted
fluorescent tube down her throat. "The spotlight went black. Her body glowed
from within, illuminating the birds in an ethereal, ghostly light, like a jungle
dawn." The author's circus career ended when the Parrot Lady invited him into
her trailer to tell him her tragic secrets and fed him so many martinis that he
later got sick and had to remove his walrus head in the middle of his act.

Does the reader believe the stories Mr. Offutt tells? Not always literally. At
times you sense that he is embroidering his memories or, more exactly, enriching
the journals he says he kept so conscientiously while training himself to become
a writer that he came to believe "that the journal was my life, and the rest of
existence only a fiction." Occasionally troubling, too, is his tendency to
strain for effects, as when he writes, "The guts of America unfolded in every
direction as I traveled the interstate bloodstream, dodging the white corpuscles
of perverts, cops and outlaws."

Still, the terrors of the author's irresponsible past balance neatly the fears
of his too-responsible future. Side by side, the two narratives powerfully
convey his sense of being trapped. It's tough to choose between running away and
becoming a father. Besides, there is nothing in the book so scary as the
eventual arrival of the baby, whose birth, in Mr. Offutt's prose, truly
recapitulates the creative violence of the nature he describes so intimately.

No wonder he concludes: "Women are stronger, more ruthless in battle.  . . .
Women invented language through application of sound to meaning. The earliest
writings are by women, receipts for the sale of land in what is now Iraq. If
childbearing were left to men, our species would have moldered because males
could never accommodate the pain. We can barely get through hangovers and
football games."

All the same, if Mr. Offutt has it right, there are men who play games and also
try to face the pain. They pride themselves on their destructiveness, and then
they turn around to face the consequences. For them, life is a river at once
tearing down and building up. And despite Heraclitus's insistence that to do so
is impossible, Mr. Offutt boldly immerses himself in that same river twice.

LOAD-DATE: January 7, 1993

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo: Chris Offutt (Sandy Dyas/Simon & Schuster)

TYPE: Review

                   Copyright 1993 The New York Times Company


                              20 of 255 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 January 8, 1993, Friday, Late Edition - Final

THE NEW PRESIDENCY: Confirmation Roundup;
Reich Charts a Path to Return the Labor Dept. to Center Stage

BYLINE: By MARTIN TOLCHIN

SECTION: Section A; Page 12; Column 6; National Desk

LENGTH: 285 words



Jesse Brown
Secretary of Veterans Affairs

WASHINGTON (AP) -- Despite bipartisan praise as President-elect Clinton's choice
for Secretary of Veterans Affairs, Jesse Brown faced suggestions from one
Republican Senator that his pension from a veterans' organization would cause
him problems.

But senators from both parties predicted quick confirmation for Mr. Brown, 48,
formerly the executive director of the Washington headquarters of the Disabled
American Veterans.

In the only hostile questioning in the confirmation hearing before the Senate
Veterans Affairs Committee, Alan K. Simpson, Republican of Wyoming, said a
generous pension from the Disabled American Veterans created the perception "you
will be beholden to them."

Mr. Simpson, a frequent critic of veterans organizations that lobby Congress,
asserted that Mr. Brown would become eligible for a pension of $41,000 a year or
instead take a lump sum of $960,000.

Mr. Simpson said the issue was a "matter of perception," and that it would
become more of an issue later, when his actions as Secretary foster controversy.

Mr. Brown said the size of the lump sum he would be eligible for at age 50 or
later was smaller, between $500,000 and $600,000. He vigorously defended its
size and propriety, noting that he had been employed by the group since his
rehabilitation from a Vietnam War wound in 1965.

He said his pension of $41,000 a year "is not an unreasonable amount for a
person with 26 years of service, who has had the level of experience I have
had."

Mr. Brown, a Marine veteran, was wounded in Danang. His right arm, which he
raised to take the oath before testifying, is partially paralyzed and bent from
the injury.

LOAD-DATE: January 8, 1993

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo: Jesse Brown, center, nominated as Secretary of Veterans Affairs,
sat with Senators John Warner, left, and Charles Robb before the Senate Veteran
Affairs Committee. (Stephen Crowley/The New York Times)

                   Copyright 1993 The New York Times Company


                              21 of 255 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 January 8, 1993, Friday, Late Edition - Final

Westminster Journal;
A Defiant Flight Stirs Vietnamese a World Away

BYLINE: By SETH MYDANS,  Special to The New York Times

SECTION: Section A; Page 10; Column 1; National Desk

LENGTH: 728 words

DATELINE: WESTMINSTER, Calif., Jan. 3


Some people here secretly doubted the spectacular story of Ly Tong's escape from
Vietnam until they learned of his even more spectacular return four months ago.

Today Mr. Tong, a former South Vietnamese fighter pilot, is once again a
prisoner of the Communists in his homeland after making a flamboyant call for
revolution with leaflets dropped from a commandeered airliner. And in Vietnamese
communities across the United States he is acclaimed as a hero, a man who with
one grand gesture carried out the desperate fantasy of almost any refugee.

From Seattle to Houston to the Vietnamese enclave here known as Little Saigon,
committees have formed to honor his spirit and to press for his release. A
Vietnamese-language radio station in San Jose has carried regular excerpts of
his swashbuckling autobiography, "Black Eagle." Community newspapers have
conducted poetry contests and printed scores of compositions in his praise.

"I never did it, but you make me dream; you really did it," reads a poem by
Nguyen Cong Thanh, a pensioner, in Nguoi Viet Daily News, the nation's largest
Vietnamese-language newspaper.

"I don't know what will happen to you," reads the poem, "but I know that you
make our lives here more significant."

The story of Ly Tong, in its drama and futility, has touched a chord of tragic
heroism that runs through Vietnamese culture. And for people here who fled their
country in defeat, it offers a certain sense of affirmation.

Shot down in his A37 Dragon Fly fighter jet in the final days of the war in
1975, Mr. Tong, who is now 44, spent five years in labor camps until breaking
free.

As he told his story in 1983 to Barry Wain, a reporter with The Asian Wall
Street Journal, Mr. Tong first tried, twice, to steal an airplane in Ho Chi Minh
City, the former Saigon.

He then embarked on a 17-month journey across five countries, threading his way
by bicycle past land mines in Cambodia, climbing over a bamboo fence to escape
from a detention camp in Thailand and crawling through the jungle to avoid
border posts in Malaysia.

He paused for sightseeing in the Malaysian capital of Kuala Lumpur, then swam
three-quarters of a mile across the Johore Strait to Singapore, where he drove
up in style by taxi to the American embassy.

After arriving in the United States 10 years ago, he worked as a security guard,
studied political science at the University of New Orleans, became a citizen and
published his 300-page autobiography.

None of this was enough. This summer he returned to Southeast Asia, where he
tried unsuccessfully to commandeer a Thai Air Force plane with which to bomb
Vietnam.

Then on Sept. 4 he hijacked a commercial Air Vietnam Airbus 300 on a flight from
Bangkok to Vietnam and forced the pilot to fly low over its destination, Ho Chi
Minh City.

From the aircraft, he dropped sackfuls of tiny leaflets calling for
demonstrations, strikes and an overthrow of the Government "to build an
independent, free and prosperous Vietnam."

Signing himself Commander of the Uprising Forces, he declared on the leaflets:
"Only the Vietnamese Communists, while in their last breath, are still
stubbornly trying, with a governing clique old and out-of-date, to go against
the tide of humankind."

Then, his mission accomplished, Mr. Tong strapped on a parachute and leaped from
the plane.

Kathleen Callo, the Reuters correspondent in Vietnam, reported that he was
quickly captured in a field on the outskirts of the city and is now being held
for trial.

In the meantime, Mr. Tong's supporters overseas have grown more agitated.
Buddhist prayer meetings have been held for him. Plans are under way for a
scholarship in his name. And in the pages of Nguoi Viet Daily News, a young poet
cries out: "Ly Tong my hero, Ly Tong my conscience, Ly Tong my duty."

There are still skeptical Vietnamese, but these days they do not speak for
publication. "This man is vain and he is crazy," said one of them, adding, "If I
said this publicly I would be condemned as a defeatist."

So far, said Yen Do, the newspaper editor, no one has made the mistake of
repeating earlier fund-raising schemes among the refugees and collecting money
on Mr. Tong's behalf.

"If they did," said the editor, "everything would collapse. People here believe
that until they collect money on behalf of this person, his legend will live
on."


NAME: Ly Tong

LOAD-DATE: January 8, 1993

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo: Ly Tong. (Tran Kheim)

TYPE: Military

                   Copyright 1993 The New York Times Company


                              22 of 255 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 January 10, 1993, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

ARCHITECTURE VIEW;
Thinking About Tomorrow, and How to Build It

BYLINE: By HERBERT MUSCHAMP

SECTION: Section 2; Page 1; Column 3; Arts & Leisure Desk

LENGTH: 2009 words


And now the Baby Boomers get to build a public realm. That is the opportunity
set before us by the new Administration, alluring or horrifying as the prospect
may be. How will that prospect materialize? What is the role of architecture in
creating a space for change?

Even a mandate for change has a past. The shape of things to come in the next
four years will be partly colored by the history of Bill Clinton's generation
and the ideals of community it has formed. The yearning for a public realm
figures strongly in the mythology of the baby boomers. They came of age,
legendarily, at Woodstock, a gathering of strangers brought together chiefly by
the chance to be together. The music was almost a pretext. The main event was an
experiment in tribalism: an instant, two-day city built on a farm's muddy
fields.

Antiwar demonstrations, like the one Mr. Clinton joined in London in 1969,
offered a similar sense of occasion. These gatherings were about something more
than opposition to America's involvement in Vietnam. They were also protests
against isolationism at home: against the divisive culture of the car and the
suburb and their failure to supply the social cohesion advertised by the
traditionalist forms of suburban buildings. For the children of the postwar
mass-produced suburbs, it became a rite of passage to rebel against their
parents' version of the American dream.

Utopia, 60's style, was a place that could prosper without material props. So
perhaps it is not surprising that the rebellion had little impact on the
architecture of cities. Despite a trickle of countermigration from the
suburbs to the inner cities, and the renovation of older buildings and
neighborhoods that followed, urban decentralization has not been reversed. Nor
have Americans given up their claim to a life of social and physical mobility,
despite the fundamental contradiction between that life and the desire for
stable community roots.

Mr. Clinton's generation has looked to the media to provide the social cohesion
once supplied by public spaces. Streets, squares and parks have been displaced,
though not eliminated, by telephones, television sets and computers. Yet, as
Robert Reich, Mr. Clinton's Labor Secretary designate, has observed, the impact
of this communications technology on cities has by no means been beneficial. It
has further fragmented the environment into islands of privilege surrounded by
the decaying remains of the old industrial cities and the poor populations that
can no longer count on the older industries that once offered blue-collar jobs.

What the Government needs to address is not the vibrant information industry, an
announced priority for the incoming Administration, but rather those large
chunks of the environment that cannot be digitized or transferred to silicon
chips. Housing, transportation and the kind of public space not reducible to
airwaves: these traditional segments of the urban spine have fallen into varying
degrees of decomposition. It is in these areas that the country's new management
could have a major impact.

THE WORD INFRASTRUCTURE has already taken root as a guiding concept of Mr.
Clinton's vision. It is a vague term, and that is part of its appeal. For many,
it evokes images of the massive public works projects undertaken in the 1930's:
dams, bridges and tunnels that shook the rust off the aging 19th-century cities
and propelled the United States to the peak of industrial prosperity. It's a
word that has taken on a lot of ideological baggage. During the Presidential
campaign, it served the political purpose of reminding Americans that the rust
was back -- and persuading them that they needed a new team to deal with it.
Let's stop the kidding around and get down to basics, this word said. The
foundations are rotten. It's time to face bedrock reality after, in the words of
the political columnist Sidney Blumenthal, "our long national daydream." Yet, so
far, the word infrastructure is itself largely a symbol, a metaphor capable of
generating some pretty fancy daydreams of its own.

Recently, the word has gained currency among the generation of architects now
coming of age. This is partly a matter of esthetics, partly a question of
generational change. For architects looking for a way to distinguish themselves
from the post-modern generation that preceded them, the sinewy industrial
vocabulary of public works holds great appeal. Work by such architects as Renzo
Piano (currently the subject of a show at the Urban Center in New York) and
Santiago Calatrava (whose work will be featured at the Museum of Modern Art in
March) has attracted increasing admiration for the visual lyricism it brings to
structural engineering.

But for many young architects the appeal of infrastructure is that it offers a
chance to shift their profession from esthetics toward social service. Now at
the age when architects traditionally graduate from a painfully prolonged
apprenticeship to a mature practice, they are looking for something more
substantial than the applied decoration into which post-modernism often
degenerated. In New York, architects in their 40's look back with something like
nostalgia to the years when Mayor John Lindsay attracted architects to public
service by conferring a Kennedyesque glamour on urban planning.

For these architects, the esthetic power of public works is less important than
their power to shape landscapes and mold cities -- to create community, in
short. As witnesses to privatization and its fragmenting effects, they regard
infrastructure as a means to link buildings, neighborhoods and regions that have
become disconnected. Above all, perhaps, they see it as a way to link themselves
and their art to a sense of common purpose and to an ethical ideal. To them,
infrastructure has become the code word for a rebuilt public realm.

There is considerable irony in these lofty expectations. The American highway
system, after all, is infrastructure -- the most ambitious example of it. This
system has caused more problems than it has solved and, moreover, has provided
the getaway route to avoid dealing with them. Roadways that once promised to
relieve urban congestion ended up depleting urban vitality. It remains to be
seen how Henry Cisneros, Mr. Clinton's Secretary of Housing and Urban
Development designate, will deal with this problem. San Antonio, where Mr.
Cisneros served as Mayor, is a case study in urban escapism. A ring highway,
encrusted with malls, does not serve the city but drains it. A downtown
Riverwalk, chockablock with tourist restaurants, festooned with twinkle lights,
offers scant compensation for the ghost town that visitors encounter when they
step outside this two-dimensional fairy tale of urban revival.

Still, Mr. Cisneros didn't invent this flawed approach. He was Mayor in the
80's, when Federal leadership insisted that the function of the public realm
was, in effect, to dissolve the public realm. Amenities had to pay their way or
die. So perhaps the urgent task at hand is to expose this Orwellian view of
"public life" as the seductive self-deception it has been all along. For a
public realm is, very simply, a place that can exist even though someone isn't
directly profiting from it. Its bottom line is that it is not governed by the
bottom line.

The climate has already been altered by the thawing of the cold war. So long as
the United States was performing the role of flag bearer for the free-enterprise
system, turning the public realm over to private interests served a strategic
purpose. But the election was, among other things, a referendum on whether or
not that strategy should continue now that the cold war is over. For the screens
of the American electronic town hall showed something terribly out of whack. We
had shipped the public realm abroad and allowed it to crumble at home. We helped
other distressed nations rebuild themselves while the homeless were piling up on
our doorsteps.

Of all the public works that have been allowed to languish in recent years,
housing now deserves the highest priority. But the virtue of infrastructure is
its flexibility. It can be expanded to embrace, and join together, many elements
of the built environment, including housing, transportation and public space.
That expansion is already under way, thanks to Federal legislation passed in
October 1991. The Intermodal Surface Transportation Efficiency Act (informally
known as Istea and pronounced ice tea), a bill brokered in large part by Senator
Daniel Patrick Moynihan, has already begun to enlarge the prospects for
architects who want to engage in public building. The bill, which sets up a
six-year program budgeted at $151 billion, significantly increases funds
available for mass transit systems. But of potentially greater importance is the
support it provides for "enhancement activities" that can be hooked onto
transportation systems. These could include the restoration of older
neighborhoods affected by a new road; the renovation of historic train stations
for nontransportation uses, and the creation of new public spaces adjacent to
subway, bus or ferry lines.

Although the enhancements program is scheduled to receive a modest $3.4 billion
over the next six years, amendments to the Istea bill could increase the
appropriation and widen the range of uses. It is encouraging that Robert Peck,
an official of the American Institute of Architects who helped frame the
legislation, has been an adviser to the Clinton transition team. Input like his
could shape an approach to urban development that would integrate building
programs normally carried out by separate government fiefdoms.  Construction of
new schools, housing, health care facilities and transit systems could go
forward as inseparable components of urban infrastructure.

SO THE PENDULUM SWINGS again. And if the time is indeed ripe for change, perhaps
it is also time to remember something critical about pendulums. They move but
they go nowhere. They're all tick and tock. And those who think that
architecture should forswear esthetics may as well abandon their hopes for
change. Art is where change materializes.

The problem with architecture in recent years has not been an overemphasis on
art but an extreme disconnection between esthetics and sociology. Politicians
are not the only people trapped by gridlock. Architects, too, have been caught
in a stalemate between conflicting visions of public life. Architects, however,
don't need the permission of governments to initiate change. It is possible,
even in a cynical time, to articulate ideals. Big public works are only one
alternative to big corporate skyscrapers, and a new transportation system is
only one way to stitch together the urban fabric. A drawing, a city mural, even
a department store window display can also spark new visions of community.
Architecture does not shape physical reality only. It also shapes consciousness.
It operates in the realm of image and metaphor as well as that of matter. And to
close the door on either realm is to trample the grass roots of architectural
creativity.

Mr. Clinton has been working overtime in the metaphor factory. The morning jogs
to McDonald's, the strolls along inner city streets, the measuring of White
House walls for bookshelves -- such actions, while symbolic, are not without
substance. They are changing the context in which political actions will unfold.

Architecture is embarking on a similar process. A change is taking place in the
context in which buildings will be viewed.  The prospect now is not that every
building will, for instance, house the homeless, but that buildings will not
have to be judged against a backdrop of indifference to the homeless. They will
arise in a culture that has at last acknowledged the need to correct policies
that allow homelessness to persist. Instead of withdrawing into forlorn
remembrances of a civic culture that once existed, architects may now have the
chance to piece together a metropolis for today.

LOAD-DATE: January 10, 1993

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Drawings

                   Copyright 1993 The New York Times Company


                              23 of 255 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 January 10, 1993, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

POP VIEW;
Pop Can Survive Almost Anything. But Respect?!

BYLINE: By Jon Pareles

SECTION: Section 2; Page 27; Column 1; Arts & Leisure Desk

LENGTH: 1207 words


A President who plays saxophone, admires Elvis Presley and came of age in the
late 1960's is bound to affect the course of popular music. Bill Clinton
doubtless has memories of a time when popular music helped shake America loose
from white-bread 50's illusions, and he clearly likes the stuff; Aretha Franklin
sang at his convention. During the campaign, Al Gore was so up to date he cited
R.E.M. albums when facing a young audience in Georgia.

The question for the next four years is whether R-E-S-P-E-C-T from the top will
make popular music more innovative, or more complacent. Under a pluralistic
administration, new musical coalitions could be built, but genres that have been
screaming in the wilderness may find themselves with less to complain about.

For more than a decade, popular music has been greeted with negligence,
incomprehension and suspicion. The Reagan years brought the first Senate
hearings about popular music since the 1950's (convened by a subcommittee that
Mr. Gore headed after his wife, Tipper, fanned parental anxieties). The Senate's
jaw-boning led to warning labels on potentially offensive albums. Although
George Bush posed with an electric guitar at his inaugural, the two Republican
Administrations clearly came from the pre-rock generation.

President Bush's vaunted love of country music seemed mostly a marketing tactic.
Even so, during his Administration, country made huge commercial gains. But
Nashville's rise, as personified by Garth Brooks, actually parallels the Clinton
campaign: acknowledging but not emphasizing Southern roots, using modern
showmanship, and making a direct pitch for suburban and baby-boomer audiences.

If the mainstream follows the President's public example, there are some obvious
predictions for the Clinton years. The upswing in Elvis imagery may start a 50's
revival that makes "Grease" look authentic. And baby boomers are bound to try to
reclaim the high ground of rock from the grunge, hip-hop and thrash noise makers
who make boomers feel old. Will Wynonna Judd and the Red Hot Chili Peppers sing
vintage Motown songs?

As a saxophonist, the President-elect is rhythmically challenged and sounds
anemic, yet his example should boost interest in jazz and blues. And while the
Smithsonian is already committed to American vernacular music, a Presidential
imprimatur can only help confirm the legitimacy of honkers and shouters. But Mr.
Clinton is a centrist; he won't kick the National Symphony Orchestra out of the
Kennedy Center.

The resurgent feminism that helped elect Mr. Clinton is already giving women a
stronger voice across pop and is battling the misogyny that mars hard-rock and
hip-hop. The Clinton campaign's emphasis on tolerance could also lessen
homophobia. With luck, the nastiest voices will begin to sound dated and unhip.

Since family values issues failed to sway most voters, the moral panic around
popular music (and other cultural forms) may recede. The result could be a
renewal of free-speech guarantees, from the National Endowment for the Arts to
major entertainment conglomerates.

At the same time, performers who depend largely on shock value and
sensationalism are likely to miss the inevitable publicity. Tolerance may do
more to blunt the Andrew Dice Clays and 2 Live Crews of the world than all the
outrage and litigation of the last decade. It would be an appropriate moment for
Tipper Gore, who is still affiliated with the Parents Music Resource Center
(which led the movement for warning labels on albums), to resign from the group,
and to admit that much of the center's so-called educational materials reflected
the influence of the religious right.

Democratic Administrations presided over one of rock's most fertile periods,
from 1961-68, and one of its most contradictory ones, 1977-80, during Jimmy
Carter's Presidency. In the 60's, under Kennedy and Johnson, an expanding
economy and the friction over civil rights and Vietnam convinced rockers that
they represented a vanguard community, that they could experiment yet stay
popular. The Carter years were another story, with domesticity in the foreground
and economic turbulence lurking. A recession bred the comfortable, introspective
corporate pop of groups like the Eagles or Fleetwood Mac (who provided the
Clinton campaign's theme song), the boom and bust of disco, and the radical
mutations of punk-rock and hip-hop, which were influential but commercially
marginal.

The Reagan-Bush years made a whole generation feel marginal. People in their
teens and 20's faced indifferent elders, the affluent yuppies. People in power
grabbed consumer goodies, sliced spending for education and infrastructure, and
shunted young workers toward jobs as hamburger flippers and keypunch operators.
Young folks couldn't distract themselves with unrestrained sexual license or
drug-induced pleasures, either.

In response, the growth areas of late-80's and early-90's popular music offered
mechanical dance-beat escapism and tidings of anger and death. Rock grew even
more contrary. Black separatist hip-hop counterbalanced racially divisive Willie
Horton campaign advertisements; after the Reagan defense buildup and
backpedaling on the environment sustained countless songs about nuclear war,
dying on the battlefield and toxic terror. Instead of the implicit optimism of
protest songs, apocalyptic thrash bands and rappers offered a chance to vent.

The priorities of the new Administration are likely to ricochet, directly and
contrarily, through the popular music of the mid-90's. Clinton likes high
technology; dancers already like techno music. Hillary Clinton's interest in
children's issues may bring more songs about child abuse, troubled families and
growing up ignored or uneducated.

Those concerns, in turn, may be part of a general shift away from global affairs
to private ones. As everyone knows by now, Chelsea Clinton's name was suggested
by a late 60's Joni Mitchell song; the Clinton years may bring a new crop of
confessional songwriters, though they'll probably use drum machines along with
finger-picking.

By raising expectations, the Clinton Administration is bound to sidetrack some
musical extremists. With the cold war over, thrashers are already backing away
from the H-bomb repertory; the new Administation's environmental initiatives
could make pollution seem less threatening. If the politicians address such
broad issues, rock's most vociferous pessimists might turn to personal miseries.

Hip-hop may not be so easily mollified. The Presidential campaign avoided
virtually all discussion of urban issues, and one of Clinton's cheapest shots
was a swipe at the little-known but divisive rapper Sister Souljah and, through
her, at the Rev. Jesse Jackson. (Rappers, among the most self-conscious of
community spokespeople, are likely to shout even louder if they feel no one is
listening.)

Yet with that conspicuous exception, the Clinton Administration arrives on a
promising mandate. The electorate voted not for some imagined good old days or
to "stay the course," but to make changes, perhaps even to experiment. It wants
something new, and that -- not revivals or reactions -- is what stimulates the
best popular music.

LOAD-DATE: January 10, 1993

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo: Elvis Presley -- Part of a 50's revival that could make "Grease"
look authentic.

                   Copyright 1993 The New York Times Company


                              24 of 255 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 January 10, 1993, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

SO MUCH FOR THEORY;
Clinton's Bright Ideas Get to Meet the Ugly Facts

BYLINE: By DAVID E. ROSENBAUM

SECTION: Section 4; Page 1; Column 1; Week in Review Desk

LENGTH: 1132 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON


IN campaigning for President, Abraham Lincoln promised not to abolish slavery.
Franklin D. Roosevelt vowed to balance the budget. Lyndon B. Johnson said he was
not "about to send American boys 9,000 or 10,000 miles away from home to do what
Asian boys ought to be doing for themselves." Richard M. Nixon had a secret plan
to end the war in Vietnam. Jimmy Carter said he would remove price controls on
natural gas. Ronald Reagan said he would never negotiate for the release of
hostages. And, of course, George Bush promised not to raise taxes.

So when Bill Clinton seemed to back off last week from his campaign pledge to
cut the Federal budget deficit in half over the next four years, hardly anyone
was surprised. As Mr. Bush said in 1990 when he announced he had changed his
mind about taxes, "That's the American system."

It is not so much that candidates mean to lie. Most of the time, they honestly
think they can keep their campaign promises. But the problems of government turn
out to be more intractable as one gets closer to being responsible for solving
them.

Presidential candidates can make the world stand still. They are free to develop
promises and proposals at the outset and stick with them through Election Day.
For a President, the world spins round and round, and what seemed like wise
policy yesterday is often overtaken by events by tomorrow.

Peter B. Teeley, the United States Ambassador to Canada, who is a friend and
political adviser of Mr. Bush's, put the matter this way: "You get into office
and you get very hard information for the first time. It can be economic figures
or it can be intelligence on foreign policy or defense problems, and it becomes
a very cold shower that wakes you up from the campaign."

That is what has happened to Mr. Clinton. Last January, the Bush
Administration's Office of Management and Budget and the Congressional Budget
Office, the Government's two main economic forecasters, both reported that a
strong economy and the completion of the savings and loan bailout would allow
the deficit in 1996 to be about half what it was in 1992, even if no tax and
spending policies were changed. So Mr. Clinton's promise was somewhat empty. All
it meant was that if somewhere he cut taxes or increased spending, elsewhere he
would have to raise taxes or reduce spending.

By July, circumstances had changed. The economy was growing more slowly than
expected. Medical costs were rising faster. Some expenditures for the savings
and loan bailout had been put off for another fiscal year. Budget officials
reported in their midyear review that the 1992 deficit would be slightly lower
than had been forecast in January but that in 1996 it would be quite a bit
higher.

But while his advisers cautioned him during the summer that his promise to cut
the deficit in half over four years would be much harder to keep, Mr. Clinton,
at least publicly, paid them no heed. "A candidate can't afford to keep changing
positions," said an aide who regularly traveled on the campaign plane. "He would
have been accused of flip-flopping, and no candidate can stand that in the
middle of a campaign."

Last week, Mr. Bush's budget office released its official economic forecasts,
and they painted a picture that was worse than ever. The deficit in fiscal year
1992, which ended in September, was $290 billion, and without any changes in
policy, the Administration reported, the deficit will be $266 billion in 1996
and $305 billion in 1997.

In Little Rock, Mr. Clinton called the new figures an "unsettling revelation."
His assistants accused the Bush Administration of cooking the books in a way
that actually understated the probable deficit for 1996 and 1997 by as much as
$60 billion each year, an assertion that Richard G. Darman, Mr. Bush's budget
director, denied.

Off Balance

Mr. Clinton's surprise was surely exaggerated, and Mr. Darman's figures were
probably unrealistic. But they agreed on one basic point: Mr. Clinton cannot cut
the deficit in half and still fulfill his promises to increase spending for
public works, education and job training, to allow college students to work off
loans by joining a national service corps, to overhaul the welfare system, to
cut taxes for middle-income families and businesses that invest in new equipment
and to raise taxes on no one but families with annual incomes above $200,000.

"The math does not work," said Mr. Darman.

In a way, Mr. Clinton seemed to relish the news. It gave him a trap door to
escape some campaign promises, and it helped prepare political ground for
unpopular tax and spending measures.

There was other bad news last week as well. The Commerce Department reported
that spending on health care rose to 14 percent of the nation's total economic
output in 1992, the highest ever, and that medical spending would continue to go
up 12 percent to 15 percent a year "unless significant changes in the
health-care system occur."

The chief Federal auditor, Comptroller General Charles A. Bowsher, a Reagan
appointee, warned the new Administration that the Government's books had been
seriously mismanaged in recent years and that it had tens of billions of dollars
of hidden liabilities for such matters as cleaning up toxic waste and paying off
depositors of failed banks and savings and loan associations.

Overseas, tensions worsened in Iraq and Somalia. The war and human tragedy in
Bosnia continued with the Clinton team seemingly undecided about what course to
follow. Mr. Clinton and his advisers have worried aloud since the election that
international problems, basically ignored during the campaign, might be so
demanding that Mr. Clinton would not be able to pay full attention to economic
issues at home.

Tax and Charge

So far, the economy is still topic A. No one divulged exactly what was discussed
at Mr. Clinton's meeting Thursday with his economic advisers. But a good bet is
that they talked about how the only way to limit the deficit is to increase the
taxes of middle-income Americans, cut popular programs or both, and how the only
way to get a handle on medical costs is to change the system under which most
people get whatever treatment they want wherever they want, at little or no
out-of-pocket cost.

Mr. Clinton clearly understands this. During his two-day economic conference in
Little Rock last month, he displayed a dazzling grasp of economic and social
policy issues. But not once during the campaign and not since has Mr. Clinton
let on that ordinary Americans might have to sacrifice anything they now enjoy.

In other words, he has still not addressed the fundamental questions he ducked
during the campaign but will have to face squarely as President: Who will have
to give up what, and when will he tell them so?

LOAD-DATE: January 10, 1993

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Drawing

                   Copyright 1993 The New York Times Company


                              25 of 255 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 January 10, 1993, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

THE NEW PRESIDENCY: The Labor Department;
Nominee Devoted Years To Rehearsing for Role

BYLINE: By STEVEN GREENHOUSE,  Special to The New York Times

SECTION: Section 1; Page 18; Column 1; National Desk

LENGTH: 1696 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, Jan. 9


Robert B. Reich will no doubt be the first Secretary of Labor who ever staged a
production of The Fantasticks.

And he is probably the first to serve as a top economic adviser to three
Democratic Presidential candidates, and the first to write seven books in 10
years.

Everything about Mr. Reich -- his love of the theater, his hyperkinetic
intellect, his close and longstanding friendship with the President-elect --
suggests that he will not play Labor Secretary as a bit role.

Top Supporting Actor

Indeed, President-elect Bill Clinton has cast Mr. Reich (pronounced REISH) in
what might prove to be a leading role, implementing one of the new President's
fundamental economic strategies: improving the skills of the nation's workers.

Mr. Reich, a 46-year-old lecturer on public policy at Harvard University's
Kennedy School of Government, has devoted much of his adult life to that cause,
churning out books and articles about how Americans are ill prepared for the
workplace of the 21st century.

"Global investors will come and create good jobs if we have a well-trained work
force," he said in an interview. "I am interested in Americans gaining skills in
computer technology, in biotechnology, not in learning how to produce buggy
whips."

'Useful Intellectual Source'

Though critics dismiss him as a pamphleteer and propagandist and point out that
he is a lawyer and not an economist, Mr. Reich has shaped Democratic thinking on
the economy more than any other academic in the last decade. Walter F. Mondale
turned to Mr. Reich for advice during his 1984 Presidential campaign, as did
Michael S. Dukakis in 1988.

But his advice made a more indelible mark on Mr. Clinton, who was with him at
Oxford University when both were Rhodes Scholars and was a classmate at Yale Law
School.

"Nobody dominates Bill Clinton, but Bob has had a very significant influence on
him," said John Isaacson, a Boston executive who was a Rhodes Scholar with the
two men. "He has been a very useful intellectual source for Bill and probably
always will be."

Large parts of Mr. Clinton's Putting People First economic program seemed to be
plucked out of Mr. Reich's latest book, "The Work of Nations" (Knopf, 1991). The
book argues that improving America's work force and infrastructure like airports
and highways is crucial to keeping and attracting high-paying jobs.

He was one of the main authors of Mr. Clinton's economic program, the
centerpiece of which was spending $220 billion over the next four years to
improve the infrastructure and job skills. When Mr. Reich was in a Boston
hospital last June for a double hip replacement operation, Clinton aides in
Little Rock faxed him copies of the plan so he could review it as it was
reworked.

Bonded by Chicken Soup

The President-elect and Mr. Reich became fast friends on the ship to England for
their Rhodes scholarships. Mr. Reich is fond of recounting how when he became
seasick, a knock on his cabin door introduced him to an affable young Arkansan
bearing chicken soup.

"They are two very similar kinds of minds and similar kinds of people," said
Nancy Bekavac, a law school classmate who shared an apartment with Mr. Reich and
two other friends in New Haven. "They both have first-rate analytical minds, but
their communications skills are even better."

While Mr. Clinton is a champion political networker, Mr. Reich is an astute
intellectual networker. He is a contributing editor to The New Republic,
chairman of the board of the American Prospect, a liberal economics magazine,
and a board member of the Economic Policy Institute in Washington.

In addition to churning out books and articles, Mr. Reich is a talented speaker
who is frequently a guest on the MacNeil-Lehrer News Hour and on various
National Public Radio news programs.

Opposing Voices

He has also attracted a number of critics. Not all of them are conservatives,
and several point to his constant presence on newspaper Op-Ed pages and
television as evidence of an outsized ego.

A far more serious assertion is that Mr. Reich is sloppy with facts and shifts
his ideas from book to book.

"His use of statistics is abusive and demagogic," said George Gilder, an author
who helped popularize conservative ideas during the Reagan era. "And I don't
think he is very rigorous on domestic policy."

Last month a writer for The New Republic attacked a 1989 Reich article that had
accused American companies of having little loyalty to their homeland. The Reich
article had stated that when an American bought a Pontiac LeMans, $6,000 of the
$20,000 paid to General Motors went to South Korea. At the time, a LeMans cost
about $10,000, the New Republic article stated. It also asserted that Mr. Reich
erred in writing that Honda's assembly plants in the United States ship about
50,000 cars a year to Asia. The real number turned out to be a fourth of that,
The New Republic said.

'You Make Some Mistakes'

Mr. Reich declined to discuss this criticism, but a longtime colleague, John D.
Donahue, a professor at the Kennedy School dismissed it. "You process 20,000
facts a year, you make some mistakes," he said.

The New Republic article also criticized Mr. Reich for inconsistency. In the
early 1980's, he was suspicious of Japanese investment in the United States,
stating, "Americans working for foreign owners do not get the kind of technical
learning they need."

But his newest book rejects the notion that Japanese companies keep their best
jobs in Japan when they own American operations.

He has also changed his mind about industrial policy. A decade ago, he supported
the vigorous use of tax incentives and job-training funds to aid promising young
industries. He now balks at that approach, saying the Government should provide
fertile ground for all.

Lacks Degree in Economics

Mr. Reich denies that he has been intellectually inconsistent, insisting that
like any good academic he has updated his views in response to changing
circumstances.

His lack of a doctorate in economics, and the belief among some Harvard faculty
that he plays loose with his facts and theories have prevented him from
receiving a tenured professorship at the Kennedy School, several colleagues
said. He was instead offered a lifetime contract for the lesser position of
lecturer.

The lack of an economics degree also prevented him from attaining his goal of
becoming Mr. Clinton's chairman of the Council of Economic Advisers, although he
directed Mr. Clinton's economic transition team.

Mr. Reich said that as Labor Secretary he hoped to pay special attention to
Americans without college degrees. "The noncollege-educated worker is on a
downward escalator," he said. "We have to try to change that."

'Dominant Figure on Campus'

Mr. Reich was born in Scranton, Pa., and grew up in South Salem, N.Y., near the
Connecticut border, where his parents ran a women's clothing store.
Valedictorian of his high school class, he went on to Dartmouth, where he was
student-council president. Although he was a vocal opponent of the Vietnam War,
his classmates say he was more a conciliator than a confrontationist.

"I remember vividly at Dartmouth what a charismatic and galvanic person he was,"
said Mr. Isaacson, who was a Dartmouth classmate as well as a fellow Rhodes
scholar. He was probably the dominant figure on campus."

When not protesting, he kept busy directing plays and writing theatre reviews.
Some friends expected that he would become a producer or theater critic.

Small Physical Stature

He did not have Bill Clinton's problems with the draft. When he showed up for
his physical, he was disqualified for being too short at 4 feet 10 inches, a
result of a rare spinal disease.

He jokes freely about his height, saying he was long on Mr. Clinton's short list
and taunting conservative critics by asking how they could think a man so short
could stand for Big Government.

After law school, he worked for the Solicitor General, Robert H. Bork, who had
been one of his law professors at Yale, then moved to the Federal Trade
Commission, where he became director of policy planning under President Jimmy
Carter.

"He challenged a lot of the orthodoxies at the commission," said Michael
Pertschuk, who was the trade commission's chairman at the time. "He left a lot
of the staff people feeling uneasy, but that was partly his role."

Praised as Administrator

Mr. Pertschuk said Mr. Reich did a good job administering a staff of 30. (At the
Labor Department, he will oversee a staff of 18,000.) Mr. Reich's colleagues
said he knew how to listen, how to delegate and how to inspire.

After Ronald Reagan was elected President, he joined the faculty at the Kennedy
School. His wife, Clare Dalton, whom he met when she auditioned for a play he
was directing at Oxford, teaches at Northeastern Law School. They have two sons,
Adam and Sam.

Throughout his writings, Mr. Reich's dominant interest has been how to
strengthen the nation's economy as it faces increased foreign competition.

Economic Divisions

In his latest book, he says the United States population is divided into three
economic levels: a thriving group consisting of people who process information,
including corporate executives, lawyers, doctors and investment bankers; a
languishing second group consisting of service-industry workers; and the
hardest-hit group, blue-collar workers like employees of the steel and rubber
industries, who have been crushed by foreign competition.

"All Americans used to be in roughly the same economic boat" he wrote. "We are
now in different boats, one sinking rapidly, one sinking more slowly, and the
third rising steadily."

In his view, education and job training can rescue those who are sinking.

Although his agenda differs from that of the labor movement, union leaders have
applauded his selection.

"We believe that he can make a superb Secretary of Labor," said Thomas R.
Donahue, the A.F.L.-C.I.O.'s secretary-treasurer. "We have always argued that we
need a Secretary of Labor who will be listened to in the Administration, and it
seems clear that he will be listened to."

NAME: Robert B. Reich

LOAD-DATE: January 10, 1993

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo:



Robert B. Reich's character suggests he will not play the role of Labor
Secretary as a bit part. Mr. Reich, second from right, and his wife, Clare
Dalton, spoke before his confirmation hearings on Thursday with Senators
Claiborne Pell, left, Paul Simon, front, and Edward M. Kennedy. (Stephen
Crowley/The New York Times)

TYPE: Biography

                   Copyright 1993 The New York Times Company


                              26 of 255 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 January 10, 1993, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

Foreign Affairs;
Vance And Powell

BYLINE: By LESLIE H. GELB

SECTION: Section 4; Page 23; Column 6; Editorial Desk

LENGTH: 708 words


Two men whose views must be respected stand in the way of lessening the
bloodshed in Bosnia: Cyrus Vance, the heroic U.N. diplomat, who negotiates
tirelessly for a peace settlement; and Gen. Colin Powell, the brilliant warrior,
who argues relentlessly against U.S. and allied military intervention.

Peace among Serbs, Croats and Muslims will almost certainly be impossible for
generations, perhaps longer. The hatreds surpass all reason.

What is possible is to establish a balance of power, and perhaps a cease-fire,
to contain the war's worst horrors. Even that will be unattainable unless
outside forces and aid are brought in to redress Serbian dominance.

I hope I'm wrong about the prospects for peace. Mr. Vance is highly experienced,
and he is on the scene. He deserves time to play out his hand -- to divide
Bosnia into autonomous provinces loosely linked to a central government. But not
much more time.

Time is not on the Vance side. Winter's coffin is already encasing
ex-Yugoslavia. Tens of thousands more will soon die or join more than a million
of their countrymen and women as refugees. The peace process cannot just drift
on, becoming an excuse for not taking decisive military action.

Nor is history on the Vance side. The peoples of this tragic land have not been
arguing for centuries simply about who among them should govern, but over who
among them will live. Any hope of burying this hatred vanished in the last nine
months of war. Neighbors killing and raping neighbors by the thousands will be
neither forgotten nor forgiven.

Revenge and fear of revenge will preclude anything resembling a peace agreement
or even a viable cease-fire. The only kind of agreement that might work and last
would have to be based on wrenching geographical separation. The three ethnic
groups would need to be moved into separate enclaves or left in carefully mixed
safe havens.

But no political settlement, cease-fire or mere slowing of the slaughter is
feasible until outside powers put the Serbs in check. And there is no chance of
that until the kinds of arguments raised by General Powell are convincingly met.

General Powell, like many of his counterparts in Europe, argues for all or
nothing. Either use whatever force is necessary to bring the adversary to his
knees or stay out militarily.

What does it mean to do nothing in this case? It means standing by while
millions are displaced and tens of thousands freeze and are shot -- thus
abandoning civilized norms and self- respect. It means faking serious efforts to
help the Muslims, thus fanning cynicism and undermining faith in democratic
leadership. It means emboldening the Serbs to turn against other neighbors in
Kosovo and Macedonia, with greater risk of a general Balkan war. It means
unsettling Germany with more refugees.

Plainly, doing virtually nothing or continuing the present policy of simply
feeding victims while they die makes no sense. But if doing "all" would lead to
an open-ended, Vietnam-like quagmire, that makes no sense either.

For months now, it has been clear that the issue boils down to this: Can the
West intervene militarily in ways that will not lead to endless and inconclusive
escalation? I believe the answer is yes and here's how:

First, Western leaders must be honest with their people about the stakes and the
risks of inaction, and clear about their limited goals and strictly limited
means.

Second, Western or certainly U.S. military involvement should be restricted to
air power. Either the Serbs accept a full cease-fire or NATO aircraft attack
Serbian military targets in Bosnia and Serbia.

Third, and this is critical, the Muslims and Croats themselves must supply the
necessary ground troops. NATO should arm them appropriately and amply.

Fourth, these troops should concentrate on protecting safe havens. And NATO
should provide food and shelter for the havens immediately.

This plan for getting in does not guarantee a way out. It does offer a way to
reduce the slaughter and limit the West's military role.

Bosnians cannot wait for Mr. Vance's illusory peace. Nor can the West suffer
General Powell's Olympian caution. Every action carries risks. Inaction is the
most risky -- and the least conscionable.

LOAD-DATE: January 10, 1993

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Op-Ed

                   Copyright 1993 The New York Times Company


                              27 of 255 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 January 11, 1993, Monday, Late Edition - Final

THE NEW PRESIDENCY: The C.I.A;
Campus Activist to Insider: Journey of the C.I.A. Nominee

BYLINE: By MICHAEL R. GORDON,  Special to The New York Times

SECTION: Section A; Page 1; Column 4; National Desk

LENGTH: 1457 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, Jan. 10


Friends of Jim Woolsey, President-elect Bill Clinton's choice as Director of
Central Intelligence, like to talk about the time after the 1968 election when
he found himself in an argument with the Deputy Secretary of Defense about the
Vietnam War.

Like many in his generation, the 27-year-old Army lieutenant, though fulfilling
his R.O.T.C. service requirement at the Pentagon, strongly opposed the war. But
the deputy, Paul H. Nitze, had backed Mr. Woolsey into a corner of the exclusive
F Street Club, insisting that Eugene J. McCarthy's Presidential campaign had
hurt the peace talks.

Refusing to Back Down

Mr. Woolsey, a founding member of the Yale Citizens for McCarthy, refused to
yield.

Twenty-four years later, at the age of 51, Mr. Woolsey has more in common with
Mr. Nitze than with that young lieutenant. After a career in both Democratic and
Republican administrations, Mr. Woolsey has become a conservative voice on Mr.
Clinton's national security team, completing an evolution from campus activist
to Washington insider with solid credentials on military issues.

R. James Woolsey's detractors portray him as an ambitious man who saw a
professional advantage in being to the right of most of his Democratic
counterparts, becoming the Republicans' favorite Democrat and the ideal
candidate to protect a Democratic White House from charges that it plans to cut
military spending too much. They say his thinking is too heavily rooted in the
cold war, when he sounded alarms about the Soviet missile threat, and that he is
not the man to help the American intelligence agencies adapt to a new world.

Experience Clinton Needs

But after more than two decades in Washington, Mr. Woolsey appears to have many
more supporters in high places than opponents, including Brent Scowcroft,
President Bush's national security adviser, and Bobby Inman, the retired admiral
and former Deputy Director of the C.I.A., who recommended to Mr. Clinton that he
appoint Mr. Woolsey to lead the agency.

His backers say he is just what the Clinton Administration needs: a nondogmatic
conservative who has experience in overseeing intelligence programs and also has
a sense of the strengths and weaknesses of intelligence reporting from his days
as an arms negotiator. To his supporters, he is an accepted member of the
national security establishment who is likely to be politically acceptable to
intelligence agencies while having the intellect and energy to change them.

While he is conservative on military issues, Mr. Woolsey has demonstrated in his
recent work for the agency that he is prepared to cut the intelligence budget.
And as the focus of the national security debate has changed, Mr. Woolsey has
also been engaged in some areas that the incoming Administration has identified
as among its national security priorities. He has talked of focusing on the
problems of the spread of nuclear and chemical weapons and ethnic conflict, the
new threats to peace and American security also identified by Mr. Clinton. And
he has participated in studies on having the United Nations enforce peace using
U.N. troops.

Mr. Woolsey, a Rhodes scholar and Yale Law School graduate who in his Washington
practice has represented major military contractors and international
corporations, is taking over the American intelligence apparatus at a critical
moment. Not only will he help guide the Administration at a time of turbulence
around the world, he also faces the task of redefining the role of the C.I.A.

The new director will face a challenge of striking a balance between
highlighting the new threats to American security and avoiding the temptation to
sound the klaxon at every potential crisis to protect the agency from criticism
that it let its guard down.

In an address to the World Affairs Council on Dec. 2 in Washington, Mr. Woolsey
stressed the need to focus on an arc of unstable and heavily armed nations that
stretch from North Africa, across the Middle East and the lower reaches of the
former Soviet Union to North Korea.

Though American intelligence organizations have already begun to focus more on
the spread of weapons and regional tensions after the cold war, Mr. Woolsey is
likely to go further by directing that more reconnaissance satellites,
electronic interception capabilities and human intelligence sources be focused
on that broad swath of nations.

A committee that he headed did a classified study this summer at the request of
the C.I.A. That study on reconnaissance capabilities proposed a new set of
priorities for intelligence gathering and outlined substantial budgetary cuts.

"This world that we are beginning to see -- with the addition of nuclear
weapons, ballistic missiles, chemicals, bacteriologicals and the rest -- begins
to look more and more like a more lethal version of the old world that existed
before 1914, when a range of nationalist sentiments produced the holocaust of
World War I," Mr. Woolsey said in the speech last month.

Change in Emphasis

At the same time, the agency can be expected to reduce its emphasis on covert
operations, which many analysts think have become less necessary after the end
of the cold war.

To reach the point of becoming C.I.A. director, Mr. Woolsey went through a
personal odyssey. Born in Tulsa, Okla., he went to Stanford University, where he
earned a Rhodes Scholarship.

After Oxford, Mr. Woolsey went to Yale Law School and worked in the
Congressional election campaign for Allard K. Lowenstein, the liberal Democrat
and social activist, though friends say that Mr. Woolsey was never a radical.

He was then asked to work at the Pentagon by the chief systems analyst for the
Defense Department, where he was working when he had the heated exchange with
Mr. Nitze. As he left the F Street Club, Mr. Woolsey remarked to his wife that
it was a good thing that Mr. Nitze would be leaving his post at the end of the
Johnson Administration.

But several months later Mr. Nitze came back as the Defense Secretary's
representative at the strategic arms limitation talks during the Nixon
Administration. Ivan Selin, then the director of the systems analyst office,
suggested that Mr. Woolsey work for Mr. Nitze. Before doing so, he checked with
Mr. Nitze, who said that Mr. Woolsey did not know what he was talking about, but
at least he was not afraid to speak up.

Connection begat connection. While working for Mr. Nitze, Mr. Woolsey met
Richard N. Perle, the hard-line aide of Senator Henry M. Jackson, the Washington
Democrat on the Senate Armed Services Committee, and later worked for three
years as the general counsel for the committee, which at the time oversaw
intelligence programs. He then went to Shea & Gardner, a Washington law firm,
where he represented aerospace and international corporations.

He supported Mr. Jackson's candidacy for President, but when Mr. Jackson lost in
the primaries, Mr. Woolsey went to work for Jimmy Carter. After Mr. Carter's
election, Mr. Woolsey landed a position as Undersecretary of the Navy, where he
managed Navy intelligence programs and got to know Admiral Inman.

Leaving the Pentagon in 1979, he returned to his law practice. He has recently
represented the McDonnell Douglas Corporation and the General Dynamics
Corporation in a lawsuit seeking to recover damages from Defense Secretary Dick
Cheney's cancellation of the A-12 for the Navy because of its excessive cost. A
little over a year ago, he joined the boards of the Martin Marietta Corporation,
the giant defense company that made the MX missile, and British Aerospace, the
North American arm of the British-owned company. He is required to resign both
posts before assuming the C.I.A. directorship.

Mr. Woolsey also registered as a foreign agent in the late 1980's for a Swiss
company, Societe Generale de Surveilliance, which inspects goods that are
exported.

Unlike many other Democrats, Mr. Woolsey did not fade from the scene when the
Republicans took over the White House in 1981. He played an important national
security role advising the Reagan Administration, working with Mr. Scowcroft in
drafting a compromise report for a Presidential panel on the MX missile that
became the basis of the Administration's strategic nuclear policy. In the Bush
Administration he was named, with the support of Mr. Scowcroft, to negotiate the
treaty that cut conventional armed forces in Europe.

Even with his impressive resume, Mr. Woolsey has never held a post as
challenging as that of Director of Central Intelligence. Still, with his
Washington credentials, he is expected to sail through the confirmation process
and take on a job that he has described as presenting a "complex and difficult
agenda."


NAME: Jim Woolsey

LOAD-DATE: January 11, 1993

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo: R. James Woolsey. (Associated Press) (pg. A14)

TYPE: Biography

                   Copyright 1993 The New York Times Company


                              28 of 255 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 January 11, 1993, Monday, Late Edition - Final

KISSINGER PROTEST CHANGES A REPORT

BYLINE: By STEVEN A. HOLMES,  Special to The New York Times

SECTION: Section B; Page 7; Column 6; National Desk

LENGTH: 629 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, Jan. 10


A Senate committee investigating the handling of missing American servicemen in
Southeast Asia toned down its criticism of former President Richard M. Nixon and
his Secretary of State, Henry A. Kissinger, after protests from both men.

In an interview today, Mr. Kissinger's lawyer, Lloyd N. Cutler, said that he and
Mr. Kissinger read portions of the draft report on Dec. 28 and succeeded in
having some of the document's conclusions changed. The report is scheduled to be
made public on Wednesday.

The issue was first reported in recent days in Newsday and The Los Angeles
Times.

Memo From Nixon

The two papers said the Senate panel, the Select Committee on P.O.W.-M.I.A.
Affairs, had criticized Mr. Nixon and his top aides for failing to get a full
accounting of American military personnel at the end of the Vietnam War.

The Times quoted Mr. Nixon as writing in a memorandum to the committee, "To
convey the impression to the hundreds of families of M.I.A.'s that an American
President deliberately left behind their loved ones and that some of them might
still be alive can only be described as obscene."

Some family members of missing servicemen were enraged that Mr. Kissinger was
allowed access to the report before its public release and that some of the
report's findings were changed as a result of his comments. Many of these family
members have for years accused Mr. Kissinger and other Government officials of
participating in a cover-up to keep the public from learning the truth about the
2,264 Americans who have never been accounted for.

"As a family member, I cannot understand why these people are being allowed to
negotiate the truth," said Dolores Apodaca Alfond, an official with the National
Alliance of Families for the Return of America's Missing Servicemen. "If the
truth is to come out, why should it be negotiated?"

From the beginning of its work, the committee has been plagued by bickering and
infighting among its members and staff. Today, in response to the latest
disclosures, Senator John Kerry of Massachusetts, the committee's chairman,
released a harshly worded statement condemning unauthorized release of
information to reporters.

1,000-Page Report

"It has been clear from the start that this emotional issue brings out those who
wish to advance their own agendas," Mr. Kerry said. "The premature and selective
release of information throughout our yearlong investigation has been designed
to divert attention from the committee's exhaustive work and thorough
deliberations."

Mr. Cutler said today that at Mr. Kissinger's request Senator Kerry allowed him
and Mr. Kissinger to view parts of the 1,000-page report that dealt with the
Paris peace accords and the follow-up to the peace plan. Mr. Cutler said he and
Mr. Kissinger inspected the report in the presence of a committee staff member.

"There was a lot of concern that it would have been a Monday morning
quarterbacking operation 20 years after the fact," Mr. Cutler said, referring to
the report.

Mr. Cutler and former aides to Mr. Nixon say it is true that Mr. Nixon and Mr.
Kissinger did not get a full accounting from the Vietnamese of American
servicemen who were missing in Vietnam, Cambodia or Laos. But these aides say
Congress must shoulder some of the blame.

For example, Mr. Cutler said, the draft report was silent on testimony by
Senator Bob Dole, Republican of Kansas, about a May 1973 effort by Republicans
to moderate a Senate prohibition on the use of force in Vietnam. The measure,
called the Dole amendment, would have allowed American military action if the
North Vietnamese failed to comply with the provisions of the peace accords
related to prisoners or men missing in action. The amendment was defeated in the
Senate.

LOAD-DATE: January 11, 1993

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1993 The New York Times Company


                              29 of 255 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 January 11, 1993, Monday, Late Edition - Final

China Builds Its Military Muscle, Making Some Neighbors Nervous

BYLINE: By NICHOLAS D. KRISTOF,  Special to The New York Times

SECTION: Section A; Page 1; Column 4; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 1749 words

DATELINE: BEIJING, Jan. 8


Buoyed by a strong economy, China is making far-reaching improvements in its
armed forces, leaving many Asian countries feeling increasingly threatened by
the behemoth in the neighborhood.

While there is no sign that a war is likely any time soon, some military experts
say that the equipment China is acquiring from Russia and other countries may
upset the balance of power in Asia by the end of the decade.

Among the key items China is buying or developing are new classes of military
ships, new fighter planes, better radar systems, new tanks and aerial-refueling
technology. The Communist Party leadership has even approved in principle the
eventual acquisition of an aircraft carrier.

The Big Kid on the Block

Most fundamentally, some diplomats believe, China may intend to fill the
military vacuum that it perceives in the Pacific Ocean after the disintegration
of the Soviet Union and the withdrawal of the United States from bases in the
Philippines.

"China is moving from a regional power to a regional superpower," said Paul
Beaver, publisher of Jane's Defense Weekly in London. "That doesn't upturn the
balance of power completely, but it does cause a lot of ripples."

The growing strength of the People's Liberation Army would not be so much of a
concern if China did not have border disputes with at least seven neighbors.
China still threatens regularly to use force to recover Taiwan, and over the
last three decades it has fought border wars or skirmishes with India, the
Soviet Union and Vietnam.

China also claims the entire South China Sea, including major shipping routes
that carry oil from the Middle East to Japan. Over the last year it became more
aggressive about asserting the borders it says are its own.

"They've really got a very major build-up going on," said a senior diplomat from
one of China's neighbors. "It could be quite dangerous."

Asking Nervously, What's Next?

Singapore's Defense Minister, Yeo Ning Hong, warned recently that China's
assertiveness in the South China Sea "has aroused distrust and suspicion" among
the five other nations with claims in the area.

He cautioned that even if a generational transition takes place smoothly in
China, "countries in the region may still be uncertain about how an economically
stronger China will behave in the longer term."

Some Western diplomats and scholars are much less alarmed, with concern receding
in proportion to the distance of their home countries from China. They also note
that China historically has tended to be a brooding, inward-looking country.

"Trying to become a superpower would be completely opposite to the tradition of
the Chinese, because they never went outward on a grand scale," a European
diplomat said.

Partly for this reason, no one seems to think that China might some day try to
conquer Japan, Indonesia or other countries that it did not control in the past.
China is not expansionist in that sense, nor is it being entirely unreasonable
in its territorial claims, which involve complex historical arguments and
ambiguities. To outsiders there often is no clear right or wrong.

The fundamental problem is that China lost huge chunks of territory over the
past 150 years in periods when it was powerless. These days China may be
increasingly able to resolve the resulting border disputes in its favor.

A map published by China in a 1954 textbook underscores the possibilities for
conflict. The map, which is reprinted in a recent book by John W. Garver,
"Foreign Relations of the People's Republic of China," delineates a Chinese view
of its sphere of influence in the 19th century and early 20th century.

Capitalism vs. Militarism

This encompassed Nepal, half of Bangladesh, Myanmar, Thailand, Malaysia,
Indochina, Taiwan, North and South Korea, Mongolia and large swatches of Russia.
While these areas have been influenced by China, most are not normally thought
of as its 19th-century territories.

There is no sign that China wants to "recover" these countries, but a sense of
territorial loss lingers in the background of any discussion of China's military
aspirations.

"Nobody is interested in expanding our borders," said an independent-minded
Chinese lawyer. "Everybody just wants to make money, and militarism would get in
the way of that."

The military equipment that China is acquiring comes in large part from Russia,
which seems to have decided that income from the sales outweighs the fear of
arming a potential enemy. But some also comes from Iran, Europe, Israel and the
United States.

A Long Shopping List

The Army is being upgraded in almost every area, but military experts describe
these crucial improvements:

*China has purchased 26 advanced fighter planes, Su-27's, from Russia, and is
said to be considering the purchase of many more. The Air Force is also
interested in buying Mig-31's and in developing joint production with Russia of
fighters or short-takeoff jets.

*The Air Force is developing aerial refueling for the Su-27's and for its
bombers. This will substantially increase the ability of the armed forces to
threaten Taiwan and Vietnam or to control the South China Sea.

*The Communist Party has decided in principle to acquire an aircraft carrier,
according to a confidential speech by President Yang Shangkun. Most experts
doubt that China will buy a huge Ukrainian carrier that it once considered;
instead it may purchase a smaller Russian carrier or build its own.

*China is developing military ships: the Jiangwei class of frigates, the Luhu
class of destroyers and a vastly upgraded version of the older Luda class
destroyers. The new ships have surface-to-surface missiles and electronic
warfare abilities that let China patrol ocean waters farther out than just along
the coast.

*The military is acquiring vastly improved radars and missile-guidance systems
from Russia and elsewhere.

*Beijing is believed to be negotiating the purchase of Russian S-300 missiles,
which are similar to the American-made Patriots.

*The Army is working on a new model of its main tank that could be an important
factor in any ground war.

Where the Money Comes From

These improvements are possible because of the strength of the nation's economy,
which grew 12 percent in 1992. The official military budget increased by
one-third over the last three years, even after inflation, but these figures are
extremely misleading: They do not include capital expenditures on equipment and
do not take account of huge sums that the Army earns from weapons sales and from
its factories, which make everything from clocks to refrigerators.

While the official budget for 1992 was $6.85 billion, the real amount was
probably at least twice that. Even so, military spending amounts to only a bit
more than 3 percent of the gross national product, less than in some other
countries in Asia and elsewhere.

China has nuclear weapons pointed at some of its neighbors, principally Russia,
but these seem to unnerve Asian countries less than the boom in spending on the
Navy and Air Force, almost all of it on equipment that would enable China to
project its power beyond its shores.

An Eye on South Asia

Another cause for concern is mounting intelligence that China may be selling
weapons to Myanmar in exchange for the right to set up naval facilities and
listening posts on islands off the Burmese coast.

Chinese leaders are trying to assuage the concerns. China's Ambassador to Great
Britain, Ma Yuzhen, declared last month that it is "absolutely not true" that
China is "filling the vacuum left by the superpowers."

For now, China's military forces are still regarded as second or third rate by
Western experts. Fighter pilots have only about 80 hours of air training a year,
less than half the level in NATO countries, and it is said that China had to ask
Russian pilots to bring the Su-27 fighter jets to their new home bases because
the newly trained Chinese pilots were not good enough.

"In general, China is no better equipped than Iraq was," said Keith Jacobs, an
expert on the Chinese military who is based in the United States. However, Mr.
Jacobs added, by 2000 China may be in a much stronger position than it is now.

New Post-Soviet Missions

The Chinese military, like that of the United States, has been struggling to
redefine its mission after the collapse of its prime potential enemy, the Soviet
Union. The goal the military has come up with, at least tentatively, is
two-fold: repression of internal dissent and guarantees for Chinese commercial
interests in disputed regions.

Most experts believe that the South China Sea is the likeliest spot for a
conflict to erupt, in part because it is claimed in all or in part by China,
Taiwan, Vietnam, Malaysia, the Philippines and Brunei. Vietnam and China have
fought several brief naval battles in the area over the years, as well as a
ground war in 1979.

The Army has published a new book, "I Love the Spratly Islands," that seems
aimed at dredging up nationalist sentiment for the claims to the area, which
includes the Spratly archipelago. For now there is no sign that China will
interfere with international shipping, but Beijing might, for example, ban Japan
from shipping plutonium through the sea.

The principal territorial dispute with Japan is over the Diaoyu Islands, known
in Japan as the Senkakus, which lie northeast of Taiwan. These are uninhabited
and for now, neither Tokyo nor Beijing seems ready for a military confrontation.

As for India, which China fought in 1962, much of the common border remains in
dispute but for now both countries seem intent on focusing instead on how to
improve diplomatic and economic relations. Likewise, China fought border
skirmishes with the Soviet Union in 1969, but relations with Russia have
improved and new fighting is thought unlikely any time soon.

A Rejuvenated Nationalism

China's interest in picking fights will depend in part on the degree of
nationalism among its people.

Michel Oksenberg, president of the East-West Center in Hawaii, noted a concern
that many diplomats and scholars share about the Communist Party's efforts --
with mixed success so far -- to win popular support by cultivating nationalistic
pride.

"On the side of factors that could induce a more muscular or assertive foreign
policy," Mr. Oksenberg said, "I would put high on the list the effort to use
nationalism as a substitute for Marxism as a unifying ideology."


LOAD-DATE: January 11, 1993

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Map: "China's View of Its Old Shpere of Influence" shows a reproduction
of a map published in a Chinese textbook in 1954, and provides one official
Chinese interpretation of losses of territory or influence over the past 150
years. (pg. A8)

                   Copyright 1993 The New York Times Company


                              30 of 255 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 January 11, 1993, Monday, Late Edition - Final

Hospital Criticized in Veterans' Suicides

BYLINE: Special to The New York Times

SECTION: Section B; Page 4; Column 1; Metropolitan Desk

LENGTH: 1041 words

DATELINE: WEST HAVEN, Conn.


Janice DiRaffaele believes her husband, Christopher, would be alive today if
officials of the Veterans Affairs hospital here had heeded her warnings about
his erratic behavior and suicidal tendencies.

"I begged the doctor and the nurses to put him in a locked ward," she said. "I
was frightened for him, for me, for my kids. I'd never seen him the way he was
acting. Before I left I was assured he would be O.K., that he was locked in. He
was gone within an hour."

Mr. DiRaffaele, 37, walked out of the hospital on July 26, 1989. A few days
later, he was found dead of a self-inflicted gunshot wound.

Since 1989, 10 patients or former patients of the Veterans Affairs Medical
Center have committed suicide or died of accidental overdoses of illegal drugs.
Eight of them died shortly after leaving the hospital, and two died on the
hospital's grounds. Four of the deaths have been since July.

Mrs. DiRaffaele has filed a Federal suit charging the hospital with negligence,
and the Inspector General's office of the Department of Veterans Affairs is
investigating the deaths, with a report expected soon. And the hospital has been
the focus of intense news media attention, including accounts of widespread drug
use by patients on hospital grounds.

Patient Population Cited

Officials here say the problems are not a result of any failure by the hospital.
Instead, they say, the problems reflect the hospital's troubled patient
population -- including many drug-addicted Vietnam War veterans -- and the
increased demand for services and the lack of adequate resources. They also say
they have taken steps to improve procedures.

"We take care of the heroes and the helpless," said the hospital's director,
Norman E. Browne. He said the hospital had the largest workload increase of the
nation's 172 Veterans Affairs hospitals and the busiest psychiatric emergency
room in the state. In 1992, the hospital had 52,000 outpatient visits, up from
22,000 in 1988.

"From our point of view," he said, "the psychiatric patients we take care of are
some of the most difficult. Many are homeless. They have been traumatized by the
war, by their poverty. They tend not to have family, and many have a history of
substance abuse."

Eileen Moran, a spokeswoman for the medical center, said that all the patients
who died after leaving the grounds left either against the wishes of their
doctors or because they were deemed not to be in grave danger of harming
themselves or others. "You're dealing with the very delicate issue of a person's
individual rights," she said. "I'm sure the doctors would have preferred they
all remain here, but you simply can't hold people against their will."

The 530-bed medical center is affiliated with Yale University, and more than 300
doctors work there. Programs include a 90-bed nursing home, a
work-rehabilitation unit, a 170-bed psychiatric unit, an H.I.V. program and
outpatient psychiatric programs.

The most recent series of incidents began in July when Tommy Golden, a Vietnam
War veteran from Enfield, Conn., was discharged from the hospital for using
drugs and was found dead of an overdose in a cemetery across the street two
hours later. His family and veterans' groups demanded an investigation.

"Drugs went in and out of that hospital like it was going out of style," said
George Golden, Mr. Golden's brother. "Tommy was a danger to himself and still
they discharged him. They never had his war records. They never even knew what
happened to him in the war, so how could they properly treat him?"

Advisory Panel Formed

After Mr. Golden's death, Linda Schwartz, the regional director for the Vietnam
Veterans of America, asked the hospital to create an advisory committee. One was
formed composed of two doctors, a city official, Ms. Schwartz and veterans. She
said the hospital has been responsive to the committee's suggestions.

"Drugs were a very big problem because many vets have substance-abuse problems,
and other vets would bring them drugs in," she said. Now, wards once riddled
with drug trafficking are being controlled, she said.

Dr. Dennis Charney, chief of psychiatry, said that of 170 psychiatric patients,
169 had substance-abuse problems and many patients have a dual diagnosis -- they
might suffer from schizophrenia or post-traumatic stress disorder as well as a
substance-abuse problem. Such patients, he said, are far more likely to be
suicidal than the populations at large.

Still Mr. Browne, the hospital's director, said the hospital "made some
mistakes" in the handling of one of the patients, Frederick Hanke, 42, a Vietnam
War veteran from North Branford, Conn., who was found hanging from a tree on the
grounds on Oct. 8. Mr. Browne said Mr. Hanke checked in to the emergency room
saying he felt suicidal and was told to check in upstairs. Mr. Hanke then
disappeared and was found dead on the grounds three days later. The hospital has
since made changes in its procedures, Mr. Browne said.

In December, another Vietnam War veteran, Stephen Bakke, 41, of Ledyard, Conn.,
was found dead in his room in a halfway house at the hospital. The Medical
Examiner recently determined that his death was caused by an accidental drug
overdose.

Joseph Calandro, the commander of Veterans of Foreign Wars Post 1684 in West
Haven said he has been a patient at the medical center, as have many veterans at
the post. "The doctors and the nurses treat the veterans with class and
dignity," he said. "I don't hear negative things, only positive."

But Mrs. DiRaffaele disagrees.

"People have to be aware there is a severe problem at the V.A. With the numbers
of suicides and accidental deaths climbing I felt I had to speak out," she said.
"I went with Chris for his outpatient therapy, and it would last a few minutes
and they never got at what was going on inside him."

Hospital officials say it treated Mr. DiRaffaele properly. They say he left on
his own, and they called the state police, who found him at his home. The
officers left after he convinced them he was fine, Mr. Browne said.

United States Senator Joseph I. Lieberman said he is working to get additional
financing for the hospital, particularly for its post-traumatic stress disorder
unit.

LOAD-DATE: January 11, 1993

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo: Since 1989, 10 patients or former patients of the Veterans
Affairs Medical Center in New Haven, above, have committed suicide or have died
of accidental overdoses of illegal drugs. (David LaBianca for The New York
Times)

Map of West Haven showing location of Veterans Affairs Medical Center.

                   Copyright 1993 The New York Times Company


                              31 of 255 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                January 12, 1993, Tuesday, Late Edition - Final

THE NEW PRESIDENCY: State Department;
60's-Era Memo May Ripple Christopher's Senate Sailing

BYLINE: By ELAINE SCIOLINO,  Special to The New York Times

SECTION: Section A; Page 18; Column 5; National Desk

LENGTH: 805 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, Jan. 11


Suddenly, Warren M. Christopher, President-elect Bill Clinton's most
swooned-over Cabinet nominee, is facing some embarrassing questions on Capitol
Hill, where there is a renewed concern about an old accusation that he knew
about Army surveillance of anti-Vietnam War protesters.

It is not that the 25-year-old incident is serious enough to jeopardize Mr.
Christopher's confirmation as Secretary of State. Rather, it is that his
confirmation hearings before the Senate Foreign Relations Committee, which start
on Wednesday, may not turn out to be the love-fest the Clinton team expected.

Questions have arisen over whether Mr. Christopher, who is universally regarded
as a man of integrity, may have misled Congress during his confirmation hearings
as Deputy Secretary of State in January 1977.

He said then that, as Deputy Attorney General in the 1960's, he neither
authorized an Army intelligence operation to spy on civil rights and antiwar
activists nor knew anything about it.

"I have no recollection of a discussion in my presence of the Army engaging in
covert surveillance or any other form of covert activity," he said then. He
added that he believed the Army was simply providing the Johnson Administration
with "summaries of what they picked up from local police departments or from
news tickers."

1968 Memorandum Surfaces

But a July 23, 1968, memorandum from an aide in the Justice Department to Mr.
Christopher, disclosed by The Associated Press on Sunday, indicates that he was
informed in 1968 that Army "operatives" were involved in the intelligence
gathering.

The memorandum on potential disturbances in Washington said that the "main
source of intelligence" in the capital was the Army's 116th Military
Intelligence Group. "The 116th relies upon local police departments for some of
their information, but also have their own operatives in the area," the document
added. A note in the margin reads, "Noted. WC," in what Mr. Christopher's aides
confirm is his handwriting.

The memo is among Mr. Christopher's files at the Lyndon B. Johnson archives in
Austin, Tex.

Mr. Christopher's aides as well as committee members and their staffs today
scrambled to figure out how to deal with the matter. Committee lawyers wrote Mr.
Christopher today asking for a written explanation before the two-day hearing.

Later in the day, William C. Triplett 2d, the minority counsel to the committee,
disclosed that the panel was seeking about 60 more documents that are still
secret. Mr. Triplett is allied with Senator Jesse A. Helms, the conservative
North Carolina Republican, who is expected to lead the charge in interrogating
Mr. Christopher.

A member of the Clinton transition said that Mr. Christopher would say, both in
a letter and in the hearing, that although he was aware that the military was
gathering intelligence, he had no knowledge of "covert activities" and that
nothing in the newly disclosed documents contradicts his 1977 testimony.

The official added, "Mr. Christopher does not recall those memos today, but his
initials are on one of them and he doesn't wish to suggest for a second that he
didn't read them."

A Statement Is Likely

While members of the Clinton team said that Mr. Christopher was likely to make a
statement Tuesday about the matter to try to defuse it before the Wednesday
hearing, Democratic members of the committee said that they did not expect the
topic to derail the nomination.

Complicating matters is Mr. Christopher's reserve. He made courtesy calls on
committee members last week, but his lifelong lawyer's habit of closely holding
his cards was interpreted by some senators and staff members as aloofness, even
indifference.

Mr. Christopher's meeting with Senator Claiborne Pell was particularly painful,
some committee staff members said. The Rhode Island Democrat who heads the
Foreign Relations Committee may be the most subdued Senator, and when the two
men met, the atmosphere was anything but electric.

"We had a good talk, and a renewal of our acquaintanceship," the courtly Mr.
Pell said in an interview. But he added, "He is very discreet, I'd say. I didn't
ask him to be indiscreet, and he certainly wasn't."

Will He Seize a Chance?

Many Democrats and Republicans will be eager to see if Mr. Christopher seizes
the opportunity of the hearings to present himself as a forceful policymaker.

Senator Daniel Patrick Moynihan, Democrat of New York, calls the nominee a
"brilliant negotiator and indomitable friend." But the outspoken Senator
conceded that his more reticent friend would have to improve his public persona.

"Chris has a lawyer-like manner because he's a lawyer-like man," said Mr.
Moynihan. "He's now returning to public life and obviously has to become a much
more a public person than he is just now."

NAME: Warren M. Christopher

LOAD-DATE: January 12, 1993

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Biography

                   Copyright 1993 The New York Times Company


                              32 of 255 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                January 12, 1993, Tuesday, Late Edition - Final

Senator Says Kissinger Was Leaked a Report

BYLINE: AP

SECTION: Section A; Page 16; Column 1; National Desk

LENGTH: 207 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, Jan. 11


The chairman of the Senate committee that altered a report on missing servicemen
in Southeast Asia after a lawyer for Henry A. Kissinger complained said today
that a draft of the report was leaked to Mr. Kissinger in December by someone
close to the committee.

But the committee chairman, Senator John Kerry, Democrat of Massachusetts, said
some of the alterations were merely factual corrections, and an aide said some
material was added as a result of the complaints. News organizations have
reported that the panel softened criticism of Mr. Kissinger, the former
Secretary of State, and former President Richard M. Nixon.

A draft summary of the report dated Jan. 5 says the committee's investigation
found that "there existed a higher degree of concern within the administration
about the possibility that prisoners were being left behind in Laos than had
been known previously, and that various options for responding to that concern
were discussed at the highest levels of government."

By contrast, Mr. Kerry had said earlier in public hearings that information on
M.I.A.'s had been ignored by top officials in the Nixon Administration.

Mr. Kerry said the committee had "strong suspicions" about who given out the
draft.

LOAD-DATE: January 12, 1993

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1993 The New York Times Company


                              33 of 255 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                January 12, 1993, Tuesday, Late Edition - Final

Justices Shun 2 Cases Involving Free-Press Claims

BYLINE: By LINDA GREENHOUSE,  Special to The New York Times

SECTION: Section A; Page 16; Column 4; National Desk

LENGTH: 850 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, Jan. 11


The Supreme Court sidestepped two potentially important First Amendment cases
today, declining to hear appeals from a newspaper reporter sentenced to jail in
Florida for refusing to identify a confidential source, and from a magazine
facing a $4.3 million damage award for a contract murder that resulted from a
classified advertisement placed by a man seeking work as a "gun for hire."

The Court made no comment in turning down the two cases. The Justices' lack of
interest in the Florida reporter's case was somewhat surprising because last
summer Justice Anthony M. Kennedy ordered the state to delay enforcing the
30-day sentence until the Supreme Court could decide whether to hear the appeal.
Justices usually reserve such orders for cases they deem most likely to garner
the four votes needed to win a review on the merits.

The Florida reporter, Tim Roche, covered a high-profile child abuse and custody
case for The Stuart News, where he worked until resigning last month. In May
1990, he wrote an article that included excerpts from a judge's order
terminating a woman's parental rights to her 2-year-old daughter. The judge, who
had intended court employees to keep the order confidential, requested an
investigation into how Mr. Roche obtained the document.

The local prosecutor issued a subpoena to Mr. Roche, ordering him to identify
his source. No subpoenas were issued to court employees or anyone else connected
with the incident. Mr. Roche was found in contempt of court when he refused to
provide the information. The Florida Supreme Court refused to hear his appeal
last summer.

A Question of Clemency

Mr. Roche's lawyer, Anne R. Noble, said today that further state court review
was necessary before the state could actually send the reporter to jail to begin
serving his 30-day sentence. Mr. Roche is also seeking clemency from Gov. Lawton
Chiles. The Governor's office may delay enforcement of the sentence while Mr.
Chiles considers the clemency question.

There was considerable dispute in the case, Roche v. Florida, No. 92-373,
between lawyers for the reporter and for the state over exactly what issue the
appeal presented.

Mr. Roche's side contended that because there was no suggestion that the
reporter had done anything illegal by receiving the information the case should
have been governed by a series of Supreme Court precedents holding that the
press has a First Amendment right to publish lawfully obtained official
information.

In their Supreme Court appeal, Mr. Roche's lawyers maintained that their
client's case was essentially indistinguishable and that the contempt judgment
should have been set aside on the basis of the earlier ruling.

Scope of Reporter's Privilege

But the state portrayed the Roche case as one involving the scope of a
reporter's constitutional privilege not to disclose a confidential source. The
state said Mr. Roche was obliged as a citizen to testify in an inquiry into the
integrity of the courthouse.

In the other case turned down today, Soldier of Fortune magazine argued that the
First Amendment barred imposition of damages for carrying an advertisement that
suggested but did not explicitly solicit criminal conduct.

The United States Court of Appeals for the 11th Circuit, in Atlanta, disagreed,
ruling last August that a magazine or newspaper could be held liable in a civil
suit for damages for publishing an advertisement that "makes it apparent that
there is a substantial danger of harm to the public," even if it stops short of
explicit solicitation.

The 1985 advertisement that led to the multimillion-dollar damage award read:
"GUN FOR HIRE: 37-year-old professional mercenary desires jobs. Vietnam Veteran.
Discreet and very private. Bodyguard, courier and other special skills. All jobs
considered."

Business Partner Slain

The man who placed the advertisement, Michael Savage, a former police officer
with no criminal record, was hired by two Atlanta men who had been trying to
kill a business partner, Richard Braun. Mr. Savage helped arrange the slaying,
in which the victim was shot in his driveway, and was convicted of conspiracy.

Mr. Braun's sons brought a civil suit for negligence against Soldier of Fortune,
which stopped carrying advertisements of this type in 1986 and prevailed on
appeal in a similar case in 1989. Soldier of Fortune's lawyers told the Supreme
Court that the magazine could not afford to pay the judgment and would have to
go out of business.

The magazine's appeal, Soldier of Fortune v. Braun, No. 92-817, was supported by
several media organizations, including the National Newspaper Association and
the Magazine Publishers of America. They contended that the appellate court had
upheld liability on the basis of a vague and subjective standard that would
increase the cost of advertising by requiring publishers to examine all
advertisements with extra care. The brief noted that on one recent Sunday three
newspapers -- The New York Times, The Los Angeles Times and The Washington Post
-- printed 69,000 classified advertisements combined.

LOAD-DATE: January 12, 1993

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1993 The New York Times Company


                              34 of 255 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                January 12, 1993, Tuesday, Late Edition - Final

Lacey Fosburgh, 50, Reporter and Writer of Fact and Fiction

BYLINE: By ERIC PACE

SECTION: Section A; Page 19; Column 3; Cultural Desk

LENGTH: 436 words


Lacey Fosburgh, a writer whose books chronicled murder, family passions and
mystery in India, died last night at California Pacific Hospital in San
Francisco. She was 50 years old and lived in Mill Valley, Calif.

Ms. Fosburgh, who began her writing career as a reporter for The New York Times,
died of complications of breast cancer, said a friend of the family.

Ms. Fosburgh's books were the nonfiction "Closing Time" (1977) and the novels
"Old Money" (1983), about a woman photographer's painful relationship with her
father, and "India Gate" (1991), a sprawling, passionate novel set in India. At
her death, she was writing a novel set in present-day New York City under
contract to Simon & Schuster.

She was a staff reporter for the Times from 1968 to late 1973. In the last 20
years, she also wrote freelance newspaper and magazine articles, many of them
for The Times, taught journalism at the University of California at Berkeley and
was a consultant to newspapers, among them The Oakland Tribune.

Murder and Mysteries

A 1973 murder case about which Ms. Fosburgh wrote for The Times became the
subject of "Closing Time," which was a selection of the Literary Guild and the
Doubleday Book Club. It won a Mystery Writers of America award.

The murder victim was a troubled teacher, Roseann Quinn. The police said she
took an Indiana drifter, John Wayne Wilson, home to her apartment on West 72d
Street in Manhattan from a nearby singles bar. They said her body had been
sexually mutilated. After being held five months on murder charges, Mr. Wilson
hanged himself in his jail cell.

In "Contemporary Authors," a series of reference books, Truman Capote is quoted
as remarking that the book showed that Ms. Fosburgh "is a skillful, selective
reporter and also a literary artist."

Ms. Fosburgh was born in Manhattan, the daughter of Hugh Whitney Fosburgh, a
journalist and author who died in 1976, and Helen Edwards Fosburgh. Through her
paternal grandmother, Leila Whitney Fosburgh, Ms. Fosburgh was descended from
the Whitney family. She graduated from the Brearley School in Manhattan and
Sarah Lawrence College. She was a debutante at a dinner-dance at the St. Regis
Hotel. From 1964 to 1966 she studied in New Delhi on a Fulbright grant.

Her 1973 marriage to Marc Libarle ended in divorce in 1975.

She is survived by her second husband, David Harris, a writer who was a
prominent opponent of the Vietnam War, whom she wed in 1977; a daughter from her
second marriage, Sophie Whitney Harris of Mill Valley; her mother, who lives in
Manhattan, and a brother, Pieter, of Manhattan.

NAME: Lacey Fosburgh

LOAD-DATE: January 12, 1993

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo: Lacey Fosburgh (Neil Reichline, 1991)

TYPE: Biography; Obituary (Obit)

                   Copyright 1993 The New York Times Company


                              35 of 255 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                January 12, 1993, Tuesday, Late Edition - Final

On My Mind;
Lessons of Casablanca

BYLINE: By A. M. ROSENTHAL

SECTION: Section A; Page 21; Column 5; Editorial Desk

LENGTH: 718 words

DATELINE: CASABLANCA, Morocco


Fifty Januarys ago, in a villa in this North African city, Franklin D. Roosevelt
used two words that decisively and precisely set the Allied goals of World War
II, determined the shape of the peace -- and have affected the lives of most of
the world's people to this day.

"Unconditional surrender," Roosevelt said -- those were the only terms on which
the Axis nations, all still strong then, would get peace from the Allies. And he
made it totally clear that meant not only military surrender but the end of the
political systems of conquest and subjugation that bound the Axis together.

In Casablanca, F.D.R. left no shadings, no misunderstandings about his war aims.
No President since has had the desire or courage to be that clear and candid
about his own wartime goals. That is something for Bill Clinton to think about
as he reads briefing papers about Iraq and Bosnia.

The Casablanca Conference of 1943 had a cast of thousands -- soldiers on guard,
detachments of generals and bureaucrats. But it was essentially a two-man
affair.

Stalin would not come because the battle of Stalingrad, the first great German
defeat, was taking place.  Gen. Charles de Gaulle had to be dragged in at the
end, because he mistrusted British and American intentions toward the Free
French.

Morocco was a French colony then. The Sultan could not do much more than watch,
act as designated host and plan to fight for the independent country he wanted
to hand over to his son -- who was 12 years old and is now King Hassan II, and
remembers.

But Winston Churchill, puffing his cigar, sat in the villa garden as President
Roosevelt spoke at a closing press conference, to reporters who did not know why
they had been brought to Casablanca. The two leaders had met in secret for about
three weeks working out plans for the conduct of the war against Germany, Japan
and Italy. Churchill, according to the historian Arthur Schlesinger Jr., had
already informed his War Cabinet about unconditional surrender, and had its
approval in his files.

Western historians are meeting here to dissect the Casablanca Conference, one of
the pivotal points of the war. The meeting is sponsored by the Franklin and
Eleanor Roosevelt Institute, the F.D.R. Library at Hyde Park and the Moroccan
Government.

The timing is perfect. European journalists and academics are giving huge
dollops of attention to a book about Churchill by the historian John Charmley.
He contends that Churchill had become subservient to Roosevelt and that Britain
should have made a deal with Germany to end the war early. Allan Clark, a former
British Conservative Defense Minister, is exuberant about the value of the book.
Presumably most Europeans and Americans will find the idea of a Nazi-dominated
Europe not to their tastes and will bury it in contempt. But indirectly at least
it points out once more the overriding importance of defining war goals.

Without "unconditional surrender" as the war aim, the deal-makers would have
been at work during the war as they were at Munich -- and as powerful. Swastikas
would be flying in every Continental capital.

President Clinton will have to deal with Saddam Hussein because President Bush
never made his goals clear. He not only did not call for unconditional
surrender, but did not insist on a surrender at all. He gave the world to
understand that he wanted Saddam out, but he was not willing to make his ouster
a condition for peace.

In Bosnia the moral duty of the West is to save Muslims from slaughter and rape,
perhaps by opening a corridor for food and medicine and creating safety zones.

But trying to restore the rule of Muslims to every Bosnian district they once
controlled would mean full-scale mountain war against a passionate enemy. One
way or another Americans should know Mr. Clinton's war goals so that they and
Congress can decide if they want to go along.

All that seems obvious -- yes, of course we must have understandable war goals.
But in one war after another -- Korea, Vietnam, Panama -- U.S. Presidents did
not provide them.

Democratic countries asked to go to war have the right to know the conditions
for ending the war. Democratic leaders have the obligation to state them. Those
are the lessons of Casablanca, as important today as 50 Januarys ago.

LOAD-DATE: January 12, 1993

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Op-Ed

                   Copyright 1993 The New York Times Company


                              36 of 255 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               January 13, 1993, Wednesday, Late Edition - Final

Clinton Aides Study Indirect End To Military Ban on Homosexuals

BYLINE: By ERIC SCHMITT,  Special to The New York Times

SECTION: Section A; Page 1; Column 2; National Desk

LENGTH: 1027 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, Jan. 12


Top aides to President-elect Bill Clinton, who is under intense pressure from
the military to back off his commitment to lift the ban on homosexuals in the
armed services, have been floating a plan to approach that goal indirectly,
without a Presidential order.

Under the proposal, Mr. Clinton would simply issue written instructions to his
choice for Defense Secretary, Les Aspin, directing him to remove the ban and
drop any current cases against suspected homosexuals in the military.  Recruits
would no longer be asked about their sexual orientation.

It is not clear what practical difference it would make to have the directive
issued by the Defense Secretary instead of the President. But homosexual-rights
advocates consulted on the plan have reacted with outrage, contending that the
proposal would weaken the pledge Mr. Clinton repeated throughout his campaign in
contrast to President Bush, who said he would not lift the ban.

Stern Message Is Desired

These advocates say that only an executive order, akin to President Harry S.
Truman's order in 1948 that integrated the military, can send the stern message
needed to convince the military of Mr. Clinton's resolve.

"This issue must be dealt with swiftly, decisively and at the highest level,"
said Thomas B. Stoddard, a Manhattan lawyer who is a former executive director
of the Lambda Legal Defense and Education Fund, which promotes gay rights. "Any
instruments that defer or delegate this issue to the military are inherently
suspect."

Advisers to Mr. Clinton say they have been stunned by the ferocity of the
response from homosexual-rights advocates and emphasize that no final decision
has been made. Gay organizations remain cautiously optimistic Mr. Clinton will
stick to his word.

"We expect the President-elect to fulfill his campaign promise to sign an
executive order," said Tanya Domi, a spokeswoman for the National Gay and
Lesbian Task Force in Washington.

Caught Between Constituencies

But the new Administration is caught between trying to satisfy two powerful,
competing constituencies. Senior military officials have increasingly pressured
Clinton advisers to ease their commitment, and some Clinton aides are looking to
take the political heat off Mr. Clinton by focusing attention on how Mr. Aspin
is dealing with the issue.

Many military officers view Mr. Clinton with suspicion, because of his draft
record in the Vietnam War era and his pledge to reduce military spending more
than Mr. Bush has. The President-elect and his advisers are determined not to
start out the new Administration on the wrong foot with the armed services.

Pentagon officials close to the matter say Gen. Colin L. Powell, the Chairman of
the Joint Chiefs of Staff, told Mr. Clinton in an hourlong meeting last November
that it would be a mistake for the White House to issue the order.  General
Powell said that if Mr. Clinton consulted with military leaders over the next
year, perhaps establishing a commission to study the issue, cooperation from the
armed services would improve.

A Threat to Discipline?

Although top Pentagon officials acknowledge that thousands of homosexuals serve
in the 1.8-million-member armed forces, General Powell has consistently opposed
lifting the ban, as do many officers and enlisted personnel. The general has
said it would be a threat to "good order and discipline."

Senior commanders concede that they will soon have to deal with the change, but
there is a widespread fear and even hatred of homosexuals among many in the
armed services.  The Navy acknowledged last Friday, for example, that the fatal
beating of a homosexual sailor last October in Japan was being investigated as a
case of gay-bashing. A shipmate has been charged in the killing.

Exploring alternatives to the executive-order approach is the responsibility of
John D. Holum, a friend of Mr. Clinton and a Washington lawyer. He is a onetime
aide to George McGovern, the former Senator from South Dakota.

Several Weeks of Interviews

Mr. Holum has spent several weeks interviewing senior military officials,
including the uniformed service chiefs and civilian service secretaries, on
their concerns about lifting the ban on homosexuals and the best way to carry
out the policy change.

Last week, Mr. Holum met with several rights advocates and at least one
influential gay lawmaker, Representative Gerry Studds, Democrat of
Massachusetts, to discuss how to carry out the policy. Under Mr. Holum's plan,
Mr. Clinton would issue a written order, or "memorandum of instruction," to Mr.
Aspin, who would order the removal of the ban on homosexuals that was officially
promulgated in 1949.

The Pentagon order, while lifting the ban, would not address standards of
conduct for gay men and lesbians. Other issues, such as permitting gay social
clubs on military installations and granting dependents' benefits to homosexual
partners, would be left up to the Defense Secretary to decide.

The Importance of Symbolism

The proposal, which The Los Angeles Times first reported last Friday, drew angry
reactions from homosexual-rights advocates.

"Because the ban has been around so long and institutionalized, we're concerned
a directive would not carry the same kind of weight or symbolism as an executive
order," said H. Alexander Robinson, a lobbyist for the American Civil Liberties
Union in Washington, who met with Mr. Holum last Tuesday.

In a brief telephone interview today, Mr. Holum declined to give details about
his meetings with military officials or gay-rights advocates. "I'm just not
going to get into a discussion on this," Mr. Holum said. "My process is to
report to Bill Clinton."

The current Defense Department policy prohibits homosexual behavior and people
in the military who acknowledge they are homosexual. The Uniform Code of
Military Justice, which only Congress can change, also prohibits acts of sodomy.

"Clinton can't do this halfway," said one senior Army official. "He has to issue
an executive order and ask Congress to change the military law or have it
ignored, or he has to back down altogether."


LOAD-DATE: January 13, 1993

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1993 The New York Times Company


                              37 of 255 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               January 13, 1993, Wednesday, Late Edition - Final

SENATORS DIVIDED ON M.I.A. SURVIVAL

BYLINE: By CLIFFORD KRAUSS,  Special to The New York Times

SECTION: Section A; Page 7; Column 1; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 633 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, Jan. 12


In a report that will help fuel the continuing argument over the handling of
servicemen missing in the Indochina war, the Senate Select Committee on
P.O.W.-M.I.A. Affairs has concluded that the possibility remains that some
prisoners of war were left behind when American forces withdrew from South
Vietnam in 1973.

After more than a year of hearings, investigations of Government documents and
trips to Southeast Asia, the committee could not come to a conclusive finding on
whether Americans were left prisoner in Vietnam, Cambodia or Laos.

Committee members were split in the final drafting of the report, with two
Republican Senators, Robert C. Smith of New Hampshire and Charles E. Grassley of
Iowa, pressing the panel to criticize the Defense Department and other agencies
more strongly for abandoning servicemen, or at least not adequately accounting
for them.

"We acknowledge that there is no proof that U.S. P.O.W.'s survived, but neither
is there proof that one or more did not," said a Jan. 5 draft of the report,
which Congressional aides say is almost identical to the final draft to be
released on Wednesday. "There is evidence, moreover, that indicates the
possibility of survival, at least for a small number" after the release of
American prisoners following the withdrawal settlement, the report said.

Prisoners Left After Pullout

The report's findings, at least in part, contradict a 1976 House committee
report, as well as numerous assertions by officials in the Nixon, Ford and
Carter Administrations that dismissed the possibility that American prisoners
had survived since the early 1970's.

"This committee has uncovered evidence that precludes it from taking the same
view," the draft stated.

The report said there were American soldiers "known or thought possibly to have
been alive in captivity who did not come back" in the 1973 prisoner release. It
also said that United States defense and intelligence officials hoped about 40
prisoners captured in Laos would be released that year, instead of the 12
returned.

"These reports were taken seriously enough at the time to prompt recommendations
for military action aimed at gaining the release of the additional prisoners
thought to be held," the draft said.

And in a finding that could be a source of encouragement to relatives to press
efforts to find missing servicemen, the report said information gathered by
intelligence agencies over the last 19 years "raises questions about the
possibility that a small number" of Americans "may have survived in captivity."

Criticism of Efforts

The committee concluded that Washington did not knowingly abandon the missing
servicemen. "American officials," it said, " did not have certain knowledge that
any specific prisoner or prisoners were being left behind." But it asserted that
missing Americans as a group were "shunted aside and discounted by Government
and population alike."

It also noted that past Administrations made attempts to account for the
missing, but it characterized these efforts as "impersonal, relatively low-level
and non-specific."

The committee reserved special criticism for the Defense Intelligence Agency's
P.O.W.-M.I.A. office, which it said was overly sensitive to criticism and slow
in responding to reports on surviving servicemen.

But it said the greatest difficulty over the years in accounting for the
servicemen was the lack of cooperation from governments in Southeast Asia.
Vietnamese cooperation has improved in the last few years, the report said. It
charged that Laos was lagging, although there are signs of improvement.

While expressing gratitude to Prime Minister Hun Sen of Cambodia, the report
said his Phnom Penh Government could not cooperate fully in areas controlled by
the Khmer Rouge.


LOAD-DATE: January 13, 1993

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1993 The New York Times Company


                              38 of 255 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               January 13, 1993, Wednesday, Late Edition - Final

Jury Declines to Indict Robb in Taping

BYLINE: By B. DRUMMOND AYRES Jr.

SECTION: Section A; Page 12; Column 1; National Desk

LENGTH: 1006 words

DATELINE: NORFOLK, Jan. 12


A Federal grand jury refused today to indict Senator Charles S. Robb of Virginia
on charges that he tried to embarrass his chief political rival, Gov. L. Douglas
Wilder, by conspiring with top aides to release a secretly recorded tape of one
of Mr. Wilder's private phone calls.

But the jury, after an 18-month Justice Department investigation, returned
charges of eavesdropping, conspiracy and witness tampering against one of the
Democratic legislator's close friends, Bruce L. Thompson

In doing so, the grand jury asserted that Mr. Robb knew his aides were trying to
discredit Mr. Wilder with the tape, which was made by an electronics buff and
includes some critical Wilder remarks about Mr. Robb. And it asserted that the
Senator ordered an aide to lie to reporters about the scheme to release the
tape. Three former aides already have pleaded guilty in the tape incident.

While the indictment is highly critical of Mr. Robb, in the end it pulls up
short at each crucial juncture of accusing the 53-year-old Senator of anything
illegal.

Mr. Wilder's office declined to comment on the case.

'Nothing I Had to Hide'

In Washington, where word of the grand jury's action first was announced,
Senator Robb appeared at a news conference with his wife, Lynda Bird, during
which they kissed and hugged and laughed.

"Normally, a grand jury will indict a ham sandwich," Mr. Robb said in the
Capitol. But he added, "The grand jurors could see what was happening. There was
nothing I had to hide."

After commenting on what he called "the incredible and unfettered power given to
U.S. prosecutors," he said, "The whole system should not be characterized by
what happened here."

At the end of the news conference, he said he would run for re-election next
year, and his wife said: "Free at last. Free at last. Free at last."

Here in Norfolk, on the steps of the Federal Court House, the lead prosecutor,
Assistant United States Attorney Robert W. Wiechering, stonily refused to
comment on the jury's decision except to say that "the grand jury has made it's
decision and I respect that."

Members of the grand jury, in accordance with Federal law, also refused to
comment on the case.

Lawyers familiar with the case said Mr. Wiechering had asked the grand jury to
indict Mr. Robb on charges of conspiring to release the Wilder tape and then
trying to cover up details of the scheme. It is against Federal law to eavesdrop
on a private phone conversation and then disclose the content of the
conversation.

The jury's refusal to indict Mr. Robb, once considered one of his party's rising
political stars and a possible Presidential contender, apparently put an end to
the Senator's legal problems. But it left unanswered how much effect the lengthy
inquiry might have on his political future.

Accusation of a Vendetta

While the eavesdropping investigation was under way, the Senator was bombarded
by news reports in which various friends and acquaintances asserted that he had
associated with drug users and that he had been unfaithful to his wife, a
daughter of former President Lyndon B. Johnson.

He steadfastly denied the accusations, some of which had been made several years
earlier, and contended that they, along with the grand jury investigation, were
part of a vendetta to destroy him politically.

Throughout his public life, Mr. Robb has boasted that his probity was his
strongest political suit. So unproved accusations of drug use and marital
infidelity seemed particularly at odds with Mr. Robb's professed vision of
himself and the general public's romantic, almost fairy tale memory of his 1967
marriage at the White House to a President's daughter.

A handsome former Marine combat officer, decorated for service in Vietnam, Mr.
Robb acknowledged at one point that he should have used better judgment in
choosing some of his friends, a number of whom have been investigated for drug
use. But he insisted, nevertheless, that his pre-investigation image as a
somewhat dour family man and workaday legislator was the true Robb image.

Mr. Robb was trained as a lawyer and after leaving the Governor's Mansion he
joined Hunton & Williams, the state's largest law firm.

The grand jury investigation grew out of an incident in which Mr. Robb and some
of his staff released a tape of a private car phone conversation Mr. Wilder made
in the Norfolk area in 1988. During the call, Mr. Wilder, then the state's
Lieutenant Governor, was critical of the Senator, saying he had encouraged a
reporter to write unflattering articles about the Senator and asserting that
accusations about Mr. Robb's private life had politically crippled him.

Mr. Wilder and Mr. Robb have been feuding politically for the better part of a
decade. But Federal prosecutors say the Wilder tape was released not only in an
effort to embarrass Mr. Wilder but also as part of an attempt to swing attention
away from Mr. Robb.

The charges against the three former aides mainly involved misdemeanor
infractions of eavesdropping laws and in agreeing to them and the minor
penalities involved the aides told investigators that Mr. Robb had played a
larger role in the eavesdropping incident than he had acknowledged publicly or
in two appearances before the grand jury.

Today's indictment of Mr. Thompson, a Virginia Beach hotelier, involved felony
charges carrying a total maximum penalty of 20 years in prison and $750,000 in
fines. He was accused of obtaining and helping make public the contents of the
Wilder tape and of trying to persuade two grand jury witnesses to lie about
their knowledge of the eavesdropping episode.

The Wilder phone call was taped by Bobby Dunnington, an electronics buff who
knew Mr. Thompson and was aware of his friendship with Mr. Robb.  Mr. Dunnington
has pleaded guilty to violating the eavesdropping law, along with the three top
Robb aides -- David K. McCloud, Robert L. Watson and Steve Johnson. The
sentences handed the four ranged from 30 days in a half-way house to a $10,000
fine.


NAME: Charles S. Robb

LOAD-DATE: January 13, 1993

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo: Sen. Charles S. Robb with his wife, Lynda Bird, yesterday in
Washington after a Federal grand jury refused to indict him in a political
eavesdropping scheme against a Democratic rival, Gov. L. Douglas Wilder.
(Stephen Crowley/The New York Times)

Chronology: "Senator Under Scrutiny"

April 1991

The NBC News program "Expose" broadcasts a report accusing Senator Charles S.
Robb of having a liaison with a beauty queen in a New York hotel in 1984 when he
was Governor. Mr. Robb admits meeting the woman at a hotel but insists there
liaison.

June 1991

Gov. L. Douglas Wilder charges that someone has taped personal calls he made on
the cellular phone in his limousine and has passed the information to Mr. Robb.
After initially denying involvement, the Senator acknowledges that his office
had been given a copy of a tape three years earlier, but that it had been
destroyed "because of concerns about its propriety."

July 1991

Mr. Robb announces the resignations of three top aides because of their
involvement in the eavesdropping incident, and all three subsequently plead
guilty to minor Federal charges involving eavesdropping.

August 1991

Mr. Robb testifies before a Federal grand jury on the secret tape recording.

May 1992

Mr. Robb is notified by Federal prosecutors that he is a target of a grand jury
investigating the illegal taping.

May 20, 1992

One of the aides who was dismissed pleads guilty to charges of violating Federal
election and wiretapping laws. He says that Mr. Robb's knowledge of the taped
conversations is more extensive than the Senator has indicated.

Dec. 17, 1992

Mr. Robb again appears before a Federal grand jury.

Jan. 12

The grand jury votes not to charge Mr. Robb.

TYPE: Biography

                   Copyright 1993 The New York Times Company


                              39 of 255 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               January 13, 1993, Wednesday, Late Edition - Final

Lacey Fosburgh, Writer, 50, Dies; Novelist and True-Crime Author

BYLINE: By ERIC PACE

SECTION: Section A; Page 19; Column 1; Cultural Desk

LENGTH: 451 words


Lacey Fosburgh, a writer whose books chronicled murder, family passions and
mystery in India, died on Monday night at California Pacific Hospital in San
Francisco. She was 50 years old and lived in Mill Valley, Calif.

Ms. Fosburgh, who began her writing career as a reporter for The New York Times,
died of complications of breast cancer, said a friend of the family.

Ms. Fosburgh's books were the nonfiction "Closing Time" (1977) and the novels
"Old Money" (1983), about a photographer's painful relationship with her father,
and "India Gate" (1991), a sprawling, passionate novel set in India. At her
death, she was writing a novel set in present-day New York City under contract
to Simon & Schuster.

She was a staff reporter for The Times from 1968 to late 1973. In the last 20
years, she also wrote freelance newspaper and magazine articles, many of them
for The Times, taught journalism at the University of California at Berkeley and
was a consultant to newspapers, among them The Oakland Tribune.

Murder and Mysteries

A 1973 murder case about which Ms. Fosburgh wrote for The Times became the
subject of "Closing Time," which was a selection of the Literary Guild and the
Doubleday Book Club. It won a Mystery Writers of America award.

The murder victim was a troubled teacher, Roseann Quinn. The police said she
took an Indiana drifter, John Wayne Wilson, home to her apartment on West 72d
Street in Manhattan from a nearby singles bar. They said her body had been
sexually mutilated. After being held five months on murder charges, Mr. Wilson
hanged himself in his jail cell.

In "Contemporary Authors," a series of reference books, Truman Capote is quoted
as remarking that the book showed that Ms. Fosburgh "is a skillful, selective
reporter and also a literary artist."

Ms. Fosburgh was born in Manhattan, the daughter of Hugh Whitney Fosburgh, a
journalist and author who died in 1976, and Helen Edwards Fosburgh. Through her
paternal grandmother, Leila Whitney Fosburgh, Ms. Fosburgh was descended from
the Whitney family. She graduated from the Brearley School in Manhattan and
Sarah Lawrence College. She was a debutante at a dinner dance at the St. Regis
Hotel. From 1964 to 1966 she studied in New Delhi on a Fulbright grant.

Her 1973 marriage to Marc Libarle ended in divorce in 1975.

She is survived by her second husband, David Harris, a writer who was a
prominent opponent of the Vietnam War, whom she wed in 1977; a daughter from her
second marriage, Sophie Whitney Harris of Mill Valley; her mother, who lives in
Manhattan, and a brother, Pieter, of Manhattan.

There is to be a funeral service at 2 P.M. on Saturday at Green Gulch Farm, Muir
Beach, Calif.


LOAD-DATE: January 13, 1993

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo: Lacey Fosburgh. (Neil Reichline, 1991)

TYPE: Obituary (Obit); Biography

                   Copyright 1993 The New York Times Company


                              40 of 255 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               January 13, 1993, Wednesday, Late Edition - Final

Book Notes

BYLINE: By Esther B. Fein

SECTION: Section C; Page 20; Column 1; Cultural Desk; Word and Image Page

LENGTH: 1058 words



Me? Write That? Naw!

Authors often yearn to see a credit line flash across the movie screen, saying
"Based on the book by" (naturally, themselves).

Patricia D. Cornwell, the best-selling novelist, fought for and won prominent
mention in the advertisements for Madonna's new movie, "Body of Evidence." It
reads: "Not based on the novel by Patricia Cornwell."

Ms. Cornwell's novel "Body of Evidence," part of her mystery series featuring
the coroner Kay Scarpetta, was published in 1990 by Charles Scribner's Sons and
became a best seller last year as an Avon paperback. Ms. Cornwell's popularity
was meanwhile rising with the hard-cover best-seller success of her latest
Scarpetta mystery, "All That Remains" (Scribners).

And apparently, as her lawyer, Neil Rosini, told MGM, which is releasing
Madonna's movie, people at book signings and interviews during her promotional
tour last year were forever telling Ms. Cornwell that they were really looking
forward to the new movie based on her book.

The confusion was made worse when Variety, the bible of the entertainment
industry, listed "Body of Evidence," a sexually explicit thriller, in its
regular schedule of movies being made and noted erroneously that it was based on
Ms. Cornwell's novel (which is rather tame by erotic comparison). Variety ran a
correction, but Ms. Cornwell was growing frustrated by the title overlap.

The problem for Ms. Cornwell and her lawyers was that titles cannot be
copyrighted. In fact, several television movies had already been called "Body of
Evidence" and a recent television series was called "Bodies of Evidence."

But there is a Federal law, the Lanham Act, that Mr. Rosini, a partner in the
New York law firm Franklin, Weinrib, Rudell & Vassallo, which specializes in
entertainment law, mentioned to MGM in an exchange of letters. Under that law,
Mr. Rosini explained, someone whose use of an existing title is causing
confusion with the public, deliberately or not, can be sued by someone who feels
her rights are being infringed.

MGM refused requests to change the movie's title but, Mr. Rosini said, "after an
exchange of letters," the studio agreed to run disclaimers in all of its
trailers and advertisements, specifically stating that the movie had nothing to
do with Ms. Cornwell's book. The notice will appear on posters, soundtracks,
future videocassettes and trailers, anyplace the billing block listing the
stars, director and producers appears, except during the credits for the actual
movie.

"The idea is to avoid confusion before people get into the theater," Mr. Rosini
said, "so they don't think they're getting a different product. Once they're
inside, they've been sufficiently warned."

What's more, to avoid further confusion in bookstores, MGM agreed that a
novelization of the movie by Harper Paperbacks would have its title changed to
"Deadly Evidence." Ms. Cornwell retains the right to have a future movie based
on her book use the title "Body of Evidence." She is in the process of selling
rights to the Kay Scarpetta character to a production company started by Demi
Moore, the actress, through Columbia Pictures.

And as a final part of Ms. Cornwell's most unusual movie deal, Mr. Rosini said,
MGM "made a small payment" to the author, "basically covering her legal
expenses."

All that and her name in lights.

A Knack for Best Sellers

Bob Loomis has been with Random House for 35 years, publishing a variety of best
sellers in that time, including John Toland's "Rising Sun," Avery Corman's
"Kramer vs. Kramer," Daniel J. Boorstin's "Discoverers" and William Styron's
"Sophie's Choice."

After all that time, Mr. Loomis has apparently achieved a distinction that
people in publishing believe is a record, although nobody keeps any formal
statistics on the category. This Sunday, Mr. Loomis will have four books on The
New York Times list of nonfiction hard-cover best sellers. Many in the business
believe that is the most titles any editor has ever had on the list
simulataneously.

Starting at No. 7 is "J. F. K.: Reckless Youth," by Nigel Hamilton, a look at
John F. Kennedy's first 29 years; at No. 12 "The Silent Passage," by Gail
Sheehy, a study of the psychological and social effects of menopause; at No. 13
"The Creators," by Mr. Boorstin, which chronicles 3,000 years in the history of
religion, philosophy and the arts through the lives of those who made it, and at
No. 15 "We Were Soldiers Once . . . And Young," by Harold G. Moore and Joseph L.
Galloway, a look at the Vietnam War through the eyes of two battalions during a
crucial battle.

"It's a marvelous confluence of something, but I'm not sure what," said Mr.
Loomis, a vice president and executive editor for the Random House adult trade
division.

He has once before achieved a rare double, in 1988, when two books he edited won
the National Book Award: Pete Dexter's "Paris Trout," for fiction, and Neil
Sheehan's "Bright Shining Lie," for nonfiction.

In his years at Random House, Mr. Loomis said, he has never solved the mystery
of best-seller success. He says he publishes between 10 and 16 books a year,
roughly two-thirds nonfiction to one-third fiction, and years have gone by when
none of them ends up on the best-seller list.

"Buying a book is a very individual thing," he said. "We try to make things work
as well as possible. We try to get the right look, the right quotes on the back,
keep it in stock. And then we hope that this will result in people going in and
buying it. But there's no formula to parlay a book into an automatic best
seller."

Book Week: What's Up

Looking for a cheap date? "Take a book to lunch" is the advice of the National
Book Foundation and the American Booksellers Association, which next week is
sponsoring their annual National Book Week.

These are among the activities scheduled nationwide:

*In Richmond, an autograph session with Virginia authors at the Virginia Center
for the Book, on Jan. 19.

*In Billings, Mont., a talk by James Lincoln Collier, a two-time National Book
Award finalist, to junior high school students about being a writer.

*In Manhattan, a free seminar on writing and publishing, sponsored by the
Association of American Publishers and PEN, on Jan. 19 at 6 P.M. at the
McGraw-Hill Auditorium (Avenue of the Americas at 49th Street).

LOAD-DATE: January 13, 1993

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1993 The New York Times Company


                              41 of 255 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                January 14, 1993, Thursday, Late Edition - Final

RAID ON IRAQ;
U.S. AND ALLIED PLANES HIT IRAQ, BOMBING MISSILE SITES IN SOUTH IN REPLY TO
HUSSEIN'S DEFIANCE

BYLINE: By R. W. APPLE Jr.,  Special to The New York Times

SECTION: Section A; Page 1; Column 6; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 1510 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, Jan. 13


Warplanes from the United States, France and Britain bombed missile sites in
southern Iraq today, two years after the allies claimed to have decisively
defeated President Saddam Hussein in the Persian Gulf war and just a week before
President Bush is scheduled to leave office.

The 30-minute night attack, limited in scope and in duration, was clearly
intended to deliver a political message of allied resolve in the face of Iraqi
defiance and not a crushing military blow.

About 80 strike aircraft and about 30 support planes took part. No economic
targets like power stations or warehouses were hit, nor did bombs rain on
airfields or on major cities as they did during the war.

Iraq Offers to Halt Incursions


 Having withstood a merciless pounding in 1991, it was not clear why Mr. Hussein
would buckle in his resolve in the face of much less punishment now, especially
since the attack took place in remote areas, far from the view of most Iraqi
citizens.

Indeed, he breathed defiance in a broadcast tonight, urging the "falcons" of his
air force to fight the allies "the way you fought God's enemies before."

At the same time, Iraq offered to halt its raids into Kuwait. They have been
taking place for several days and were a violation of United Nations
resolutions. Iraq has also deployed missile batteries in forbidden areas and
fired an Iraqi missile at an American plane, actions the United States has
described as brazen provocations by Baghdad.

1,250 Troops Sent to Kuwait

In a further warning to Mr. Hussein that he could not continue to flout the will
of the United Nations, Mr. Bush announced the dispatch of a battalion-sized task
force, composed of about 1,250 American troops, to neighboring Kuwait, where
they will act as a deterrent to further Iraqi incursions.

"I would think that soon Saddam Hussein would understand that we mean what we
say and that we back it up," the President said in a meeting with reporters,
brushing aside any suggestion that it was improper for him to launch an attack
with so little time left in office. He implied, and officials in Paris and
London said more bluntly, that if the Iraqi leader did not mend his ways, there
would be more attacks.

"If he infringes again, he must expect us to retaliate again," Prime Minister
John Major of Britain said. "We have made it clear to him that we will certainly
do that."

President-elect Bill Clinton, who was briefed on the raids and supported them,
said in Little Rock, Ark., that "it was the right decision, done in the right
way." He added in an interview that he hoped Mr. Hussein would change his
policies so a new leaf in relations between Baghdad and Washington could be
turned on Jan. 20.

All the strike aircraft, which operated mainly from airfields in Saudi Arabia
and from the aircraft carrier Kitty Hawk in the Persian Gulf, returned safely,
and there were no allied casualties, Pentagon officials said. Marlin Fitzwater,
the White House spokesman, said early reports indicated that "the mission was
accomplished."

'Systematically Destroyed'

A Navy Intruder pilot, Comdr. Rick Hess of the 52d Attack Squadron, based at
Whidbey Island, Wash., said the missiles he had struck, which were in position
to imperil allied aircraft patrolling the air-exclusion zone in southern Iraq,
had been "systematically destroyed."

United States pilots, who were joined by British airmen in Tornadoes and
Frenchmen at the controls of Mirages, said they flew through skies lit by the
orange splashes of antiaircraft fire.  Several said they made double passes over
the targets before dropping their bombs to make sure they had correctly
identified the targets.

Reports from the Kitty Hawk said at least four surface-to-air missiles had been
fired at the American planes. But they were apparently launched at random,
without the benefit of the crucial guidance supplied by radar.

Intelligence specialists and military analysts said most of the missiles based
in southern Iraq were obsolete and could easily be replaced by more modern
Soviet-built weapons that are kept in reserve near Baghdad. But the allied bombs
also hit control bunkers and radar units, using high-speed anti-radiation
missiles that home in on radar beacons, and that may prove to be of more
significance.

"This takes out his ability to control his aircraft south of the 32d parallel,"
where the air-exclusion zone begins, exulted Comdr. Kevin Thomas, commander of
an A-18 Hornet squadron on the Kitty Hawk. "It was like a big laser light show."

The troops headed for Kuwait will be drawn from the Army First Cavalry Division,
based at Fort Hood, Tex., and will join 300 special operations force troops who
are already there some time later this month. The division saw extensive action
in the Vietnam war and in the campaign in the gulf.

For Mr. Bush, it was an oddly aggressive start to his final week in office.
Never in recent American history has an outgoing President initiated a military
attack so close to his date of departure; more often, lame ducks in the White
House have sought to make peace. For example, Harry S. Truman left the Oval
Office in the midst of talks on ending the Korean War, and Lyndon B. Johnson
ordered a bombing halt in a vain effort to end the war in Vietnam.

But Mr. Bush, who according to his aides had been weighing an armed response to
Mr. Hussein for months, said he had no reservations at all about the course he
had decided upon.

"You got to do what you have to do," the President said, "and there should be no
question about that. I'm President until the 20th, and I will run the foreign
policy and conduct these -- make these kinds of decisions as long as I am
President."

The Pentagon said the attacks in Iraq, which won the support of virtually all
major figures on Capitol Hill and most leaders abroad, began at 6:45 P.M.,
Baghdad time, 10:45 A.M. Eastern time.

Laser-Guided Bombs

In addition to the anti-radar missiles, the allied planes dropped laser-guided
bombs as well as conventional munitions, senior officers said.

Conspicuous by their absence from the strike force were planes from Arab
nations, which took part in the gulf war. According to some accounts, Saudi
refueling planes did play a support role, orbiting just outside Iraqi airspace.
Some Arab leaders have voiced skepticism about the course of recent allied
policy in the gulf.

Gen. Joseph Hoar, commander of the United States Central Command at MacDill Air
Force Base, near Tampa, Fla., who had overall charge of the operation, said all
the targets were below or close to the 32d parallel. He said they included radar
sites at Tallil air base near Nasiriya, and also at Samawa, Najaf and Al Amara.
Mobile missile sites in the general area of Tallil and Basra were also struck,
according to the general.

Saudi Sensitivities

General Hoar said during a briefing in Florida that he had monitored progress in
the raids over an open phone line to the United States commander on the spot,
Maj. Gen. James Record of the Air Force. General Record was reportedly in
Riyadh, Saudi Arabia, but United States officials said as little as possible
about that country because of Saudi sensitivities.

The strike force included F-117 Stealth bombers, F-16's, F-15's and
F-18's, as well as tankers, Awacs radar planes, reconnaissance planes and
helicopters.

"It was well crafted, a pin-point strike," a briefer at the Pentagon said,
speaking under ground rules that forbade reporters to identify him. "It was
designed to send a crystal-clear message."

But Defense Secretary Dick Cheney said on the "MacNeil/Lehrer Newshour" that
"the restrained and modest option" had been chosen to deliver that message.
Other options existed, including target lists of much wider scope. It was not
clear why those options had been rejected.

Missiles Were Not Returned

Last Saturday, the White House said Iraq had "backed down" in response to an
ultimatum by dispersing its missiles that had been placed in the southern zone,
where allied planes patrol to enforce a ban on Iraqi military flights.  They
presented it as a victory in the latest showdown with Mr. Hussein.

But the missiles were never returned to their original bases, as the allies had
demanded. When asked about this, the Bush administration called it a mere
technicality and said the missiles were no longer a threat.

Today, Mr. Fitzwater told a different story. "After initially responding to the
terms of the Jan. 6 warning," he said, "Iraq violated its requirements and the
coalition is acting to restore an environment that poses no threat to coalition
aircraft." In between, there was no major change in the status of the missiles
in the South.

But Mr. Hussein angered the President and his allies by sending missiles to a
northern zone where they are also forbidden and dispatching troops into
territory that the allies have given to Kuwait, where they took back weapons
that had been sized in 1991. Notable among those weapons were several
Chinese-made Silkworm missiles.


LOAD-DATE: January 14, 1993

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH



GRAPHIC:  The force attacked military targets below or close to the 32d
parallel, the northern border of the southern no-flight zone.
Map/Chart shows cites of the following initiatives:

About 35 planes from the U.S.S. Kitty Hawk took part in an attack coordinated by
U.S., French and British forces yesterday, beginning at 6:45 P.M. (10:45 A.M.
Eastern time).

Targets included radar stations at Tallil Air Base near Nasiriya, Al Amara,
Najaf and Samawa.

About 1,250 ground troops are being sent to Kuwait to deter further Iraqi
incursions. (pg. A1)

Chart of principal airplanes used by US and its allies in strike against Iraq
yesterday. (Source: Jane's All the World's Aircraft)

                   Copyright 1993 The New York Times Company


                              42 of 255 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                January 14, 1993, Thursday, Late Edition - Final

RAID ON IRAQ;
Hitting Hussein With a Stick, Keeping a Sledgehammer Ready

BYLINE: By MICHAEL R. GORDON,  Special to The New York Times

SECTION: Section A; Page 8; Column 1; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 1102 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, Jan. 13


Despite repeated threats of broad retaliation by Washington, the air strike
against Iraq today was a minimal military action. It was intended not to produce
a decisive outcome but to send the political signal that Washington and its
allies were determined to enforce the restrictions imposed on Baghdad at the end
of the Persian Gulf war.

The raid was limited to attacks on a handful of surface-to-air missile batteries
in southern Iraq and their "associated infrastructure," mostly radars and
low-level command bunkers.

Iraq's surface-to-air missile batteries in the north were not targets. President
Saddam Hussein's key command centers and Government ministries were spared. The
allies did not hit any of Iraq's offensive military power -- its military bases,
aircraft or armored divisions.

Parallels With Vietnam

Immediately after the strike, the White House said the raid demonstrated that
the Iraqi leader could not flout the restrictions, which were imposed by the
allies and the United Nations. Or as the White House spokesman, Marlin
Fitzwater, put it, "The United States and its coalition partners today took
forceful actions against Iraq."

But the attack had more in common with the philosophy of gradual escalation in
the Vietnam war than the day-and-night blitz of the gulf war, when Air Force
F-117 stealth fighter planes and Navy Tomahawk cruise missiles brought the war
to the enemy's capital.

As in Vietnam, the United States struck, ordered a pause in the bombing to
evaluate the response, and suggested it would expand the attack if the enemy did
not get the message.

Western officials said the United States, Britain and France were prepared to
renew their air strikes if Iraq did not comply with the broad list of allied
demands.

The White House said as much in the statement by Mr. Fitzwater: the allies are
ready "to take additional forceful actions with our coalition partners if Iraq
continues to flout the will of the international community and if it continues
to disregard its international obligations."

Obedience, Not an Overthrow

Bush Administration officials said that their measured action was proportional
to the Iraqi violations and that their aim was to induce Iraq to comply with the
restrictions, not to topple Mr. Hussein. But after months of growing tension
between Baghdad and Washington, including calls by President Bush for the Iraqi
people to overthrow Mr. Hussein, the main question was which message would get
through.

The initial Iraqi response was primarily tactical -- yielding enough to avoid
the full force of the allies' military power while continuing to challenge the
legitimacy of restrictions imposed on Iraqi sovereignty.

Just before the announcement of the attack, Nizar Hamdoon, the Iraqi
representative to the United Nations, told the president of the Security Council
that Baghdad would drop its opposition to allowing United Nations inspectors to
fly United Nations aircraft and would no longer raid the weapons caches in
territory the United Nations has awarded to Kuwait. This met two of the United
Nations' demands.

But he said nothing about returning the Silkworm antiship cruise missiles and
other weapons that armed Iraqis had taken in recent days from the disputed
territory.

'Cheat and Retreat'

And while Washington has made clear that it is prepared to use further force, it
seemed unlikely that the raid today would put an end to what the Pentagon has
called an Iraqi pattern of "cheat and retreat" in violating the restrictions.

Thus the Bush Administration's worries over Iraq's threats to its Kurdish and
Shiite populations, Baghdad's continuing efforts to develop weapons of mass
destruction and Mr. Hussein's push to break loose from United Nations
constraints will be passed onto the Clinton Administration.

The raid today could not have been more different than the air campaign that
Washington and its allies launched two years ago after Baghdad refused to
withdraw its forces from Kuwait.

Then, a huge air fleet attacked Iraq's military command centers, electrical
power grid, oil refineries, television and radio installations, telephone
exchanges, chemical-weapons bunkers, sites for developing weapons of mass
destruction, air-defense systems and places where Mr. Hussein and his top aides
were thought to be.

The immediate aim during the Persian Gulf war was to paralyze the Iraqi command
structure and, it was hoped, create conditions that could lead to Mr. Hussein's
overthrow. Indeed, according to news reports today from Baghdad, Iraqi officials
were relieved and surprised at the limited scope of this attack.

The scope and nature of the gulf war attack embodied the Air Force's philosophy
of strategic bombing -- to try to win a victory through air power by taking the
war deep into an adversary's heartland. The scope of those attacks also
reflected the doctrine of Gen. Colin L. Powell, the Chairman of the Joint Chiefs
of Staff, who has advocated the use of overwhelming force to win a decisive
military victory.

During the confrontations between Iraq and the United States that have arisen
since the gulf war, it was clear that Washington was not contemplating action on
anything like those dimensions.

Still, United States officials suggested that they were prepared to undertake
punishing bombing raids, more extensive than today's strike, to compel Iraq to
meet United Nations requirements.

In July 1992, when Washington and Baghdad were at odds over Iraq's refusal to
allow United Nations inspectors into a building that the United States said
contained records of Iraq's weapons program, the White House threatened force.
Iraqi officials dismissed the threat, saying they were not afraid of being hit
by one or two bombs. But General Powell countered that if an attack were
launched, "It will be our rules, not his."

Some Broader Lessons

Thus the strike today appeared to run counter to General Powell's often
expressed insistence that military force be used decisively or not at all.

In recent weeks, Pentagon officials have argued against the limited use of air
strikes in Bosnia and Herzegovina to send political signals to the Serbs, saying
such attacks could not be sure of accomplishing political goals.

If today's 30-minute raid fails to compel the Iraqis to comply with Washington's
demands and broader strikes are needed, the raid will be seen as an unwise
departure from the Pentagon's philosophy.

But if it succeeds, the Pentagon has done more than punish Iraq: It has opened
the door to the use of limited force in other crises.


LOAD-DATE: January 14, 1993

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: News Analysis

                   Copyright 1993 The New York Times Company


                              43 of 255 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                January 14, 1993, Thursday, Late Edition - Final

Signing of Chemical-Arms Pact Begins

BYLINE: By ALAN RIDING,  Special to The New York Times

SECTION: Section A; Page 16; Column 4; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 1175 words

DATELINE: PARIS, Jan. 13


In what has been hailed as the first attempt to eliminate an entire category of
weapons of mass destruction, more than 120 nations, including the United States
and Russia, began today to sign an agreement to ban the production, stockpiling
and use of chemical weapons.

All such weapons must be destroyed within 10 years of the treaty's entry into
force. It further establishes a system of on-site inspections of chemical plants
capable of making chemical weapons and contemplates sanctions against countries
violating the accord.

American and other Western officials said the treaty stands out among
disarmament agreements because of the strictness of its verification regime.
They said countries that refuse to sign the treaty after some years may also
face an embargo of sales of certain chemical products.

Iraqis Have Yet to Sign

At present, only the United States, Russia and Iraq admit possessing chemical
weapons, but experts believe another 20 countries -- among them China, India,
Pakistan, Libya, Iran and Israel -- have stockpiles of the weapons. The treaty
requires signatories to disclose any chemical warfare capability.

Most countries thought to possess chemical weapons have agreed to sign the
agreement. But the Iraqis have not, and some other Arab countries, while
claiming to support its objectives, have decided to withhold adherence to the
treaty to protest Israel's refusal to accept the nuclear Non-Proliferation
Treaty of 1967.

Because of the large number of delegations involved, the signing ceremony, which
began today at the headquarters of the United Nations Educational, Scientific
and Cultural Organization, will continue through Friday. The United States and
Russia were among those signing today.

Weapons' Full Horror

Speaking on behalf of the United States, which has already begun destroying its
chemical-weapons stockpiles, Secretary of State Lawrence S. Eagleburger noted
that the treaty mandates a global ban on the only class of weapons of mass
destruction "that has been widely used in combat."

Russia's Foreign Minister, Andrei Kozyrev, also expressed appreciation of
Western offers to assist in the destruction of his country's chemical weapons.
Experts say they believe it may cost up to $10 billion and take more than 10
years to destroy Russia's 40,000 tons of chemical weapons.

The full horror of chemical weapons, like mustard gas, first became apparent in
World War I, when they killed almost 100,000 people and left another one million
wounded or blind. They have been used occasionally since then.

Those weapons generally fall into four categories -- blister, nerve, choking and
blood agents -- depending on the part of body that they attack. Blister agents,
like mustard gas, can cause permanent lung damage if inhaled. Nerve agents, the
most dangerous, can bring on death within minutes.

Some Mideast Countries Sign

While negotiations on the new treaty began as far as back as 1968, they only
gathered momentum after poison gas was used to kill some 5,000 Kurds in March
1988 in northern Iraq, near the Iranian border. The Iraqi Government is
suspected of launching the attack, but international investigations have
concluded that it could have come from Iraq or Iran, which were at war at the
time.

Iraq threatened Israel with chemical weapons in 1989, prompting fears it might
use them in the Persian Gulf war. Since then, United Nations Security Council
resolutions have forced Iraq to begin destroying its chemical-weapons stockpiles
under international supervision. No Iraqi delegation was present at today's
ceremony and Baghdad has given no indication whether it will later accept the
treaty.

As recently as Monday, the 22-nation Arab League announced that Arab countries
would not sign the so-called Chemical Weapons Convention on the ground that
Israel possessed another weapon of mass destruction, the nuclear one. But today,
several Arab countries went their own way.

Just as Mr. Eagleburger was publicly lamenting that "so many" Middle Eastern
countries were absent today, Morocco, Algeria, Tunisia, Mauritania and Iran were
signing the treaty. Libya, Jordan, Yemen, Kuwait and Oman have indicated that
they will do so this week.

Some Bans, Some Controls

Speaking after he signed the accord, Israel's Foreign Minister, Shimon Peres,
pointedly used the occasion to suggest "to all the countries of the region to
construct a mutually verifiable zone free of surface-to-surface missiles and of
chemical, biological and nuclear weapons."

In Asia, the one other region of the world that is caught up in an arms race,
the major powers -- China, India and Pakistan -- have all agreed to back the
agreement, but North Korea and Vietnam did not attend today's ceremony and have
given no sign of their future intentions.

Going far beyond the 1925 Geneva Protocol that banned the use of chemical
weapons, the new treaty is considered unique among disarmament accords, not only
because it is global and includes sanctions against non-signing nations, but
also because it establishes the most complex verification regime ever conceived.

Recognizing that many chemicals can have dual military and civilian functions,
the treaty identifies 29 toxic chemicals and 14 "families" of chemicals subject
to international supervision. Manufacture and sales of, say, nerve and mustard
gases are banned outright, while production of other chemicals are to be tightly
controlled.

2-Year Delay for Pact

A new Organization for the Prohibition of Chemical Weapons headquartered in The
Hague will be charged with carrying out routine verification of compliance with
the treaty, including inspections of chemical weapons destruction sites and
civilian chemical industries.

But the treaty also permits a so-called "challenge inspection" that can be
requested by any country that has signed that suspects another might be
manufacturing chemical weapons. The challenged country has 120 hours in which to
open the site in question to inspection by international experts.

Countries that refuse such inspections or are found to have violated the treaty
may be subject to sanctions. Any country threatened or attacked with chemical
weapons can in turn seek outside assistance, but it cannot retaliate in kind.
After a grace period, countries not adhering to the treaty may also have
products added to an existing list of embargoed chemical goods.

The agreement will enter into force 180 days after it has been ratified by 65
countries, but not before Jan. 15, 1995. The minimum two-year delay is
considered necessary to allow time for the new organization to build up a
capability for administering the immensely complex accord.

'Destroy Atomic Weapons'

Confident in the efficiency of the verification procedures to be used for
chemical weapons, many Western countries now hope that a similar regime can be
adopted for biological weapons. While the use of biological weapons was banned
in a 1972 convention, that treaty included no system of verification.


LOAD-DATE: January 14, 1993

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1993 The New York Times Company


                              44 of 255 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                January 14, 1993, Thursday, Late Edition - Final

Senate Panel Report Fails to Settle M.I.A. Dispute

BYLINE: By CLIFFORD KRAUSS

SECTION: Section A; Page 13; Column 1; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 701 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, Jan. 13


No issue has been more enduring or painful over the last three decades than the
fate of thousands of United States servicemen taken prisoner or missing during
the Vietnam War and still unaccounted for.

But after 17 months of hearings, the largest declassification of Government
documents in history and search missions throughout Asia, today a special Senate
panel issued a report that may succeed only in fanning the embers.

The Senate Select Committee on P.O.W.-M.I.A. Affairs was organized to put the
issue to rest. The panel offered comfort and information to scores of families
about their loved ones. It succeeded in pushing Vietnam to cooperate in
accounting for the missing. And it helped expose the operations of people faking
evidence to capitalize on the hopes of relatives of the more than 2,000
Americans whose fates have not been conclusively determined.

But the report's basic conclusion differs little from what the official
Government position has been for years. "We acknowledge that there is no proof
that United States P.O.W.'s survived, but neither is there proof that all of
those who did not return had died," the report said.

While it found "no compelling evidence" that missing servicemen were still alive
in Indochina, it reported evidence "that indicates the possibility of survival,
at least for a small number" of them after the 1973 prisoner release following
the Paris peace talks.

"This report does not close the issue," Senator John F. Kerry of Massachusetts,
the Democratic chairman of the committee, acknowledged today. "There is
evidence, tantalizing evidence, that raises questions. But questions are not
facts and are not proof."

Perhaps the report's most provocative finding is that American officials had
hoped that about 40 prisoners would be released by Laos in 1973; instead only 12
were returned.

"These reports were taken seriously enough at the time to prompt recommendations
by some officials for military action aimed at gaining the release of the
additional prisoners thought to be held," the report said.

The committee criticized Washington's handling of intelligence information and
said disclosure of information to family members had been inadequate. But it
strenuously denied that any deliberate cover-up took place.

It also disclosed that the Reagan Administration had secretly funneled donations
from P.O.W.-M.I.A. groups to supply and arm anti-Communist Laotian rebels, an
operation that was not authorized by Congress and that Senator Charles E.
Grassley, Republican of Iowa, said he would refer to the Justice Department for
investigation.

Only moments after the report was released, several friends and families of the
missing attacked its conclusion that there was no compelling evidence that the
servicemen were still alive. They said that was a wrong interpretation of the
evidence or another instance of a wide conspiracy that goes back to the Nixon
Administration.

Six relatives of missing Americans put out a statement criticizing the report,
saying the panel failed to obtain essential documents and testimony.

Ted Guy, a retired Air Force colonel active in the National Alliance of Families
for the Return of Americas Missing Servicemen, said, "The coverup and mindset to
debunk continues." Mr. Guy, who was shot down and held in Laos from 1968 to
1973, said nearly 600 Americans captured in Laos were never recovered. He said
Laotians could still be holding Americans for ransom, which the report says
defies logic since no ransom demand has been made.

The charges of cover-up were also fueled by dissent in the committee.

For instance, Mr. Grassley and Senator Robert C. Smith of New Hampshire, the
deputy chairman of the panel, urged the inclusion of a section on satellite
imagery of what the two Republicans said was credible evidence of prisoners'
sending distress signals.

Senator John McCain, a Republican panel member from Arizona, said he hoped that
the report would show that "there is no proof that Americans are alive there."
But he added that some families of the missing "have accused me of being
everything from a traitor to the Manchurian candidate, and that isn't likely to
change."

LOAD-DATE: January 14, 1993

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1993 The New York Times Company


                              45 of 255 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                January 14, 1993, Thursday, Late Edition - Final

Authoritative Answers on M.I.A.'s

SECTION: Section A; Page 24; Column 1; Editorial Desk

LENGTH: 455 words


The thorough Senate committee report released yesterday on the fate of Americans
missing since the Vietnam War should dispel suspicions of a U.S. Government
conspiracy or cover-up.

Should, but probably won't. Word that Henry Kissinger's lawyer was given a
last-minute opportunity to propose cosmetic changes in language criticizing the
former Secretary of State will damage the report's credibility, even though
telling substantive criticisms of Nixon-era officials seem to have survived
largely intact.

Mr. Kissinger's intrusive intervention is regrettable. More important public
issues than his personal reputation are at stake.

The main reason this committee was established, almost 20 years after America's
withdrawal from Vietnam, was that many Americans no longer trusted the executive
branch's efforts and assurances on the issue of P.O.W.'s and M.I.A.'s.

To its credit, the Bush Administration granted the committee unprecedented
access to official records. So did the Vietnamese Government. And sworn public
testimony was taken from a procession of former high American officials.

The public expected authoritative, if not definitive, conclusions. To a large
extent, that's what it got, despite tensions between some Republicans who
believe captive Americans may still be alive and other committee members who
believe that the passage of many years effectively rules out that possibility.
The committee majority found no hard evidence to support Republican suspicions;
it also uncovered no hard evidence to completely refute them.

The dispute has its roots in the Nixon Administration, which publicly declared
that no Americans remained in captivity even though there were more than 100 who
were last reported to be alive but remain unaccounted for.

The committee found that efforts by the Nixon Administration and its successors
to track down reported sightings of live Americans were not always given
suitably high priority. But it found no evidence of a cover-up or official
conspiracy.

The committee also reported that Vietnam and Cambodia were now cooperating in
the search for further evidence. Vietnam's failure to cooperate has been an
impediment to normal diplomatic and economic relations.

Hanoi must be held to its new commitments. But Washington can now prudently go
ahead on normalization. There's still time for President Bush to act, redeeming
the hope he expressed in his inaugural address four years ago that America could
at last overcome the bitterness and divisions of the Vietnam War.

If Mr. Bush won't act, it will be up to Bill Clinton to close the last chapter
of the Vietnam War. For bringing that end within reach, the Senate committee
deserves the nation's thanks.


LOAD-DATE: January 14, 1993

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Editorial

                   Copyright 1993 The New York Times Company


                              46 of 255 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 January 15, 1993, Friday, Late Edition - Final

NEWS SUMMARY

SECTION: Section A; Page 2; Column 5; Metropolitan Desk

LENGTH: 981 words



International A2-9

CLINTON RETREATS ON HAITIANS

Fearing an exodus of Haitians to the U.S., Bill Clinton announced that he would
at least temporarily abandon a campaign pledge and would continue the Bush
Administration's policy of forcibly returning Haitians who try to immigrate to
the U.S.  A1

Advocates of Haitian refugees expressed disappointment.  A2


U.S. JETS HIT ONE OF 4 TARGETS

In their raid on Iraq, U.S. warplanes destroyed one of the four Iraqi
surface-to-air missile batteries they targeted, the Pentagon said. Despite that
assessment, it characterized the raid as a success, saying, "The Iraqi southern
air defense network is now seriously degraded." A1

Bill Clinton ruled out reconciliation with Saddam Hussein.  A1

ARABS SEE A DOUBLE STANDARD

Arab reaction to the allied air raid on Iraq was muted, reflecting little
concern for Iraq but focusing on what some Arabs described as a double standard
in applying U.N. sanctions to Arabs and non-Arabs.  A8

Israeli worries that it may be next on the Security Council's list.  A8

'NIGHTMARE' FOR BOMBAY MUSLIMS

Muslims in Bombay, who have suffered the most in the last 10 days of
Hindu-Muslim violence, are finding that their initial shock is now turning to
grief and anger.  A3

BOSNIANS MAKE A DASH FOR LIFE

Every night for three months, thousands of people have headed out from a row of
ruined buildings near the Sarajevo airport for a dash across the only ground
that offers hope of reaching the world beyond the Serbian siege.  A6

FERRY CAPSIZES IN BALTIC SEA

A ferry carrying 68 people from Poland to Sweden capsized in the Baltic Sea amid
a storm with 90-mile-an-hour winds, leaving at least 39 dead and 15 missing, the
authorities said. Rescuers saved 9.  A7

THE ISLAMIC FACTOR IN SOMALIA

In a coastal town in Somalia, feelings for and against U.S. intervention run
strong. Many have openly welcomed the U.S. presence. But the Americans have
badly bruised the feelings of many of the town's militant Islamic
fundamentalists.  A9

Benjamin Netanyahu of Israel is caught up in a sex scandal.  A9

Guatemalan Indians forced from their homes are returning.  A3

A suburb of Budapest is an incubator of young rightists, or skinheads.  A4

National A10-18

ADMINISTRATION SET TO DEFY JUDGE

A Federal judge said the Bush Administration had indicated that it would begin
destroying White House computer tapes today, in defiance of his orders.  A1

NEW GLOBAL-MESSAGING STEP

In a move that could make it harder to avoid telephone calls, but easier to
track stolen cars or find lost hikers, the F.C.C. assigned a block of radio
frequencies for satellite paging services that would let people send and receive
brief messages anywhere in the world.  A1

The F.B.I.'s effort at enhanced wiretapping has stalled.  A12

SENATORS GRILL SHALALA

The President-elect's choice for Secretary of Health and Human Services
encountered tough questioning from members of her own party, who said she seemed
to be ignoring Mr. Clinton's campaign promise to "end welfare as we know it."
A15

Clinton knew that Zoe Baird had hired two illegal aliens.  A15

New Haven Journal: In Baird's neighborhood, no shock.  A15

MORE APPOINTMENTS BY CLINTON

Six days before taking office, the President-elect announced the appointment of
a mostly youthful group of White House aides and named his campaign manager,
David C. Wilhelm, as Democratic national chairman.  A14

A region-by-region look at foreign problems facing Clinton.  A16

Strains have developed in the Clinton-Gore relationship.  A14

Washington Talk: Notes on the inauguration.  A14

The woman who designed Hillary Clinton's inaugural dress.  A15

QUAYLE CALLS FOR SPACE WEAPONS

In a blunt report as the departing head of the National Space Council, the Vice
President said the nation should develop space weapons to fire at foes trying to
exploit the high ground of space in wartime.  A12

THE RACE WITH A VERY FULL FIELD

Given that the job carries relatively little formal power and poses daunting
problems, it is extraordinary how many people -- 24 of them -- want to be the
next mayor of Los Angeles.  A10

A former engineer testified G.M. knew of fuel-tank dangers.  A10

A former official recalled no misgivings on Demjanjuk.  A11

The Census Bureau linked family breakups to poverty.  A10

The nation's teachers called for a new drive on school violence.  A18

Law Page B16

Legal experts study reports of rapes in the Balkans conflict.

What the law allows people who employ household workers.

Metro Digest B1

KATIE BEERS SUSPECT ARRAIGNED

The man accused of holding Katie Beers hostage in an underground bunker was
arraigned on kidnapping charges as a legal battle, pitting the mother against
Suffolk County authorities, began over custody of the 10-year-old girl. The
suspect, John Esposito, a longtime friend of the Beers family, pleaded not
guilty to second-degree kidnapping and was held on $500,000 bond.  A1

REZONING INDUSTRIAL LAND

After years of preserving industrial zoning for thousands of acres of land in
the hope that New York City's manufacturing base could be revived, the city's
planners acknowledged that the policy had not worked and said they wanted to
open the land for more promising uses.  A1

Neediest Cases B2

Business Digest D1

Weekend C1-30

Sports B8-14

Obituaries A21

Editorials/Op-Ed A28-29

Editorials

The stampede from a tax cut.
Needed: answers from Ms. Baird.
David Letterman takes a hike.

Letters

A. M. Rosenthal: Saddam closer up.

Anthony Lewis: A different President.

Richard H. Ullman: Dump Hussein.

Gideon Rose: A Balkan Vietnam.

LOAD-DATE: January 15, 1993

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Summary

                   Copyright 1993 The New York Times Company


                              47 of 255 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 January 15, 1993, Friday, Late Edition - Final

Seeing the Big Picture (and Talking About It): A Museum Series Schedule

SECTION: Section C; Page 18; Column 1; Weekend Desk

LENGTH: 1670 words


"Changing the Picture: The Emergence of African-Americans in Television," a
series of screenings of documentaries, dramas, comedies, movies, sports events,
music and talk shows, runs through March 28 at the American Museum of the Moving
Image, 35th Avenue at 36th Street, Astoria, Queens.

Lectures and discussions are scheduled throughout the series. The date of a
planned discussion with the actress and dancer Deb bie Allen has not yet been
announced.

Unless otherwise noted, admission to discussions is $10 ($5 for museum members)
and includes museum admission. Screenings are $2 a program and are not included
in museum admission: $5; $4 for the elderly; $2.50 for children and students.

On view at the museum through Feb. 28 is "From Harlem to Hollywood: American
Race Movies, 1912-1948," an exhibition of posters, photographs and oral
histories.

Museum hours are Mondays, noon to 7 P.M.; Tuesdays through Fridays, noon to 4
P.M., and Saturdays and Sundays, noon to 6 P.M. Information: (718) 784-4520. A
schedule of screenings and discussions follows.

Tomorrow

THE REV. DR. MARTIN LUTHER KING JR. BIRTHDAY TRIBUTE: "FREE AT LAST" (1968), a
documentary by Jim Desmond and Nick Proferes, completed before the assassination
of the civil-rights leader. The film makers will introduce the work. 2 P.M.

"THE NEGRO AND THE AMERICAN PROMISE: INTERVIEWS OF MARTIN LUTHER KING JR.,
MALCOLM X AND JAMES BALDWIN BY KENNETH CLARK" (1962) and the "I HAVE A DREAM"
speech (1963). 4 P.M.

Sunday

"THE GREEN PASTURES" (1957), an NBC "Hall of Fame" adaptation of a biblical
fantasy by Marc Connelly, directed by George Schaefer and featuring William
Warfield, Eddie Anderson and Earle Hyman. 2 P.M.

1950's MUSIC PROGRAM 2: "THE NAT (KING) COLE SHOW" (1956-57); "SHOWTIME AT THE
APOLLO" (1957), with Ruth Brown, Sarah Vaughan, Cab Calloway and Marian
Anderson; "STANDARD HOUR" (1951), with Lionel Hampton, and the "JOHNNY OTIS
SHOW" (1959). 4 P.M.

Monday

1950's COMEDY STEREOTYPES: "AMOS 'N' ANDY" (1952), with Spencer Williams and
Alvin Childress; and "TROUBLE WITH FATHER: TV COMES TO THE ERWINS," with Willie
Best. Noon to 7 P.M.

1950's CIVIL RIGHTS ON TV: "DEGREE OF DIFFERENCE" (1956); "CLETE ROBERTS SPECIAL
REPORT: THE HUMAN EXPLOSION" (1957); clips from the "EISENHOWER ELECTION EVE
SPECIAL" (1952), and "DINNER WITH THE PRESIDENT" (1953). 2 P.M.

AN EVENING WITH MALCOLM-JAMAL WARNER, GEORGE CROSBY AND JOHN BESS: MAKING "HERE
AND NOW." A discussion with Mr. Warner, the star of the television series; Mr.
Crosby, the show's producer, and Mr. Bess, the executive director of the
Manhattan Valley Youth Program. 7 P.M.

Jan. 23

"SOPHISTICATED GENTS" (1981), an NBC mini-series written by and starring Melvin
Van Peebles, and featuring Roosevelt Grier, Paul Winfield, Bernie Casey and
Robert Hooks. Mr. Van Peebles is to appear at the screening. 2 P.M.

Jan. 24

AN AFTERNOON WITH MARIAN ETOILE WATSON. Ms. Watson, a reporter for Channel 5, is
to discuss her work with Donald Bogle, author of "Blacks in American Films and
Television." 2 P.M.

"PIONEER OF COLOR: A CONVERSATION WITH MAL GOODE" (1992), a documentary by
WHMM-TV of Baltimore about the first black American network news correspondent.
4:30 P.M.

Jan. 30

1960's MUSIC: "TV GOSPEL TIME" (1965), with performances by Rosetta Tharpe and
the Blind Boys of Alabama; "MAHALIA JACKSON SINGS THE STORY OF CHRISTMAS"
(1963); "ABC SPECIAL: THE SINGERS," featuring Aretha Franklin (1967); "HOLLYWOOD
PALACE," with Diahann Carroll (1964); "TARZAN," with the Supremes (1968);
"HOLLYWOOD A GO GO," with Marvin Gaye and the Dixie Cups (1967), and "THE DINAH
SHORE SPECIAL," with Harry Belafonte (1965). 2 P.M.

1960's DRAMA PROGRAM I: "CHANNING: FREEDOM IS A LOVESOME THING, GOD WOT!"
(1964), a teleplay by Jack Guss, with James Earl Jones and Agnes Moorehead, and
"PROFILES IN COURAGE: FREDERICK DOUGLASS" (1965), a drama based on the
nonfiction book "Profiles in Courage" by John F. Kennedy, starring Robert Hooks
and Frederick O'Neill. 4:30 P.M.

Jan. 31

BLACK JOURNAL: AN AFTERNOON WITH WILLIAM GREAVES AND MADELINE ANDERSON. A
discussion about public television's series on black life, with Mr. Greaves, the
show's first producer and Ms. Anderson, a film maker. 2 P.M.

Feb. 6

CHILDREN'S PROGRAMMING: CHILDREN'S TELEVISION WORKSHOP, with excerpts from
"Sesame Street" and "The Electric Company." 2 P.M.

"SHEENA, QUEEN OF THE JUNGLE: THE MAGIC BAG" (1955), "A MATTER OF PRIDE" (1969),
"I AM THE GREATEST: THE ADVENTURES OF MUHAMMAD ALI: SUPER STAR" (1977), "GETTIN'
TO KNOW ME: THE NAMING OF KWAME" (1969) and a CBS film, "FAT ALBERT AND THE
COSBY KIDS" (1972). 4 P.M.

Feb. 7

OSSIE DAVIS AND RUBY DEE ON TELEVISION: "NOW IS THE TIME," a program of dramatic
readings (1967), "WITH OSSIE AND RUBY," a storytelling series (1981), "THE
DEFENDERS: STAR-SPANGLED GHETTO" (1964), featuring Mr. Davis; "PEYTON PLACE,"
featuring Ms. Dee. 1 P.M.

"FOR US THE LIVING: THE MEDGAR EVERS STORY" (1983), a drama written by Mr. Davis
and featuring Howard E. Rollins Jr. and Irene Cara. 4 P.M.

Feb. 13

SAMMY DAVIS JR.: "G.E. THEATER: AUF WIEDERSEHN" (1952), written by Kurt Vonnegut
and Valentine Davies; "THE LAWMAN: BLUE BOSS AND WILLIE SHAY" (1961); "THE
COLGATE COMEDY HOUR" (1952); "SOUPY SALES" (1964). 2 P.M.

1960's DRAMA PROGRAM 2: "ROUTE 66: GOOD NIGHT, SWEET BLUES" (1961), with Ethel
Waters, Coleman Hawkins and Roy Eldridge; "EAST SIDE, WEST SIDE: NO HIDING
PLACE" (1963), with Ruby Dee and Joseph Campanella. 4 P.M.

Feb. 14

"SEE IT NOW: CLINTON AND THE LAW" (1957), with Edward R. Murrow, and "WALK IN MY
SHOES," an ABC documentary about public school integration in Clinton, Tenn.,
with interviews with the Rev. Dr. Martin Luther King Jr. and Percy Sutton, the
New York City politician. (1961). 2 P.M.

"THE GLARING LIGHT: TELEVISION COVERAGE OF CIVIL RIGHTS 1956-1967"; "FEEDBACK,"
a show that measured viewers' racial attitudes (1963); "THE FOURTH MAN," a
portrait of a family moving from Louisiana to Chicago (1963), and "SAME MUD,
SAME BLOOD," a documentary about black Americans in Vietnam and in the United
States (1967). 4 P.M.

Feb. 15-19

1950's COMEDY STEREOTYPES: "AMOS 'N' ANDY" (1952) and "TROUBLE WITH FATHER: TV
COMES TO THE ERWINS" (1951), with Willie Best. Noon to 4 P.M.

"CRISIS: BEHIND A PRESIDENTIAL COMMITMENT" (1963), a documentary about the
confrontation between John F. Kennedy and Robert F. Kennedy and the former
Alabama Gov. George Wallace over the admission of black students to the
University of Alabama. 1:30 P.M.

Feb. 20

BILL COSBY WEEKEND: "BLACK HISTORY: LOST, STOLEN OR STRAYED" (1968), a
documentary about stereotyping in Hollywood, narrated by Mr. Cosby. 2 P.M.
Followed by excerpts from "I SPY" (1965-68), "THE BILL COSBY SHOW" (1969-71),
"FAT ALBERT AND THE COSBY KIDS" (1969-71) and "THE NEW BILL COSBY SHOW"
(1972-73). 3:30 P.M.

Feb. 21

"MAKING 'THE COSBY SHOW.' " Writers from the show will discuss its making, among
them John Bowab, a principal director. 2 P.M.

Feb. 27

"THE PHENOMENON OF ROOTS" (1977), a documentary by Warner Brothers about the
making of the television mini-series "Roots." 2 P.M.

"THE WHITE SHADOW: COOLIDGE GOES HOLLYWOOD" (1980), an episode from the CBS
dramatic series about young black Americans. 3:15 P.M.

"COMMERCIALS: PRODUCT COMMERCIALS FROM THE 1950's THROUGH THE 1970's," featuring
the Jackson Five, Mantan Moreland and Sammy Davis Jr. 4:30 P.M.

Feb. 28

THE VARIETY-COMEDY SHOW: "THE FLIP WILSON SHOW" (1970-75), excerpts featuring
Bill Cosby and the Supremes. 2 P.M. "THE RICHARD PRYOR SHOW" (1977). 4 P.M. "IN
LIVING COLOR" (1969) and "DEF COMEDY JAM" (1991), an HBO showcase for comedians.
5 P.M.

March 6

"SISTER, SISTER" (1962), a movie about three sisters reunited after the death of
their father, written by Maya Angelou and featuring Diahann Carroll, Irene Cara
and Rosalind Cash. 2 P.M.

"CREATIVITY WITH BILL MOYERS: MAYA ANGELOU," an interview with the author and
Mr. Moyers for public television. 4:30 P.M.

March 7

"JULIA: I'M DREAMING OF A BLACK CHRISTMAS" (1970), show from the television
series featuring Diahann Carroll; "THE BILL COSBY SHOW: CHRISTMAS BALLAD" (1970)
and "SOUL," a pilot program for a black "Laugh-In" series on NBC. 2 P.M.

"PRODUCED BY LEAR AND YORKIN," with episodes from "GOOD TIMES" (1974-79),
"SANFORD AND SON" (1972-77), "THE JEFFERSONS" (1975-85) and "PALMERSTOWN,
U.S.A." (1980-81), a memoir of the writer Alex Haley's childhood. 4 P.M.

March 11

AN EVENING WITH DIAHANN CARROLL, who will be interviewed by the author Donald
Bogle. 7 P.M. Tickets: $15; $10 for museum members.

March 13

"DONAHUE," excerpts from the talk show featuring the Rev. Jesse Jackson, and
segments of "OPRAH." 2 P.M.

BLACK SPORTS HEROES, with excerpts featuring the Brooklyn Dodgers on "The Ed
Sullivan Show" (1953); Althea Gibson, winning the Wimbledon title (1957); the
Harlem Globetrotters and the Harlem Globegirls (1965), and the Muhammad
Ali-Sonny Liston championship fight (1964). 4 P.M.

March 14

"ARSENIO HALL," highlights from the talk show. 2 P.M.

"THE OUTCASTS: TAKE YOUR LOVER IN THE RING" (1968), an ABC series about race
relations, set in the late 1800's, starring Otis Young, and "SHAFT" (1970),
starring Richard Roundtree. 3:30 P.M.

March 20

AN AFTERNOON WITH STANLEY ROBERTSON. A discussion with one of the first black
network executives. 2 P.M.

"MY SWEET CHARLIE" (1970), a television movie about an interracial romance,
featuring Patty Duke and Al Freeman Jr. 4:30 P.M.

March 21

AN AFTERNOON WITH SUSAN FALES. A discussion with the executive producer and head
writer of "A Different World." 2 P.M.

March 27

AN AFTERNOON WITH GIL NOBLE. A discussion with the television journalist and
producer, preceded by "THE LOSS OF OUR WARRIOR," a documentary about Malcolm X,
produced by Mr. Noble. 2 P.M.

March 28

BLACK ENTERTAINMENT TELEVISION, with excerpts from programming on the
black-owned cable station, including specials, news and public-affairs programs
and music videos. 2 P.M.

LOAD-DATE: January 15, 1993

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo: Bill Cosby in a scene from "I Spy," which ran from 1965 to 1968
and was the first dramatic television series with a black leading character.

TYPE: Schedule

                   Copyright 1993 The New York Times Company


                              48 of 255 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 January 15, 1993, Friday, Late Edition - Final

THE NEW PRESIDENCY: Clinton's Headaches: A World Afflicted by Wars and Poverty
-- Japan and East Asia;
A Rising Sun; Crises-in-Waiting

BYLINE: By DAVID E. SANGER,  Special to The New York Times

SECTION: Section A; Page 16; Column 2; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 574 words

DATELINE: TOKYO, Jan. 14


While Bill Clinton was elected President pledging to focus on the American
economy like a "laser beam," his attention to domestic issues may be diverted by
foreign affairs, a point brought home since the election by events in Iraq,
Somalia and Bosnia. Here is a region-by-region look at the world, showing some
of key issues that the new President is likely to face.

For all of what Bush Administration officials describe as their foreign policy
successes elsewhere, the concede that they are leaving Mr. Clinton with an
overarching problem in Asia: a Japan policy that is in disarray, with few fresh
ideas about how to deal with America's biggest economic competitor.

The trade deficit, after declining temporarily, is almost at record levels --
nearly $50 billion in 1992. With Japan in the midst of one of its steepest
economic declines in years, the chances for a boost in imports of American goods
this year are virtually nil. And the Japanese fear a backlash that will lead to
unilateral American action to restrict Japanese imports, poisoning early
relations with the new Administration. Lurking beneath the surface is resentment
at the failure of the Bush Administration to focus on Japanese concerns; as
Secretary of State, James A. Baker 3d spent more time visiting Ulan Bator than
Tokyo.

Before the election, Mr. Clinton acknowledged that "we really do not have a
good, coherent policy toward Japan that will lead us to open markets and give us
enough respect in their country." But he has not explained how he thinks the
United States should become re-engaged in the country or the region, beyond his
domestic goals for enhancing competitiveness.

Early Challenges

Among Mr. Clinton's early challenges will be how to promote a greater presence
of American manufacturing and services in Japan -- without looking like he is
creating jobs for Japanese instead of Americans -- and how to replace the Bush
Administration's fizzled effort to remove "structural impediments" to trade
between the two countries.

Japanese officials are now publicly saying the Bush Administration's initiative
lost credibility because the United States never followed through on many of its
own commitments to economic reform, the quid pro quo for changes in Japan. But
the Japanese, one senior American official here noted recently, have failed to
come up with their own initiatives to greet Mr. Clinton. "They are going to
Washington with even fewer new ideas than we have," he said.

Elsewhere in Asia, Mr. Clinton faces two crises-in-waiting: Cambodia and North
Korea. With the Khmer Rouge unwilling to take part in the elections scheduled
for later this year, Mr. Clinton may soon have to decide whether the new
American role in enforcing United Nations resolutions extends to a new
involvement in Indochina. Continued evidence that North Korea may be developing
nuclear arms likely poses the largest threat to peace in the region, and will
almost certainly slow any effort to reduce American military presence in the
Pacific. Mr. Clinton will also face hard decisions on future relations with
Vietnam.

But the most delicate problem for Mr. Clinton may be finding the right security
role for the Japanese -- as a member of the United Nations Security Council, as
United Nations peacekeepers and as a nation once again able to exercise power of
a noneconomic nature -- in a way that will not reawaken fears elsewhere in Asia.

LOAD-DATE: January 15, 1993

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1993 The New York Times Company


                              49 of 255 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 January 15, 1993, Friday, Late Edition - Final

THE NEW PRESIDENCY: Clinton's Headaches: A World Afflicted by Wars and Poverty
-- Japan and East Asia;
A Rising Sun; Crises-in-Waiting

BYLINE: By DAVID E. SANGER,  Special to The New York Times

SECTION: Section A; Page 16; Column 2; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 574 words

DATELINE: TOKYO, Jan. 14


While Bill Clinton was elected President pledging to focus on the American
economy like a "laser beam," his attention to domestic issues may be diverted by
foreign affairs, a point brought home since the election by events in Iraq,
Somalia and Bosnia. Here is a region-by-region look at the world, showing some
of key issues that the new President is likely to face.

For all of what Bush Administration officials describe as their foreign policy
successes elsewhere, the concede that they are leaving Mr. Clinton with an
overarching problem in Asia: a Japan policy that is in disarray, with few fresh
ideas about how to deal with America's biggest economic competitor.

The trade deficit, after declining temporarily, is almost at record levels --
nearly $50 billion in 1992. With Japan in the midst of one of its steepest
economic declines in years, the chances for a boost in imports of American goods
this year are virtually nil. And the Japanese fear a backlash that will lead to
unilateral American action to restrict Japanese imports, poisoning early
relations with the new Administration. Lurking beneath the surface is resentment
at the failure of the Bush Administration to focus on Japanese concerns; as
Secretary of State, James A. Baker 3d spent more time visiting Ulan Bator than
Tokyo.

Before the election, Mr. Clinton acknowledged that "we really do not have a
good, coherent policy toward Japan that will lead us to open markets and give us
enough respect in their country." But he has not explained how he thinks the
United States should become re-engaged in the country or the region, beyond his
domestic goals for enhancing competitiveness.

Early Challenges

Among Mr. Clinton's early challenges will be how to promote a greater presence
of American manufacturing and services in Japan -- without looking like he is
creating jobs for Japanese instead of Americans -- and how to replace the Bush
Administration's fizzled effort to remove "structural impediments" to trade
between the two countries.

Japanese officials are now publicly saying the Bush Administration's initiative
lost credibility because the United States never followed through on many of its
own commitments to economic reform, the quid pro quo for changes in Japan. But
the Japanese, one senior American official here noted recently, have failed to
come up with their own initiatives to greet Mr. Clinton. "They are going to
Washington with even fewer new ideas than we have," he said.

Elsewhere in Asia, Mr. Clinton faces two crises-in-waiting: Cambodia and North
Korea. With the Khmer Rouge unwilling to take part in the elections scheduled
for later this year, Mr. Clinton may soon have to decide whether the new
American role in enforcing United Nations resolutions extends to a new
involvement in Indochina. Continued evidence that North Korea may be developing
nuclear arms likely poses the largest threat to peace in the region, and will
almost certainly slow any effort to reduce American military presence in the
Pacific. Mr. Clinton will also face hard decisions on future relations with
Vietnam.

But the most delicate problem for Mr. Clinton may be finding the right security
role for the Japanese -- as a member of the United Nations Security Council, as
United Nations peacekeepers and as a nation once again able to exercise power of
a noneconomic nature -- in a way that will not reawaken fears elsewhere in Asia.

LOAD-DATE: February 6, 1993

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1993 The New York Times Company


                              50 of 255 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 January 15, 1993, Friday, Late Edition - Final

A Balkan Vietnam

BYLINE: By Gideon Rose;  Gideon Rose is a fellow at the Olin Institute for
Strategic Studies at Harvard University.

SECTION: Section A; Page 29; Column 2; Editorial Desk

LENGTH: 717 words

DATELINE: CAMBRIDGE, Mass.


Both supporters and opponents of American intervention in Bosnia have been
reluctant to draw explicit lessons from Vietnam. The wars and the world
situation are indeed different. But real parallels exist, not between Serbian
irregulars and the Vietcong but between the calls of well-intentioned
commentators then and now for a "moderate" American approach: gradual, limited
military involvement.

Three decades ago, the U.S. had to choose among four basic options:
noninvolvement; striving for a negotiated settlement; limited intervention, and
overwhelming force to guarantee a client's victory. National leaders agreed that
we should prevent South Vietnam from falling to the Communists, but not risk war
with China or the Soviet Union, so they ruled out the first and last options.
Since the second option did not really exist, they ended up walking
fatalistically into a quagmire.

The irony of Vietnam was that during the conflict the U.S. decision-making
system worked the way it was supposed to. There was a consensus that something
had to be done, and the U.S. followed what seemed like a sensible path between
two extremes. That was enough to avoid losing but not enough to insure winning.
The result, given a determined enemy, was a deepening stalemate. In retrospect,
we know that both middle options should have been avoided. The fourth course
(more involvement with a different strategy) might have worked, but would have
carried more risks than the limited stakes warranted. Few favored what seems to
have been the wisest option: noninvolvement.

Thirty years later, supporters of military intervention in Bosnia recommend an
approach strikingly similar to the early Johnson Administration policies
regarding Vietnam. Like hard-liners then, they understand that diplomatic
efforts alone are unlikely to succeed, because the stronger side has no interest
in compromise. Cease-fires, partial settlements, coalition governments -- all
want these to work, but few think they will.

But since interventionists again rule out the first and last options --
noninvolvement and overwhelming force -- most end up advocating the same
compromise that failed in Vietnam: American bombing combined with military aid
to the losing side. They say U.S. ground troops should not be used, but they are
silent on what should happen if air power and armed Bosnians cannot stop the
Serbs.

Because of the differences between Bosnia and Vietnam, such a strategy might
work. But given the passions of the region and poor record elsewhere of air
strikes alone, it probably will not. In that case, U.S. officials would face the
same bitter choices as they did in Vietnam: escalate to avoid defeat or walk
away from disaster. (How the U.S. might aid a European-led operation is a
separate issue.)

Serbian atrocities, "ethnic cleansing" and mass rape horrify civilized people.
America must denounce such acts and take steps to aid the victims.  Solving the
political difficulties of what was Yugoslavia is another question. Human rights
violations occur repeatedly outside a small group of liberal democracies, and
long-term solutions to humanitarian crises are difficult to achieve short of
something resembling neocolonialism.

One of the crucial lessons of Vietnam is that you cannot judge the costs of
military intervention properly unless you know the political solution you want
and have a reasonable strategy for achieving it.

Prominent among the few early voices raised against intervention in Vietnam were
George Kennan and Hans Morgenthau. These cold warriors dissented because they
defined U.S. interests in strategic, material terms. They recognized that
Vietnam would consume much American blood and treasure, and felt that since the
conflict was essentially peripheral to our interests we should not take on the
commitment.

Few people have argued that military intervention in Bosnia is necessary for
strategic reasons. Supporters of humanitarian intervention have yet to offer a
solution to the political problems there, or a clear vision of what to do if
limited measures prove insufficient. We should have listened to the realists
about Vietnam. Until interventionists come up with plans for the last moves as
well as the first, we should listen to the realists about Bosnia, too.

LOAD-DATE: January 15, 1993

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Op-Ed

                   Copyright 1993 The New York Times Company


This document could not be formatted for delivery. If your delivery request
included other documents, they completed successfully.

                              52 of 255 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 January 17, 1993, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

The Company He Keeps

BYLINE: By Michael Kelly and Maureen Dowd;  Michael Kelly and Maureen Dowd are
White House correspondents for The New York Times.

SECTION: Section 6; Page 20; Column 1; Magazine Desk

LENGTH: 8248 words


We're in a reaching out sort of mood this Inauguration. We're connecting. We're
opening up. We're celebrating diversity and embracing wholeness. We're on an
odyssey of self-discovery. We're thinking communitarian, New Covenant, a
Government that looks like America, inclusive not exclusive, omnicultural. We're
having Renaissance Weekends, wearing our names strung around our necks on pieces
of colored yarn and talking about renewal of nation and self. We've released our
inner children and are looking for nannies for them. We're feeling a little
weepy, but that's O.K. (and you're O.K., too, although your family's
dysfunctional). We're wearing clothes that look like the Summer of Love, only a
lot more expensive, and the designer gives part of the profit to Friends of the
Earth. We're not buttoned down and monogrammed anymore: We have a President
named Bill, a First Lady named Hillary, a First Daughter named Chelsea and an
Attorney General named Zoe. We're hugging trees. We're hugging each other. We're
hugging each other's trees.

The Co-Dependent White House is upon us. The President likes to talk of his
family's two generations of compulsions (stepfather an abusive alcoholic, mother
a gambler, brother a recovering cocaine addict, himself a fast-food addict). He
has admitted to marital problems and has been through family therapy for his
brother's addiction.

Vice President-elect Gore also became involved in family therapy as his son was
recovering from near-fatal injuries sustained in 1989 after he was hit by a car.
In the ensuing years, Gore developed into something akin to the nation's first
Senator-Shrink. He enjoyed weekly visits from a therapist in his Senate office,
once conducted a group seminar on dysfunctional families and, in the wake of
Anita Hill, was host of a consciousness-raising "gender dynamics" seminar for
Slow-to-Get-It Senators and their spouses. He decries "psychic numbness," quotes
John (Healing the Shame That Binds You) Bradshaw, and has written a book mixing
ecology and psychology in sentences like ". . . just as the unwritten rules in a
dysfunctional family create and maintain a conspiracy of silence about the rules
themselves, even as the family is driven toward successive crises, many of the
unwritten rules of our dysfunctional civilization encourage silent acquiescence
in our patterns of destructive behavior toward the natural world."

With their Iron John election-night clinch, Bill and Al struck a blow not only
against psychic numbness but also against the unwritten political ban on male
full-body contact -- strictly observed since the famous Richard Nixon-Sammy
Davis Jr. hug in 1972 bruised the reputations of both men.

What it all comes down to is, we're relating again.

Of course, there are relationships and there are relationships. The word covers
a lot of territory. Tristan and Isolde had a relationship. But so did Bonnie and
Clyde. Scott and Zelda. Michael Dukakis and Jesse Jackson. George Bush and Ross
Perot. David Letterman and NBC.  John F. Kennedy and libido. Richard Nixon and
bile.

Washington, never mistaken for Sunnybrook Farm, is, on the whole, more
comfortable with the darker side of the relationship picture, preferring sharp
elbows to Buscaglian embraces. As power transfers from George Bush to Bill
Clinton, from the Republicans to the Democrats, the nation's capital is busy
with the sort of relating it knows best: conniving and maneuvering, tossing and
turning at 2 A.M. thinking about what jobs are available and whose back has to
be climbed over, polishing the old brass knuckles and shining up the shiv.
There's so much looking over shoulders that the entire city is practically
pirouetting.

Here, then, in the spirit of new-age -- and age-old -- relationships, we offer
six to watch as the Administration gets under way. How these liaisons, dangerous
and otherwise, play out over the next four years will determine the essential
character -- and success -- of the Clinton Presidency.


BILL AND AL
The Incredible Shrinking Vice President

THE SCENE IS A familiar one. The new President is at the podium. He is talking
on, in that Washington way, at length and about himself. A couple of steps back,
tucked in the shadow of his right shoulder, stands the helpmeet, listening and
smiling, with an occasional widening of the eyes to mark an especially orotund
piece of rhetoric.

But with Bill Clinton, the adoring one standing in his shadow is not his wife,
Hillary. (She is probably busy in a smokeless back room, vetting Supreme Court
candidates.) It is Al Gore.

Like every marriage, the private relationship between Clinton and Gore is more
complicated than the public one. The delicate tension of this uncommon
partnership was revealed during the Vice Presidential debate in October, a night
expected to be a cakewalk for an A-student over the class clown.

Instead, as Bill Clinton watched in growing frustration, Al Gore failed, time
after time, to answer directly Dan Quayle's repeated charge that the Arkansas
Governor did not have the integrity and character to be President. "Why the hell
isn't Al defending Bill more?" one top campaign adviser asked another. Clinton
aides muttered darkly that Al had missed five shots to stand by his man.

Afterward, Gore called a friend. "Do you think I should have responded more to
the attacks on Bill?" he asked. "Some people are saying that, but I don't think
that's fair."

To a few close friends, Gore confided that he had gone about as far as he
thought he could in sticking up for Clinton. Famously straight-arrow, Gore was
uncomfortable in the role of character witness to a man who has not always lived
a life as careful and disciplined as his own, whose evasiveness was a problem
throughout the campaign.

"He felt an inner constraint," says one Gore confidant. "He could not push
himself to say something that would sound preposterous. As he said to me, 'There
are certain things you can say and certain things you cannot.' "

When they next met on the campaign trail, the two men patched things up. Each
recognized that theirs was a beautiful political friendship, not to be risked
over misunderstandings, and for the rest of the campaign, Gore went to great
lengths to defend Clinton's character. On election night, he delivered a long
and sugary encomium to his boss: "He asked for your vote by challenging you to
make America better. Where I come from, we have a name for that. It's called
character."

For years before the 1992 campaign, the two Southern politicians had circled
each other warily. One from the political aristocracy, one a charmed son of the
meritocracy, each saw in the other an unswerving ambition, a sense of
generational entitlement to the Presidency.

But these political siblings had their weaknesses. Gore, who had tried and
failed to reach the White House on his own, was a man of such starchy manner and
deliberate speaking style that he seemed, as the writer Michael Kinsley once
noted, "an old person's idea of a young person."

In private, there was a playful side. Gore amused friends by balancing spoons
and quarters on his nose and he repeated jokes at his own expense. (He told
friends that one perk of the Vice President's job would be free medical care
from the Forest Service: "They'll send over a tree doctor.") But his public
demeanor was numbingly earnest, even by the standards of Washington, where the
Senator had been known to show up at dinner parties with charts and graphs to
illustrate a lecture on the fate of the ecosystem.

Clinton, by contrast, was a man of too many faces, all of them smiling. Beset by
accusations of marital infidelity and draft dodging, his easy charm and
seductive expressions smacked of the actor's artifice.

In their campaign symbiosis, each man helped diminish the other's flaws. Gore
benefited from the reflected warmth of Clinton's social skills. More important,
Clinton received from Gore a dowry, not of geographical balance or political
supporters, but of image. With the square-jawed Dudley Doright from Tennessee by
his side, Slick Willie from Arkansas did not seem quite so slippery. Having a
Vietnam veteran as his running mate helped shield Clinton as he defended his own
troubled war history. And with the openly affectionate Gores holding hands
beside them, the Clintons were able to sidestep some old baggage, the appearance
that their union was less a romance than an arrangement between two calculating
souls. "It was like the gestalt theory -- the whole was greater than the sum of
the parts," says Tipper Gore.

The two men campaigned together less like the top and bottom of a ticket than
like two sides. They both had healthy egos. Clinton was, in the psychological
jargon he favors, outer-directed; he craved the adulation he drew from crowds,
so much so that he felt compelled to plunge into every rope line he saw, no
matter how late the hour, and to keep talking even when audiences grew restless
and reporters chanted "Get in the car!" Gore seemed curiously inner-directed for
a politician, a man who was nothing so much as his own reflection. It was as
though there were two Albert Gores on stage: one a Victorian maiden high on a
pedestal; the other at the base looking up in admiration and wonder.

Having come to the relationship bearing a great gift, Gore was always determined
to be treated with appropriate respect. He made the point in the Governor's
mansion, the morning of July 9, as he and Clinton were rehearsing for the joint
news conference they would soon hold to announce that Gore was joining the
ticket. An aide, acting as reporter, threw out a question accusing Gore of being
an environmental extremist.

Gore answered, but then Clinton cautioned, "We don't want to come off like a
bunch of Greenpeace warriors."

Gore, the author of a best-selling psycho-environmental polemic, "Earth in the
Balance," shot back: "What do you mean we, kemo sabe?"

After a tense moment, Clinton began to laugh, then everyone else did, too. From
that day on, Clinton and Gore appeared as the Alphonse and Gaston of politics,
handing off the microphone to each other on stage, picking up each other's
points. Except for some Southern focus groups' grumping that the two looked like
a couple of yuppies with cellular phones and Rolexes, the act went over big.
While George Bush campaigned with rarely a mention of Dan Quayle's name, Clinton
used Gore to great advantage, employing him to lead the attack on the Bush
Administration's prewar coziness with Saddam Hussein, and to serve as ambassador
to Jewish and environmental groups.

Gore used Clinton to achieve true national celebrity, glomming great gulps of
time at their joint appearances, grabbing the microphone to interrupt Clinton in
midsentence. Campaign insiders said that the words Clinton most feared were,
"I'd like to add something to that."

But that was then. That was back when Clinton had to put up with all sorts of
things. He doesn't now. He is President. And Gore is not. Clinton no longer
needs Gore to rescue him, because when reporters ask Presidents questions about
affairs, they mean foreign and domestic -- not extramarital. And those sorts of
questions Clinton can handle on his own.

Those familiar with Vice Presidential territory say the job is always difficult
for two reasons: The No. 2 has to try to use a largely ceremonial office to
polish his reputation so he can someday run for No. 1, and the natural rivalry
between the President's and the Vice President's staffs tends to magnify slights
and miscues.

The supremely confident Clinton does seem prepared to give Gore a certain amount
of influence and a good deal of attention. Gore's power was evident in the
transition, as Clinton included him among the handful of people with a final say
on Cabinet appointments. "At the table in the Governor's mansion, there were
only five people present on a regular basis," says Mark Gearan, the Clinton aide
who ran the Gore campaign. "Bill Clinton, Hillary Clinton, Warren Christopher,
Bruce Lindsey and Al Gore."

Gore's first big play was to block the selection of the former Vermont Governor
Madeleine Kunin as Environmental Protection Agency chief. He preferred that the
post go to Carol Browner, his 37-year-old former Senate aide who had most
recently served as the Secretary of Environmental Regulation in Florida.

But Gore's ambition may outstrip Clinton's largess. Gore told friends during the
transition that he expected to have serious say in at least three or four
Cabinet appointments. Instead, a friend says, Gore was told, in essence, "
'Look, you can have Environment.' Then they give him the gift of letting him sit
at the table." Gore was also disappointed when his two best Congressional
friends, former Colorado Senator Tim Wirth and former New York Representative
Tom Downey, were passed over for Cabinet seats.

During the transition, two top Gore staff members sat in the main dining room of
the Capital Hotel in Little Rock and talked for an hour over breakfast about who
might get the job of Clinton's chief of staff. "We've got to get someone in
there who is going to look out for Al and not just Bill," one said.

But Clinton soon made it clear that he does not intend to gear his White House
to protect Gore's interests. He chose the candidate most likely to give total
loyalty to him -- his oldest friend, the Arkansas businessman Thomas F. McLarty
3d.

Another unfortunate omen for Gore came during Clinton's first press conference
as President-elect, when he invited his Vice President to join him on stage, but
made no opening for him to say anything. Gore stood silently, staring somewhat
vacantly into the middle distance with his arms straight at his side. He looked,
said William Kristol, Vice President Quayle's chief of staff, "like an
environmentally correct wooden Native American outside a cigar store." The
humorist Calvin Trillin later memorialized it in a poem for The Nation, asking
"What's that, behind the President-elect --/That manlike object stiff from head
to toe?"

No one knows better than Gore that he looks awkward hovering in his boss's
shadow, and his friends worry that he might take Quayle's place as the favorite
target of late-night comedians. "He's getting more and more stiff because he's
cognizant of the fact that, as the Administration expands, his power contracts,"
says one Gore friend.

In response, Gore has developed a tendency to overcompensate. That was
embarrassingly clear at the first really big show of the incoming
Administration, the 19-hour talkathon in Little Rock on the economy. Clinton
impressed many in the audience at the two-day forum with his knowledge of what
he called "megaissues and metaissues" -- macro- and micropolicy, human
infrastructure and information infrastructure and technological infrastructure
and just plain old infrastructure. Gore chimed in from time to time, trying to
show off his own command of policy arcana. But it came across as the class
salutatorian trying to keep up with the valedictorian.

Gore also faces one nearly insurmountable obstacle to gaining real power in the
new Administration. "Al Gore hasn't yet realized there is going to be a
co-Presidency, but he's not going to be part of the co," says one Republican
lobbyist, paying backhanded homage to the clout of Hillary Clinton. During the
transition, Susan Thomases, Clinton's scheduler and a close friend of Mrs.
Clinton's, told associates that Gore did not understand that, once the
Administration got under way, he would have to adjust to a smaller role. He
could make it easy, Thomases said, or he could make it hard. (Gore had had
run-ins with Thomases and other Clinton staff members during the campaign: he
wanted more bus tours with Clinton and more visibility in the campaign
commercials, and he wanted to make more major speeches.)

One other sign of possible trouble ahead for Gore comes in a story told by a
close friend. When the Vice President-elect and his wife did not show up on the
invitation list for the highly publicized dinner party for the Clintons at the
Georgetown home of the Washington Post Company chairwoman, Katharine Graham,
Tipper Gore had to ask Hillary Clinton if that was what she really had intended.
Mrs. Clinton said no and instructed a staff member to rectify the oversight.
Meanwhile, Graham, who had originally intended to have a separate party for the
Gores, had decided on her own to add them to the list. But the Gores blamed the
Machiavellian work of Clinton staff members for not making sure they were
invited in the first place.

It was for Al Gore a particularly pointed lesson in Vice Presidential humility.



BILL AND HILLARY
From Policy Maker To Cookie Baker and Back

THE FIRST FIB WAS always that 1600 Pennsylvania was the only household in
America where the wife had no say over what the husband did.

Even in the face of strong First Ladies like Abigail Adams, Mary Todd Lincoln,
Edith Wilson, Eleanor Roosevelt, Rosalynn Carter, Nancy Reagan and Barbara Bush,
that fiction about Presidential domestic life persisted.

The Clintons hewed to the hoary "Father Knows Best" script long enough to win
the Presidency, and then quickly put to rest the notion that East Wing never
meets West. After the election, when he was asked whom he wanted in the room
when he makes his big decisions, Bill Clinton replied "Hillary" -- shattering,
with a single word, 200 years of Presidential protocol.

"If we disagree and I think I'm right," he told Time magazine, "I just go on and
do what I think is right. And then she tells me, 'I told you so.' "

Those who try to Balkanize the influence of the new First Lady -- Is she
responsible for the liberal Cabinet appointments? The number of women chosen for
top spots? -- are underestimating her. "You can't disentangle the two," says one
Democrat who has known the Clintons for years. Hillary Rodham and Bill Clinton
both came east to the Ivy League to remake themselves, and they ended up doing
it together. Those who forecast marital tensions as Hillary, the liberal, tugs
Bill, the centrist, to the left also misread the pair. "He's a hell of a lot
more liberal than people understand," says their Democratic friend. "But he's
guileful and he moves crablike, with certain kinds of conservative cover. Part
of their initial attraction was that they are both very political people, and
there's not a terrific ideological difference between them."

In the end, the ideological truth about the Clintons is like Poe's purloined
letter -- so obvious that no one notices it, even though the couple point it out
themselves. "It's rare that I think he's wrong," she said in one interview. "We
think so much alike and our values are so much alike."

Both Clintons are committed believers in the liberal religion of their 60's
college days, the promise that Government activism and central planning could
solve the problems of private lives. But far from being liberal sentimentalists,
they are political pragmatists. Both husband and wife were chastened by the
lesson of Clinton's 1980 defeat in Arkansas: that the public does not like
politicians who surround themselves with the kind of people George Orwell once
described as "that dreary tribe of high-minded women and sandal-wearers and
bearded fruit-juice drinkers who come flocking towards the smell of 'progress,'
like bluebottles to a dead cat."

The real tensions in the Clinton marriage have been personal, not political. The
focus was intensified by the role Hillary Clinton played in saving her husband's
campaign. When she stood beside him, after he euphemistically confessed to past
marital "problems," she was endorsing the idea that their marriage was real. As
their poll taker, Stan Greenberg, conceded at the time, voters would reject Bill
Clinton if they thought that he did not have the imprimatur of his wife, or if
they thought the union was a phony arrangement fueled only by ambition.

Some friends say that the Clintons can be affectionate in front of others;
campaign insiders say that, offstage, the candidate kissed his wife whenever he
came into a room. Other friends, perhaps wishful thinkers, even see the strains
in the marriage as evidence of its authenticity. As one dryly notes: "You
couldn't sustain that level of irritation if it were an arrangement."

Yet the campaign image of their marriage was, in many ways, contrived. Last
April, several of their top strategists sent the Clintons a long memo with
suggestions on ways of making their relationship seem more affectionate and
Hillary more traditional and maternal.

"More than Nancy Reagan, she is seen as 'running the show,' " the memo said.
"The absence of affection, children and family and the preoccupation with career
and power only reinforces the political problem evident from the beginning." The
remarkably detailed course of action recommended for Mrs. Clinton included
"joint appearances with her friends where Hillary can laugh, do her mimicry," a
family vacation (preferably to Disneyland) and "events where Bill and Hillary
can go on dates with the American people."

But whatever romance was dished up for public consumption, and whatever painful
patches they have gone through in private over the years, the Clintons have a
political partnership so tight that, as one former Carter Administration
official puts it, "they make Jimmy and Rosalynn Carter look like strangers."

"I don't doubt that she's probably wanted to kill him sometimes -- and with good
reason," says a lawyer who is a close friend of Hillary Clinton's. "But this
relationship is more than a cold, practical bargain. They like each other
immensely."

More than most Presidential marriages, the Clintons' will need to have a happy
public face. The image of the incoming President as a honest, decent man depends
on the carefully cultivated idea that though he may have sinned, he has been
redeemed. "He can't play J.F.K.," says a top Democrat. "If he does, it would be
a killer. All bets would be off."

Bill Clinton told his family long ago that he didn't want to marry a beauty
queen. Rather, he wanted to marry the smartest girl in the class. When they met
at Yale Law School, he was immediately drawn to her ambition, discipline and
love of liberal causes, and since then he has never shown any desire to diminish
her -- except when, as in the 1992 campaign, it was politically expedient to do
so.

When George Bush decided to run for President, there were suggestions that
Barbara Bush spruce herself up. "I'll do anything you want," she told Roger
Ailes, the campaign media adviser, "but I won't dye my hair, change my wardrobe
or lose weight."

By contrast, Hillary Clinton, supposedly far more independent, transformed her
looks from plain to glamorous, from campus radical frump to blond Junior Leaguer
with velvet headband -- a curtsy to the mainstream. After her husband's 1980
gubernatorial defeat, she also gave up her surname, Rodham, a sacrifice to prove
she wasn't an uppity Northern feminist, and took the name Clinton.

But the R-word was always hovering, just out of sight. Even at the height of the
campaign controversy over her crack that she could have just stayed home baking
cookies and having teas, and even when she was in a tremendous rush, she always
made sure to sign autographs Hillary Rodham Clinton, the same way she signed her
tax returns. Staff members refer to her as H.R.C., which is also the
magic-marker monogram on her bulging file boxes.

Other First Ladies perpetrated the myth that they would never think of talking
to the President about anything as serious and complicated as foreign affairs,
but they might whisper to him about some White House staff member who was
overstepping bounds. The new one isn't playing that game.

The real Hillary Clinton, superseded for much of the 1992 campaign by a quiet,
smiling baker of cookies, popped back up in an interview with Ted Koppel
broadcast on Election Day. The Clintons sat side by side in their airplane
seats, and twice, as Koppel directed questions to Bill, Hillary answered for
him. Her husband did not seem to mind, nor even particularly to notice.

Mrs. Clinton also sat in on her husband's "Man of the Year" interview with Time,
boldly answering questions about policy and politics and speaking not of "he"
but of "we." That idea is beginning to sink in. Even the Rev. Billy Graham, who
will deliver the Inaugural invocation, recently said that Bill and Hillary "will
make a unique team to help lead America and the Western world at this period of
history."

Clinton staff members are just as scared of offending Her as Him (the Clintons
both have a temper with aides if something is not done to their liking), and
they know that if She tells them to do something a certain way, they don't have
to double-check with Him.

They don't argue about it, either. During the transition, Clinton's staff worked
out the usual arrangement by which the President-elect is always covered by a
small pool of journalists. One afternoon during their New Year's vacation in
Hilton Head, S.C., the Clintons decided to go for a bicycle ride on the
hard-packed sandy beach. As they were leaving the house, Mrs. Clinton noticed
two pickup trucks, carrying the journalists, getting in position to accompany
them on the ride. "No trucks," she said abruptly to the Secret Service agent in
charge. And so in a second, because the next First Lady wanted more privacy, the
agreement made by her husband's staff was broken.

With the possible exception of Dan Rather, no public figure is the recipient of
more unsolicited advice than the President's wife. And the advice is often
unpleasantly personal. How the First Lady dresses, how she decorates, what she
spends money on, her social manners, the way she raises her children, the way
she treats her husband -- these are all subjects the nation has felt utterly
free to weigh in on.

Washington, a city prone to devour those who ignore its tribal rules, has always
regarded First Ladies as particularly appetizing subjects. Presidential wives
who have shown an independent turn of mind have quickly found themselves cast in
the role of First Lady Macbeth.

"My sense is that Hillary will get brushed back a little bit," says Edward
Rollins, the Republican strategist. "She's got to be careful not to overexpose
herself or to play bad cop to Bill's good cop. She can't overshadow him or be
perceived as manipulating him."

Sheila Tate, who saw the worst of what can happen to a First Lady's image when
she worked as Nancy Reagan's press secretary, agrees: "No matter how careful the
Clinton people are to point out how qualified Hillary is, there could be
trouble. People don't like the wife mucking about in the husband's affairs. She
wasn't elected and they just don't like it."

Mrs. Reagan has told friends that she empathizes with Mrs. Clinton's bumpy press
coverage. "They were after me before I even got to Washington too," she told one
confidante, and added this about Hillary Clinton's negative publicity: "It's not
fair."

One night during the campaign, at a small dinner in a revolving restaurant atop
a hotel in Covington, Ky., Mrs. Clinton wondered why Americans treated the First
Lady's office as though it were Miss Havisham's dining room, circumscribed by
the cobwebs of the past and great expectations for the future. She did not
understand why people cared whether Rosalynn Carter attended Cabinet meetings.
She did not see why she could not behave in the White House just as she had in
Arkansas -- shepherding some legislation in areas of interest to her (education,
for example), helping her husband choose who would run departments, being as
deeply involved in policy as he.

Hillary Clinton's friends say she does understand, however, that as First Lady
she will have to thread her way through at least three sets of demands --
feminists urging her to smash the mold, liberal interest groups wanting to
coalesce around her and conservatives complaining she wasn't elected to
anything. Like Anita Hill, she will undoubtedly come to serve as the canvas on
which others, warring over the shifting role of women in American society, may
paint their individual passions. She is clearly a First Lady with her own agenda
and power base. What she cannot yet fully know is what structural tensions with
the West Wing may surface, and whether she will be able to control the forces
that seek to use her name and influence.

"Hillary feels like she's walking into Washington with her arms wide open and
smiling, but she's watching on both sides," says Linda Bloodworth-Thomason, the
Arkansas-bred television producer of "Designing Women," "Evening Shade" and
"Hearts Afire" who has known the Clintons for years. "She's not a fool. She
knows that Washington is treacherous." But unlike her husband, Hillary is not
someone, Bloodworth-Thomason says, who "feels the overwhelming need to be
understood and validated by everyone. She will do everything she can not to be
misunderstood. Then she will be who she is and let the chips fall where they
may."

But, as Mrs. Clinton has shown through much of her public life and particularly
during the transition, she does not intend to jeopardize her husband's efforts
to move his party toward the center -- efforts that are at the very heart of his
political success.

The Clintons have been careful to keep a strategic mix of liberal and
conservative in their Democratic appointments so far. And Mrs. Clinton shares
with her husband an ability not only to look for compromise but also to keep
both eyes on the prize. When two campaign honchos, Susan Thomases and Mickey
Kantor, both "Hillary people," crossed swords with political advisers during the
campaign and transition, they were the ones who were forced to back down.

"Hillary is willingly taking on the freight of a lot of liberal groups," says
one prominent Southern Democrat who knows the Clintons. "But she is not a little
high priestess of idealism, either." The Democrat points out that while Mrs.
Clinton served on the board of the liberal-activist Legal Services Corporation,
she also served on the board of Wal-Mart and has been a corporate litigator for
the Rose Law Firm, one of Arkansas's three largest.

Mrs. Clinton is still struggling to figure out how to bring her role into modern
times. She has speculated with friends about the possibility of a job outside
the White House, teaching law part-time perhaps. She does not know to what
extent she should formalize her position in the new Administration. Should she
be in the paper loop of critical documents, or should she just wait until
evening to look at them? Should she have office space in the West Wing, to be
closer to the action? She still feels she was burned during the campaign by her
husband's open talk of giving her a Cabinet post and by the use of the motto,
"Buy one get one free." She wants to tread more gingerly now.

But there are signs that the new First Lady has little patience for what is
conventionally expected of the attentive political wife. At the end of the
Clintons' Hilton Head bike ride, he stopped to play a game of touch football
with their daughter, Chelsea, and 40 or 50 others, in front of a cordon of
cameras eager for a happy-family-at-play shot. Hillary Clinton never paused in
her pedaling but sailed serenely on, without a backward glance at the scene
behind her.



BILL AND HIS ENEMIES
The Top 10, Even Before He Takes Office

CLINTON'S FRIENDS LIKE to say that he cannot hold a grudge. And indeed, the
President-elect's instinct for consensus is so strong, going back to his
earliest days as a play(Continued on page 48)
ground glad-hander, that this chronic conciliator does seem incapable of
personal vendetta. But that hardly matters. Bill Clinton's closest advisers,
beginning with his wife, are more than capable of making up any shortfall.

Even before Inauguration Day, the Clinton enemies list is longer than George
Bush's was after four years. Herewith, the Top 10 at the moment:

John Major, Prime Minister of Great Britain, for sending Conservative Party
strategists to Washington to advise Bush's campaign on how to beat Clinton.

Jerry Brown, for being relentlessly annoying, for not knowing when to quit and
go home, for just generally being Jerry Brown.

Representative Charles Rangel of New York, for unhelpfully pointing out, again
and again, how little time Clinton was spending in poor black neighborhoods.

The Democratic Governor of Maryland, William Donald Schaefer, for, amazingly,
endorsing Bush.

Clifford Jackson, a former Oxford Friend of Bill's turned enemy, for his
unceasing peddling of dodge-the-draft stories.

Republican Representative Robert K. Dornan of California, for being the
architect of the McCarthyite assault to depict Clinton as the last pinko.

The former Republican Representative from Michigan Guy Vander Jagt, for holding
a news conference two days before the election to accuse Clinton of having
carried on a campaign-trail affair -- without a scintilla of evidence.

Marilyn Quayle, Rich Bond, Bob Novak and anyone else who ever said, implied or
even thought anything mean about Hillary.

NBC (the Nail Bill Clinton network, staff members called it), especially the
correspondent Lisa Myers and the magazine program "Dateline: NBC," for its long
piece during the primaries examining whether, as Governor of Arkansas, Clinton
had sought to cover up two allegedly fatal mistakes by his mother as a
nurse-anesthesiologist.

Mary Matalin, the acid-tongued Bush deputy campaign manager, who once insinuated
that Clinton was a "philandering, pot-smoking draft dodger." Yet Matalin gets a
special Presidential pardon on the grounds that she is already undergoing the
punishment of writing a "he said, she said" campaign memoir with her
lover-political foe, James Carville, sentencing herself to relive her mistakes
and his shrewd moves.

Aside from those whom Bill Clinton has reason to dislike, there is another
growing list of people who have reason to bear him ill will. Heading that list
at the moment are former Senator Wirth, former Governor Kunin and the Washington
lawyer Brooksley Born, the one-time leading candidates to head up, respectively,
the Department of Energy, the Environmental Protection Agency and the Justice
Department. They all came away from talks with Clinton believing they had been
chosen, only to lose out at the last minute.

How many enemies a politician makes is not much help in forecasting how he will
fare. Richard Nixon stumbled with an extremely long list and George Bush
stumbled with an extremely short one. All his life Bill Clinton has tried to
avoid having any enemies at all. But the President-elect seems to offend as many
people by making them think he agrees with them as he would if only he let them
know that he didn't.



BILL AND HIS FRIENDS
It's Payback Time

FOR THE FIRST Democratic President in 12 years, enemies are not the biggest
problem. It's his friends that Bill Clinton has to worry about.

Not his real friends, but his professional ones, the organizers and members of
Democratic interest groups. Each faction, from Act Up to Zero Population Growth,
holds itself responsible for at least a piece of the Democratic victory, and
each wants at least a piece of the President in return.

With his oft-repeated campaign promise of "a Government that looks like
America," Clinton had fed the expectations of all. But there was only so much
pie to go around, and, by halfway through the transition, some of the
President-elect's constituencies were turning on him, and on each other.

"Lesbians to Clinton: Why no Dykes in the Cabinet?" asked a news release from
the homosexual activist group Queer Nation.

"Department Secretaries Named to Date: Total: Male 3, Female 1; White 3,
African-American 1," counted the Coalition for Women's Appointments during the
selection process.

"Dear Mr. President-elect, environmentalists worked very hard to help you
achieve victory in November," wrote the Sierra Club and the League of
Conservation Voters. They were trying to bring Clinton back to the fold after he
had selected Hazel O'Leary (black and female) as Secretary of Energy over Tim
Wirth (a white-but-environmentally-correct male).

Responding to all the pressures, Clinton complained, calling the feminist
pressure groups "bean counters" who were "playing quota games and math games."
Some said the outburst was calculated to distance himself from the feminist
lobby and to send a warning signal to all the pressure groups to back off. That
may have been the case, but Clinton did seem genuinely outraged, his face red,
his voice edged with sharp anger.

His feminist friends shrugged the scolding off. "Right now, he's just starting
to squirm a little," says Patricia Ireland, the president of the National
Organization for Women.

It boggles the mind, but Bill Clinton may have even more friends than George
Bush. The President-elect, one of the great Rolodexers of modern times, has been
networking and cultivating the rest of the human race on a vast scale since
childhood. Is there a city in America that doesn't boast at least a few people
who call themselves F.O.B's? The sheer volume of these friends, with their
cacophony of points of view and competing desires for White House access, can
mean trouble down the road for the new President.

Republicans eagerly anticipate a four-year siege of Bill's friends trying to
push him this way and that. "If this continues," says Dan Quayle's speech
writer, Lisa Schiffren, "those of us who are packing up our offices now will be
packing up to move back in again in four years."



BILL AND HIS DIET
The President as Omnivore

WHEN Barbara Bush began living at the White House, she worried about all the
elaborate meals she was about to be served and how they would affect her weight
problem. But when the White House waiters began putting plates in front of her,
she noticed something strange: the portions were puny. "Why aren't they feeding
us?" she wondered, telling the story later to friends.

Then Mrs. Bush realized what the problem was: the chefs had been instructed by
Nancy Reagan to serve social X-ray portions. But Mrs. Bush decided not to
reverse the policy of less-than-normal-size meals. "She figured it was good for
her and the President to just ask for seconds and thirds," says a friend of Mrs.
Bush.

If Hillary Clinton also adheres to to Nancy Reagan's Lean Cuisine regime, expect
the local Domino's Pizza to be getting plenty of 3 A.M. calls from the White
House.

We have seen the President as communicator, the President as warrior and the
President as healer. Now comes the President as omnivore.

"He eats like a Tasmanian devil -- Dunkin' Donuts, McDonald's, tin cans," says
Mort Engelberg, a Hollywood producer ("Smokey and the Bandit") and occasional
Clinton adviser who shares Clinton's accordion appetite. "You'll never find this
guy asking for a splash more coffee. He's not a nervous eater. He enjoys it."

Engelberg claims that during the campaign, Clinton had a special radar for
finding a Dunkin' Donuts in the middle of the night in small towns. "He'd say,
'Let's just get a cup of coffee,' but then he'd end up eating donuts and soup
and broccoli with cheese."

Clinton is not the only President who tends to get, as he likes to put it, "fat
as a wood tick." The first thing William Howard Taft did after his Inauguration
was to flop his 300 pounds onto a White House sofa, just to prove he was
President and could bust any spring he liked.

George Bush eats like a teen-ager, gobbling down nachos, steaks and egg rolls
with equal gusto, and once ingested the most disgusting breakfast in
Presidential history: oatmeal with a Butterfinger bar crumbled on top.

Clinton eats like a teen-ager, too. Linda Bloodworth-Thomason laughs about her
old pal's habit of reaching over and spearing something on a companion's plate,
noting, "You don't want that, do you?"

Bill Clinton's favorite foods include chicken enchiladas, tacos, barbecued ribs,
cheeseburgers, lemon chess pie, peach pie, beef tenders marinated in Italian
dressing and his mom's sweet-potato casserole. (Take 6 pounds of mashed sweet
potatoes. Add 1 pound of brown sugar, 3 eggs, half a pound of butter and a pound
and a half of sweetened condensed milk. Flavor with nutmeg, cinnamon, vanilla,
ginger, allspice and nuts. Top with 10 ounces of melted marshmallow miniatures.)

His weight fluctuates by about 40 pounds, beginning at a minimum of 190 and
going up to 226. One of his more embarrassing food moments on the road came when
a customer at a Taco Bell greeted Clinton by reminding him that they had met
before -- at a Pizza Hut.

James Carville, Clinton's wiry chief political strategist, recalls eating many
an awful plane meal with Clinton. A former heavyweight himself, Carville
marveled at the candidate's cheerfully gluttonous feeding patterns. "We would
get warmed-over lasagna and two-day-old salad, the worst stuff I had since the
Marines, and I never did see him complain," he says. "I suspect if they give it
to him, he'll eat it. If the White House chef comes down with an elaborate duck
a l'orange, he'll eat that, too."

Clinton's eating habits have already turned into something of a national joke.
Political cartoonists have portrayed him with his cheeks swallowing up his eyes,
while comics and esthetes alike have begged him to stop wearing short shorts
while jogging. "Saturday Night Live" depicted the President-elect in a sketch
ending a 30-foot run at a McDonald's, where he foraged through the room
snatching burgers and fries from startled customers. Jay Leno asserted that
Clinton needs to appoint "a Thighmaster General," pointing out that Vice
President-elect Gore is "just a Big Mac away from the Presidency."

Warning that the well-upholstered Clinton and Gore might, should their padding
increase, become known as "the Blubber Bubbas," the writer and noted eater
Calvin Trillin envisioned mud-throwing Republicans questioning whether "men who
order the cottage-cheese-and-fruit salad and then pick at a companion's double
order of cheese French fries to the point at which the plate requires no washing
are really the sort of men you want making life-and-death decisions for this
nation."

Even Clinton's press secretary, Dee Dee Myers, said at a recent political dinner
in Washington that those who were skeptical when Clinton said he "didn't inhale"
had clearly never been to a McDonald's with him.

But girth is no laughing matter to the gastronomically correct. A group of chefs
led by Alice Waters of Chez Panisse, the exceedingly cutting-edge Berkeley,
Calif., restaurant, sent the President-elect a snippety letter urging him to
appoint a White House chef who would serve food that shows "care for our waters
and pastures."

Clinton, reasonably enough, did not feel the need to respond personally to a
dietary tract that included among its signatories Paul Prudhomme, the New
Orleans chef who has singlehandedly refuted the poet John Donne's contention
that no man is an island.

But will the new President continue to flout the social conventions of a nation
of Stairmasterers? Calvin Trillin respects Clinton for going beyond what he
disdainfully calls the "show eating" of George Bush -- who used pork rinds as a
political statement -- and defended the Clinton sweet-potato-casserole recipe as
"not as bad as Tricia Nixon's Chicken Divan."

"I'm not so sure how deep into society this whole calorie-counting,
cholesterol-watching, stair-stepping sickness ever really went," Trillin says.
"The Clinton Administration could be like the Day the Fat People Invaded. This
sort of eating may very well be the secret of Clinton's appeal, his link to the
common man."



BILL AND THE CAMERA
Are They Spending Too Much Time Together?

IT WAS ABOUT HALFWAY between Election Day and Inauguration Day that it began to
dawn on people that there was simply no escaping Bill Clinton.

It had become almost impossible to turn on a television set without seeing the
President-elect talking or waiting for his turn to talk while someone else
talked to him. C-Span had come to resemble some sort of 24-hour Clinton channel:
"All Bill. All the time."

The deluge reached biblical proportions at the Little Rock economic conference,
a made-for-television event featuring more than 300 people talking for 19 solid
hours. Clinton, clearly in his element, had never seemed happier.

"And so the specific question I wanted to ask is in this whole idea of
redirecting the $15 billion," he told one participant in a discussion on defense
conversion. "Do you think we ought to do it through the Defense Advanced
Research Products Agency, through a new agency, through expanding that mission?
And how, as a practical matter, based on your own experience in this area -- how
much dual-use technology can we really do that will benefit, truly benefit both
the commercial sector and the defense sector that we're not doing now?"

When it came time on the second day of the conference to break for lunch,
Clinton demurred. "I'm not going to have a break for lunch," he said to his
fellow gasbags. "This is too interesting." (He also actually referred to a chart
at one point as "moving.")

The participants in the conference seemed equally enthralled; never before had
so many been allowed to talk so long about so much that was so boring. "Mr.
President, words fail me in describing what an extraordinary event this is,"
said the economic columnist Robert Kuttner.

Clinton replied, "I hope that doesn't mean it's all downhill from here."

It could be. Clinton, the only man in America who would actually pay for C-Span
if it became a premium channel, has promised to numb the nation with further
colloquia on such topics as health care, welfare reform and the environment. He
has hinted as well at further getting-out-among-my-people bus trips, conjuring
up the frightening image of the Presidency as nightmare combination of Greyhound
tour and "G.E. College Bowl" -- with Clinton leading a caravan of eggheads
endlessly through the heartland, touching down periodically for 20 hours or so
of stimulating conversation.

In the 1980's, everyone had their 15 minutes of fame; in the 1990's, it looks as
though everyone will have 15 minutes on air with Bill Clinton -- especially now
that the President will have access to 500 cable channels.

Clinton's never-ending conversation with the American public is going over big
now, because, after four years of George Bush's headmasterish style of
governing, Americans are starved to have a voice in their own political affairs.
But there is a precedent from which it is possible to gauge just how long voters
can be expected to tolerate all this listening, and it does not augur well for
Clinton.

Jimmy Carter, like Bill Clinton, began his Presidency with an extravaganza of
populism. He updated F.D.R.'s fireside chats for television, hosted a telephone
call-in show to the White House, held a "town hall" in the town of Clinton,
Mass., and traveled around the country visiting with "average Americans." The
act palled quickly. By the time Carter ran unsuccessfully for re-election, his
strategists were advising him that his best hope lay in staying home, out of the
public eye.

Ronald Reagan's advisers, having studied Carter's approach, sharply limited the
President's visibility. "The more you expose yourself, the more you expose
yourself to trivialization," says Michael Deaver, the Washington public
relations executive who was Reagan's chief imagist. "And if things start not
working, people are going to say, 'Get off your rear, quit talking and do
something about it.' "

At the moment, however, the Clinton camp appears not to be able to conceive of a
world in which their chatty boss could be overexposed.

"I think you'll see a lot of town halls, of the sort we did in the campaign,"
says one Clinton official, his enthusiasm rising as he contemplates the future.
"Maybe one every couple of months. Also, bus tours, of course. We have to keep
doing those, but not so many, maybe one every six months or once a year. And
maybe we could do the old capital-for-a-day bit too. You know, move the White
House and the entire Cabinet to some place like Bismarck, N.D., one morning and
make it the capital of the whole country for a day. Wouldn't that be great?"

WILLIAM JEFFERSON CLINTON becomes the 42d President of the United States three
days from now an oddly unknown man. He has succeeded remarkably well in being
many things to many people, but that leaves the question of who he really is.

Is he the New Democrat, or the same old thing? Will he only tell people what
they want to hear, or will he be able to say no to important constituencies?
Will he continue to act as though the solutions to the country's problems are
painless, or will he explain what sacrifices need to be made?

There is a fundamental tension in Bill Clinton between the glib politician and
the dedicated student of public policy, the man always looking for approval and
the man who knows that wrenching changes are required to put the country on a
new course.

In the end, the most important relationship to be sorted out in the next four
years is between Bill and Bill.

NAME: Bill Clinton

LOAD-DATE: January 17, 1993

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photos: After Clinton and Gore grasped victory in November, Gore was
seen but not heard as much. (Mark Reinstein/Photoreporters)(pg. 20); An embrace
like the one shared by Clinton and Gore on election night would have been
unthinkable for, say, Nixon and Agnew. (Alex Quesada/Matrix)(pg. 21); Partners
to the end. The Clintons at a rally in New Jersey on Nov. 1, two days before the
election. (Jim Estrin/The New York Times); Women with a victory in common.
Hillary Clinton and Tipper Gore at the Democratic National Convention. (Allan
Tannenbaum/Sygma); In February, polls were sagging but spirits weren't. (David
Burnett/Contact)(pg. 22-23); They brake for fast food. The candidates at Parma
Pierogies in Parma, Ohio, with Tipper Gore and Senator Bill Bradley in August.
(Andrea Mohin/The New York Times); Clinton's jogging regimen provided some
checks and balances on his appetite. (Cynthia Johnson/Gamma-Liaison); Aides were
relieved when he traded his short shorts for the more capacious style pictured.
(Monica Almeida/The New York Times)(pg. 24-25); A high school in East St. Louis,
Ill., was an early stop on the bus tour. In those days Gore spoke almost as much
as Clinton. (Jim Estrin/The New York Times); The personal approach to a midday
rally in New York in April. (Edward Keating/The New York Times); A made-for-TV
candidate. Clinton with Larry King in October. (Lee Romero/The New York Times);
Jerry Brown and Bill Clinton were at odds during a "Donahue" taping in April.
Brown is still considered an E.O.B. -- Enemy of Bill. (pg. 51)(Photograph by Jim
Estrin/The New York Times)

TYPE: Biography

                   Copyright 1993 The New York Times Company

                              53 of 255 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 January 17, 1993, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

POP MUSIC;
The Durability of Doo-Wop

BYLINE: By MARTIN GOTTLIEB

SECTION: Section 2; Page 1; Column 2; Arts & Leisure Desk

LENGTH: 2658 words


In a country whose new President imitates Elvis, it may well be time to pay
homage to doo-wop. After all, Elvis and doo-wop started out at the same time to
a like mixture of teen idolatry and adult approbation. Doo-wop's most resonant
star, Frankie Lymon of the Bronx, sang with the passion of his tenement streets
as much as Elvis embodied Memphis. And Lymon led a life even more drug-filled
and tormented than the King and, not incidentally, died every bit as
prematurely.

But Elvis achieved sainthood, while Frankie Lymon's grave remained unmarked for
years. Big surprise.

Doo-wop is so submerged in caricature and deprecation that shadings of Rodney
Dangerfield color its very name.

Beyond associations with the Fonz and dorky proms and some of pop music's most
insipid lyrics, however, is a lost world, lush, raw and, in the words of more
than one of its habitues, "a little bit weird." In its richest artistic period,
from about 1951 to 1956, it often possessed an unaffected beauty created with
the simplest ingredients -- a straightforward chord structure, spare
instrumentation, a strong lead singer and baroque background harmonies replete
with "yips," "werps" and "poppa-ooh-mow-mows." Embedded in this era are a trove
of powerful, self-taught tenors whose names are all but forgotten, as well as
silky, ethereal harmonies, offered up by groups that fans can distinguish
instantly -- the Moonglows, the Flamingos, the Cadillacs, fronted by the famous
Earl (Speedo) Carroll.

With some frequency, particularly in the New York metropolitan area, where
doo-wop became a teen-age cottage industry that supplied Tin Pan Alley, this
world periodically surfaces in concerts that draw thousands to hear groups
reconstituted with fill-ins and whatever original members can be found. The next
will take place Saturday at Radio City Music Hall with such vintage groups as
the Limelites, Earl Lewis and the Channels, and the Penguins, who in 1954
recorded the emblematic doo-wop hit, "Earth Angel." On radio, Don K. Reed's
Sunday-evening Doo-Wop Shop on WCBS-FM in New York, fueled in good part by
nostalgia, draws a substantial audience, as do similar shows in Boston,
Philadelphia and other large cities.

The Top 40 has also been infiltrated by doo-wop, with Boyz II Men reaching back
to 1956 to remake "In the Still of the Nite." Others, including the
rhythm-and-blues group Jodeci, have reclaimed doo-wop's close harmonies and
unabashed romance, sometimes backed with the crisp electronics of new jack
swing, sometimes (as in Shai's "If I Fall in Love") as unaccompanied as
street-corner harmonizers. Meanwhile, even Frankie Lymon and the Teen-Agers had
a moment of glory last week, when they were inducted -- belatedly in the eyes of
doo-woppers -- into the Rock-and-Roll Hall of Fame.

Most consistently, however, the doo-wop world exists in a string of specialty
record shops, private record collections, small club dates and gatherings of
devotees sprinkled through the blue-collar byways of the New York region. This
network, in fact, approximates the poles of Mr. Clinton's winning coalition: an
audience made up heavily of classic Reagan Democrats -- white, middle-aged,
working-class men -- and the black performers most fans venerate.

The dichotomy is vivid at monthly meetings of the United in Group Harmony
Association, a 2,000-member organization headed by one of doo-wop's prime
fanatics, a Clifton, N.J., record store owner named Ronnie Italiano. Other
record shops have albums in their windows. Mr. Italiano has a 2,000-pound
granite tombstone for Lymon. (With the unmarked grave, at St. Raymond's Cemetery
in the Bronx, as their call to arms, association members chipped in for the
headstone, but Lymon's widow eventually said she would take care of the
headstone herself.)

The association gathers in an old German restaurant complex called Schuetzen
Park in North Bergen, N.J. Here, against a background of black walls and
mirrored ceilings with gold trim, the mood is casbahlike, with rows of fans
transfixed by activities on stage and a moving parade of others cruising from
tables of souvenirs and collector's records to the bar to knots of friends.

The crowd is mostly 45 to 60 years old, outer borough or suburban. In it are
folks who were infected by the music circa 1954, when Alan Freed and other disk
jockeys electrified the first postwar generation of teen-agers, mostly white,
with the authenticity, passion and sexuality of music that was then entirely
black. White doo-wop groups eventually proliferated, most heavily in Brooklyn,
but as Bob Diskin, manager of several of them, says: "All the white groups
themselves only like black groups. When they started, they didn't want to sound
white, but in most cases they couldn't help it."

To have been in a black group, no matter how insignificant, is to be royalty at
Schuetzen Park. Ask Eugene Tompkins, a retired captain for the New York City
Corrections Department. When he was a sophomore at Morris High School in the
South Bronx in 1956, he was a member of the Limelighters, who cut a single
record featuring a quickly forgotten flop, "Cabin Hideaway."

Twenty-one years later, he found himself at an association festival, and when
word passed of his presence, he was called to the stage, where he received an
ovation. Association members recited to him the lyrics of "Cabin Hideaway."

"The scene is spontaneous and it's friendly," said Vernon Boggs, a sociologist
at York College and the City University Graduate Center who is immersed in this
world. "It reminds you of the gospel church -- people moving back and forth and
exchanging greetings. The dynamics of this crowd are so different from those of
jazz or rock crowds." As a measure of racial bifurcation between audience and
performer, Mr. Boggs, who is black, was once greeted at the men's room door at
Schuetzen Park by a white fan who looked at him quizzically before brightening.
"Hey, you sung good," he said.

Nostalgia, of course, played a huge part in bringing most people back to
doo-wop, but for many it is respect for the music that holds them. "I think the
nostalgia stage was over for these people in the early 70's," said Donn Fileti,
co-owner of Relic Records of Hackensack, N.J., which has reissued scores of
doo-wop albums. "I think they've developed a genuine appreciation for the
music."

Association members greet esteemed groups like the Harptones with warm cheers.
In a recent appearance, the Harptones dressed in red blazers with narrow lapels,
much as they did in the mid-50's when they used to ignite the Apollo with daring
dance routines, and ran through their hits -- "Life Is But a Dream," "A Sunday
Kind of Love," "Since I Fell for You" and more. The adulation that followed came
from more than tinted memories. Harptone harmony glows, and the group's lead
singer, a genre icon named Willie Winfield, has a voice marked by gentleness and
clarity. Even in his 60's, his unlined face seems to capture the music's
innocence and good will.

He is the friendliest of people, who for all the veneration lives in the Gowanus
public housing project in Boerum Hill, Brooklyn, and delivers prayer cards to
funeral homes for a living. But because of his Schuetzen Park status, it often
takes association members months to find the courage to approach him. "It took
me a year," said Phil Groia, a Long Island teacher who wrote and published "They
All Sang on the Corner," a book about New York's black harmony groups.

DOO-WOP'S SIMPLICITY WAS ITS strength and undoing. It was easy for teen-agers to
emulate, but it also led to broad parody, mediocrity and, to many critics, a
creative cul de sac that caused pop music to move on without it. "The thing that
made the music special was that contained within its very simple blues structure
was a very, very exciting, dance-oriented music for kids that had very simple
lyrics," said Tim Hauser, a member of the contemporary vocal group the Manhattan
Transfer. "It was a real thing for kids to compete and outdo the other local
groups. And they sang with such innocence -- an innocence you don't find in
music today."

Most parameters were established in the early 50's by groups like the Ravens and
Sonny Til and the Orioles, who while idolizing the fabled Ink Spots, developed a
prismatic sound featuring bigger beats and more distinct basses and cresting
falsettos. Instrumentation was minimal, the songs being carried by lilting
harmony, and the leads were most frequently high, pleading tenors.

By the mid-50's, teens by the thousands had taken to street corners and school
bathrooms. The prime purveyors were "relatively innocent bad boys," Anthony J.
Gribin and Matthew M. Schiff wrote in their recent exhaustive and droll book
"Doo-Wop." Girls were supposed to swoon and buy records.

Gilbert Valentin, whose Valentinos still perform, remembers a South Bronx
overrun by singers, with earnest social workers scheduling battles of the groups
as an alternative to juvenile delinquency. Mr. Groia wrote of one Harlem
epicenter: "It would have been possible to walk along 115th Street in 1955 and
pass groups singing on the corners of Fifth, Lenox, Seventh, St. Nicholas and
Eighth Avenues." The activity had become "a way of life that prolifically
produced the greatest number of recording groups ever to come from one
neighborhood."

There were levels of excellence, and one of the highest evolved at 55 West 119th
Street, known simply as "55." It was here that the Harptones' guiding light,
Raoul Cita, a self-taught keyboard maestro, rehearsed numerous ensembles,
including the first white group with a hit, the Neons from Brooklyn. At his most
far-reaching, he merged the Harptones, the Lyrics and a girl group called the
Joytones into a 13-voice extravaganza known as the Royale Cita Chorus. Teens
from the neighborhood listened at a respectful distance.

Bobby Jay, a disk jockey for WCBS-FM, who was a member of the Laddins,
remembered, "You couldn't help but wonder, 'Are they singing the same stuff
we're singing?' " Years later, he learned the answer was no. Instead of
conventional four-chord harmonies, Mr. Cita, who admired the likes of Glenn
Miller and Louis Jordan, employed far more elaborate chord structures. "The
Harptones extended the harmonic structure so you didn't have three people
singing one note," Mr. Jay explained. "You had five people singing five distinct
notes."

Into Mr. Cita's harmonic mix came choice singers like William Dempsey, a tenor
from Harlem, and Mr. Winfield, who had migrated from Virginia with a musical
sensibility informed by the Delta Rhythm Boys; Herb Jeffries, the singing black
cowboy, and the harmony ensemble that many doo-wop fans revere beyond all
others, the Five Keys, who lived near him in Newport News, Va.

Last year, George Lavatelli and Bruce Grossberg of the Relic Records Shop
(across the street from but unaffiliated with the Relic Records label) polled
several dozen cognoscenti and produced a ranking of the 50 greatest groups. The
white group that ranked highest was the Skyliners, who recorded the blockbuster
"Since I Don't Have You" in 1959. They came in 52d. "There was only one white
singer who could ever truly sing like a black person," Mr. Lavatelli said. "Paul
Himmelstein."

Mr. Himmelstein, who lives in the Bronx, fronted an otherwise black group, the
Heartbreakers, that won four talent shows at the Apollo. He offered this
explanation of his singing style: "I come up in a black neighborhood, you know
what I'm saying? I only have flashes of white people in the neighborhood. We'd
go to one another's houses to rehearse. In the background, there would be gospel
singing or church music, you understand? Evidently I incorporated it into my
singing style."

The only group on the survey with a female lead was Lillian Leach and the
Mellows, who placed 49th. The Platters, the smooth pop-oriented group that
outsold all the others, came in 25th. Ranking higher were Earl Lewis and the
Channels, the Drifters, with the quintessential Clyde McPhatter, and Frankie
Lymon and the Teen-Agers. They have the synchronized, riveting feel of diesels
streaming through the night, their lead voices lighting the way.

At the top were groups with more mysterious, murky sounds, their tenors softer
and idiosyncratic. Each of these groups has its partisans: the Five Keys with
Rudy West (finishing 1st), the Harptones (6th), the Spaniels with Pookie Hudson
(10th) and the Heartbeats with James (Shep) Sheppard (12th). Discriminating
among them, says Mr. Groia, is like "developing a taste in wine."

LEGENDARY IS THE STORY OF HOW most groups were robbed blind of royalties and
writing credits. On top of this, other ensembles, most often white, were hired
to recreate -- some would say steal -- the originals' songs in antiseptic
versions that were less competent, better distributed and more successful. To
this day, Ernie Sierra, a police officer in the Bronx, remembers what he earned
when his still-active group, the Eternals, scored with the hit "Babalu's Wedding
Day," which reached No. 14 on the charts in 1959: $165.

By the 60's, the British Invasion shoved doo-wop off the radio and the war sent
performers and fans alike to Vietnam. Heroin finished Frankie Lymon and many
others.

Fame was where you could find it. Returning home from his clerical job at the
Methodist church headquarters in Manhattan one day, Mr. Cita got on a subway at
116th Street and heard the conductor announce, "Now entering our train, Mr.
Raoul Cita of the world famous Harptones!" Mr. Cita raced through the cars until
he found the voice responsible. It belonged to William Dempsey, the group's
longtime second tenor. He had to quit, Mr. Dempsey said recently, for a transit
job "mostly to support my family."

Doo-wop's survival strikes some as miraculous. By all accounts it can be traced
to a revival stimulated in the early 70's by a charismatic New York disk jockey,
Gus Gossert, and an outburst of live oldies shows that captured a latent
yearning for the music. Today, the shows are a staple, and the earliest records
sell for thousands of dollars. According to Lou Silvani of Times Square Records
in Dobbs Ferry, N.Y., who wrote the encyclopedic "Collecting Rare Records," the
rarest Harptones recordings can command $2,000, while an obscure 1953 single by
the Hornets brought $18,000.

There is more than a touch of bitterness in Mr. Cita's voice when he reviews a
lifetime of musical promise and legitimate success that never yielded a
breakthrough or financial security. He still arranges music in the brownstone at
55 West 119th Street, which he manages for the city. His family lost the
building in a tax foreclosure 20 years ago.

Mr. Cita works with a synthesizer purchased with his biggest performance
paycheck, $1,100, received when the Harptones appeared at a concert headlined by
Bowser of the oldies goof group Sha-Na-Na. He guides a contemporary group called
Klass Generation and still practices twice a week with the Harptones.

Mr. Winfield, his star lead singer, also thinks of might-have-beens that, at
times, leave him with what he called "an envy thing." But he added: "I leave a
lot of the frustration behind when I'm singing. I'll forget all about my age. I
fall in love with my audience, and I can feel very happy."

The feeling can be infectious, particularly at a gathering of the United in
Group Harmony Association. There, two blocks from a boulevard filled with
Korean, Arab and Cuban shops, a crowd made up mostly of Italians and Jews of a
certain age will spill into the parking lot after a long night of song, carrying
a love of the black music of the city of their youths. Late into the night, many
break into groups and offer up "Gloria," "Hello" and "A Sunday Kind of Love."

The echoes bounce off the wall of a red brick senior citizens' housing project
looming nearby and into the New Jersey night.

LOAD-DATE: January 17, 1993

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photos: Frankie Lymon and the Teen-Agers -- inductees into the
Rock-and-Roll Hall of Fame are receiving a belated momnet of glory. (Michael
Ochs Archives)(pg. 1); The Harptones, left (Chuck Stewart), circa 1955 and,
right (Monica Almeida/The New York Times), in a recent performance at Schuetzen
Park in North Bergen, N.J. -- The makeup of the group changes, but the spirit of
the music remains the same. Ronnie Italiano, above, whose record store in
Clifton, N.J., has a 2,000-pound tombstone in the window, a tribute to Frankie
Lymon. His shop offers vintage albums by the likes of Shep and the Limelites and
the Jive Five. (Keith Meyers/The New York Times); The Surf-side Serenade from
Jersey City performing at Schuetzen Park. (Monica Almeida/The New York
Times)(pg. 25)

                   Copyright 1993 The New York Times Company

                              54 of 255 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 January 17, 1993, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

Conversations/Lou Reed;
Rock's Grim New York Poet Brings His Wild Side to an Inaugural Show

BYLINE: By JON PARELES

SECTION: Section 4; Page 7; Column 1; Week in Review Desk

LENGTH: 1204 words


IN what may be the oddest booking of the year, the godfather of punk rock is
scheduled to play an inaugural ball. "I didn't think I was the first name that
sprang to mind," Lou Reed said drily in a telephone interview the other day.

Mr. Reed has sung, with some sympathy, about junkies, transvestites, hustlers
and psychotics; with the Velvet Underground in the 1960's, he created shrieking,
assaultive pre-punk rock that savaged the optimism of flower power. In the
1970's, leading his own bands, he would perform "Heroin" while pretending to tie
off his arm and inject the drug. More recently, he has made albums about urban
chaos ("New York"), about his early sponsor Andy Warhol ("Songs for 'Drella")
and about the age of AIDS ("Magic and Loss").

On Monday afternoon, he is to perform at the Tennessee Street Festival, an
inaugural event honoring the home state of Albert Gore, the Vice
President-elect, and his wife, Tipper, known for her efforts to clean up rock
lyrics.

"The impression I've got about that is that it's water under the bridge," he
said. "Or else why would so many music-business people have been supporting the
Democrats? And on the other hand, she's welcome to her opinion. Whether she gets
clout because of who her husband is, well, that's the American way, isn't it?
Besides, if Bush had his way, there wouldn't be any records at all.

"This is such a puritan country," he said with a sigh. "Somebody asked John
Mellencamp, who has a young daughter, 'Would you let her hear this record that
has a so-called obscenity?' He said 'Yes, and so what.' It makes people aware of
more things -- that's called education. What is this terrible power?"

Doesn't art have the power to reshape someone's thinking? As Mr. Reed wrote in
the 1960's, couldn't people's lives be "saved by rock and roll"?

"Yeah, but they're also not corrupted by pop," he said. "Art transforms, pop is
just entertainment, and it's in and out and you don't even remember it two
minutes later."

Suppose someone wrote a brilliant, artistic song entitled "Kill Your Sons," as
Lou Reed did in 1974? "I don't think people are that stupid," he says. "You
can't ban things just because there's a couple of lunatics out there, committing
suicide after they hear a Judas Priest record. You know, people aren't going to
go into really hurtful sex acts because they go to a Mapplethorpe exhibition.
It's just not the way it works.

"I played at a Christmas party at Big Mike's, a sound rehearsal studio, and I
did 'Heroin.' I prefaced it by saying, 'We're going to do a song called
'Heroin.' But I don't want anybody who overdoses in the bathroom to blame it on
this song.' "

People From Another Planet

Prudery and censorship irritate him. "In New York, some people think that in
schools, if students are being made aware of homosexuality, more people will
catch it. As if it's, like, such an attractive thing that all of a sudden,
heterosexuals are going to drop like flies. Fantastic! These people are crazy!
What planet are they from?

"The whole situation is too demented. At a time when AIDS is killing people, you
have a church that doesn't want you to have sex education, that doesn't want to
have condoms available in schools. It's just hilarious that this is what they're
going on about in 1993."

A cultural tangent struck Mr. Reed. "I try to figure out sometimes, who goes to
Broadway musicals? I thought that music was dead and gone 20 years ago. Who goes
to see 'Phantom of the Opera'? Who watches 'Cats'? I was starting to think that
maybe corporate people are importing audiences to have these shows constantly
succeed, so they can say, 'See, this is what mainstream America really wants.' "

Asked about politics, he demurred at first: "I don't keep up with politics
enough to really speak that knowledgeably about it." But as one of rock's
quintessentially urban songwriters, he has strong opinions about New York and
other cities.

"If we can go into Somalia, why can't we go into New York?" he said. "Maybe we
should be putting all that effort into the cities of America. I still live here
and I'm not leaving. I love New York. I can't stand to see the fact that it
keeps going on getting worse."

He has suggestions. "Instead of closing all those army bases," Mr. Reed said,
"why not keep the army at its present level and use them: build roads, clean up
cities, patrol things. They don't have to be there for just wartime things."

With his pessimism about the state of the world, what keeps his hopes up? "I
just bought a really great guitar," he replied, his tone brightening as he
described his new Danny Gatton model Telecaster. He is also considering a Velvet
Underground reunion; over the last year, he has performed with the group's other
original members in New York and Europe.

Although he's now 48, Lou Reed said the thrill of music hasn't gone away. "When
you're out there and all of a sudden something goes right in the playing, then
you know why you're doing it," he said. "You're doing it because it's so
beautiful."

Trust a Musician

Mr. Reed is just two years older than Mr. Clinton but he brushes aside notions
of a generational bond. "I have no idea," he said. "I don't know him. I didn't
see him play saxophone but if he could play like Boots Randolph" -- a Nashville
studio musician who had the hit "Yakety Sax" -- "that would be fine.

"I think your hopes can go up a little bit if someone plays a musical
instrument, although I'm sure we'll find out Hitler played something. Oh, that's
right, he painted."

There will be politicians close enough to buttonhole at the inaugural party in
Washington; what would Mr. Reed tell them? "A big guy doesn't have to beat up a
little guy," he said after a pause.

"Just because you've been abused and had a rough time, that doesn't mean that
when you get power, you have to beat up on the guy under you. There's a more
humane and better way of doing it, to learn about it and to realize, now that
you've got it, don't abuse it."

Has he been impressed by any political figures? "Vaclav Havel," Mr. Reed
replied. "To see a political leader who was a wonderful poet and playwright, and
who had wonderful ideas about how to run a country, was an amazing thing."

The admiration could be mutual. Mr. Havel was active in the Czechoslovak human
rights movement, Charter 77, which grew out of the trial of the Plastic People
of the Universe, a group weaned on Frank Zappa and the Velvet Underground.
(Czechoslovakia's "Velvet Revolution" may have drawn its name from Mr. Reed's
band.) Yet Mr. Havel was a rarity, an artist running a government.

At the time of the conversation, Lou Reed hadn't settled on his song list for
Washington. Two possibilities, typically clear-eyed and bleak, were "Dirty
Blvd.," about a boy living in a welfare hotel, and "Xmas in February," about a
disabled Vietnam veteran. Another was "One for My Baby," which he recorded with
Rob Wasserman, the bassist who's backing both him and Bob Weir (of the Grateful
Dead) at the Tennessee Ball. The song is a pop standard, one of Frank Sinatra's
staples.

"Maybe we'll do the Frank Sinatra thing," he said. "After all, Frank won't be
able to make this gig."

NAME: Lou Reed

LOAD-DATE: January 17, 1993

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo: Lou Reed in a Manhattan hotel last week. (Philip Greenberg for
The New York Times)

TYPE: Biography

                   Copyright 1993 The New York Times Company

                              55 of 255 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 January 17, 1993, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

THE NEW PRESIDENCY: THE BOOMERS' BALL;
Clinton's Musical Taste Stops in the Carter Era

BYLINE: By Maureen Dowd and Frank Rich,  Special to The New York Times

SECTION: Section 1; Page 18; Column 1; National Desk

LENGTH: 1232 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, Jan. 16


There has been a lot of loud talk this week about Bill Clinton slip-sliding away
from his campaign promises. But on one major issue, he has drawn a line in the
sand: His taste in pop culture.

When asked the other day what slogan he would have on his desk in the Oval
Office, the President-elect made it clear that the buck stopped in 1977. His
sign, he said, would read: "Don't Stop Thinking About Tomorrow."

During the campaign, Mr. Clinton's young aides fretted constantly about how to
get him to switch from the Fleetwood Mac anthem to something more, well, hip.
Even Christine McVie, one of the singers in the band that is reuniting for Mr.
Clinton's sake at the inauguration, told a television interviewer that she
viewed the song as one that might be more appropriate as a commercial jingle for
an insurance company.

But this President-elect, who paid permanent tribute to the Judy Collins hit,
"Chelsea Morning," by naming his only child after it, is not the sort of man who
cuts and runs when he is under pressure from hip-hop lobbyists and other
cultural elitists.

"As of yet, I haven't heard about a grunge version of 'Chelsea Morning' coming
out," said Judy McGrath, the creative director of MTV, the music channel that is
putting on the hottest inaugural ball on Wednesday night.

Americans will be raptly watching the Clinton inauguration this week not only to
hear the new President's plans (and possibly find out what happened to the
middle-class tax cut), but also to get a sense of the cultural style of the next
White House.

In the campaign, Bill Clinton and Al Gore promoted themselves as the cool,
baby-boom generation alternative to George Bush, a 60-something President whose
idea of a cutting-edge cultural event at the White House was a visit by
Siegfried and Roy, the Las Vegas lion tamers or the actress Bo Derek, the former
"10."

While Mr. Bush resisted talking with MTV until the end of the campaign, saying
he did not want to be seen as a "teeny-bopper," Mr. Clinton happily gave an MTV
interview ("Wow, this set is cool," he told the producers) and jazzed up his
faltering campaign with saxophone gigs and Elvis imitations.

Now, perhaps because he hyped the hip, the small but hardy band of Washington
cultural pundits have not waited for the curtain to go up before pouncing on
"Elvis" Clinton and the self-professed "Deadhead," Al Gore, who has been posing
in a tie designed by Jerry Garcia, the Grateful Dead guitarist.

"It turns out that philistinism is a bipartisan phenomenon," Leon Wieseltier,
the cultural editor of The New Republic, wrote this week. "Sensitive souls were
shaken a few months ago to learn that Clinton's favorite musician is Kenny G."
He said Maya Angelou, the inauguration poet, is no Robert Frost, calling her "a
cross between Rod McKuen and Maxine Waters."

And it is not only the highbrows who are grumbling. Commenting on Mr. Clinton's
musical taste, the savants of "Wayne's World" on "Saturday Night Live"
patronizingly informed the President-elect, "It's the 90's."

When a Park Service guard at the Lincoln Memorial on Friday night told Joan
Yoshiwara, a 40-year-old visitor from Honolulu, that she had just missed the
rehearsal for the Sunday musical gala at the monument, Ms. Yoshiwara asked who
would be performing.

With awe in his voice, the guard reeled off a litany including Kenny Rogers,
Tony Bennett, Diana Ross and Michael Bolton. Ms. Yoshiwara, who would rather
have heard some inaugural rap by Arrested Development or Naughty by Nature,
complained that the music was in the "dinosaur" category. "Yeah, right, very
hip," she said, rolling her eyes.

Certainly, Mr. Clinton, who plays Dave Brubeck and reminisces about taking
college dates to Ray Charles concerts, is way ahead of his idol, John F.
Kennedy. Jacqueline Kennedy once said that the only music her husband liked was
"Hail to the Chief."

But despite all the talk about the New Generation by the first political ticket
who came of age with anti-establishment rock and roll in the 60's, there is a
sneaking suspicion that this White House will comprise the sort of grinds who
stayed in the library studying when the entire campus emptied out for a concert
by Jimi Hendrix or The Doors.

"Maybe Hillary had a collection of 45's, but I bet she had a lot of Cowsills in
there," said Robert Morton, the producer of "Late Night With David Letterman."

Tom Baer, one of the entertainment producers for the inaugural festivities, was
more diplomatic. Asked what generation Mr. Clinton represented, he replied,
"Those in their mid-40's to early 50's."

Mr. Clinton's cultural sensibility mirrors his political style, which aims at
all costs not to offend and obsessively seeks consensus and the middle road. The
inaugural tone, cool by compromise and hip by committee, is the cultural version
of Mr. Clinton's famous "I never inhaled" quote, with the angrier edge of the
Vietnam War era music sanded down.

"Maybe in his secret heart he really likes Cream," said Ms. McGrath of MTV. "But
he will not have 'Sunshine of Your Love' as the backdrop of the inaugural ball."

Mr. Clinton's politics of inclusion extends to music, as long as the selections
do not push the envelope of Lite FM or VH-1. "The Clintons' and Gores' musical
tastes run from classical to pop with everything else in between," said Harry
Thomason, the Hollywood producer from Arkansas who is running the inaugural
show.

Ms. McGrath said she had made some concessions to this easy listening style for
the MTV ball. In addition to bands like Boyz II Men and 10,000 Maniacs for
younger guests, MTV has arranged for Roger Clinton, the Presidential brother, to
sing with En Vogue, and for Don Henley to dedicate a song to Bill Clinton from
"his era," as the 39-year-old Ms. McGrath delicately refers to it.

"Don Henley's thinking of doing a song called 'Dirty Laundry,' " Ms. McGrath
said. She added that the MTV viewers, who once loved George and Barbara Bush for
being parental, would be uncomfortable if the Clintons invited Diggable Planets
and Pearl Jam to play in the East Room.

"I really think it's a relief to them that he's not hip," she said.

Brandon Tartikoff, who recently resigned as chairman of Paramount Pictures and
once ran programming at NBC, agreed: "When your parents say they like something,
it's not yours anymore. It's too accepted."

He predicts that one likely cultural legacy of the Clinton Administration would
be a television series about Socks, the family cat. "We won't be seeing a
Hillary show following 'Murphy Brown,' " he said. "Someone will rip off Socks
before they rip off Bill and Hillary because Socks is easier to understand."

All cultural observers seem to share the opinion that the time has come for Mr.
Clinton to retire his overdependence on Elvis imagery.

Even Andrew Bergman, the screenwriter who gave every Elvis impersonator in
Hollywood a job in his recent film, "Honeymoon in Vegas," feels Elvis must rest
in peace. "I don't think Clinton is going to go any further with it," he said.
"After the Elvis stamp and the impersonator in the inaugural parade, that's it."

Don Imus, the New York radio talk-show host who gave Mr. Clinton a chance to
loosen up and show off his cultural side during the campaign, has also had his
fill. "We've pretty much had it with Elvis," he said. "I mean he is dead. He
really is dead."

LOAD-DATE: January 17, 1993

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photos: Judy Collins, whose song "Chelsea Morning" inspired the
Clintons' name for their daughter. (The New York Times); Don Henley plans to
dedicate a song to Bill Clinton from "his era" during the Inaugural Ball. (Gary
Gershoff/Retna)

                   Copyright 1993 The New York Times Company

                              56 of 255 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 January 17, 1993, Sunday, Late Edition - Final
                              Correction Appended

For Weapons Makers, a Time to Deal

BYLINE: By CALVIN SIMS

SECTION: Section 3; Page 1; Column 2; Financial Desk

LENGTH: 2148 words

DATELINE: LOS ANGELES


Last spring, the Air Force warned the three major contractors for the F-22 jet
fighter -- General Dynamics, Lockheed and Boeing -- that if costs continued to
escalate, the program could be drastically scaled back or even canceled as part
of the Pentagon's deep budget cuts.

Predicting that there wasn't room for three F-22 contractors in a shrinking
weapons market, General Dynamics offered to buy Lockheed's majority share of the
program. But Lockheed refused to sell, saying that the F-22 was crucial to its
aeronautics business.

Then Lockheed, also leery of the industry's overcapacity, made a counteroffer
for General Dynamics's stake. Last month, the two struck a deal for Lockheed to
acquire General Dynamics's entire military aircraft division for $1.53 billion.

The deal was hardly an anomaly. After years of cutbacks and now the end of the
cold war, the military industry seems to be galloping toward consolidation.

The marching order is to concentrate on areas of strength and ditch the rest.
For some, like the General Dynamics Corporation, that means abandoning markets
in which they can be only marginal players. For others, like the Lockheed
Corporation and the Martin Marietta Corporation, it means big purchases in areas
they can dominate. While still others, like the Grumman Corporation, are taking
a wait-and-see attitude, those that will survive and thrive must move quickly or
else risk being left behind, weapons industry executives and other experts say.

The shift is sure to have broad implications not only for the shareholders and
employees of the nation's 9,000 primary military suppliers but also for the
economy. Weapons companies account for about 3 percent of the gross national
product, employ slightly more than three million workers and perform critical
research and development. Even if the consolidations are handled well, they
promise painful dislocations at a time when the economy is still struggling to
emerge from the recession. The impact will be felt most heavily here in southern
California and in Texas and other states where there is a high concentration of
weapons producers.

The shift has already resulted in a string of big deals, the largest being
Martin Marietta's purchase in November of the General Electric Company's
aerospace electronics division for $3 billion.

Picking Up Steam

As the Clinton Administration takes office this week, it brings with it the
promise of a more directed focus on deficit reduction that could further
diminish the military budget and in turn accelerate the consolidation.

Indeed, according to a recent study by the management consultant firm Booz,
Allen & Hamilton, between 75 and 80 percent of existing weapons contractors
could be swallowed up by more aggressive industry leaders or simply leave the
market by the end of the decade.

"Defense contractors have three options: becoming the very best in a specific
area through acquisitions, selling off their overcapacity or simply shutting it
down," said Ronald W. Stahlschmidt, an aerospace and defense industry analyst
for Ernst & Young. "Waiting for the clouds to clear is not the way to weather
this storm. This will not pass. It is a permanent resizing and reshaping of the
industry."

Just how big a reshaping can be seen from the magnitude of the budget cuts.
Government spending for military supplies -- everything from uniforms to
aircraft carriers -- has declined 22 percent, to $161 billion in 1992 from a
high of $206 billion in 1987, according to the Defense Budget Project, a
Washington-based research group.

That has resulted in the loss of some 315,000 jobs in the industry, nearly 10
percent of the total. More job losses seem inevitable, given that spending is
expected to drop to $133 billion by 1997 under the latest projections.

In the past, most contractors adapted to cutbacks by increasing foreign sales
and converting to commercial work. But while foreign sales have been rising in
recent years, they are not expected to offset the steep budget-cutting. In
addition, American contractors face increasing competition abroad from foreign
suppliers.

So far, conversion from weapons to commercial production is not occurring on a
major scale, and many analysts say it may never happen. This is partly because
attempts at conversion failed after the Vietnam War, and many contractors are
now avoiding them altogether. Those who are attempting them are finding that
opportunities for making consumer products are few in a weak economy.

That makes it increasingly important for companies to consolidate, industry
experts say. Those who move first stand to benefit the most because they can
select the best deals at the best prices.

"If you don't do anything, you can quickly move from a No. 1 position to a No. 3
or 4 position in a given market," said John R. Harbison, vice president for
aerospace at Booz Allen Hamilton. For example, Mr. Harbison cites the Hughes
Aircraft Company's acquisition of General Dynamics's missile division last year.
The deal suddenly put Hughes on an equal footing with the Raytheon Company,
which had been the leader.

"If you are Raytheon and suddenly overnight you are no longer the biggest guy in
tactical missiles because of a consolidation, you are going to be more than a
little concerned and then go out and try to acquire someone else," Mr. Harbison
said. "And hopefully there's still someone left to buy." (In fact, Raytheon did
make a run at the missile unit of the LTV Corporation, but lost out to the Loral
Corporation last August.)

What do buyers look for? Among other things, complementary operations for
existing programs and technical skill to develop new ones.

But once a contractor acquires a new business, there is still the challenge of
successfully integrating it into the rest of the company.

"Simply acquiring more assets is not enough," said Jerrold T. Lundquist, a vice
president at McKinsey & Company, the management consultants. "The real task is
making the asset an integral part of the company and not just transferring
capacity."

Notwithstanding the push toward consolidation, there are obstacles, a big one
being the Federal Trade Commission. Just last month, Alliant Techsystems called
off its acquisition of the Olin Corporation's ammunition business when the
F.T.C. threatened to file an antitrust suit. The F.T.C. contended that since the
merger would leave the company as the sole supplier of some types of tank
ammunition, the cost to the Government would increase.

Some industry experts oppose the F.T.C.'s interference in such situations,
arguing that the Pentagon has full access to suppliers' costs and, as the sole
customer, could closely regulate the price.

But Mary Lou Steptoe, director of the F.T.C.'s competition bureau, said the
Government has found that some agencies overseeing military contracts lack the
sophistication and personnel to protect against overcharges when there is only
one supplier.

Another cautionary note relates to the weak economy. Though the rate of weapons
consolidation is expected to increase during the Clinton Administration, many
industry watchers predict that the new President will wait for the economy to
improve before undertaking more extensive cuts.

"The prudent man at this juncture will wait a little bit until he sees just how
the Clinton budget unfolds," said Richard Bitzinger, an analyst for the Defense
Budget Project. "It would be highly unfortunate to buy something big and then
see the Administration cancel its programs."

What follows are three starkly different approaches to the changes now reshaping
the military industry.

Buy, Buy, Buy:
Marietta, Lockheed

"Our strategy is to win more than our fair share of aerospace business through
acquisitions and focusing on future technology," said Charles Manor, a Martin
Marietta spokesman.

That was the underpinning for the largest acquisition last year, Martin
Marietta's purchase of G.E.'s aerospace electronics business. G.E. has announced
a strategy of remaining only in businesses where it can lead and the deal allows
it to leave the electronics market where it faced limited growth. By contrast,
Martin Marietta is now poised to become the nation's premiere aerospace
electronics supplier.

Analysts have speculated that future weapons systems will integrate land and sea
radar, which the G.E. aerospace operation specialized in, with advanced sensing
systems, which has been Marietta's forte.

Market dominance and synergies are also expected to come from the
Lockheed-General Dynamics military aircraft deal. The merger of the two
divisions is expected to reduce overhead costs, bring together technical
expertise that would ultimately produce more advanced aircraft, and generate
enough revenues to make Lockheed the market leader.

"We first had to define what area we wanted to concentrate in and then this
great opportunity came along so we took advantage of it," said Vince Marafino,
Lockheed's vice chairman.

Wait and See:
Grumman, McDonnell

Some contractors, like Grumman and the McDonnell Douglas Corporation, have taken
a much more cautious approach toward consolidation, deciding first to
restructure internally and divest smaller assets before taking any giant steps.

Grumman, based in Bethpage, L.I., announced in November that it would combine
its aircraft, space and electronics groups to cut costs and become more
competitive. Most of its aircraft programs are being phased out or are modest in
size and in recent years the contractor has been shrinking its production
capacity as its contracts near their end, producing erratic earnings.

Nonetheless, Grumman, which also makes space systems and commercial aircraft
components, has about $250 million in cash and little debt.

"We don't feel that we are under any immediate pressure to acquire or sell
something," said Robert P. Harwood, Grumman's vice president for public affairs.
"We are more optimistic about certain segments of the industry than are others.
If you run out and buy just anything you could be getting a pig in a poke."

Still, Mr. Harwood said that Grumman is looking for acquisitions, especially in
the radar-surveillance and information integration fields, which he said the
company expects to grow.

But analysts said that companies like Grumman and McDonnell Douglas, which have
a wide variety of weapons programs, are overexposed and should focus on a few
businesses and shed the rest.

McDonnell Douglas, the nation's largest military contractor, announced a huge
restructuring last year to consolidate operations and cut costs. In a separate
move, it sold its international information systems and visual simulation
businesses.

But the St. Louis-based contractor is struggling as some of its largest
production programs face cancellation in the next few years. McDonnell has also
been unable to remain competitive with its rivals in the commercial aircraft
industry -- the Boeing Company and Airbus Industrie, the European consortium --
which have kept their manufacturing costs lower than McDonnell's.

Analysts expect McDonnell to shed more assets to obtain much-needed cash to
buttress the troubled commercial end of its business.

Sell, Sell, Sell:
General Dynamics

A year ago, General Dynamics announced a new strategy that has become the mode
of operation for the majority of companies in the industry. Faced with declining
orders, the St. Louis-based contractor said that it would divest itself of all
businesses except its four core operations -- aircraft, tank, space-launch
vehicles and shipbuilding, where it hoped to remain dominant or become so.

So far, General Dynamics has sold $1.3 billion of "nonessential" businesses,
including missile systems and Cessna Aircraft. But the contractor also sold its
military aircraft division to Lockheed, a move that has led some analysts to
speculate that General Dynamics sees little future in the weapons business as a
whole and is liquidating.

Company executives deny that they are cashing out. They add, however, that they
are now willing to sell core businesses because in some instances they cannot
acquire operations from other contractors that would strengthen those areas.

The asset sales have produced a mountain of cash that General Dynamics is using
in part to reduce debt. It is also returning some of the money to shareholders,
in the form of higher dividends and stock buybacks.

General Dynamics is still seeking acquisitions to bolster its three remaining
product lines, said James J. Cunnane, a senior vice president, but the company
will not pay a premium for them.

"The smaller, weaker, more peripheral players in this industry will probably go
under. We didn't want to be one of them," Mr. Cunnane said. "There will be a
General Dynamics 5 or 10 years from now, but it's hard to say what it will look
like."

LOAD-DATE: January 17, 1993

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

CORRECTION-DATE: January 24, 1993, Sunday

CORRECTION:

A chart last week with an article about weapons makers referred incompletely to
the military operations that the General Electric Company recently agreed to
sell. In addition to aircraft electronics, G.E. agreed to sell businesses listed
under these chart headings: space systems, Strategic Defense Initiative, other
electronics, other weapons, training/simulation and military services.


GRAPHIC: Tables: "Leading Military Contractors: Who's Strong Where," lists
leading U.S military contractors, indicating areas in which they are involved
and extent each area is part of their business (Source: Analysts' estimates
based on data from Department of Defense and company reports); "Top
Contractors," lists top military contractors in U.S., ranked by estimated 1992
military sales. (Source: C.J. Lawrence); "Biggest Deals of 1992," lists major
lines of military-related business that changed hands, or nearly changed hands,
among major contractors in 1992 (pg. 6)

Photos of military equipment (pg. 6)

Drawing (pg. 1)

                   Copyright 1993 The New York Times Company

                              57 of 255 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 January 17, 1993, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

Writer Finds Bearings, and Success

BYLINE: By RICHARD JAY SCHOLEM

SECTION: Section 13LI; Page 15; Column 1; Long Island Weekly Desk

LENGTH: 1272 words


SEAN M'GRADY of Northport was a 20-year-old junior at Yale when he wrote his
first novel, "Rock Lyric," a coming-of-age story about high school life.

The publisher whom Mr. McGrady hoped would buy the book called at 7 o'clock one
morning and said he wanted to meet at noon at Morey's in New Haven. Mr. McGrady
put on his blue blazer and university tie and told his college friends that he
had been discovered and that his first novel was going to be published.

When he arrived at the appointed time and place, it was raining. The publisher
was waiting for him outside Morey's, where he had a luncheon appointment with
someone else. He told the would-be author that he was not interested in the
book, but wanted to return the manuscript personally.

With that he tossed the packet of papers to Mr. McGrady. It landed in a puddle
at his feet. That was Mr. McGrady's most crushing rejection, the first of many,
and he had learned something that everyone who writes for a living has to know,
that rejection is a writer's life.

Mr. McGrady is now 33, and his book, "Dead Letters," is in bookstores across the
country. The movie and foreign rights to the mystery thriller are being
negotiated.

Even before his contract to write a second book had been filled, his publisher,
Pocket Books, a division of Simon & Schuster, signed him to write a third and
fourth.

'They Were Rave Rejections'

In the decade between his Yale days and the publishing of "Dead Letters," Mr.
McGrady, who grew up on Eatons Neck, had written six novels, all of which were
rejected. But, he said, "they were rave rejections." Comments like "brilliant
writer" and "better than most of the people we publish" were common on the
returned manuscripts.

Mr. McGrady knew he would still be unpublished and unknown, he said, were it not
for straight talk from an editor and a wager that he made with his wife and
father.

After reading a number of Mr. McGrady's books, the editor at Putnam Publishing
invited him to lunch. She told him, he recounted, " 'You're a great writer, but
you can write forever and never get published, because you're not doing what we
want. We need saleable plots, commercial plots. You have to write a book the
reader is going to be interested in."

His father, Mike McGrady, a former columnist for Newsday and fiction writer, had
been telling him the same thing for years. When he heard about the editor's
comments, Mike McGrady joined forces with his son's wife, Ingebjorg, and bet him
that he could not write a best-seller. Shortly thereafter a plot outline for
"Dead Letters" emerged from ideas discussed by Sean McGrady, his father and
friends at a dinner party.

Mr. McGrady wrote the 229-page book in three months and gave it to his father,
whose reaction was swift and enthusiastic, "Sean," he said, "you're going to
sell this right away and have to keep writing more. You will probably end up
writing 100 of them."

Two of the 100 are done. The second, "Gloom of Night," is completed and will
soon be printed, and Mr. McGrady is working on his third book, "Sealed With a
Kiss." The fourth and final book under his current contract will be called "Town
Without a ZIP."

All four books are part of a series that features a postal inspector, Lieut.
Eamon Wearie. In "Dead Letters," Lieutenant Wearie finds a grisly photograph in
Depot 349, the final destination for undeliverable mail. The picture puts him
and his partner, Bunko, on the trail of the "executioner" who has been
kidnapping, torturing and killing boys.

Although the book is packaged and promoted as a mystery thriller and as a
page-turner, Mr. McGrady said, "I wanted to see how good I could make it and
still get it published. I asked myself, 'What can I get away with?' "

Mr. McGrady sees "Dead Letters" as a novel about "the crimped sexuality of
America, about the hidden sexual secrets of Americans."

"We wear American flags in our lapels and go to church but are the most
un-Christian of people," he said.  "America's serial killers can be explained by
looking into our society."

His novel has thrust him into a new world of literary agents, money, security,
audio cassettes and letters from strangers. But "Dead Letters" is the end of an
often frustrating quest as much as the beginning of a young writer's career.
Even before Northport High School and Yale, there were his father's example,
influence and inspiration.

Third-Grade Compositions

Mike McGrady, who wrote "A Dove in Vietnam," "Ordeal, the Linda Lovelace Story,"
"The Kitchen Sink Papers," "My Life as a House Husband," and was a co-author of
the best-seller "Naked Came the Stranger," was continually asking his son, "What
do you want to say?"

He red-penciled the boy's compositions as early as the third grade, and he
displayed the self-discipline to go to an office, with no boss, to write every
day. Most of all, Mike McGrady believed in his son and told him so.

When Sean McGrady was reeling from the brutal rejection of "Rock Lyric," his
father said, as he would many times over the years: "It doesn't matter at all.
They just don't get it."

"That attitude helped a lot," Sean McGrady said.

So did the 10 years that followed, his second and final dropping out from Yale.
Mr. McGrady used that time to work, write, wander and experience life. "I wanted
to know what was out there," he recalled. For a year, he was a caretaker at a
villa in southern France, where he "pretended to write a novel, drank a lot of
wine and chased French girls."

On returning to Long Island, he met Ingebjorg Amlid, a Norwegian au pair, who
was walking down Main Street in Northport. The two began talking and did not
stop until the next morning. Six months later they were married, and Mr. McGrady
settled down to the first of a few so-called regular jobs.

Gung-Ho Sales Manager

He became director of public relations for the old New York Arrows soccer team.
He ran the press box, traveled with the team, drank too much and hated his life.
At a staff meeting, a new gung-ho sales manager symbolically passed a chain
around, asking each person what came to mind. He received predictable answers
like unity and a chain is only as strong as its weakest link. Mr. McGrady said
prison. The next day he was dismissed.

Even worse was his experience at a large public-relations business in Manhattan.
"I put on a suit and tie, drank martinis, talked about deals, raises and
promotions and lived a life of privilege and mediocre work," he recounted. "I
was never more successful and never more miserable. The best fiction I wrote was
my expense account."

Mr. McGrady took much less money to become the editor of Good Life magazine in
Greenport. While living in a $300-a-month house, he began "to write and drink
seriously." But his lowest point came during a year of writing in a slum
apartment in Baltimore, complete with mice, brown drinking water and drug
trafficking across the street.

Two-Book Contract

He returned to Northport, broke and still unpublished. For two years he and his
wife lived with his parents. He wrote in his boyhood bedroom and lived with the
shame and embarrassment of failure.

Three years ago, while Pocket Books was discharging other writers, they signed
him to a two-book contract for "Dead Letters" and a follow-up novel. Everything
changed. For the first time in a decade, Mr. McGrady felt good about himself.
The money he is earning from the Eamon Wearie series has given him the
opportunity to write other novels, as well. Now he says, with conviction and
optimism, "I'm doing this and staying with it no matter what."

LOAD-DATE: January 17, 1993

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo: Sean McGrady, writer of "Dead Letters."

                   Copyright 1993 The New York Times Company

                              58 of 255 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 January 17, 1993, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

From Thunderbird to Hawk to Dove

BYLINE: By John Lewis Gaddis;  John Lewis Gaddis is the Harmsworth Professor of
American History at Oxford University this year. His most recent book is "The
United States and the End of the Cold War."

SECTION: Section 7; Page 26; Column 1; Book Review Desk

LENGTH: 1569 words



PROMISE AND POWER
The Life and Times of Robert McNamara.
By Deborah Shapley.
Illustrated. 734 pp. Boston:
Little, Brown & Company. $29.95.

Robert S. McNamara has not exactly made things easy for his biographers. Mr. Mc
Namara rose within the Ford Motor Company to become its president -- briefly --
in 1960, but by that time he had already emerged as a sharp critic of the
corporate culture that nurtured him. As John F. Kennedy's Secretary of Defense,
Mr. McNamara developed a reputation for possessing a steely, computerlike mind
that seemed to feed on and disgorge statistics; and yet that same Mr. McNamara
was emotionally fragile, capable of breaking down in tears -- to his own intense
embarrassment -- on public occasions. Although he quickly discovered that
Kennedy's 1960 campaign allegations of a "missile gap" had been exaggerated, he
presided over a significant buildup in American nuclear weapons and delivery
systems during the early 1960's, which may well have provoked the Soviet Union
into following suit. Now he claims that he regarded nuclear weapons as unusable
all along, and that he so advised the Presidents he served.

More than anyone else apart from President Lyndon B. Johnson himself, Mr.
McNamara bears responsibility for the escalation, and ultimately for the
failure, of the American military effort in Vietnam. Almost alone among Johnson
Administration officials, however, he has made no attempt, until now, to explain
or defend his decisions. Mr. McNamara chose instead a kind of silent penance at
the World Bank, which he ran for 13 years -- as if by saving lives in the third
world he could somehow compensate for the lives lost in Indochina.

Mr. McNamara has written no memoir, and apparently intends none. He has been
content to let the historians sort all of these issues out; but as Deborah
Shapley, a Washington journalist and the co-author of a book on American
technology, comments in the most comprehensive biography of Mr. McNamara to
date, what this has really meant is, "Let the historians sort me out."

Ms. Shapley has bravely undertaken this task in "Promise and Power," and has
even managed to elicit a certain amount of cooperation from Mr. McNamara, who
with some reluctance made himself available for interviews. She has consulted
Mr. McNamara's family, friends and associates, few of whom have been as
reluctant to talk as he himself is. And she has used declassified documents to
supplement her account, confronting Mr. McNamara with them directly when they
seemed to contradict what he had told her.

The result is the best study of Mr. McNamara yet available, especially for what
it tells us about his upbringing, his family life, his years at Ford and the
World Bank, and his role in shaping the war in Vietnam. It is nonetheless an
unsatisfying biography, because Ms. Shapley herself often seems unsure what to
make of her subject.

The difficulty she faces, as any biographer of Mr. McNamara must, is to explain
the contradictions that have been so striking a feature of his public life. How
was it possible for the same man to be both a corporate success and a corporate
critic? To be a number cruncher and a sentimentalist? To build up, but also to
abhor, America's nuclear weapons arsenal? To be a hawk and then a dove on
Vietnam?

One explanation, to which Ms. Shapley returns repeatedly throughout the book, is
that Mr. McNamara may simply be a liar: that he habitually told those he most
wanted to impress what he thought they most wanted to hear. Having thereby
satisfied his bosses at Ford, or the Presidents for whom he worked, or the
scholars who will ultimately determine his historical reputation, he then went
on, she suggests, to believe his own falsehoods, passionately and with utter
conviction.

Ms. Shapley does indeed catch Mr. McNamara in a number of instances in which he
appears to have been less than candid. Examples include his flat denial to
reporters that there were Soviet missiles in Cuba just days before Kennedy
announced that fact in October 1962; his failure to inform Congress of
difficulties in developing the TFX fighter plane; and his upbeat public
portrayal of the war in Vietnam, when he knew it was going badly. But she
provides no standard against which we can judge what she calls these "tactically
useful fibs." Did Mr. McNamara employ them more frequently than other public
figures do? To what extent were they really tactical, which implies deliberate
intent, and to what extent did they reflect the malleability of memory,
something that afflicts even those not particularly concerned with how they will
be remembered? Since Ms. Shapley so strongly emphasizes Mr. McNamara's alleged
habit of prevarication, she owes her readers a more thorough discussion of these
issues than she provides.

There is another possible explanation for Mr. McNamara's inconsistencies over
the years, however, and although Ms. Shapley offers considerable evidence for
it, she does not fully develop it. It is that, in contrast to many figures in
public life, Mr. McNamara may actually have learned on the job. Top officials
usually take up their responsibilities with their positions on the issues more
or less in place; it is unusual for them to alter those views while in office,
and even rarer for them to admit to having done so.

But as Ms. Shapley points out, Mr. McNamara became a public figure almost
overnight. Thrust abruptly from the insular environment of Detroit into the
Pentagon and often the Oval Office, he had no time to evolve or to season his
views, but rather had to devise them all at once. This he did, with all of the
energy and bluntness for which he became famous; but experience, together with
the wisdom it produces, had to be acquired along the way. Mr. McNamara's
inability to conceal his emotions insured that his educational process would be
a highly visible one.

This alternative explanation by no means diminishes Mr. McNamara's
responsibility for what happened on his watch. Ms. Shapley is right to note, at
the beginning of her book, that he "carries a large load, indeed." But to
explain Mr. McNamara's inconsistencies in terms of a propensity to lie may be to
miss a more interesting possibility: that he was that rare public servant who
was capable of reconsidering underlying assumptions and reversing course if
necessary, even while in office, and even at the price of appearing to be
inconsistent.

IF that is the case, though, why did Mr. McNamara support the war in Vietnam for
as long as he did? He now claims to have become convinced, as early as the end
of 1965, that the conflict was unwinnable; and yet he remained in office for
another two years, years in which his opposition to the war only gradually
became publicly known. Mr. McNamara's explanation to Ms. Shapley is that he
continued to hope throughout 1966 and 1967 that increasing military pressure
would bring the North Vietnamese to the conference table, even if a North
Vietnamese capitulation was nowhere in sight.

Ms. Shapley criticizes Mr. McNamara for not having left office and launched an
open protest against the war; no doubt his reputation among historians would be
a good deal higher if he had done so. Resignation in protest was not Mr.
McNamara's style, though, any more than it was for others of his generation who
were appalled by what their Government was doing, yet stayed on in Washington in
the belief that they could somehow alter the policies to which they objected.

But Ms. Shapley also acknowledges that Mr. Mc Namara did, in the end, accomplish
such an alteration. By quietly developing criticism of the Vietnam War effort
from within the Pentagon itself, he prepared the way for his successor, Clark
Clifford, to convince President Johnson early in 1968 that existing policies
were not working and would have to be changed. It is not easy to see how Mr.
McNamara could have achieved this result had he resigned earlier with a public
condemnation of Administration policies.

As this example of wanting to have it both ways suggests, Ms. Shapley's account
is not always as reflective as it might be. Her book also shows signs -- as do
so many others these days -- of hasty composition and superficial editing. Names
and titles are at times garbled, endnote citations are often imprecise, episodes
are recounted more than once and the writing itself is frequently slack.

Ms. Shapley occasionally leaves out important parts of the story as well. The
Kennedy Administration's October 1961 decision to expose the "missile gap" as
nonexistent -- an act many historians believe precipitated Nikita Khrushchev's
decision to place Soviet missiles in Cuba -- receives only an endnote. Ms.
Shapley's account of the missile crisis itself makes less than adequate use of
recent revelations about that event from both Russian and Cuban sources. Her
discussion of the Johnson Administration's decision to proceed with the
development of an antiballistic missile system in 1967 gives only cursory
attention to what precipitated that development: the Soviet deployment of a
comparable system around Moscow.

The fact that the puzzling but consistently intriguing figure that is Robert S.
McNamara remains elusive reflects, at least in part, the shortcomings of this
biography. But it also no doubt reflects Mr. Mc Namara's own -- perhaps
calculated -- intractability as a subject.

NAME: Robert S. McNamara

LOAD-DATE: January 17, 1993

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo: Secretary of Defense Robert S. McNamara, 1963. (George Tames/The
New York Times)

TYPE: Review; Biography

                   Copyright 1993 The New York Times Company

                              59 of 255 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 January 17, 1993, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

Auguries, Pieties And Scraps of Memory

BYLINE: By By Edmund Morris;  Edmund Morris won a Pulitzer Prize in 1980 for
"The Rise of Theodore Roosevelt." He is writing an authorized biography of
Ronald Reagan.

SECTION: Section 4; Page 17; Column 2; Editorial Desk

LENGTH: 1294 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON


I write these words on a winter's evening, looking west through a bay window at
the floodlit dome of the Capitol, about 400 yards away. Its shimmering symmetry
(rendered ethereal by the window's old glass, which makes it waver as though
reflected in water) is to me the most American of shapes. That pale bell first
imprinted itself on my mind when, as a boy in Nairobi, I browsed illustrated
books in the library of the United States Information Service and dreamed of
being able to walk in its environs, along with my bosom buddy Thomas Sawyer of
Hannibal, Mo.

The Capitol imprints itself still whenever I come into my study, never more
beautifully than at times like this, when the vast spiraling nation of which it
is the center begins to slow down and solidify around it, like some quadrennial
nebula gathering energy for fresh circuits and collisions.

The floodlights are so white tonight -- I think they're testing for Wednesday's
television exposure -- that I'm conscious of the dome even as I hunch over my
desk. Just now, for example, I was pondering the particles of the word
inaugurate and remembered that Shakespeare uses the word augur in his poem "The
Phoenix and the Turtle." I got out the text but was distracted in my search by
that lingering, translucent image, casting a wholly relevant reflection on his
invocatory verses. Of the upcoming ceremony one may indeed pray:

From this session interdict

Every fowl of tyrant wing

Save the eagle, feather'd king:

Keep the obsequy so strict.

My town house was built in 1905 -- just in time, perhaps, to observe the
inauguration of Theodore Roosevelt, who was sworn in on March 4. (In those days
transitions were even more ridiculously protracted than they are now.) As a
writer living in what amounts to an ivory tower -- or at least an off-white
walk-up -- I like to imagine myself seated here then, catching a few of T.R.'s
screechy remarks. It was a windy day, and he had to keep a tight hold of his
typescript. Who knows, the phrase "Power invariably means both responsibility
and danger" may have blown across the park and buffeted against these curving
panes.

For reasons I cannot figure out, the window refracts sound as well as light,
with equal capriciousness. At times a Presidential motorcade will speed by
almost silently, at others I can hear Chief Justice William Rehnquist sneeze as
he ambles pigeon-toed along the sidewalk to his chambers. Such selectivity, of
course, also characterizes historical memory. Maybe that's why some of the
inaugurations this house has witnessed will not replay here. I click my
viewfinder, and get only snow.

In the case of William Howard Taft's ceremony, however, the atmospherics are
genuine. A blizzard blanketed Washington that morning, so little could be heard
or seen of Big Bill, even though he was our most visible Chief Executive. (His
current namesake, after four years of state dinners au sauce bechamel, may well
challenge that record.)

What other scraps of pomp and circumstance waft this way, through space and
time? Massed bands thumping Calvin Coolidge up the Hill in 1925. I'm sure they
were noisy, because Cal was still awake when he got here. Herbert Hoover's
furious face in 1933 as he reluctantly crested the brow of the Hill in company
with Franklin D. Roosevelt. And F.D.R. about half an hour later, cranking
himself up to the microphones and plagiarizing Thoreau's plagiarism of a line
written by Montaigne in 1580: "The thing of which I have most fear is fear
itself" (For this scholarly information I am indebted to Ralph Keyes's new
quotation-corrector, "Nice Guys Finish Seventh.")

Whoever lived here on Jan. 22, 1961, and saw John F. Kennedy deliver his
inaugural, probably watched it through a rime of ice. I cannot imagine the event
in situ, because I so clearly remember being half a world away and listening as
that awkward nasal voice promised to "pay any price" and "bear any burden" in
behalf of the "survival and success of liberty." One hardly foresaw that these
alliterations would ultimately send 55,000 soldiers to death in Vietnam.
President Kennedy's words should be stenciled around the Oval Office in gilt
letters as a warning to future Presidents of the dangers of cute phraseology.

Richard Nixon was no slouch in the alliteration department either. He liked to
use plosives that drove his massive jowls apart, a la Dizzy Gillespie -- f's and
double f's and p's that popped every loudspeaker within earshot. As a result,
his 1969 address was the most pneumodynamic since T.R.'s. How the Capitol
pigeons must have risen when he huffed, "In these difficult years America has
suffered from a fever of words: from inflated rhetoric that postures instead of
persuading." Inflated is right!

This window saw nothing of Gerald R. Ford's inauguration, but then neither did
Jerry Ford. Jimmy Carter's oath-taking was the first, and let us hope the last,
to be profaned by a nickname -- can anyone imagine the Great Emancipator
intoning, "I, Abe Lincoln"?

Yet we must give Mr. Carter credit for staging a supreme piece of inaugural
choreography: his pas de deux hand-in-hand with Rosalynn, out among the
applauding crowd, in open air and sunshine on Pennsylvania Avenue. After the
armor-plated claustrophobia of the late 1960's and early 1970's, this was an
ecstatic moment. And as moments go, it went.

For sheer theater, however, nothing eclipsed Ronald Reagan's decision, in 1981,
to stage his inauguration on the other side of the Capitol. Like Davy Crockett
(or was it Fess Parker?) crossing the Appalachian Mountains, like Lincoln and
William McKinley returning home, like Grover Cleveland throwing open the great
Columbian Exposition of 1893 in Chicago, Mr. Reagan aligned himself toward the
West. No matter that the fugitive frontier which "explains American development"
had long since dissolved into the Pacific. He wanted to project his cheerful
pieties in the same symbolic direction -- and, not incidentally, give Yuri
Andropov a view of his back.

Alas for this house, the Reagan Realignment means that all future Presidents,
unless they are partial to parking lots, will take their oaths facing the same
way, over one of the world's great urban spaces. Whoever sits here after me and
wishes to experience something of the elation attending the election of
President M'Chege Hwange, or President Nguyen Nu, or even President Kathy McLane
(my intern of a few summers back, and a cinch for the White House), is going to
have to forsake this ivory tower and join the crowd further down the Hill.

On Wednesday, though, I think I'll stay put. Not that I don't wish Mr. Clinton
well -- who, knowing what confronts him, doesn't? When noon approaches I'll
stand close to the glass and hope to sense, if not see, something of that most
solemn of constitutional moments (too rapid for television, too silent for
radio), the transfer of power from one President to another. If the transfer is
also from party to party, then so much the better for democracy. Civilized
government requires that the bums be thrown out with some regularity.

This huge chimera floating over the trees (a mist like white samite is now
curling up and around) tempts all Americans to pose beneath it, hold up their
hands, and hope that a member of the judiciary will happen by. For at least one
day in the four years looming, let our mutual hostilities of rich and poor, male
against female, majority over minority, and regular versus decaf reconcile
themselves under the unity of this dome. Let us temporarily exult, as
Shakespeare did at the mutual embrace of Phoenix and Turtle:

How true a twain

Seemeth this concordant one!

Love hath reason, reason none,

If what parts can so remain.

LOAD-DATE: January 17, 1993

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Drawing

TYPE: Op-Ed

                   Copyright 1993 The New York Times Company

                              60 of 255 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 January 18, 1993, Monday, Late Edition - Final

Dr. King, Peaceful Disturber

SECTION: Section A; Page 16; Column 1; Editorial Desk

LENGTH: 423 words


A distorting revisionism threatens the memory of Dr. Martin Luther King Jr.,
whose 64th birthday Americans commemorate today.

In life, he was the passionate voice of a civil rights revolution, an apostle of
civil disobedience and speaker of uncomfortable truths to power. In memory, some
now cast him as the unthreatening "Moderate Alternative," an integrationist
whose nonviolence can be favorably contrasted to more militant strategies of
black empowerment.

To remember Dr. King this way denies his vitality and blurs his legacy for a new
generation of Americans.

Dr. King's nonviolence was militant, "nonaggressive physically but dynamically
aggressive spiritually," as he described it. He rejected the "negative peace" of
black subservience and demanded a true peace of brotherhood, justice and good
will. And he grasped early on the importance of psychological empowerment in the
struggle for civil rights. Hear him in 1957:

"This new self-respect and sense of dignity on the part of the Negro undermined
the South's negative peace, since the white man refused to accept the change.
The tension we are witnessing in race relations today can be explained in part
by this revolutionary change in the Negro's evaluation of himself and his
determination to struggle and sacrifice until the walls of segregation have been
fully crushed by the battering rams of justice."

His most famous speech, delivered 30 years ago this August, is known for its
soaring refrain -- "I have a dream" -- invoking a future of full racial equality
and justice that has yet to arrive.

But the same speech is also laden with urgent, uncompromising demands and
warnings: "We've come to cash this check . . . that will give us upon demand the
riches of freedom and the security of justice. . . .  We have . . . come . . .
to remind America of the fierce urgency of now. . . . There will be neither rest
nor tranquillity in America until the Negro is granted his citizenship rights."
Or in today's idiom: No justice. No peace.

Dr. King was more than a civil rights leader, more than a champion of black
America. He was a national moral resource, even if his personal life was
sometimes less than exemplary. He broke with the civil rights establishment to
oppose the Vietnam War. He died lending his support to a labor struggle by
Memphis sanitation workers.

His assassination at the age of 39 was a devastating national loss. Let him be
remembered as he was: a nonviolent revolutionary and a tireless fighter for
peace and racial justice.

LOAD-DATE: January 18, 1993

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Editorial

                   Copyright 1993 The New York Times Company

                              61 of 255 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 January 18, 1993, Monday, Late Edition - Final

Abroad at Home;
Clinton's Nightmare

BYLINE: By ANTHONY LEWIS

SECTION: Section A; Page 17; Column 5; Editorial Desk

LENGTH: 708 words


Bill Clinton wanted, and promised, to be a domestic President. But he is going
to take office facing the worst foreign-policy nightmares of any incoming
President since the time of Vietnam.

Serbia's savage aggression continues in Bosnia even as its leaders say they are
ready for peace. The siege of Sarajevo goes on, as do attacks elsewhere.
Instability threatens the whole Balkan region.

Serbian leaders moved toward accepting a settlement last week only because the
growing anger of Americans and Europeans -- and the approaching inauguration of
Mr. Clinton -- made outside military intervention seem imminent. It will take
immediate and determined pressure from Mr. Clinton to actually stop the fighting
and see that any settlement terms are kept.

Iraq is a major and menacing piece of unfinished business. The latest U.S. air
strikes seem unlikely to end Saddam Hussein's capacity, or his desire, for
provocation. Iran is buying and building weapons -- possibly including nuclear
weapons -- even as it finances the spread of its fundamentalist politics
elsewhere.

The Arab-Israel peace negotiations, so filled with hope, are stalled. Israel's
self-defeating response to Hamas terrorism, the expulsion of 400 suspected Hamas
leaders, has put at least the Palestinian talks on hold. There will have to be a
new push from Washington.

Russia is on the brink of economic and political disaster. A parliament stacked
with old Communists and conservative nationalists has hobbled economic reform.
Boris Yeltsin has lost his hold on public opinion. The country is sliding toward
a chaos that would devastate the hopes for democracy there and elsewhere.

Other former Soviet republics are in a state of growing misery and instability.
The most unfortunate is Armenia, beset by neighboring Azerbaijan, its fuel and
power supplies cut.

Japan's relations with the United States are the tensest in 40 years. Mr.
Clinton has been urged by fat cats of the U.S. auto industry to make up for
their failures by putting punitive tariffs on Japanese vehicles. What the new
President does will affect what is becoming this country's most crucial
relationship.

Then there is Somalia. Everyone recognizes now that if the American military
intervention ends abruptly, it will have done no good.

Somalia raises the larger question of how to handle political and humanitarian
disasters in the third world. Americans would like the United Nations to do
more, but that requires decisions on such questions as a standing U.N. military
force -- decisions on which the world will be looking to Mr. Clinton to lead.

To list some of those problems is to understand how questions of foreign policy
will press on the new President. It is also to understand something about
President Bush.

Mr. Bush made his claim to achievement as a President in foreign affairs. He
exulted in being on telephone terms with dozens of world leaders. His great
moment in the White House was the victory over Saddam Hussein.

But as he leaves, his record looks thin. He responded too late to the menace of
Saddam Hussein, feeding the tyrant until the moment of the Kuwait invasion, and
then failed to finish off Iraqi forces. He did not have the vision to understand
the stakes in Russia and Eastern Europe as they struggled for democracy and
market economies. He turned away from the horror of Serbian aggression. He
delayed acting in Somalia and gave the mission unrealistic limits.

The result is to have left a vacuum of leadership on issue after issue. And the
world will not wait. If it is to avoid widening armed conflict, trade war and
human misery, it must have leadership. And that can only come from Washington.

Mr. Clinton must do more than respond to the particular crises awaiting him. He
has to give us a general sense of where we are going, and why. In short, he has
to begin articulating a rationale for American foreign policy: a new vision to
replace the cliches of the cold war.

Explaining is important not just for its own sake but to give American policy
something it has too often lacked in recent years: political legitimacy. To be
effective in the long run, a President has to persuade Congress and the public
in foreign as in domestic affairs.

LOAD-DATE: January 18, 1993

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Op-Ed

                   Copyright 1993 The New York Times Company

                              62 of 255 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 January 18, 1993, Monday, Late Edition - Final

King's Light, Malcolm's Shadow

BYLINE: By Michael Eric Dyson;  Michael Eric Dyson is a professor of American
civilization and Afro-American studies at Brown University.

SECTION: Section A; Page 17; Column 1; Editorial Desk

LENGTH: 831 words

DATELINE: PROVIDENCE, R.I.


The renewed attention paid to Malcolm X's life and career often trades on the
assumption that he was the polar opposite of the Rev. Dr. Martin Luther King Jr.
Malcolm was open to armed black self-defense while King was nonviolent. True.
Malcolm blessed black rage, while King preached the virtues of Christian love.
True.

Most forcefully, Malcolm spoke the uncompromising truth about black America
while King, in Malcolm's words, was a "20th-century Uncle Tom" -- the "best
weapon that the white man" has ever had. Nothing could be further from the
truth.

Though Malcolm revised his views of King -- he later confessed that King's
movement was more "militant" than he initially believed -- some members of a
young black generation who claim Malcolm as an inspiration have failed to heed
his change of heart. In lecture halls across America, I encounter young blacks
who believe King was at best a moderate front for white interests.

Their perception that King was a sellout is rooted in two factors. First, it
reflects the continued influence of certain varieties of 60's black power and
black nationalist rhetoric, which often cast the debate about race in narrow,
dualistic terms. Either one was for black separatist racial strategies or one
was a pawn of white America. Sadly, this Manichaean perspective persists in
pockets of black America.

Second, the belief that King undermined black interests grows out of ignorance
about his intellectual growth. Awareness of his evolving thought has been
smothered beneath white attempts to make him a safe American hero (witness the
softening of his image in commemorative ads) and by attempts of some blacks to
portray him as a tool of an amorphous white power structure. Neither view is
true.

King began his career optimistic about the possibilities of erasing America's
racial problems. He believed that fundamental change would be achieved by
appealing to the consciences of white Americans. He was only partially correct.

He and his cohorts were largely successful, especially in the South where their
efforts were concentrated. Public accommodations and transportation were
desegregated, the Civil Rights Act was passed, the Voting Rights Bill was
signed, and Southern apartheid appeared banished.

But the golden era of King's hope quickly passed, especially after its peak in
the summer of 1963 when he forever etched into public memory the eloquent words
of his Washington "I have a dream" oration. After that summit of keen
expectation, his dream dramatically receded, particularly with the Watts riots
of 1965, when his doubts about the willingness of whites to work for a racially
just society greatly increased.

As King grew more suspicious of our nation's ability to change, his language
became more radical, his temperament less patient. Where before he spoke of
nonviolent civil disobedience, he began during the planning of the Poor People's
March on Washington to speak about "aggressive nonviolence," by which he meant
disrupting government and blocking roads during protests. By 1968, King said
America was a "sick, neurotic nation" in need of a "revolution of values." He
also became more critical of economic inequities, pointing out that America
practiced "socialism for the rich and free enterprise for the poor."

Ten days before his death, King argued before the convention of the Rabbinical
Assembly that "temporary segregation" -- the maintenance of certain exclusively
black schools and businesses, for example -- may be necessary to prevent the
loss of economic power that could result from complete integration.  And in the
last year of his life, King planned the Poor People's March, uniting poor
blacks, whites, Latinos and native Americans in a multiracial coalition that
sought to challenge the unfair distribution of wealth, employment and education.

King's later moral and economic principles put him on the outs with journalists
and officials, and he saw his popularity plummet before his assassination, at
age 39, in Memphis on April 4, 1968. In a January 1967 Gallup poll, King was no
longer regarded as one of America's 10 most admired men. Many whites disapproved
of his changed views, and many blacks resented the broadening of his moral
mission to include opposition to war.

The columnist Carl Rowan called King's stance on Vietnam a "tragic decision,"
while Whitney Young, then head of the National Urban League, rebuked King for
his position. King's scorching retort to Young was uncharacteristically blunt:
"Whitney, what you're saying may get you a foundation grant, but it won't get
you into the Kingdom of Truth."

Martin Luther King Jr. was a complex and flawed human being, a trumpet for moral
and social revolution whose own failures are by now well known. But no one who
lived, fought and died as he did can ever be accused of selling out black people
or compromising the principles of racial and economic justice. Like Malcolm X,
King deserves a second look.

LOAD-DATE: January 18, 1993

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Drawing.

TYPE: Op-Ed

                   Copyright 1993 The New York Times Company

                              63 of 255 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                January 19, 1993, Tuesday, Late Edition - Final

Criticized as Appeaser, Vance Defends His Role in Balkans

BYLINE: By DAVID BINDER,  Special to The New York Times

SECTION: Section A; Page 1; Column 4; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 1338 words

DATELINE: GENEVA, Jan. 18


On the eve of what he regards as a decisive moment in his five-month effort to
find a way to end the savage wars in Bosnia and Herzegovina, Cyrus R. Vance
finds himself for the first time in his life being sharply criticized for even
talking about peace.

Some of Mr. Vance's longstanding admirers are among those who say they are
dismayed at his willingness to deal with Serbian leaders in Yugoslavia and
Bosnia whom Secretary of State Lawrence S. Eagleburger has included on a list of
suspected war criminals. The underlying criticism is that Mr. Vance, in his
desire to find a solution, is appeasing the aggressors in Bosnia.

Some of those critical of Mr. Vance do not want to be identified out of respect
for the 75-year-old diplomat's long record of achievements in the Foreign
Service, including negotiations that averted a war over Cyprus in 1967, ended
America's involvement in Vietnam in 1973, ended white minority rule of Rhodesia
in 1978 and led to the Camp David Mideast peace accords in 1979.

Criticized by Brzezinski

But the French Foreign Minister, Roland Dumas, has criticized Mr. Vance's
positions in the Bosnia negotiations, and he was joined over the weekend by
Zbigniew Brzezinski, a colleague and eventual opponent of Mr. Vance when they
both served in the Carter Administration. Mr. Brzezinski was national security
adviser to Mr. Carter and Mr. Vance was his Secretary of State until he resigned
in April 1980.

In a commentary in The Washington Post on Sunday, Mr. Brzezinski accused Mr.
Vance and Lord Owen, the co-chairmen of a United Nations-European Community
negotiating team trying to forge a peace in the Balkans, of being "negotiators
whose basic concept of dealing with thugs is to talk endlessly while assuring
the aggressors that their use of force will not be matched by a counterforce."

"Not surprisingly," Mr. Brzezinski continued, "the result has been that mass
murders have been propitiated and 'ethnic cleansings,' not to speak of mass
rapes, tolerated."

In an interview today, Mr. Vance said the charges were "hogwash."

"If we refuse to talk, on so-called moral grounds, to all parties to a conflict,
how could we have ever settled any problem?" he said in clipped tones, hammering
the table with the tip of his pen in a rare moment of indignation and anger.

"Frankly I'm getting fed up with this mindless criticism that doesn't face up to
a central fact," he continued. "In Bosnia there is no viable alternative to a
negotiated settlement.

"What we must do is stop the fighting," he added, "and keep the humanitarian
effort going so that fewer people die."

Neville Chamberlain Analogy

In emphasizing the requirement to talk to "all parties," Mr. Vance was alluding
to Slobodan Milosevic, the president of Serbia, and Radovan Karadzic, leader of
the Bosnian Serbs, who are widely held to be the main instigators of the
fighting in Bosnia and who were included on Mr. Eagleburger's list of war-crime
suspects.

In the appeasement analogy promoted by columnists and editorial writers of
influential newspapers and magazines in the United States, Britain, France and
Germany, Mr. Milosevic is Hitler and Mr. Vance is Neville Chamberlain, replaying
the Western acceptance of Germany's swallowing of Czechoslovakia in 1938.

When Mr. Vance and Lord Owen, a former British Foreign Secretary, brought Mr.
Milosevic to join the peace talks on Jan. 11, the critics saw their darkest
suspicions confirmed.

But Mr. Vance said that Mr. Milosevic had been included, after nearly five
months' of keeping him at arm's length, because the Serbian leader had helped as
"a broker in the process that led to the Serb-Croat armistice," an accord worked
out by Mr. Vance a year ago that ended the fighting in Croatia.

Using Milosevic's Leverage

Mr. Vance also said he wished to use Mr. Milosevic's considerable leverage with
Dr. Karadzic to persuade the Bosnian Serbs to accede to a peace agreement.

This tactic produced a possible breakthrough last week when Dr. Karadzic agreed
to the peace plan after stiff warnings of punitive measures from Mr. Milosevic.
The Bosnian Serbs rely on Serbia for much of their food, clothing, weapons and
ammunition.

The Bosnian Serbs' parliament is to meet Tuesday to vote on whether to endorse
Dr. Karadzic's position.

The results are what count, Mr. Vance argued, and in any case he and Lord Owen
have repeatedly and publicly endorsed the proposal for an international tribunal
to bring to justice those who have committed war crimes in the fighting in
Croatia and Bosnia.

Up to the Courts

"There could well be war criminals among the people we are dealing with," Mr.
Vance said, "but I'll leave that to the courts to decide." He noted that he had
dealt with people accused of crimes before, in the Middle East talks and in
Rhodesia.

Mr. Vance also rejected the accusation that the peace plan he has promoted in
Bosnia, calling for the division of the country into 10 largely autonomous
provinces under the loose control of the Government in Sarajevo, constituted a
sellout to the Bosnian Serbs, who have seized 70 percent of the territory of the
republic with their overwhelming military strength.

"Anyone who says that just hasn't studied the plan or the map and hasn't done
basic math," he said. He pointed out that the mostly rural Serbs had settled on
and owned 60 percent of Bosnia's territory before the fighting began, but would
predominate in only 43 percent of the territory under the peace proposal.

This would mean they would be compelled to relinquish about one-quarter of their
territorial gains from the war, Mr. Vance said, adding that this would in effect
reverse the "ethnic cleansing" in which at least one million Bosnian Muslims
have been driven from their homes.

'That Disappoints Me'

Told that among his accusers were men whose government careers he had fostered
as Secretary of State, Mr. Vance's brow furrowed.

"That disappoints me," he said, with his jaw set. "But I've got to do what I'm
doing."

"David and I," he said, referring to Lord Owen, "have been working round the
clock to stop the slaughter of innocent civilians and keep alive the
humanitarian effort. It's nonsense to say we are appeasers for talking to the
people who can make a difference in our pursuit of a lasting settlement. That's
why we're here."

Mr. Vance has been working for the United Nations since October 1991, when he
was named special envoy for Yugoslavia by Secretary General Javier Perez de
Cuellar.

He obtained the Croatian cease-fire in January, then resumed some of the
activities he had pursued in private life since he left the State Department in
1980 -- the partnership in the New York law form of Simpson, Thacher & Bartlett,
as well as membership on the boards of The New York Times Company and other
businesses.

With the onset of hostilities in Bosnia last April, the Balkans again began to
occupy more of Mr. Vance's time. Since early September, home base for Mr. Vance,
Lord Owen and their staff of 35 has been a sixth-floor row of offices at the
Palace of Nations here, seat of the old League of Nations. But he travels often
to the Balkans and to Western capitals and United Nations headquarters in New
York.

Mr. Vance has enjoyed the unwavering support of Mr. Perez de Cuellar's
successor, Boutros Boutros-Ghali.

The Secretary General has publicly rebuked Mr. Dumas, the French Foreign
Minister, who early this month expressed frustration with the Vance-Owen
negotiations and threatened French military action to open detention camps run
by the Bosnian Serbs.

Behind the scenes Mr. Vance has also received steady backing for his approach
from the Bush Administration and the incoming Clinton team.

It has come on a personal level from President Bush and Secretary of State
Eagleburger as well as from Warren M. Christopher, who is to be Mr.
Eagleburger's successor. Mr. Christopher was Mr. Vance's deputy at the State
Department and they maintain a close relationship.


LOAD-DATE: January 19, 1993

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo: Cyrus R. Vance. (Associated Press) (pg. A7)

                   Copyright 1993 The New York Times Company

                              64 of 255 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                January 19, 1993, Tuesday, Late Edition - Final

Senate Republicans Hire Official Cited in Clinton Passport Search

BYLINE: By ROBERT PEAR,  Special to The New York Times

SECTION: Section A; Page 18; Column 4; National Desk

LENGTH: 886 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, Jan. 18


A State Department official who was demoted for his role in the search of Bill
Clinton's passport files during last year's Presidential campaign has been hired
by Senate Republicans to monitor State Department activities under the new
President.

The official, Steven K. Berry, was Acting Assistant Secretary of State for
Legislative Affairs at the time of the search. On Wednesday, he will go to work
for the Senate Foreign Relations Committee, having been hired by Senator Jesse
Helms of North Carolina, the ranking Republican on the committee.

In November, the inspector general of the State Department, Sherman M. Funk,
said Mr. Berry had helped arrange the search through passport files in an effort
to find politically damaging information about Mr. Clinton. Mr. Funk recommended
disciplinary action against Mr. Berry, saying he had shown "serious lapses in
judgment" and seemed, through improper use of his position, to be trying to
influence the outcome of the Presidential election.

Mr. Berry was relieved of his title as Acting Assistant Secretary of State, but
has continued to perform miscellaneous duties at the department. A colleague,
Elizabeth M. Tamposi, was dismissed as Assistant Secretary of State for Consular
Affairs, on orders from President Bush.

'Can't See What Was Wrong'

James W. Nance, director of the Republican staff of the Foreign Relations
Committee, said today that the criticism of Mr. Berry was unfair. "I have no
faith at all in the inspector general's report," he said. "I have absolutely no
problem with what Steve did. I just can't see what was wrong with it."

Mr. Nance said Mr. Berry had been just as diligent in getting information
requested by Democratic members of Congress as he was in assisting Republicans
who sought information on Mr. Clinton. He said Mr. Berry had promptly supplied
information to Democrats seeking information about Bush Administration dealings
with Iraq and a scandal involving the Bank of Credit and Commerce International.

The hiring of Mr. Berry dismayed some Senate aides from both parties. But on the
Foreign Relations Committee, as on most Senate panels, Republicans and Democrats
hire separate staffs. While Democratic aides say it will be difficult for them
to work with Mr. Berry, they cannot block Republican staff appointments.

Mr. Nance said Mr. Berry would work on the State Department authorization bill,
a wide-ranging charter for the department, which also serves as a vehicle for
Congressional efforts to shape foreign policy. As a member of the committee's
professional staff, Mr. Berry will also have general responsibility for
monitoring State Department operations, especially dealings with Russia and
Eastern Europe.

Investigation Continues

An independent prosecutor is investigating the search of Mr. Clinton's passport
files. The prosecutor's charter directed him to focus among other things on the
activities of Janet G. Mullins, the White House political director, who worked
closely with Mr. Berry in arranging the search.

Mr. Funk, the inspector general, said Mr. Berry had helped orchestrate a letter
to the State Department from a Congressman asking for records that would show if
Mr. Clinton, while a student at Oxford University in England, had ever
considered renouncing United States citizenship to avoid military service in
Vietnam.

State Department employees searched for Mr. Clinton's passport files on Sept. 30
and Oct. 1. Ms. Tamposi said Mr. Berry had called her on Sept. 28 and discussed
White House interest in Mr. Clinton's passport records, especially any letter
renouncing citizenship.

'White House Interest'

"Tamposi said Berry represented himself as working on behalf of Janet Mullins,
assistant to the President for political affairs," Mr. Funk reported. "Tamposi
said that Berry wanted to know if Tamposi could look through consular files on
her own for the letter. Tamposi said she adamantly refused to do this and became
frightened about its impropriety."

Ms. Mullins was Assistant Secretary of State for Legislative Affairs and Mr.
Berry's direct superior before she moved to the White House last August. The two
were friends and talked often about the Clinton campaign, Mr. Funk said.

The inspector general said Mr. Berry admitted that "he may have told Tamposi
about White House interest" in Mr. Clinton's passport files but insisted that no
one in the White House explicitly asked him to search the files.

Mr. Funk said, "Mr. Berry did not appear to view such partisan election-related
activity as inappropriate for a State Department official." But the inspector
general said Mr. Berry was "dead wrong."

Assessing Mr. Berry's actions, Mr. Funk concluded: "It is totally inappropriate
for a department employee to attempt to influence the outcome of a Presidential
election campaign. It is totally inappropriate for a department employee to help
orchestrate a fishing expedition for purely partisan purposes into the
department's files and records."

Lawyers for several Bush Administration officials involved in the search of Mr.
Clinton's passport files said they were discussing a possible "joint defense
agreement," which would allow them to share information and to coordinate their
responses to the independent prosecutor, Joseph E. diGenova.


NAME: Steven K. Berry

LOAD-DATE: January 19, 1993

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo: Steven K. Berry. (Associated Press)

TYPE: Biography

                   Copyright 1993 The New York Times Company

                              65 of 255 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                January 19, 1993, Tuesday, Late Edition - Final

THE INAUGURATION: Generations of Transitions;
Former Torch Passers Reflect on Clinton's Daunting Task

BYLINE: By R. W. APPLE Jr.,  Special to The New York Times

SECTION: Section A; Page 15; Column 2; National Desk

LENGTH: 1167 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, Jan. 18


To Herbert Brownell Jr., Bill Clinton's experience is renewed proof that no
incoming President has anything approaching complete control of his agenda.
Hamilton Jordan urges Mr. Clinton to fight the natural tendency to overreact to
previous administrations' failings. Michael K. Deaver hopes the Clinton team
understands that "what's in the package counts as much as the wrapping."

Since the end of World War II, eight new Presidents have moved into the White
House. Two of them succeeded to power suddenly -- Lyndon B. Johnson on the death
of John F. Kennedy and Gerald R. Ford on the resignation of Richard M. Nixon.
The six others, accompanied by leading members of their administrations, went
through what Mr. Clinton and his associates are experiencing now.

Today survivors of each of those transitions spent a few moments reflecting on
what has changed in the intervening years and what has not.

Forty years ago, Mr. Brownell, Dwight D. Eisenhower's top strategist in his
Presidential campaign, was preparing to take office as Attorney General. Now a
New York lawyer, nearing his 89th birthday on Feb. 20, he has been watching
events in Little Rock, Ark., and Washington, and he says he has been struck
again by the power of events outside a President-elect's control to blow him off
course, even when he is the repository of the hopes of much of the nation.

Ike Knew Every Leader

"I think he was entirely genuine when he talked in the campaign about the
urgency of the need to repair the economy, and his determination to rescue the
country from depression," Mr. Brownell said, referring to Mr. Clinton.  "But the
rash of international problems will make it hard for him, and it's going to take
him a while to establish relationships with people in London, Bonn, Tokyo.

"For Ike it was different. He had been through the war, and he knew every leader
in the western world by his first name. His great priority was to cement the
wartime alliance and turn his party away from isolationism. In that area he was
the cock of the walk, but unlike Clinton he had a lot to learn about domestic
policy, which posed significant problems for us."

Thirty-two years ago, Theodore C. Sorensen was putting the finishing touches on
Kennedy's Inaugural Address, the most memorable of the modern era. On Jan. 21,
1961, he moved into the White House at Kennedy's right hand, as special counsel
to the President. Now 64, he, too, has been a New York lawyer since leaving
since leaving office in Washington.

"He had a bad week last week," said Mr. Sorensen about the President-elect, "but
that's a very minor matter in the ultimate balance."

In Charge of the Henhouse

Mr. Sorensen sees the crises in the Middle East, Bosnia and Somalia as parallels
to the hot spots that faced the Kennedy Administration: Cuba, Berlin, the Congo,
Laos, Vietnam.

"I think that it was Douglas MacArthur who came by and told the President, 'The
chickens of the past eight years are coming home to roost and you're in charge
of the henhouse,' " he recalled. "John Fischer wrote in Harper's sometime in
1961 that while Kennedy 'was still trying to move in the furniture, in effect,
he found the roof falling in and the doors blowing off.'

"The same thing seems to be happening to Bill Clinton, before he can even get to
know the senior career military and diplomatic and intelligence people, and
figure out which ones are good and which ones just have reputations."

Twenty-four years ago, Gerald L. Warren went to work as an assistant press
secretary in the Nixon White House. He survived the Watergate scandal without
damage, and now, at 62, he is the editor of The San Diego Union-Tribune.

"The thing that bothers me," Mr. Warren said, "is that they seem to be trying to
extend the campaign into the Presidency. I worry about the Clinton people being
ready to go because I remember the frantic rush we were in to fill the
sub-Cabinet. We had Nixon's big policy book to go by, and we had Kissinger and
Moynihan working away in the basement -- Amazing! -- but the work is so much
harder than you anticipate. You have to start so fast, with empty bookcases and
no user's manual."

No Way to Prepare

Sixteen years ago, Mr. Jordan was faced with the awesome prospect of taking over
as White House chief of staff for Jimmy Carter, in fact if not in name, without
ever having worked in Washington. Now, at 48, he is an official with Whittle
Communications, a business and education venture in Knoxville, Tenn. He had a
short, unhappy run last year as an official of Ross Perot's campaign.

"There's no way for anyone to prepare for this thing, if you think about it," he
said. "If the new President is a governor, he doesn't know Washington.  If he's
a senator, he doesn't know the executive branch. And it's harder now than it
once was.

"Every administration tends to be an overreaction to the last. We went in
because of Watergate, and in that environment we wanted to be loose, informal,
open, press conference every week, no White House perks, and it didn't work. You
have to strike a balance. Clinton needs to. I hope the inaugural will get them
off to a better start, give them a firebreak and a new beginning."

Having staged elaborate media carnivals during the 1980 Presidential campaign,
Mr. Deaver was set 12 years ago to take over as deputy chief of staff in the
Reagan White House. Later he went into big-time lobbying, and in 1987 he had to
pay a $100,000 fine after conviction on charges of lying about his activities.
But he remains one of Washington's keener and more pungent political figures.

'More Than He Can Deliver'

"Mr. Clinton has promised more than he can deliver, and that could be a big
problem," said Mr. Deaver, who is now 54 and back at work in public relations in
the capital. "I got the sense during the campaign that it had more specifics
than any I'd ever seen. People are fearful. They want answers and not just
pageantry.

"We had our imagery and symbolism, sure. But there was never any question about
what Ronald Reagan wanted to do when he came to town, and no question that he
did what he said he was going to do. That's why he left office with a 70 percent
approval rating. I'm not sure that they understand that."

Only four years ago, Peter B. Teeley was gripped in the hoopla of inaugural week
as his old friend, George Bush, prepared to move up from the Vice Presidency to
the Presidency. For a time he was a member of Mr. Bush's kitchen cabinet, an
informal adviser. Now Ambassador to Canada, Mr. Teeley, at 52, anticipates
staying on for several months under Mr. Clinton.

"This is significantly different from what happened to us," Mr. Teeter said by
telephone from Ottawa. "You have thousands of people coming from every corner of
the country who have never participated in government before.  Naturally, they
are tremendously exited. Frankly, we never had the energy, enthusiasm and
creativity you get when you have a change of parties."


LOAD-DATE: January 19, 1993

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1993 The New York Times Company

                              66 of 255 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                January 19, 1993, Tuesday, Late Edition - Final

Mysterious Epidemic Of Furtive Liver Virus

BYLINE: By GINA KOLATA

SECTION: Section C; Page 1; Column 5; Science Desk

LENGTH: 1864 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON


EVERY Tuesday is liver clinic day at the Veterans Affairs Hospital in
Washington, a time when patients with every sort of liver ailment are seen by
Dr. Leonard Seeff and his staff. Last week was typical. Dr. Seeff saw 15
patients, and 13 had hepatitis C, a tenacious, insidious and sometimes fatal
virus that infects the liver and that only now is becoming recognized as a
public health threat.

The virus is a medical mystery. Ever since a test to detect it in blood became
available in 1990, doctors have found more and more people who are infected but
have no symptoms. Some 20 to 40 percent of people coming to inner-city hospitals
have the virus, as do 80 percent of intravenous drug users. Yet, to doctors'
puzzlement, some 40 percent of hepatitis C carriers say they never used
intravenous drugs, never had a transfusion before 1990 when blood was first
screened for the virus, and have no apparent reason for contracting the
infection by blood-to-blood contact.

Equally mysterious is the clinical course of the disease. It can take many years
for the virus to damage the liver, but researchers do not yet know how many or
what proportion of patients are at risk. They are feverishly trying to learn how
to treat the virus, which seems impervious to the immune system's attempts to
squelch it and which, a new study shows, seems never to go away once it enters
the liver.

"It's a very scary situation," said Dr. Robert Perillo, director of
gastroenterology at the Veterans Affairs Hospital in St. Louis.

Dr. Ira Jacobson, a hepatitis specialist at New York Hospital-Cornell Medical
Center, said: "Given the number of patients I see who have no identifiable risk
factors yet have hepatitis C, I think it is a significant public health threat.
It is not clear yet how preventable the disease will be by avoidance of the
obvious risk factors."

Among Dr. Seeff's patients last Tuesday was 42-year-old Bob Moran, who lost both
his legs in Vietnam in 1970 when he stepped on a land mine. "I learned to live
with it and I thought I was pretty healthy," he said. But when he went for an
annual physical examination two years ago, his doctor noticed that his liver
enzyme concentrations were low and suggested he have further tests. A year
later, Mr. Moran followed his doctor's advice. The diagnosis: hepatitis C. Mr.
Moran said he is pretty sure he got the infection from the blood transfusions 23
years ago.

Kenneth Sparks, 42, said he used intravenous drugs from 1986 until 1988. A year
and a half ago, after a physical exam, he learned he had hepatitis C and
cirrhosis of the liver, although he has no symptoms.

The mystery case was Lyntellus Brooks Sr., 66. He said he never used drugs and
never had a transfusion. Yet he has hepatitis C. "I'm kind of shocked that I
have it," he said. "And I am concerned."

The more that investigators see patients with hepatitis C, the more they wonder
whether the virus has always been as common or whether it is a newly emerging
threat. Dr. Seeff thinks that at the very least, it has become much more common
now.

One reason, he said, is that if it were as as prevalent in the past as now, and
if, as expected, many patients eventually have serious liver damage, there
should now be enormous numbers of patients with liver cancer and liver disease.
The Centers for Disease Control and Prevention estimates that at least 150,000
people are newly infected with hepatitis C each year; yet liver disease kills
only 35,000 to 40,000 a year.

Dr. Seeff found that among the 40 percent or so of patients admitted to the V.A.
Hospital in Washington who had hepatitis C infections, most did not know it. Dr.
Thomas Quinn and his colleagues at Johns Hopkins University found that 18
percent of emergency room patients there had hepatitis C infections; 5 percent
had hepatitis B infections and 6 percent had H.I.V., the virus that causes AIDS.

Another indirect sign that the disease may be more prevalent now comes from a
study of blood, stored since World War II, which was drawn from soldiers
inoculated with a tainted yellow fever vaccine. The vaccine, made with human
serum, infected 350,000 troops with hepatitis B, Dr. Seeff and his colleagues
found. The hepatitis B virus, which is entirely different from hepatitis C
virus, lingered in only 1 percent of the soldiers.

When the blood test for hepatitis C became available in 1990, Dr. Seeff used it
to screen the stored blood . He found no hepatitis C in the blood of the
vaccinated troops or in an unvaccinated comparison group. But as many as 13
percent of the comparison group had hepatitis B infections acquired in the usual
ways.

Dr. Seeff and others say they strongly suspect that hepatitis C existed in the
1940's, but the vaccine study suggests it was not so common.

How It Is Transmitted

Hepatitis, a liver infection that manifests itself as jaundice, has been known
since ancient times. But it was not until the infection of the World War II
soldiers that scientists had proof that a form of hepatitis could be transmitted
by blood.

Disturbed by their inability to understand how hepatitis is transmitted,
researchers in the United States and in England then conducted studies trying to
give hepatitis to "volunteers," mostly children with Down syndrome and
prisoners, Dr. Seeff said. Those "horrendous" studies eventually led to the
isolation of the hepatitis viruses and the development of a hepatitis B vaccine,
he said.

In the 1960's, researchers began studying hepatitis cases linked to blood
transfusions. To their astonishment, hepatitis B accounted for only a small
percentage. Now, with the isolation of the hepatitis C virus in 1987, it is
known that essentially the non-B hepatitis was actually hepatitis C.

If the prevalence of hepatitis C is growing, it may be due to the epidemic of
intravenous drug use in the 1960's and 70's, researchers say. Dr. Miriam Alter
of the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention showed in a paper published on
Dec. 31 that almost everyone infected with hepatitis C goes on to become a
chronic carrier, whether or not they develop symptoms of disease. So, with an
ever-expanding pool of infected people who generally have no symptoms for years
or decades, the disease could mushroom in the population.

But that still leaves the question of how people like Mr. Brooks were infected.
Dr. Alter and her colleagues found that like him, 40 percent of people with
hepatitis C say they never had a transfusion and never used intravenous drugs.
The most common link is poverty, she said. Dr. Alter said the virus even shows
up in 1 out of 200 blood donors, a highly screened, healthy group of people.

One possibility is that the virus is spread through sexual contact. But, said
Dr. Harvey Alter, a hepatitis researcher at the National Institutes of Health,
"if it's spread sexually, and it probably is, it's spread inefficiently." Groups
that are at high risk for sexually transmitted diseases are at much lower risk
for hepatitis C, he said. For example, 60 to 80 percent of homosexual men were
infected with H.I.V. or the hepatitis B virus, but just 4 percent with hepatitis
C.

Dr. Alter, who is not related to Dr. Miriam Alter, believes the disease is
probably spread by blood-to-blood contact, and he thinks that "there are
inapparent ways that blood is being spread around." Recently he studied blood
donors found to be infected with hepatitis C virus and learned after careful
questioning that 70 percent were exposed in some way to other people's blood.
Some had used intravenous drugs, maybe just once or twice, and often decades
ago. Others had had a transfusion long ago, and had all but forgotten. Still
others had gotten tattoos or had had their ears pierced.

Even if blood is the principal route of transmission, that would still leave the
cause of infection unaccounted for in 30 percent of Dr. Alter's subjects.
"There are all kinds of subtle ways in which blood-to-blood contact can occur,"
Dr. Seeff said.

Many investigators suggest that the virus, unlike H.I.V., may be transmitted
through shared toothbrushes or razor blades. Dr. Seeff and Dr. Jacobson also
said they were concerned that barbers could transmit the virus when they shaved
many with the same straight razor. Dr. Harvey Alter said that another
possibility was dental instruments that were not thoroughly sterilized.

Dr. Jacobson and Dr. Perillo suggest it is also plausible that the virus could
be transmitted by mosquitoes.

Carriers for Life

The next question is what happens to infected people. The body seems unable to
make any antibodies that fight the virus, Dr. Miriam Alter said, which means
that a vaccine, like the hepatitis B vaccine, would probably be useless. It also
may explain why, once infected with hepatitis C, people seem to stay infected
and probably infectious for the rest of their lives. Dr. Alter said that the
virus mutates in the body, constantly changing its coat and thwarting the immune
system's attempts to recognize it.

Researchers also recognize that the virus can take decades to damage the liver.
Dr. Seeff and his colleagues recently published a study tracing more than 1,500
patients who had had transfusions 18 years ago, asking whether those who
acquired hepatitis C from the donated blood had a higher death rate. The answer
was no, but Dr. Seeff added that many of these patients were elderly and may
have died of other ills before liver problems showed up. The real question, he
said, is what happens to people infected when they were younger.

Dr. Seeff is continuing his study of the transfusion recipients, examining their
medical records and learning whether those who survived became ill from
hepatitis and whether the virus was damaging their livers. He is finding, he
said, that the vast majority have liver damage. This leads him to suspect that
the virus might eventually cause problems in most people who are infected.

Dr. Seeff and most others recommend that hepatitis C patients with evidence of
active liver inflammation consider taking the only available treatment, a
six-month course of alpha interferon injections. It is, said Dr. Jules Dienstag,
a liver specialist at the Massachusetts General Hospital, "just a foot in the
door."

About a quarter of hepatitis C patients who take interferon respond, meaning
that their liver enzyme levels return to normal. But no one knows whether normal
liver enzyme levels will translate into a quelling of the smoldering disease. In
the meantime, clinical trials are under way with drugs like ribavirin, which,
investigators hope, may actually combat the hepatitis virus.

Patients like Mr. Moran wait nervously, meanwhile, and hope for the best. The
diagnosis of hepatitis C, Mr. Moran said, "has altered my life." He stopped
social drinking, he said, he worries about whether foods he eats might put
strain on his liver, and he gives himself interferon injections, "just like a
diabetic."

"I'm always worried," Mr. Moran said. And, he added, in the back of his mind is
the chilling thought: "I'll be damned if I survived a land mine in Vietnam only
to die at 45 of cirrhosis. I'm not even an alcoholic."

LOAD-DATE: January 19, 1993

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo: Kenneth Sparks, who has hepatitis C and cirrhosis of the liver,
but no symptoms, with Dr. Leonard Seeff at Veterans Affairs Hospital in
Washington. The clinical course of hepatitis C is highly variable. (George Tames
for The New York Times)

                   Copyright 1993 The New York Times Company

                              67 of 255 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                January 19, 1993, Tuesday, Late Edition - Final

An Invisible Generation Looks in the Mirror

SECTION: Section A; Page 20; Column 4; Editorial Desk

LENGTH: 383 words


To the Editor:

In "The Boomlet Generation" (Op-Ed, Jan. 4), Alexander Abrams and David Lipsky
make a case for defining generations by decade of college graduation. They then
go on to characterize the generation that completed college in the 1980's,
people who are now between 24 and 32. As a member of that generation, I am
dismayed by how foreign the people described by the authors seem.

No, we are not the Grunge Kids; but neither are we baby boomers (read yuppies)
cheated by a recession out of investment banking jobs, houses on the beach, and
Volvos and Saab convertibles.

Yes, we are being passed over, like the middle child, as the authors aptly put
it. Going unnoticed is a hallmark of our generation.

We came of age at a bad time. The monumental social upheavals and the profound
tragedies of the 1960's left the country wounded and emotionally exhausted.
Vietnam continued to drain the nation's energies until many of us were in our
early teens. And the betrayal of Watergate further weakened the country's
spirit.

Finally, there was the stagflation of the 70's. Growing up in that time was like
being raised by a depressive mother: the country was consumed by its own pain
and did not have the emotional resources to cope with, or pay attention to, our
needs.

Left unattended, our generation developed a peculiar sense of meaninglessness.
Our nihilism is very personal -- it is a profound sense that we have no weight
or value. It is the desperation expressed by people turning 30 who are adrift
professionally, spiritually or emotionally.

This sense of emptiness was poignantly evoked for me not long ago by a woman
friend in a conversation we had about children and families. Saying that she did
not want to have kids, she explained, somewhat apologetically: "I feel so
bereft. What is there to pass on?"

We have been overlooked, and we continue to overlook ourselves. If our special
quality is that we listen to 10,000 Maniacs, rather than Pearl Jam, then we are
truly bereft.

Moreover, to continue defining ourselves in prefabricated, consumer terms is to
accept generational meaninglessness.

We have more value than our purchasing power. It's not enough to say, "We are
here"; it's time to say who we are.

ALEXANDER KOPELMAN
New York, Jan. 6, 1993

LOAD-DATE: January 19, 1993

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Letter

                   Copyright 1993 The New York Times Company

                              68 of 255 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               January 20, 1993, Wednesday, Late Edition - Final

Rene Pleven, 91, Prime Minister Of France Twice in Early 1950's

BYLINE: By BRUCE LAMBERT

SECTION: Section A; Page 21; Column 4; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 569 words


Rene Pleven, a top official in the Free French movement in World War II who
served twice as Prime Minister in the 1950's, died on Jan. 13 in Paris.  He was
91.

His family said he died of heart failure.

Mr. Pleven, a telephone company executive before the war, began his long
political career by taking on some vital missions for de Gaulle's exiled forces
against the Vichy regime in the 1940's. He scored an early coup in Africa by
soliciting support for the Free French from Chad, Cameroon, Gabon and Congo,
which were then French colonies.

Service Under de Gaulle

Recalled to London by de Gaulle in 1941, he was appointed national commissioner
for the economy, finance, the colonies and foreign affairs of the general's
French National Committee.

As provisional commissioner for the colonies, Mr. Pleven presided over a 1944
conference in Brazzaville, the Congo, where delegates drafted a more liberal
policy that lent some momentum to independence movements in equatorial Africa.

After France's liberation, he became Minister of the Economy and Finance and
helped set the country's postwar course. He instituted policies leading to the
first postwar devaluation of the franc but also some painful inflation as he
resisted more radical proposals to restructure French industry.

Postwar Political Career

Despite his early ties to de Gaulle, Mr. Pleven broke with him politically and
was a founder of the small Democratic and Socialist Union of the Resistance
party. He served as party president from 1946 to 1953, when he resigned to
protest its endorsement of Vietnam peace talks. His successor was his longtime
rival, Francois Mitterrand. Later Mr. Pleven was allied with a series of small
centrist parties.

Mr. Pleven was elected a legislator from the Cotes-du-Nord region in 1945 and
would keep his seat for nearly three decades. He held several Cabinet posts
under the tumultuous Fourth Republic, including Defense Minister from 1949 to
1950.

He was Prime Minister from July 1950 to February 1951, as power in the National
Assembly was shifting toward the right, and again from August 1951 to January
1952, when he resigned in a dispute over budget deficits.

Backer of European Unity

An ardent proponent of European unity, he won ratification of the European Coal
and Steel Community, the precursor of the European Community. But his proposal
for the European Defense Community, with a rearmed Germany, was defeated by
opposition from Gaullists, Socialists and Communists in 1954.

The same year brought another historic setback. He was a hard-liner on French
colonial rule in Southeast Asia.  In 1954, when he was Defense Minister, the
French stronghold at Dien Bien Phu fell to Vietnamese forces, signaling the
beginning of the end of French hegemony in the region.

Newspaper in Brittany

After losing re-election as a legislator in 1973, Mr. Pleven became president of
a regional development council in his native Brittany.

Born in Rennes on April 15, 1901, he earned a law degree from the University of
Paris. After failing an examination for the financial corps of the civil
service, he went to work in Canada and the United States, rising to become a
telephone company executive in Canada and later in England.

His wife of 42 years, the former Anne Bompard, died in 1966. He is survived by
two daughters, Francoise and Nicole, and eight grandchildren.


NAME: Rene Pleven

LOAD-DATE: January 20, 1993

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo: Rene Pleven. (Camera Press, 1970)

TYPE: Biography; Obituary (Obit)

                   Copyright 1993 The New York Times Company

                              69 of 255 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                January 21, 1993, Thursday, Late Edition - Final

Judges in Dallas Continue Shutdown Over Security

BYLINE: Special to The New York Times

SECTION: Section A; Page 18; Column 3; National Desk

LENGTH: 439 words

DATELINE: DALLAS, Jan. 20


Frustrated and angered by Dallas County's slowness in securing the courts, state
and county judges here refused to reopen their courtrooms today and vowed to
keep them closed until metal detectors or X-ray machines were installed.

The protest began Tuesday after a man shot his estranged wife, a bystander and
then himself in the hallway of a county courthouse.

The man, Van Hai Huynh, 30, died of his wounds today; his wife, Ly Thi Dang, 26,
died late Tuesday. The couple immigrated from Vietnam in 1990. The bystander,
Rogelio Gutierrez, 16, was listed in good condition with a leg wound.

Immediately after the shooting, dozens of state and county judges halted
proceedings in their courtrooms to protest a lack of security. Dallas's four
county court buildings are not equipped with any devices to detect weapons, with
the exception of one walk-through machine that was installed at a state appeals
court and is paid for by the state.

Judges met today to discuss a county proposal to upgrade security, and many said
the plan was inadequate.

'Can't Protect Our Jurors'

County civil court judges, who work across the street from the site of the
shooting, were particularly incensed that their building, which is a records
repository, and a juvenile center would, at best, receive hand-held scanners,
which are not as reliable in detecting weapons as metal detectors or X-ray
machines.

"There is such solidarity of judges on this that we're not going back to work,"
said Judge Martin Richter of Dallas County Court, whose office is in the records
building. "We're concerned for ourselves, but the majority of our concern is for
the public. We can't protect our jurors or our witnesses."

Criminal courts also remained shut. "We're looking over the proposal by the
commissioners and trying to decide whether it's adequate for our security," said
Judge John Price, a spokesman for the criminal courts.

The head of the Dallas County Commissioners Court, an administrative body, said
security equipment could be in place as early as Monday.

Court officers and workers around the country have become particularly concerned
about courtroom violence after several incidents in the last year.

Judge Victoria Welcome, who hears cases involving evictions, breaches of
contract and domestic disputes, said she had delayed announcing jury verdicts
when emotions run high. "Sometimes it's the ordinary cases that cause the
problems," she said.

Judge Robert Day, who has worked in Dallas courthouses as an assistant district
attorney and judge for 35 years, agreed, saying, "Courthouses have become
dangerous places."

LOAD-DATE: January 21, 1993

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1993 The New York Times Company

                              70 of 255 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                January 21, 1993, Thursday, Late Edition - Final

Books of The Times;
Empire-Building in the Peacetime Army

BYLINE: By CHRISTOPHER LEHMANN-HAUPT

SECTION: Section C; Page 19; Column 1; Cultural Desk; Word and Image Page

LENGTH: 907 words



Buffalo Soldiers
By Robert O'Connor
324 pages. Alfred A. Knopf. $22

"Peace is hell" might aptly be the slogan of Robert O'Connor's powerful first
novel, "Buffalo Soldiers," which comes at the reader with the brutality of a
fist to the face. But the book's epigraph from Nietzsche says it just as well,
"When there is peace, the warlike man attacks himself."

Having avoided the Vietnam draft by purposely failing to graduate from high
school, Ray Elwood, from Syracuse, has finally joined the all-volunteer
peacetime Army and found himself the clerk of the "Fighting 57th," an ordnance
battalion stationed outside Mannheim, West Germany.

Among Elwood's many talents is his knack for writing memos, reports,
requisitions and proposals, as well as personal notes home to the families of
soldiers who have died, which for a peacetime military unit happens with a
frequency that Elwood finds alarming. It is this writing talent that makes
Elwood indispensable to his clownishly careerist superior, Lieutenant Colonel
Berman. It also accounts for some of the novel's black humor. When Elwood writes
in a letter mourning the death of an incompetent soldier who was universally
disliked that "in him were resplendent the virtues of honor and loyalty to his
country and God that are what keep our civilization together," Colonel Berman
responds: "I don't like this word 'resplendent.' It's not the kind of word you
use about a soldier.  . . . Scratch 'resplendent.' Make sure that word doesn't
leave this base."

But away from Berman's office, life is nasty and brutish for Elwood, a torment
of boredom, fear, harassment and murderous racial conflict, relieved only by sex
and drugs. Elwood believes he has a talent for "tuning people," part of which
enables him "to put personnel in touch with others who can transform stolen
goods such as stereo equipment, televisions and clothing into cash and
pharmaceuticals." As the text continues, "The most important of these items, of
course, is the pharmaceuticals."

A descendent of the enterprising Milo Minderbinder of Joseph Heller's
"Catch-22," Elwood has exploited Colonel Berman's "genius for requisition" by
building himself an empire based on drug-dealing. As the opening chapter
describes an episode in Elwood's daily routine: "You push the plunger down a
little more, giving Simmons a rush. Then you pull it back up, milking blood from
the vein and mixing it with the scag in the syringe to make gravy. You wait a
moment, letting Simmons get a feel for it. His eyes focus on the bloody mixture
in the syringe. It contains everything: Hope, Love, Life, Death."

Yes, throughout his entire text, Mr. O'Connor addresses his protagonist as
"you," for a reason that can't be revealed here but is not justifiably logical.
The device is annoying until one gets so accustomed to it that one doesn't
notice it any more. Other irritations include an excess of raunchy barracks talk
and the author's occasional habit of pushing his tough-sentimental poetry beyond
certain limits, as, for instance, when he writes, "It is November, and Novembers
in Germany remind you of the sadness and despair of a fallen woman," or when he
intones: "In this world, God is Drugs. Scag is His Son. God has sent His Son to
earth to spread the Word. The Word is that Scag is good.  Scag is our shepherd.
We shall always want."

But despite such distractions, the narrative of "Buffalo Soldiers" drives
forward irresistibly and gathers the momentum of a bolo punch to the
breadbasket. Elwood in his cynicism believes that "every man has a key." He
continues, "Once you have another man's key, you can hold him in the palm of
your hand."

Unfortunately for him, there are two men who come into his life for whom he
cannot find the keys. One of them is his new roommate, Pfc. Brian Knoll, who is
so gung-ho and eager to please that he even calls Elwood "sir." As the narrator
comments: "He looks like something so fresh and pathetic that you want to tell
him to get up and run immediately, that he has no idea what he's in for. You
want to tell him he has signed up for a tour of duty in hell."

The other is Elwood's new head noncom, Sergeant Lee, known as the Top, who at
the start of "Buffalo Soldiers" is suddenly on Elwood's case: "I seen you before
and I'm going to be sitting on you till you make a mistake. You ain't smart
enough to take that kind of weight."

It is Sergeant Lee who says to a black buddy of Elwood's: "You don't even know
what a buffalo soldier is, do you? . . . That's when we let you guys in? -- the
black army. You poor bastards fought the peace, took on the Indians after the
Civil War. It was a dirty job, you couldn't get a white man to do it." Lee then
turns to Elwood. "What you are, Elwood, is a buffalo soldier who don't even know
it."

Elwood tries frantically to tune in Knoll and Lee. He even attempts to get at
the Top by taking up with his one-armed daughter, Robyn Lee, whom Elwood first
encounters while she is shoplifting at a supermarket.  But he is too far gone in
his pessimism to see what is staring him in the face. His failure tips this
sometimes blackly humorous novel from the humorous side of the scale to the
black one. A grimmer version of reality sweeps his dark illusions away. At the
end he is forced to recognize a variation on von Clausewitz's famous dictum. He
learns to his final regret that "peace is a continuation of war by other means."


LOAD-DATE: January 21, 1993

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo of Robert O'Connor (Donna Marsh O'Connor)

TYPE: Review

                   Copyright 1993 The New York Times Company

                              71 of 255 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                January 21, 1993, Thursday, Late Edition - Final
                              Correction Appended

THE INAUGURATION;
CLINTON TAKES OATH AS 42D PRESIDENT, URGING SACRIFICE TO 'RENEW AMERICA'

BYLINE: By THOMAS L. FRIEDMAN,  Special to The New York Times

SECTION: Section A; Page 1; Column 5; National Desk

LENGTH: 2281 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, Jan. 20


William Jefferson Clinton became the 42d President of the United States today,
and in an Inaugural Address striking in its appeal for sacrifice, he told
Americans that if they assume greater responsibility for their country's future,
"there is nothing wrong with America that cannot be cured by what is right with
America."

The 46-year-old Governor of Arkansas, virtually unknown to most Americans 18
months ago and a long shot for the White House, took the oath of office under a
stunningly blue sky from Chief Justice William H. Rehnquist. President George
Herbert Walker Bush, who once seemed sure to win a second term, watched
stoically from his seat on the Capitol steps.

Under Mr. Clinton's left hand, his wife, Hillary, held a King James Bible given
to Mr. Clinton by his grandmother. His 12-year-old daughter, Chelsea, stood at
his right as he uttered the traditional oath at 11:58 A.M. Eastern time. He then
spoke for 14 minutes to a sea of people, flowing down from the flag-draped
Western facade of the Capitol to the Washington Monument.

'What America Does Best'

"We must do what America does best: offer more opportunity to all and demand
more responsibility from all," Mr. Clinton declared in an echo of John F.
Kennedy's Inaugural Address. "It is time to break the bad habit of expecting
something for nothing, from our Government or from each other. Let us all take
more responsibility, not only for ourselves and our families but for our
communities and our country."

In a speech with the recurring theme of renewal, Mr. Clinton implored at one
point: "To renew America we must be bold. We must do what no generation has had
to do before." [Transcript, page A15.]

Washington never looked better, or felt better. Cheerful chaos reigned on the
streets, in a subway system that is usually weirdly sedate and on the Mall, in
front of the Capitol, where something like a quarter of a million people endured
mobs and metal detectors and midwinter chill. Schools and Federal offices had a
quadrennial holiday, so natives joined tourists beneath a Capitol that was
dressed for the day in gowns of red, white and blue, and glittered in the
January sun.

Walk Through the Crowd

In a day of ceremonies intended to be casual and intimate -- with lots of
Presidential bear hugs for friends and a conscious assertion of the passing of
power to the post-World War II generation -- the Clintons walked the last few
blocks down Pennsylvania Avenue from the Capitol to the White House. Before the
Clintons decided to get out of their new armor-plated Cadillac, the crowds along
the route were chanting: "Walk! Walk!"

From the viewing stand in front of the White House's iron gates, the Clintons
watched a politically inclusive parade, encompassing everyone from Arkansas
bands to gay groups to Elvis impersonators -- like the rest of the inaugural as
meticulously scripted as any Hollywood production. Throughout, Mr. Clinton wore
the amazed grin of a man whose lifelong dream had just come true.

The flag-waving crowds along the parade route were striking both for their
enthusiasm and their racial diversity. The upbeat mood of the well-wishers
seemed on track with that of recent national polls -- one of guarded optimism
about Mr. Clinton's prospects, coupled with a strong desire to give the new
President a chance.

Short, Informal Speech

Mr. Clinton's Inaugural Address, far more compact than the lengthy oratory of
his long 1988 Democratic National Convention speech, was informal and almost
conversational.

It was typical of the New Age political style that helped him win the highest
office in the land. While Mr. Clinton paid homage to many of the themes that won
him the election -- the need for renewal, health-care reform, economic revival
and political reform -- his address was not an agenda for action, but rather a
call to service.

"You, my fellow Americans, have forced the spring," he said. "Now we must do the
work the season demands."

The address was at times brutally frank in its assessment of the decline of the
country under Mr. Bush and in its chastising of an aloof and self-absorbed
Congress, as well as an apathetic American public.

"We know we have to face hard truths and take strong steps. But we have not done
so," said Mr. Clinton, who wore a dark blue suit and no top coat as he spoke on
the chilly winter day. "Instead, we have drifted, and that drifting has eroded
our resources, fractured our economy, and shaken our confidence.

"Thomas Jefferson believed that to preserve the very foundations of our nation,
we would need dramatic change from time to time. Well, my fellow Americans, this
is our time. Let us embrace it. Our democracy must be not only the envy of the
world but the engine of our own renewal. There is nothing wrong with America
that cannot be cured by what is right with America."

In the age of satellite communications, which Mr. Clinton put to such good use
during the campaign, the new President used his address to speak not only to the
hundreds of thousands gathered before him, but also to America's allies and
enemies over the horizon. He signaled the world in general, and President Saddam
Hussein of Iraq in particular, that while America renewed itself at home it
would not abandon its responsibilities abroad.

"Together with our friends and allies, we will work to shape change, lest it
engulf us," said Mr. Clinton, speaking behind a shield of bullet-proof glass.
"When our vital interests are challenged, or the will and conscience of the
international community is defied, we will act, with peaceful diplomacy whenever
possible, with force when necessary."

Transfer of Power

A moment after being sworn in, Mr. Clinton turned and shook hands with Mr. Bush.
Their eyes locked for three seconds as they pumped each other's hands in what
appeared in many ways to be the real passing of authority. At that moment, Mr.
Bush's military aide carrying the locked briefcase of nuclear-warfare codes, and
standing on the podium behind him, began taking orders from a new Commander in
Chief.

While every inauguration celebrates the peaceful transfer of power that is the
hallmark of American democracy, in the case of Mr. Bush and Mr. Clinton that
transfer is all the more amazing. Eighteen months ago, Mr. Bush was at the peak
of his political power, the victorious commander of a successful and unusually
painless war in the Persian Gulf, riding the crest of polls with 80 percent
approval ratings. Most serious Democrat did not believe there was any sense in
even trying to challenge him.

Mr. Clinton was then Governor of one of the nation's poorest states, worrying
about getting a one-cent sales tax through his legislature, but also burning
with enough ambition to set off against Mr. Bush when more cautious Democrats
hesitated.

Mr. Clinton got his reward today. About 1 P.M., he and his wife waved from the
Capitol steps as Mr. Bush and his wife, Barbara, flew off by helicopter to an
early retirement in Houston -- while a United Van Lines trailer with Arkansas
license plates was backing into the White House driveway to move in the
Clintons' belongings.

Mr. Bush and Mr. Clinton had to work closely during the transition to deal with
foreign-policy crises in Haiti and Iraq, and it may have left them with a
measure of mutual respect undetectable in their bitter election campaign, when
Mr. Bush once dismissed Mr. Clinton as a "bozo" who knew less about foreign
affairs than Millie, the Bushes' dog.

Salute to Bush

At the top of his address Mr. Clinton hailed Mr. Bush, saying: "On behalf of our
nation, I salute my predecessor, President Bush, for his half-century of service
to America."

Mr. Clinton's inauguration represents not only a change in Presidents and
parties but also of generations. The generation symbolized by President Bush was
shaped by the patriotism of World War II, sobered by the deprivations of the
Great Depression and serenaded by the music of Frank Sinatra.

It now gives way to a fortysomething crowd who were born into politics during
the idealistic, prosperous era of John F. Kennedy, but forged their identities
singing along with Bob Dylan through the troublesome seasons of Vietnam,
Watergate and acid rain.

For the first time America has a President and Vice President younger than the
Beatles. At age 46, Mr. Clinton is the third youngest President. Only his idol
John F. Kennedy, who took office in 1961 at 43, and Theodore Roosevelt, who took
office at 42, were younger.

Mr. Clinton's fellow baby-boomer and now Vice President, Al Gore, the
44-year-old former Senator from Tennessee, was sworn in by Justice Byron R.
White, as his wife, Tipper, and his four children crowded around. Mr. Gore had
chosen the retired Justice Thurgood Marshall, but Mr. Marshall was too ill and
had to beg off at the last minute.

There were 14 official balls and who knows how many unofficial ones tonight,
including an "Inaugural Ball for the Not Well Connected" and an affair sponsored
by MTV, the only one where women showed up with bats tatooed on their bare
backs.

"Everybody here knows that MTV had a lot to do with the Clinton-Gore victory,"
Mr. Clinton told the rock-loving crowd, where attire ranged from prom dresses to
ripped jeans.

The MTV crowd greeted the Clintons like celebrities, surging forward with
enthusiasm when they appeared. But Tipper Gore, who has opposed violent and
sexually suggestive rock lyrics, was visibly shaken when she was booed as she
approached a microphone.

Presidential reserve was thrown to the winds at a ball with fellow Arkansans.
The new President grabbed a saxophone from the rhythm and blues musician Ben E.
King and played a solo, then topped of a little speech with the Arkansas
football holler, "Soooooweeeee, Razorbacks."

In his speech in the afternoon, Mr. Clinton said, "Today, a generation raised in
the shadows of the cold war assumes new responsibilities in a world warmed by
the sunshine of freedom but threatened still by ancient hatreds and new plagues.
Raised in unrivaled prosperity, we inherit an economy that is still the world's
strongest, but weakened by business failures, stagnant wages, increasing
inequality and deep divisions among our own people."

In a line that appeared directed most at the politically reform-minded
supporters of Ross Perot, Mr. Clinton included in his address a swipe at the
politicians, lobbyists and political forces that he said had made Washington a
city synonymous with corruption.

"This beautiful capital, like every capital since the dawn of civilization, is
often a place of intrigue and calculation," Mr. Clinton said, with Senators and
Congressmen gathered on the Capitol steps behind him. "Powerful people maneuver
for position and worry endlessly about who is in and who is out, who is up and
who is down, forgetting those people whose toil and sweat sends us here and pays
our way. Americans deserve better."

Biblical Flourish

Mr. Clinton then closed with a rhetorical flourish, that blended the Biblical
with the political: "From this joyful mountaintop of celebration, we hear a call
to service in the valley. We have heard the trumpets. We have changed the guard.
And now, each in our own way, and with God's help, we must answer the call."

Mr. Clinton's first official act was to sign an executive order imposing his
new, much stricter ethical standards on senior officials in his Administration,
and another order proclaiming Friday as a "national day of fellowship and hope."
He also signed nominating papers for his Cabinet appointees.

Republicans, wary of being drowned in what they see as a reservoir of goodwill
greeting Mr. Clinton's inauguration, despite his occasionally rocky transition
to power, pledged their cooperation.

"I think he is going to have a lot of good will," said Senate Minority Leader
Bob Dole, who just returned from a Florida vacation. "I was running on the beach
and I saw a lot of people and they would shout at me: 'Give him a chance, give
him a chance.' So this is Clinton's moment and we won't do anything to interfere
with it."

Mr. Clinton's day began, as his term begins, with a focus not on the domestic
issues which got him elected but on the foreign crises which threaten to divert
his attention. He was briefed at Blair House, one last time, by Brent Scowcroft,
President Bush's national security adviser, on the state of the world he is
about to inherit.

Mr. Clinton walked out of Blair House, gripping a mug of decaffeinated coffee,
for the short drive to the Metropolitan African Methodist Episcopal Church, a
prominent black Baptist church in downtown Washington.

A Laugh and a Tear

While the chorus gave a rousing rendition of the hymns "Holy Ground" and
"Precious Lord Take My Hand," Mr. Clinton laughed, nodded, and sang along,
dabbing a tear on his left cheek.

President Bush began his last day in the White House by making a solitary walk
around the South Lawn and then returning to the Oval Office to write a note to
leave behind for Mr. Clinton, as Ronald Reagan had done with Mr. Bush.

Mr. Reagan's note said: "Don't let the Turkeys get you down." Mr. Bush would not
say what his note said.

Mr. Clinton's inauguration was closed by a poem read by his favorite poet, Maya
Angelou, who wrote "On the Pulse of Morning" to celebrate Mr. Clinton's
inauguration as the dawn of a new era of national unity. It ended with the
verses:

Here, on the pulse of this new day

You may have the grace to look up and out

And into your sister's eyes, and into

Your brother's face, your country

And say simply

Very simply

With hope --

Good morning.

NAME: Bill Clinton

LOAD-DATE: January 21, 1993

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

CORRECTION-DATE: January 22, 1993, Friday

CORRECTION:

An article yesterday about the inauguration of President Clinton referred
incorrectly to the church where Mr. Clinton attended a morning prayer service.
It is African Methodist Episcopal.


GRAPHIC: Photo: Bill Clinton being sworn in yesterday by Chief Justice William
H. Rehnquist as the 42d President of the United States. With him outside the
Capitol were his wife, Hillary, their daughter, Chelsea, and Vice President Al
Gore, who had taken his oath of office moments earlier. (Jose R. Lopez/The New
York Times)

TYPE: Biography

                   Copyright 1993 The New York Times Company

                              72 of 255 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                January 21, 1993, Thursday, Late Edition - Final
                              Correction Appended

THE INAUGURATION;
A Change of Power, but Barely a Break in Stride

BYLINE: By R. W. APPLE Jr.,  Special to The New York Times

SECTION: Section A; Page 1; Column 5; National Desk

LENGTH: 1163 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, Jan. 20


Today was the day of Bill Clinton's dreams, the day he and his party finished
the arduous climb to a "joyful mountaintop of celebration," but like all
Inauguration Days, it was more than that.

It was a day when the nation committed itself once more, with the recital of a
simple 18th-century oath, to what the new President felicitously termed "the
mystery of American renewal." The solemn magic of the moment, in this most
telling of national rituals, lies in what it symbolizes: the unquestioned
acceptance by victor, vanquished and public alike of the continuity and
legitimacy of governance.

The United States crowns no kings.  But as he stood before the Capitol and spoke
the words George Washington first uttered in lower Manhattan on April 30, 1789,
Mr. Clinton embodied this nation's unity, in something of the way a monarch
embodies Britain's at the hour of coronation in Westminster Abbey.

Jack Valenti, who worked in the White House three decades ago, calls the man in
the Oval Office "the keeper of the national integrity and the steward of our
civic virtue."

As such, Mr. Clinton starts with the good wishes of most Americans. But he is
the leader of a Government as well as an icon of nationhood, and in that
capacity he begins with less than universal acceptance. He won the votes, after
all, of only 43 percent of those who cast ballots last November, and since then,
he has excited wariness as well as enthusiasm in the country.

Bitter Democratic Memories

Few will take exception to his message of hope and rebirth, but it is far less
certain that he will carry the country with him in his appeal to "face hard
truths and take strong steps" in a spirit of shared sacrifice. That will depend
not only upon who is asked to give up what, and how fair the apportionment
seems, but also upon Mr. Clinton's ability to stir a citizenry that has been
more preoccupied with "me" than with "us" for much of the last two decades.

The Old Guard in his party remembers all too well the self-immolation of the
last two Democratic Administrations, those headed by Lyndon B. Johnson and Jimmy
Carter, and prays that the rule of three will not apply in this case. But many
have been perturbed by a rocky transition period.

"Lyndon used to say that the President proposes and the country disposes," said
Walter Shorenstein, the San Francisco financier and fund-raiser, "and in his
case it disposed of him.  No matter how smart the Clinton people are, there are
lots of bumps in the road ahead, and I hope they remember that."

Even at their moment of triumph, many of the Clinton people seem acutely aware
that their margin for error, never great, has been reduced by the conflict, the
disorganization and the resultant tardiness that marred the transition. When a
reporter complained this week to George Stephanopoulos, the White House
communications director, that his answers to her questions were flat and
unilluminating, he replied, "I can't afford to be colorful."

At the beginning and end of his Inaugural Address, especially, the new President
showed that he can find the language of exaltation that a President needs. Many
in his audience were moved by the Biblical cadences so beloved of Southern
orators. The length of the speech as well, only 14 minutes, showed a new
discipline in a man who has often proven embarrassingly prolix.

He brings other strengths to the task of coping with economic dilemmas at home
and the "ancient hatreds and new plagues" of the world -- not only his
intelligence and mastery of policy detail, not only his determination and
stamina, his youth and idealism, but also his membership in a fresh generation.
Only four years ago, Ronald Reagan, who was born before World War I, sat in the
White House; the new occupant was born after World War II, "in the shadows of
the cold war," as Mr. Clinton put it.

The prospect of new departures has produced a new if guarded optimism among
voters across the country who found the Bush Administration old and tired. The
prospect of power has galvanized Democrats eminent and humble, from Pamela
Harriman, the Georgetown hostess and power broker, who pronounced herself
"thrilled" after the swearing-in, to the thousands who lined up early to cheer
the Monarch Band from Papillon, Neb., and a double-dozen others.

A Need to Buy Some Time

Yet Mr. Clinton has not yet shown the country that he himself can make the tough
choices that will be needed -- between cutting the deficit and investing in new
infrastructure or new governmental programs, say, or between allowing the
slaughter of innocents in Bosnia to continue or risking a prolonged and draining
American involvement.

He will try to buy time on some thorny issues, like homosexuality in the
military, where he is proposing a two-step approach, or meeting with Boris N.
Yeltsin, on which he is just plain stalling so as not to lose his focus on
domestic affairs. But he promised a lot, and he will have to deliver something
soon.

The problems experienced by the Clinton team during the transition may prove to
be transitory, the product of inexperience. If a President does well in his
first few months, the transition is soon forgotten. But problems may persist. As
Carl M. Brauer writes in "Presidential Transitions" (Oxford University Press):
"Transitions are the shadow of the man who heads them. They silhouette his past
experience and future goals, strengths and weaknesses."

Some profess to see in Mr. Clinton's promises of a Government that "looks like
America," to cut the deficit by a quarter in four years, to produce wonders in
his first 100 days, and so on, a tendency to give hostages to fortune.
Certainly they have caused him embarrassment during the transition, as has his
habit of talking casually about complex foreign-policy issues.

Others worry that he is too eager to please, too loath to say no.

Fragile Covenant

After a campaign that focused on questions of character, the President will be
judged mostly on what he accomplishes and what he does not, at least at first.
No one expects him to accomplish everything he promised to.  But if he seems to
make a habit of trimming, if he gains a reputation for evasion, as he did for a
time during the campaign, he will quickly dissipate the advantage that accrued
to him as he stood today, bright as a new penny in a city and a nation that love
new things, in the thin winter sunshine of the capital.

It will happen quickly because the covenant between President and people has
become a fragile one, worn thin by the lies of Vietnam and Watergate and the
suspicions about politicians and institutions that linger, and also because of
the awesome speed and impact of the modern media of communication.

But Bill Clinton's advantage is this: The nation is tired of gridlock and
cynicism. It longs to believe again.  Tonight he is there at the center, in the
White House, after such a long and unlikely journey from Hope, Ark.

LOAD-DATE: January 21, 1993

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

CORRECTION-DATE: January 22, 1993, Friday

CORRECTION:

A news analysis article yesterday about the transfer of power in Washington
described one of President Clinton's campaign pledges incorrectly in some
editions. He promised to cut the budget deficit in four years by half, not by
one-quarter.


GRAPHIC: Photos: President Bush welcoming the new tenant to 1600 Pennsylvania
Avenue yesterday before they left for the inauguration. (Agence France-Presse)
(pg. A1); Surrounded by their children, Al and Tipper Gore kissed yesterday on
the inauguration platform after Mr. Gore was sworn in as the 45th Vice President
of the United States. (Jose R. Lopez/The New York Times); Chelsea Clinton
picking up the toe markers on the inauguration platform after the ceremony ended
yesterday in Washington. (Michael Geissinger for The New York Times); President
Clinton and his wife, Hillary, walking on Pennsylvania Avenue in the inaugural
parade. (Agence France-Presse) (pg. A12)

TYPE: News Analysis

                   Copyright 1993 The New York Times Company

                              73 of 255 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 January 22, 1993, Friday, Late Edition - Final

OUR TOWNS;
Seton Hall Team Puts Words Through Hoops

BYLINE: By Andrew H. Malcolm

SECTION: Section B; Page 5; Column 1; Metropolitan Desk

LENGTH: 839 words

DATELINE: SOUTH ORANGE, N.J.


HERE'S startling news: Not every student at Seton Hall University plays
basketball.

Here's a second stunner: There's another Seton Hall team that's ranked higher
nationally than the basketball squad.

It probably should not be surprising, given the state of American values and the
power of commercialized sports, that a bunch of young men who happen to be tall
have gained more renown for lobbing a large ball through a net than eight other
students who research social problems, assemble their arguments rationally and
hone their skills of language and presentation in endless hours of rehearsals
for grueling interscholastic competitions.

But, hey, this is America. What do you think college is for, learning or
something?

Enter the Seton Hall University debate team, currently ranked third in the
United States -- as in, behind only two other schools. The best the basketball
players can do recently is seventh.

You probably remember the college debate team of yesteryear, those earnest Young
Republicans who always wore neckties, oxfords and plastic pocket-protectors in
class. Their right arm was surgically attached to a briefcase the size of a
Buick, which could, on a moment's notice, produce voluminous arguments for and
against colonialism, for and against trade with the Soviet Union, for and
against fluoridation, for and against mining Haiphong harbor and probably even
for and against being for and against. You name it and those geeks could argue
for it -- or against it.

Well, except for the briefcases, college debate teams have changed, big time. Or
maybe we're the ones who've changed. And no team has changed more than Seton
Hall's, thanks to Catherine Zizik, an assistant professor of communications and
the Pirates' debate coach.

"These kids are like family," says Ms. Zizik, who was recruited seven years ago
to recruit debaters. She scouts local high-school debates. The result: her team
went from obscurity to 52d place, 36th, 17th, 13th, 5th and 3d, in successive
years.

College debates have changed, too. They still have the old Lincoln-Douglas
back-and-forth timed debate (this year's standardized topic is term limits for
Federal legislators -- for and against, of course). But they have 12 other
categories, from analytical, extemporaneous or persuasive arguments to
entertaining after-dinner talks, poetry readings and dramatic interpretations.

Americans so fear being wrong in front of peers that, from kindergarten on, few
raise their hand in class, unless requesting a restroom pass. If you want to
silence any large group of Americans, just ask suddenly if anyone has a
question.

See, most of us would rather talk at each other than listen, reason and respond.
We'd choose imprisonment in a small metal box with a battalion of hairy spiders
before we'd stand in front of debate judges for a 10-minute presentation 20
times every single weekend from October to May.

"It's fun," said Whitney Sugarman, a 21-year-old senior majoring in
communications who has already broken the all-time national career record of
placing in collegiate debates 349 times. With a full semester's competition
remaining, she has 356 awards entering this weekend's competitions at Columbia
University.

Here's her idea of fun: Drive to a nearby park in her gray Chevy Corsica and sit
there memorizing presentations (Coach Zizik doesn't allow notes). Miss Sugarman
has committed to memory 13 (thirteen!) 10-minute speeches, each with its own
format and required ingredients. Each word of each speech has a practiced
emphasis. Each phrase has a precise timing. Each sentence has a choreographed
gesture or movement from a raised eyebrow to a crouch. Every rehearsal results
in some refinement. But this is peak season, so her practice time has declined
to only 20 hours a week. (Tired yet?)

Last weekend she gave 33 such 10-minute presentations. (Bring on the spiders.)

Then, there's Sharon Holley, a 19-year-old nursing student who's been debating
half her life. "It's fun," she said. "When I see my words grip the audience, I'm
flying."

She practices in the shower, commuting or even in front of Pepper, her friendly
terrier, who never interrupts. She started researching her 13 topics last June.
In five months, she'll start over.

Or take Joy Matak, a 19-year-old sophomore from Bayonne who relaxes late at
night by reaching for a calculus book. "Debate focuses my mind," she says. "And
it teaches me the value of preparation. It is such a rush to win."

She has a hilarious presentation on today's ubiquitous support groups, including
support groups for people addicted to support groups. Her talk on Goodyear's
tire-maintenance plan makes listeners want to enroll. Her analysis of aluminum
poisoning arouses universal outrage.

"It's vital," says Coach Zizik, "that our society develop citizens who can make
and analyze persuasive arguments, find the holes and think for themselves. These
kids are so bright, it's frightening."

RESOLVED: Society could use more frightening people like this.

LOAD-DATE: January 22, 1993

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Drawing

                   Copyright 1993 The New York Times Company

                              74 of 255 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                January 23, 1993, Saturday, Late Edition - Final

SETTLING IN: The Armed Services;
Joint Chiefs Fighting Clinton Plan To Allow Homosexuals in Military

BYLINE: By ERIC SCHMITT,  Special to The New York Times

SECTION: Section 1; Page 1; Column 4; National Desk

LENGTH: 1149 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, Jan. 22


In an angry challenge to the Administration's promise to lift the ban on
homosexuals in the armed forces, the Joint Chiefs of Staff are fighting to
persuade President Clinton to reverse his campaign pledge, senior military
officials said today.

Defense Secretary Les Aspin's first meeting on Thursday with the Joint Chiefs
was dominated by an emotional, two-hour discussion of their concerns that
repealing the ban would wreck morale, undermine recruiting, force devoutly
religious service members to resign and increase the risk of AIDS for
heterosexual troops, senior officers said.

The Chiefs are scheduled to meet with Mr. Clinton on Monday to voice their
opposition to the Administration's plan to repeal the restrictions. Under the
plan, the ban would be removed in two steps. The Defense Department would be
directed sometime next week to suspend enforcement of the ban for several
months, and during that time military officials would repare an executive order
for Mr. Clinton that would formally end the ban and establish a code of conduct
for uniformed service members.

Officers Not Consulted

Firm support of the Joint Chiefs is crucial for carrying out the new policy. In
the military chain of command, officers and enlisted personnel take their cues
on social issues like sexual harassment and racial discrimination from their
superiors.

Many officers said they believed that Mr. Clinton had promised to consult with
them before making a final decision, and were furious that they learned of the
new approach from a news article.

The Joint Chiefs and Mr. Aspin came away from Thursday's meeting with slightly
different interpretations, senior officials said.

"We feel we're in a position to convince the President that this would be the
wrong decision," said one of the Chiefs, who spoke on the condition of
anonymity.

But Pentagon aides, surprised and dismayed at the intensity of the Chiefs'
reaction, said that only the means of carrying out the pledge remained open to
discussion, not the pledge itself.

"The meeting was entirely dominated by the gay issue," another Chief said. "At
the end, we spent a few minutes on Iraq, Somalia and Bosnia."

Distortions Are Charged

Pentagon officials said Mr. Aspin was eager to avoid a confrontation with his
senior uniformed advisers. "It was a give-and-take session but Aspin had his
receive button pushed for a long time," one Pentagon aide said.

Military officials seemed generally pleased, too.

"Aspin listened to all our views and said they would all be taken into
consideration," one Chief said. "At least he is someone we can work with on this
thing."

Advocates of homosexual rights contend that military officials are exaggerating
or distorting the effects of lifting the ban, and have urged Mr. Clinton to be
tough with his top-ranking brass.

"Clinton will not get the support from his Joint Chiefs unless he takes full
leadership by issuing a statement to be distributed to all troops that no form
of verbal or physical harassment against gays in the military will be
permitted," Jim Woodward, president of the San Diego Veterans Association, an
organization for homosexual and bisexual veterans, said in a telephone
interview.

While not openly defying the civilian Commander in Chief, the Chiefs' strenuous
opposition in private contrasts with the slightly more conciliatory tone in
public statements that several of the officers made in December. The anger of
the meeting with Mr. Aspin also differed from the muted, almost resigned
response from the military to the news of Mr. Clinton's two-step compromise
earlier this week.

Thousands Now In Military

Gen. Colin L. Powell, the Chairman of the Joint Chiefs, is among the most
forceful and articulate opponents of lifting the ban. General Powell discussed
the issue with Mr. Clinton at Blair House in Washington last Sunday, before the
inauguration, and several times with Mr. Aspin in the last week, emphasizing
each time the threat that lifting the ban would pose to "good order and
discipline" in the ranks.

"We know we have a certain number of gays performing extremely well, but they're
in the closet, and as long as they stay there we're fine," said one Navy
admiral, acknowledging that thousands of homosexual men and women secretly serve
in the military now. "But when they come out of the closet and get proactive,
it'll be really nasty."

Officers opposed to the policy say that heterosexual service members would feel
uncomfortable sharing group showers with acknowledged homosexuals or a dance
floor at a military social club next to a homosexual couple.

General Powell and senior Navy officials have also complained about practical
issues like sleeping berths on combat ships, where all-male crews are squeezed
into triple bunks for six months at sea.

In addition, other officers interviewed this week said a number of deeply
religious service members might resign rather than serve alongside an avowed
homosexual.

Fear the Spread of AIDS

Most recently, opponents of lifting the ban have argued that doing so would help
spread AIDS. They contend that open homosexuality in the military would increase
promiscuity, and this would allow more chances for the virus that causes AIDS to
infect heterosexuals.

Senior military officials said that at Thursday's meeting in "the tank," a
sound-proofed, second-story Pentagon conference room where the Joint Chiefs meet
regularly, the most vocal opponents of the Clinton plan were General Powell;
Adm. David Jeremiah, the Vice Chairman of the Joint Chiefs; Gen. Gordon
Sullivan, the Army Chief of Staff, and Gen. Carl Mundy Jr., the Marine Corps
Commandant.

Adm. Frank B. Kelso 2d, the Chief of Naval Operations, and Gen. Merrill A.
McPeak, the Air Force Chief of Staff, also oppose the policy change, but were
less insistent, senior officers said.

The Clinton plan does not propose to address sodomy laws now included in the
Uniform Code of Military Justice, because these are not enforced now unless they
involve a minor or nonconsensual sex.

Caught between two powerful constituencies, Mr. Clinton and Mr. Aspin have
sought to accommodate both groups. Mr. Clinton and Vice President Al Gore
deliberately made the Veterans Ball their first stop on a round of inaugural
ball appearances on Wednesday night.

Mr. Clinton told partygoers that the views of America's veterans and active-duty
service members would always be heard in his Administration. Mr. Clinton's
record during the Vietnam draft and his plans for increased military cuts have
provoked concern among some military officials.

At Mr. Aspin's confirmation hearing before a Senate panel, the former Wisconsin
lawmaker offered an olive branch to the 1.8-million-member armed services,
saying, "We will not lose sight of our first duty -- the maintenance of sound,
ready, effective forces."

LOAD-DATE: January 23, 1993

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1993 The New York Times Company

                              75 of 255 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                January 23, 1993, Saturday, Late Edition - Final

SETTLING IN: The Passport Search Case;
Prosecutor Gets White House Records on Clinton File Search

BYLINE: AP

SECTION: Section 1; Page 10; Column 3; National Desk

LENGTH: 427 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, Jan. 22


An independent prosecutor has obtained the computer records of the Bush White
House in his investigation of the search of Bill Clinton's passport files by
Bush Administration officials during the Presidential campaign.

The prosecutor's acquisition of the records became known this week when some
officials of the Clinton Administration, moving into their new White House
offices, found that the hard-disk drives were missing from their computer
terminals.

A memo distributed to the White House staff explained that the prosecutor,
former United States Attorney Joseph E. diGenova, had obtained a subpoena for
original computer disks, printouts and backup tapes as evidence to be presented
to a grand jury. He is investigating the possibility of criminal wrongdoing in
the Clinton-file search.

An aide to Mr. diGenova said today that the prosecutor was traveling and could
not be immediately reached for comment.

Effort to Save Evidence

The task of Mr. DiGenova, appointed by a Federal court last month, is to
determine whether officials at the Bush White House prompted the Clinton-file
search for political reasons and later sought to cover up their actions. His
subpoena for the tapes is seen here more as an effort to preserve potential
evidence than as an attempt to unearth any particular incriminating message.

Mr. diGenova obtained the subpoena soon after a Federal appeals court, in an
unrelated case, had barred the Bush White House from erasing any computer
records without making identical backup copies. The White House had planned to
erase data from its computers "in order to create clean user space for the
incoming Administration's staff members," Bush Administration lawyers had said
in court papers.

Mr. diGenova was appointed after the Bush Administration itself had found "some
evidence of criminal intent" in the passport search, which was carried out by
the State Department in late September and early October.

The State Department initially said that it had conducted the search at the
request of news organizations, which were trying to determine whether Mr.
Clinton, as an advocate against the Vietnam War, had considered renouncing his
American citizenship while studying in England in 1969-70.

But the department's own inspector general, Sherman Funk, later concluded that
the searches had been conducted in haste that violated department procedure. Mr.
Funk found the search improper, saying it had been carried out in hopes of
finding material that would damage Mr. Clinton's chances in the November
election.

LOAD-DATE: January 23, 1993

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1993 The New York Times Company

                              76 of 255 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                January 23, 1993, Saturday, Late Edition - Final

Observer;
The Generation Excess

BYLINE: By RUSSELL BAKER

SECTION: Section 1; Page 21; Column 1; Editorial Desk

LENGTH: 707 words


The papers say a new generation has come to power. It is tempting to smile at a
pomposity. Nowadays new generations come along more often than the Ninth Avenue
bus. It's inevitable that a few will wind up in power.

When it happens there is good talk about the regenerative effect of youth on a
nation with tired blood. Yet when these new generations come to power -- Kennedy
in 1961, now Clinton -- power passes not to the young, but to the middle-aged.

And what is middle age if not the home office of tired blood? Men in this age
bracket are more apt to be associated with midlife crisis than with generational
newness. Ask any 17-year-old.

Seventeen-year-olds are youth in its purest distillation. When youth truly comes
to power in this country, timid and crusty 43-year-olds will no longer hold veto
power over rights to the car on Saturday night.

The Founders, wisely understanding that youth is best served by being allowed to
finish high school, said nobody could be President before age 35. This seems
young nowadays when a lot of parents are still supporting 35-year-olds in
college, but when the Founders flourished people of 35 were assumed to be
grizzled adults.

What is new with President Clinton is not his generation but all the Democrats
he will install in places long filled with Republicans. Most of them will also
be middle-aged, which means they have passed from rollicking vigor into the
shadow of midlife crisis without having known the temptations to insolence that
come with fancy Washington offices.

In these appointments the President discloses perhaps a little hint of his own
midlife unease. Note his reluctance to lodge too much power in a generation that
may be just a mite too new for his middle-aged taste. The three top Cabinet
positions -- State, Treasury and Defense -- go not to bumptious new-generation
types but to blooded Washington veterans: Warren Christopher, 67; Lloyd Bentsen,
71, and Les Aspin, 54.

Thinking in terms of generations tends to cloud the mind. The important test of
a new government's intellectual vigor does not lie in birth dates, but in the
ideas it is willing to fight for.

President Kennedy's Peace Corps was fresh, young and valuable, but despite the
talented youth he installed at the Justice Department and Pentagon, his
Administration remained very old indeed in its timid policy on black civil
rights and its commitment to war in Vietnam.

All this generation talk also tends to segregate Americans by age. How the craze
started is hard to say. Maybe with Gertrude Stein telling Ernest Hemingway's
Paris crowd in the 1920's that they were "all a lost generation." The romance of
that phrase -- who wouldn't love to be part of a lost generation? -- may have
inspired later romantics to cook up other catchy titles for their own age
groups.

The sense of generational identity bestowing membership in an exclusive age club
became pronounced in the 1960's when the narcissistic "age of Aquarius" produced
"the Woodstock generation." Fortunate indeed was the rare crone or geezer who
did not have to listen to some young "Aquarian" gasbag dilate on the excellences
of "my generation."

Kennedy's inaugural eloquence about a torch passing to "a new generation"
doubtless stimulated a craze for generation gabble. This had surfaced in the
1950's with "the generation gap," popular journalism's jazzy new phrase for
restating the ancient truth that children and parents often have little in
common except a gene pool.

People began affixing generation labels all over the population. Long after the
Depression and World War II, people who had never thought of themselves that way
were classified as "the Depression generation" and "the war generation." Those
who had been in college in the 1950's, before the vogue for campus uproar, were
called "the silent generation."

Segregation by calendar had infinite possibilities. Soon we had yuppies and
boomers and thirtysomethings who are now fortysomethings and have begot
twentysomethings. What a good job we have done of dividing ourselves. In 1936
when Franklin Roosevelt said "This generation of Americans has a rendezvous with
destiny," he was talking about all Americans of all ages. He was right too.

LOAD-DATE: January 23, 1993

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Op-Ed

                   Copyright 1993 The New York Times Company

                              77 of 255 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 January 24, 1993, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

New & Noteworthy

BYLINE: BY LAUREL GRAEBER

SECTION: Section 7; Page 24; Column 1; Book Review Desk

LENGTH: 900 words


TROPICAL NIGHT FALLING, by Manuel Puig. Translated by Suzanne Jill Levine.
(Norton, $8.95.) The Argentine author's last novel, published posthumously,
concerns two elderly sisters in Rio de Janeiro who become embroiled in their
neighbors' lives. Set in the late 1980's, it is told completely through
dialogue, correspondence and police reports. "Manuel Puig delivers his exit
lines with great grace, good humor and much wisdom," Robert Houston said here in
1991.

FORTUNATE SON: The Autobiography of Lewis B. Puller Jr. (Bantam, $5.99.) At
first there seems to be little that is fortunate in the life of Lewis B. Puller
Jr. Son of the much-decorated Marine general Lewis Burwell (Chesty) Puller, the
author went off to Vietnam in 1968 for a tour that was brief but brutal: three
months into his stay, he stepped on a booby-trapped howitzer round, losing his
legs and part of both hands. His book, which won a 1991 Pulitzer Prize,
chronicles his long struggle to heal physically and psychologically. Our
reviewer, William Styron, said: "Because Mr. Puller writes with simplicity and
candor, with touches of spontaneous humor, his outcry of agony and isolation,
while harrowing, leaves one primarily overwhelmed with wonder at the torture a
human being can absorb this side of madness."

THE THIRTEEN-GUN SALUTE, by Patrick O'Brian. (Norton, $9.95.) This is the 13th
in Patrick O'Brian's personal fleet of novels about the British Navy during the
Napoleonic Wars. "Like [his heroes] Aubrey and Maturin playing Mozart duets
beneath a Pacific moon, he works elegant variations on the tradition of the
seafaring adventure story," Thomas Flanagan said in The Book Review in 1991.

POVERTY AND COMPASSION: The Moral Imagination of the Late Victorians, by
Gertrude Himmelfarb. (Vintage, $15.) Gertrude Himmelfarb explores England's
first great period of social reform, when individuals like Charles Booth and B.
Seebohm Rowntree analyzed the causes of poverty and the means to end it. In 1991
our reviewer, Philip Ziegler, praised "the profundity of her scholarship, the
soundness of her judgment, the generosity of her sensibilities." Portraits of
some of the recipients of that era's beneficence appear in LOVE IN THE TIME OF
VICTORIA: Sexuality and Desire Among Working-Class Men and Women in
Nineteenth-Century London, by Francoise Barret-Ducrocq, translated by John Howe
(Penguin, $11). This French scholar researched the records of a foundling
hospital that kept detailed dossiers on its unwed mothers. The archive, which
debunks the Victorian stereotypes of frail, wronged maidens and of plebeian
promiscuity, is a "haunting mosaic," one critic said in 1991.

GUARDIAN ANGEL, by Sara Paretsky. (Dell, $5.99.) In Sara Paretsky's seventh
novel about her private-eye heroine, V. I. Warshawski, the intrepid detective
gets to defend the elderly, wreak revenge on her ex-husband's law firm and, of
course, come close to dying. "Ms. Paretsky deftly provides enough leads and
loose ends to keep V. I. on a very busy schedule and us turning pages," our
reviewer, Vincent Patrick, said last year.

HOME COOKING, by Laurie Colwin. (Harper Perennial, $10.) The author, who was an
accomplished chef as well as a novelist and short-story writer, serves up both
cooking tips and reminiscences in this homage to old-fashioned food. "Even
without the recipes, 'Home Cooking' makes a comfy read," Ann Banks said here in
1988.

SIRO, by David Ignatius. (Avon, $4.99.) Siro is a code name for the C.I.A. in
this novel about an agency plot in 1979 to undermine Soviet influence in central
Asia. In 1991 our reviewer, Robin W. Winks, said, "The reader . . . is led
inexorably on by likable people, good dialogue and Mr. Ignatius' intimate sense
of place."

THE THIRD CHIMPANZEE: The Evolution and Future of the Human Animal, by Jared
Diamond. (Harper Perennial, $12.) The DNA molecules of human beings and two
species of chimpanzee are more than 98 percent identical -- but that small
disparity makes all the difference in the world. "The book's provocative style
forces one to reflect thoroughly on the puzzle of human evolution," Frans B. M.
de Waal said here last year.

THE UNCLE FROM ROME, by Joseph Caldwell. (Penguin, $10.) A middle-aged American
opera singer, grieving over the death of his lover from AIDS, travels to Naples,
where he is asked to play his most difficult role yet: that of a fictional Roman
uncle in a local wedding. The result, Herbert Mitgang said last year in The
Times, has "such brio that it could be the basis for a half-comedic, half-tragic
grand opera libretto."

KEEPER OF THE MOON: A Southern Boyhood, by Tim McLaurin. (Anchor/Doubleday,
$10.) Tim McLaurin reflects on his past in rural North Carolina, where he lived
in poverty with his alcoholic father, long-suffering mother and five siblings.
Last year our reviewer, Robb Forman Dew, called Mr. McLaurin a "moving writer"
whose "prose has a lyrical clarity that conveys with unusual dignity the
integrity of his own experience."

TEMPLES OF DELIGHT, by Barbara Trapido. (Evergreen/Grove, $11.95.) This novel
examines the unusual friendship between two schoolmates, one a shy, stammering
child of privilege, the other a girl whose messy background leads her to invent
her own life story. "Humorously, the novel pits the valuable bonds among women
against the antagonism of the opposite sex," Amy Boaz said here in 1991.

LOAD-DATE: January 24, 1993

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo: Lewis B. Puller Jr. (Daniel Borris/Bantam)

TYPE: Review

                   Copyright 1993 The New York Times Company

                              78 of 255 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 January 24, 1993, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

Should Doctors Tell the Truth? -- The Case Against Terminal Candor

BYLINE: By Martha Weinman Lear;  Martha Weinman Lear is the author of "Heart
Sounds," a memoir of her physician husband's illness and death.

SECTION: Section 6; Page 17; Column 1; Magazine Desk

LENGTH: 1468 words


After her surgery, my Mother would ask how her growth was and I'd say, 'Your
growth is fine,' " says Dr. William G. Cahan, senior attending surgeon at
Memorial Sloan-Kettering Cancer Center in New York. "She died at 91 without ever
hearing the word cancer. It was a death-knell word then. It would have burdened
her. So I went along, which turned out to be a nice bit of palliation. Today, we
can't keep truth from people, nor do I say we should. But total candor can be
the rape of hope."

Truth never used to be an issue in medicine. If the news was bad, it was simply
not told, a reflex response first identified by Dr. Ronald M. Weintraub, chief
of cardiothoracic surgery at Beth Israel Hospital in Boston, as the Uncle Moe
Shouldn't Know Syndrome: The family begs the doctor to lie to the patient, which
the doctor does, and would have done anyway.

The doctor has lied ever since Hippocrates, and in most of the world,
truth-telling is still considered bad medicine. Dr. Jimmie Holland, chief of
psychiatry at Sloan-Kettering, recently surveyed oncologists in 22 countries.
She says: "In much of Europe, South America, most of Asia -- they consider it
unethical to tell. They say, 'America is so brutal, you make it so difficult for
the patient, and we are kind and gentle.' "

But just yesterday, America was identically kind and gentle. We are, after all,
truth parvenus. In 1961, in a study published by The Journal of the American
Medical Association, 9 out of 10 doctors said they generally concealed a cancer
diagnosis from their patients. But by 1977, the ratio had been reversed: More
than 9 out of 10 said they usually told the truth.

In the decade between, the threat of malpractice suits and powerful
antiauthoritarian forces -- the consumer advocacy movement, the anti-Vietnam War
movement, the women's and civil rights movements -- had pushed doctors toward
the doctrine of informed consent. And with advances in oncology and heart
surgery, bad news was not always so bad anymore. It hurt less to hear and less
to tell.

But nobody had ever been taught how to tell, and many doctors and medical
ethicists recall it as a time of wretched excesses. "You're dying, you know, and
we really have to talk about it," George J. Annas, a lawyer and ethicist who is
professor of health law at the Boston University School of Medicine and Public
Health, remembers zealous doctors saying. "We called it terminal candor."

Carol Schert of Greensboro, Md., whose son Mark died of cystic fibrosis in 1980,
still weeps to recall how she learned the diagnosis: "He had been in the
hospital for nine weeks, and we still didn't know what was wrong, and then one
day the doctor told me: 'It turns out he has cystic fibrosis. Do you know what
that is?' I said, 'No.' He said, 'Well, that's what he has,' and walked out of
the room."

There was a lot of what the psychiatrist Dr. Willard Gaylin labels
"truth-dumping" -- disclosing every possible treatment and side effect, down to
the remotest chance that a certain pill may produce a pimple on the nose, and
then leaving the patient to decide what to do. "In the release of information,
caring is the great modifier," he says. "This was informing without caring."

Today, unvarnished truth seems to have yielded to what one doctor calls a
slightly varnished truth, by which he means not a lie but a good spin on bad
news. As in: A patient comes to Dr. Weintraub at Beth Israel as a candidate for
open-heart surgery. He is too high-risk and is turned down. Dr. Weintraub says:
"The absolute truth would have been to say, 'You are so sick and your heart is
so bad that if I operate on you I'll kill you.' Instead, I said: 'I've looked at
the alternatives. Surgery would carry high risk and I think that, in your
situation, continued medical therapy is the way to go.' It's euphemism, sure. He
was sent to me because medicines weren't working well anymore. But you don't
need to hit people over the head."

Dr. James F. Holland, an oncologist and chairman of the department of neoplastic
diseases at Mount Sinai Medical Center in New York, agrees: "Say a patient asks,
'Do I have a chance?' It serves no useful purpose to say, 'Yes, about one in a
hundred,' though that may be statistically so. But it is useful to say, 'Yes,
but you must work for it, because the treatment won't be easy.' Then they can
concentrate on the positive elements of treatment. People need the possibility
of hope."

It might be called the "bad news, but" school of truth-telling: "The treatment
hasn't worked, but we never know what's just around the corner."

Dr. Cahan, whose autobiography, "No Stranger to Tears," looks back on 50 years
of surgical practice, recalls how antibiotics suddenly appeared around that
cosmic corner, "and people who had been dying like flies, of ruptured
appendixes, blood poisoning, pneumonia, suddenly were living as if by a
miracle."

Even in dealing with AIDS, perhaps especially with AIDS, they hold out that
straw of optimism.

" 'This is the end, I've had it.' That's how cancer patients talked 30 years
ago, and it's exactly how AIDS patients talk today," says Dr. James J. Strain,
professor of psychiatry at Mount Sinai. "We tell them that, though the
breakthrough hasn't yet come with AIDS, it will, and, meanwhile, whatever
happens, we will be right here with you and we will keep you free of pain."

At the Mount Sinai School of Medicine, a doctor sits facing a patient who seems
distraught beyond words.

"Can you show me just where the pain is?" the doctor asks.

The patient presses her stomach and sighs heavily.

He says: "You seem worried. Is something worrying you?"

"The pain," she whispers.

"Why does it worry you? What do you think it is?"

Her mouth opens and the word falls out: "Cancer."

The doctor grimaces and consults the ceiling. Suddenly he says, "Time out."

The "patient," a professional actress, freezes. The "doctor," a second-year
medical student, faces his audience: his classmates and their professor, Dr.
Mark H. Swartz.

"Why did you want time out?" Dr. Swartz asks him.

"I wasn't sure what to say next. She seems so sad, I wonder if it's
psychological. Can I tell her it's probably not cancer?"

"Is that the truth?"

"I don't know. It could be a lot of other things."

"Then that's the truth: You don't know, and it could be a lot of other things.
Just tell the truth," the professor says, and the show goes on.

This unfrivolous game, using actors trained to simulate illness, is played at
the Morchand Center at Mount Sinai, where students explore such issues as
ethics, empathy, coping with death and dying, and truth-telling.

Medical schools used to ignore all that. But as hospitals have grown more
competitive and society more litigious, the profession has seen an urgent need
to improve its bedside manners. Today, of 126 accredited medical schools in the
country, 117 now require some study of physician-patient relationships,
admissions committees are trying to measure applicants' "humanity" and the
biggest buzz phrase is "communication skills."

For a practice now so broadly endorsed, truth-telling is little understood.
There is plenty of passionate conviction but no conclusive evidence that
disclosure is "better" (or worse), in any medical sense, than the beneficent
lie.

"I saw a woman whose ovarian cancer had come back after three years," says Dr.
Stuart E. Lind of Harvard Medical School, who has written extensively on
disclosure. "The surgeon had never told her it would probably recur. Was it
better for her to have those years free of worry? I think it's better to know
the truth. But I can't be sure. And there may not be a simple answer ever."

Among medical ethicists and philosophers, the issue is not what is "better":
"The point is the right to know," says the ethicist George Annas. "You can
withhold the truth only if the patient says, directly, 'I do not want to know.'
"

But doctors insist that they must also listen to what the patient doesn't say.
Dr. Arthur W. Ludwig, an internist at Mount Sinai, tells this cautionary tale:
"When I was an intern, Fiorello La Guardia was admitted for exploratory surgery.
He said to me: 'Ludwig, these sons of bitches will never tell me the truth. I
want you to swear that you will.' I swore. He was loaded with cancer and died a
few months later. But he never once asked me. And I never told him."

It's the same old paternalism, the purists say. It is a necessary beneficence,
the compromisers say.

"Which is worse? It's a value judgment," says Dr. Jimmie Holland at
Sloan-Kettering. "Paternalism had its downside, but so does patient autonomy. We
need a middle ground. But these changes come from a society's demands, and
society isn't sure what it wants, either."

LOAD-DATE: January 24, 1993

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Drawing

                   Copyright 1993 The New York Times Company

                              79 of 255 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 January 24, 1993, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

FILM;
Playing the Odd Sayles Role

BYLINE: By DOUGLAS MARTIN

SECTION: Section 2; Page 16; Column 1; Arts & Leisure Desk

LENGTH: 1087 words


Rennie, David Strathairn's romantic character in the new movie "Passion Fish,"
has a knack for communicating more than it at first seems -- maybe on purpose,
maybe not. "No matter where you are, there you is," Rennie says matter-of-factly
when asked if he has gotten his guests -- a paraplegic and her attendant -- lost
in the steamy Louisiana bayous.

Rennie is only the latest slightly odd, more-than-a-little inexplicable man Mr.
Strathairn has played in a John Sayles movie. The two have teamed up in six
films to create compelling characters ranging from a backwoods sheriff to a
bounty hunter from another planet. All the movies are offbeat, while still
clearly trying to convey something universal.

"They go after what is unusual about a human being," said Mary McDonnell of Mr.
Sayles's movies. "You're never going to get a cliche." In "Passion Fish," Ms.
McDonnell plays May-Alice, the paralyzed woman who flirts with Rennie, and comes
to terms with life.

"Passion Fish" is a collaboration that both Mr. Sayles and Mr. Strathairn value.
"He's somebody I always think of when I write," said Mr. Sayles, 42, who
compares Mr. Strathairn's physical dexterity to Steve McQueen's. Said the
43-year-old actor, "I just have an affinity for the stuff he writes."

The two go back to the days when they were students at Williams College in
Williamstown, Mass. They teamed up a few years later in a summer theater
company, and shortly after that Mr. Sayles cast the actor in "Return of the
Secaucus Seven."

In what was obviously intended as a high compliment, Mr. Sayles -- known for his
tight control -- said that Mr. Strathairn is the only actor he lets stand behind
him when he himself is appearing in a scene. This means the director cannot see
Mr. Strathairn for, oh, at least a few seconds.

Mr. Sayles's comment amused Mr. Strathairn, who said it's probably impossible to
see him behind the 6-foot-5-inch Mr. Sayles anyway. "If I can stay in that
shadow, it's pretty great," he added.

Mr. Strathairn is currently on something of a roll, having recently appeared as
a blind, brilliant computer hacker in the high-tech caper "Sneakers" and as a
brainstorming adman in "A League of Their Own." He has just finished making
"Lost in Yonkers," based on the Neil Simon play, in which he was cast as an
emotionally stunted movie usher. He is currently filming the role of a failed
brother in "The Firm," based on John Grisham's best-selling novel.

Until "Passion Fish," in fact, most of his roles have been supporting.  Aside
from his movie work, Mr. Strathairn has appeared on television (as the title
character's boss in "The Days and Nights of Molly Dodd") and on stage (as the
lead in Vaclav Havel's "Temptation" at the Joseph Papp Public Theater).

"Usually what I get to read for is supporting roles," Mr. Strathairn said.

Added Mr. Sayles: "He could have been a leading man if that's what he wanted to
do. But those tend to, generally, be very boring roles."

Mr. Sayles believes that Mr. Strathairn could become a star -- if he were just a
little pushier, not something Mr. Sayles necessarily recommends. "That requires
a certain kind of self-assurance and hogging the stage," he said. "David only
takes as much of the scene as he should take."

Mr. Strathairn exhibits a sharp interest in ideas, social phenomenon, politics
and the arts in general. His idea for a meeting place was the exhibition of
Indian portraits at the New York Public Library. He arrived wearing scruffy work
boots and dirty blue jeans.

He explained that his interest in the show comes from spending time in the
Southwest as a boy visiting his grandfather, who had helped map Western rivers.

The actor, who lives near Poughkeepsie, N.Y., with his wife and two sons, does
not like talking about himself.

He reluctantly gave a brief reprise of his life. The son of a surgeon, he grew
up in the San Francisco Bay area. After graduating from Williams, he set off to
the Florida Everglades to visit his grandfather, the river explorer. But the
grandfather died, so Mr. Strathairn joined the Ringling Brothers and Barnum &
Bailey circus, which has a clown college in Florida.

Thus, he became a clown, occupying one half of a Siamese twin costume. The act
came to an abrupt end when he began to experiment with his appearance. His
partner's remained the same.

Next, Mr. Strathairn helped start a children's theater in Glens Falls, N.Y.
Summers, he hitchhiked around the United States, picking up theater work. One
job was at a summer theater in New Hampshire, where he met up with his old
acquaintance Mr. Sayles. "The snowball started," he said.

Mr. Strathairn has created memorable profiles in Mr. Sayles's films. "My
characters come from a different flight of stairs," the actor observed.

In "Secaucus Seven," the 1980 film that tells of a reunion of Vietnam War
protesters, he plays a guy who pumps gas for a living and loves his Dodge van.
In "Brother From Another Planet," in 1984, Mr. Strathairn teamed with Mr. Sayles
to play a pair of extraterrestrial bounty hunters. For "Matewan" (1987), he is a
scion of the famous Hatfields, working as the local sheriff. With "Eight Men
Out," the 1988 film recounting how the White Sox threw the 1919 World Series,
Mr. Strathairn is a pitcher who at first declines to help throw the games.

And in last year's "City of Hope," he is Asteroid, an off-kilter street person
Mr. Strathairn describes as "a renegade piece of the universe."

Mr. Sayles permits no deviation from what he has written in his scripts, down to
and including what kind of accent is used. In "Passion Fish," Mr. Sayles himself
decided that Rennie would not have a strong Cajun accent. In Rennie's
generation, he said, only Cajuns deep in the swamps would have much of one.

And Mr. Sayles preferred that an air of mystery be left in the relationship
between Rennie and May-Alice.Mr. Strathairn's Rennie is a laconic but friendly
sort who scrapes together a living through odd jobs. He has five children, a
wife who turned fundamentalist between No. 2 and No. 3., and he does not grasp
that he is part of a love story.

Ms. McDonnell said that Rennie's appeal lies in the fact that "he's just real."
She said, "I don't know if May-Alice dares to imagine specifically what the
relationship could be." Tellingly, the only really sensual moment between the
two happens in May-Alice's dreams.

Mr. Strathairn's view of the couple's future is simple: "The two are going to be
friends, all things considered."

NAME: David Strathairn

LOAD-DATE: January 24, 1993

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo: David Strathairn -- In "Passion Fish" he's a laconic, friendly
sort. (Ed Quinn for The New York Times)

TYPE: Biography

                   Copyright 1993 The New York Times Company

                              80 of 255 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 January 24, 1993, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

TELEVISION;
Pure Baltimore, Right Down to the Steamed Crabs

BYLINE: By BILL CARTER

SECTION: Section 2; Page 26; Column 1; Arts & Leisure Desk

LENGTH: 1534 words

DATELINE: BALTIMORE


Barry Levinson takes a look at the suspect through the window of "the box," the
tiny interrogation chamber tucked into the squad room of the Baltimore Police
Department's homicide unit. Inside, a man with a hand-held camera circles the
two detectives questioning the suspect.

"We designed this whole set to be shot in 360," Mr. Levinson says, after the
director inside the box yells, "Cut!" Mr. Levinson points to the cameraman, and
then to the open expanse of the squad room, where associate producers,
technicians, script coordinators, makeup artists and gofers sit at detectives'
desks, drinking coffee, sorting through supplies, reading the sports pages of
The Baltimore Sun.

"We set it up for 360 degrees so that the camera operator can come around
completely in here," Mr. Levinson says. "When we're shooting the squad room, the
actors will always be at work. They will be in many more shots. They'll never
know if they are definitely in or out of a given shot. It will look ragged. All
I care about is that the audience notices something is different, something is
not the way we have seen things before on television."

Having made high-profile movies like "Bugsy," "Good Morning, Vietnam," "The
Natural," "Diner" and "Rain Man" (for which he won an Academy Award), Mr.
Levinson is producing -- and occasionally directing -- his first television
series, an hourlong police drama called "Homicide: A Year on the Street." The
show, starring Ned Beatty, Yaphet Kotto and Richard Belzer, carries a
substantial burden. NBC, which needs a hit like a drowning man needs a raft,
calls "Homicide" its most promising new series.

That's why the network has decided to broadcast its first episode next Sunday
night, immediately after the most-watched television event of the year, the
Super Bowl (probably about 10 P.M.). After that, the show will be seen Wednesday
nights at 9, beginning on Feb. 3.

Warren Littlefield, the president of NBC Entertainment, says the network is
"absolutely high" on the series and even predicts that it could rejuvenate the
one-hour drama format, which audiences have largely been rejecting. In its look,
its complexity and its effort to redesign the traditional cop-show form,
"Homicide" will surely be compared to another police drama, which NBC, then in
similarly dire ratings circumstances, took a chance on a dozen Januarys ago. "
'Hill Street Blues,' obviously," Mr. Levinson says. He hopes, he adds, that
viewers will react as they did to "Hill Street Blues": "The first time you see
it, it's a little odd. Then you get drawn into it, and suddenly it makes sense."

But Mr. Levinson has taken the revisionism of "Hill Street" even further. The
entire show, not just certain scenes, is shot with hand-held cameras. Some
dialogue is so "real," so authentically conversational, as to be difficult to
follow. Mr. Levinson will set an entire episode inside the
claustrophobia-inducing interrogation room, something the peripatetic "Hill
Street" never tried.

Despite its enthusiasm for the series, NBC does have concerns about how viewers
might respond at first to such exotic fare. Mr. Littlefield said NBC would use
promotions before, and especially during, the football game that would "educate
the viewers that we will be offering something truly different and special
here."

Many highly successful film makers have dabbled in television (David Lynch,
Steven Spielberg, George Lucas) or are about to (Oliver Stone, Robert De Niro),
and they usually cite as a reason for doing so the creative challenges of
working in a different medium. Mr. Levinson says that, too, but he had an
additional reason: the series could be shot in Baltimore.

Baltimore, Mr. Levinson's hometown, has been a dominant motif of his career; it
is to him what Monument Valley was to John Ford, a film maker Mr. Levinson
admires and often mentions. Three of his movies have been set in Baltimore; his
company is called Baltimore Pictures; now he is making a television show --
every single frame of it -- here. Only the editing will be done in New York and
Los Angeles.

"I don't find it any different from a writer who wrote about his particular
region," Mr. Levinson says. "Whether it was William Faulkner or Tennessee
Williams or whoever. They wrote about their regions. When I would sit down to
write these pieces, Baltimore and its characters and its rhythms just made sense
to me."

To David Simon, a Baltimore journalist who wrote the book of the same title
about the Baltimore homicide unit, it made sense that if anyone in Hollywood
would be interested in making a movie based on the book, it was Barry Levinson.

"I thought right away that its real potential was as a series," Mr. Levinson
says. "The thing Simon was doing was showing how this unit works over a long
period of time. How some crimes are like a slam dunk and others take quite
awhile, and some never get solved."

The detectives on the show are composites of the real-life detectives in the
book. Their work ranges from the numbingly pedestrian drug-related murders
common to every big city to one-of-a-kind cases with an undercurrent of dark
humor, like the oft-married minister's wife whose husbands have a knack for
getting in the way of stray bullets, to cases that are difficult to solve and
difficult to think about, like a little girl murdered on her way home from the
public library.

The series takes full advantage of its setting, using the rowhouses of East
Baltimore, the Fells Point waterfront, the hotels and office towers downtown.
The first episode includes a long scene in which the detectives hammer away at a
pile of steamed crabs. And the main set, built in a former gym on the Baltimore
Recreation Pier, is an exact replica of the real homicide squad room just a few
miles away, right down to the old plastic-foam coffee cups strewn around, the
pink message memo pads stacked on desks, and the big white bulletin board that
lists which murders have been solved and which are still open.

Much of the show's staff is local, including the set decorator and the wardrobe,
hair and makeup artists. "When I came back here to do 'Diner,' there was almost
nobody here for us to use," Mr. Levinson says. "Then we developed a base. Now
there are quite a few good people you can pick up."

"HOMICIDE" IS NOT MR. Levinson's first television project. He started his career
as a comedy writer, most prominently for "The Carol Burnett Show" from 1974 to
1976. In 1983 he developed "Diner," his first Baltimore movie, as a comedy pilot
for CBS, with such now-familiar actors as James Spader and Paul Reiser. CBS
killed it after the pilot had been shot. It was broadcast in the dead of summer
and went unnoticed.

"They said it wasn't compatible with their other programming," Mr. Levinson
recalls.  "I'm not sure why we went through the entire exercise, because if you
know it's not going to be compatible, then you could save a lot of money and not
do it at all. It was ahead of its time, I think."

Mr. Levinson is aware that the same might be said of "Homicide," which may prove
difficult for the casual viewer to absorb on first viewing. "I imagine anyone
who has been drinking a lot at the Super Bowl party might have trouble following
the show," Mr. Levinson says.

He directed the pilot episode himself because he wanted to set the visual style
for the series. "It's like exercise in a way," he says. "It keeps you alert. I
plan on doing more episodes periodically."

The faster shooting schedule of television did not throw him, Mr. Levinson adds,
because he has always tried to move through his movies more swiftly than most
other directors. Even "Toys," his latest and most elaborate feature film, was
shot in just 80 days, relatively quickly, he points out, especially given all
the special effects.

"Toys" failed with critics and at the box office, and Mr. Levinson, who had
wanted to make the film for more than a decade, believes that the experimental
nature of the film was its undoing.

"There's a point when you have to challenge yourself, when you have to step up,"
he says. "I believe in that. So then you take some hard knocks. Those are the
dangers you face when you take risks. The one thing I'm disappointed most about
is the climate that says experimentation is discouraged."

Asked whether he would change anything about "Toys," he replies: "I don't know
that I'd do anything different. I wanted to do something audacious and out
there."

Mr. Levinson went back into the pilot episode of "Homicide" for some re-editing
after he realized that the sound in several scenes was too garbled and that some
scenes that introduced characters obliquely could be dropped to improve the
episode's clarity.

Still, he knows that "Homicide" will require patience from the audience. "The
initial episode may get a lot of exposure because of the Super Bowl," he says,
"but it still needs that week-to-week thing where people start to discover it,
where you start to find the sensibility of it. Generally a show that is a little
left or right of center needs a little more time. It's one thing if it's
'Laverne and Shirley' -- you like it, and you're there. You've got it."

LOAD-DATE: January 24, 1993

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photos: Barry Levinson, the producer of NBC's "Homicide," on a
Baltimore street -- Even the wardrobe people had to be local. Richard Belzer,
left, and Ned Beatty as police detectives -- Some of their cases are standard,
some carry a tinge of humor, and some will never be solved at all. Photographs
by Marty Katz for The New York Times)

                   Copyright 1993 The New York Times Company

                              81 of 255 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 January 24, 1993, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

THEATER;
Their Songs Were America's Happy Talk

BYLINE: By STEPHEN HOLDEN

SECTION: Section 2; Page 1; Column 5; Arts & Leisure Desk

LENGTH: 2939 words


Once upon a time, America dreamed of itself as a singing fairy tale for
grown-ups, with a happy ending. Norman Rockwell painted this storybook country,
and Richard Rodgers and Oscar Hammerstein 2d wrote its songs. More than just pop
confections, they added up to a kind of secular catechism that sweetly but
firmly instructed people on the rules of behavior in a world where America knew
best and good triumphed over evil.

Certainly, Rodgers and Hammerstein didn't invent the code of values that their
songs taught. With their stern, semioperatic melodies and know-it-all lyrics,
they offered an idealized mirror image of American middle-class morality in the
heady afterglow of Hitler's defeat. At a moment when everyone understood what
was meant by terms like "maturity," "good citizenship" and "mental hygiene,"
they helped define the notion of a national culture.

In this wholesome, cheery land, nothing could be more desirable than to be as
corny as Kansas in August and as normal as blueberry pie. If you kept on
whistling a happy tune, you would never walk alone. And on some enchanted
evening, you might even find your true love. Those who climbed every mountain,
beginning with foothills that were alive with the sound of music, would surely
find their dreams.

It was 50 years ago, on March 31, 1943, that Rodgers and Hammerstein astounded
Broadway at the opening of their first show, "Oklahoma!" A landmark, with its
seamless integration of song and story, it revolutionized musical theater. And
in this anniversary year, their enduring legacy is being celebrated by dozens of
projects.

Rodgers and Hammerstein together wrote several dozen songs that have had a life
outside the theater. The best of them had a polish, romantic confidence and air
of authority that inspired millions to live by their sentiments. One of the most
influential love songs ever written, "Some Enchanted Evening" from "South
Pacific," encouraged a generation to expect to fall in love at first sight, as
the lyric promised: "You may see a stranger/ Across a crowded room/ And somehow
you know."

But like all fairy tales, that vision had its grim underside. Happy endings only
came to those who conformed to the rules, who looked on the bright side and
behaved like nice young ladies and gentlemen. And a sense of belonging to that
magic kingdom was conditional on belonging to a comfortable stratum of society
in which people, when describing an evening out, trillingly threw around
highfalutin words like "enchanted."

The genteel ethos of the Rodgers and Hammerstein song -- a middle-class society
with a suppressed id -- represented everything that rock-and-roll would aim to
smash. If "Some Enchanted Evening" had a rock-and-roll rebuttal, it came in 1956
when a leering Elvis Presley snarled, "You ain't nothin' but a hound dog."

It is only slightly overstating the case to say that all American pop since the
mid-1950's, from rock-and-roll to Stephen Sondheim's highbrow deconstructions of
their esthetic, has been a reaction to Rodgers and Hammerstein. Certainly
rock-and-roll at its rawest represented a spontaneous burst of rebellion by huge
segments of American society that found the cultured urbanity of Rodgers and
Hammerstein's Broadway songs too sweet, too sophisticated and too pious to speak
for them.

But that revolution scarcely negated the team's accomplishment. Every soaring
ballad played on adult contemporary radio stations contains a grain of Rodgers
and Hammerstein, whether listeners know it or not.

IT ALL BEGAN DURING THE darkest days of World War II, when the composer Richard
Rodgers and the lyricist and librettist Oscar Hammerstein 2d first collaborated
on "Oklahoma!" The show is still acknowledged as one of the two or three most
influential of all Broadway musicals, and it helped to define a national mood of
optimistic self-assurance that persisted for two decades, until the
assassination of John F. Kennedy. "Oklahoma!" opened around the time that
country music was becoming recognized as a distinct genre of American pop. And
perhaps more than any Broadway show before or since, it addressed America's
urban and rural cultures in a language that both could understand.

Over the next 14 years -- from 1945 to 1959 -- Rodgers and Hammerstein would
collaborate on eight more Broadway shows -- "Carousel," "Allegro," "South
Pacific," "The King and I," "Me and Juliet," "Pipe Dream," "Flower Drum Song"
and "The Sound of Music" -- as well as on the movie musical "State Fair" and the
television musical "Cinderella." Besides "Oklahoma!" which played 2,212
performances on Broadway, four of those shows would become classics. "Carousel"
enjoyed 890 performances, "South Pacific" 1,925, "The King and I" 1,246 and "The
Sound of Music" 1,443. The 1965 film version of "The Sound of Music" became one
of the blockbusters of all time.

When Rodgers and Hammerstein joined forces, both were already over 40 and had
distinguished careers behind them. With the lyricist Lorenz Hart, who died in
1943, Rodgers had composed the scores for a succession of hit shows that
included "On Your Toes," "Babes in Arms," "The Boys From Syracuse," "By Jupiter"
and, most important, "Pal Joey." Those scores yielded more than 80 popular
standards. The quintessential Rodgers and Hart song -- "My Funny Valentine" or
"Little Girl Blue" -- represented an exquisite wedding of Hart's wry, wistful
observations on love and its follies, with a buoyant melody by Rodgers that felt
so natural it appeared to have floated into being.

Hammerstein came from the grander and more formal world of operetta. He had
helped to create some of the biggest hits of the 1920's, including "Rose-Marie"
and "The Desert Song." In 1927, he hit his pinnacle with "Show Boat," the
landmark musical that was the first Broadway show to weave book, music and
lyrics into a coherent whole. But by 1942, Hammerstein was down on his luck. He
had not had a hit show in 10 years.

In "Oklahoma!" their strengths meshed awesomely, as the Old World grandeur of
operetta was joined to a slangy New World vernacular filtered through Broadway's
roistering musical-comedy tradition. Rodgers's change of collaborators had such
a pronounced effect on his music that his compositions with Hart and those with
Hammerstein seem almost like the work of different composers. Where Rodgers and
Hart's greatest songs were intimate reflections, Rodgers and Hammerstein's had
the slightly stentorian ring of official statements on life. And upon scoring
their second consecutive hit with "Carousel," the pair ruled the Broadway
musical for the next decade and a half.

"Oklahoma!" was set in Indian territory just after the turn of the 20th century.
It opened with "Oh, What a Beautiful Mornin'!," one of Rodgers and Hammerstein's
greatest anthems. A roar of ebullience that announced, "I've got a beautiful
feelin' -- everything's goin' my way!" the song seemed to proclaim the coming
century as belonging to America, the land of wide-open spaces and the wild west.
And when the war was won two years after "Oklahoma!" opened on Broadway, and the
victorious troops streamed home in triumph, that proclamation came true. For the
next 20 years -- until Vietnam -- everything seemed to be going America's way.

The show, like Rodgers and Hammerstein's subsequent hits, portrays a world in
which the choices between good and evil are very clear-cut. The slender plot,
which was based on Lynn Riggs's 1931 play, "Green Grow the Lilacs," focuses on
whether the wholesome Curly McLain or the mean, dirty-minded Jud Fry will take
Laurey Williams to the box social. Eventually, she marries Curly, but at their
wedding, Curly accidentally kills Jud in a fight.

With its pivotal dream ballet choreographed by Agnes DeMille, in which Laurey is
almost literally pulled in two directions, the show is a crude Freudian allegory
of the struggle between a young woman's nice and nasty impulses. But more than
that, as Ethan Mordden points out in his book "Rodgers and Hammerstein," a
fascinating new study of the team's work, the play is also "a consideration of
how a relatively primitive but orderly community deals with brutish lawlessness
in its preparation to enter civilization -- that is, to assume American
statehood."

In one way or another, all the major Rodgers and Hammerstein shows examine
notions of community, civilized behavior and initiation from a perspective that
was considered liberal in the 1940's and 50's but that in the light of today's
sexual and racial politics seems slightly right-of-center, especially in
treating relations between men and women.

In "Carousel" (1945), which was adapted from Ferenc Molnar's 1921 play,
"Liliom," the central character, Billy Bigelow, is killed in an attempted
robbery but returns to earth to do one good deed. He achieves this at the high
school graduation of his shy, lonely daughter, Louise, whom he encourages to
listen to the uplifting sentiments of the song "You'll Never Walk Alone." Of the
team's "big five" shows, "Carousel" was the only one that approached tragedy.

The other three hits, although they didn't always involve American characters,
evoked American hegemony abroad by being set in far-flung locales and by dealing
with such war-related themes as East meets West and escape from Nazism. In
"South Pacific" (1949), adapted from James Michener's collection of war stories,
"Tales of the South Pacific," an exotic Pacific island became what Mr. Mordden
calls "a moral testing ground." Before Nellie Forbush, a Navy nurse from Little
Rock, Ark., and Emile de Becque, a wealthy French planter, can find happiness
together, he must embark on a perilous war mission and she must overcome her
intolerance and accept his two children, whose mother was an island woman.

"The King and I" (1951), which was adapted from Margaret Langdon's book, "Anna
and the King of Siam," told of the true adventures of Anna Leonowens, a
Victorian Englishwoman who became the governess to the children of the King of
Siam. Clashing with her employer, a polygamous despot, Anna represents the
civilized, all-knowing West offering reason and humanity to the barbarous East.

By "The Sound of Music" (1959), the tone of Rodgers and Hammerstein's chin-up
optimism had turned sugar-coated and goody-goody. Adapted by Howard Lindsay and
Russel Crouse from Maria von Trapp's autobiography, "The Trapp Family Singers,"
"The Sound of Music" was set in 1938 in the Austrian Tyrol. It tells how Maria
Rainer, an indefatigably cheerful postulant, teaches the seven children of the
wealthy Capt. Georg von Trapp such ditties as "Do-Re-Mi" and leads them over the
Alps to Switzerland and safety from Nazi invaders.

AS RODGERS AND Hammerstein's career progressed, their social catechism became
increasingly doctrinaire. "Carousel" yielded two songs -- "You'll Never Walk
Alone" and "Soliloquy" -- that, heard off the stage, seemed to hammer home an
all-American code of values.

"You'll Never Walk Alone" quickly became a secular hymn and a staple of school
glee clubs across the country. A soaring churchy ballad, it proffered an
uplifting message of faith without actually invoking the deity. The anthem,
whose sentiments were later reprised in the more sugary "Climb Ev'ry Mountain"
from "The Sound of Music," is probably the most influential of all Rodgers and
Hammerstein songs, for it established a genre of inspirational pop ballad that
has flourished ever since. Among its more famous descendants are "The Impossible
Dream," "You've Got a Friend," "Bridge Over Troubled Water," "That's What
Friends Are For" and numerous hits for Barry Manilow, Lionel Richie and others.

"Soliloquy" offers a 1940's-style instructional guide on the differences between
little boys and girls. The ideal son will be "as tall and as tough as a tree,"
the daughter "as pink and as white as peaches and cream."

This polarized vision of men and women as sticks and snails versus sugar and
spice is implicit in Rodgers and Hammerstein's traditional patriarchal view of
sexual roles and marriage. It found its most naively sexist expression in "A
Fellow Needs a Girl," from "Allegro." Beginning with the lines, "A fellow needs
a girl to sit by his side at the end of a weary day/ To sit by his side and
listen to him talk and agree with the things he'll say," the song is a
condescending -- not to say didactic -- description of a good wife's emotionally
supportive role. This Tarzan-and-Jane version of love ran through many other
Rodgers and Hammerstein songs, most notably "There Is Nothing Like a Dame" (from
"South Pacific") and "I Enjoy Being a Girl" (from "Flower Drum Song").

More lessons on such themes as antiprejudice ("Carefully Taught" from "South
Pacific") and overcoming fear ("I Whistle a Happy Tune " from "The King and I")
are threaded through the works. By "The Sound of Music," this preaching had
turned icky-poo-infantile in songs like "Do-Re-Mi" and "My Favorite Things."
Despite its popularity, the show was pretty much the end of the road for grand,
secularized uplift in American musicals.

WHEN THE INEVITABLE reaction came, it was from none other than Hammerstein's
brilliant pupil and protege, Stephen Sondheim.

While carrying forward and even refining Rodgers and Hammerstein's standards of
craft, Mr. Sondheim systematically dismantled their sunny world view. No longer
did America, or anybody else, know best. Nor did that cherished ideal of
"normality" hold the stage. From "Company" to "Sweeney Todd" to "Assassins," Mr.
Sondheim's shows frequently focused on what used to be called "abnormal
psychology."

"Pacific Overtures," in which Westerners were seen as the barbarians wreaking
havoc on a stable Asian civilization, suggested a pointed,
through-the-looking-glass answer to "The King and I." In "Into the Woods,"
"Cinderella's" happy-ever-after ending went kaput in the second act. "Sweeney
Todd," in which goodness is an aberration in a corrupt, evil world, is the
fiendish nightmare reality that "The Sound of Music" tried to deny.

By the time of Sondheim's ascendancy in the 1970's, of course, the dream of
America as a fortress of rectitude had crumbled with race riots, assassinations
and Vietnam. And the Broadway musical had been superseded as a cultural force by
pop records. If Sondheim was Hammerstein's heir and antidote, the less talented
Andrew Lloyd Webber is Rodgers's most commercially successful descendant. One
reason Mr. Webber's songs may seem hollow, however, is that he has never worked
with a lyricist whose talent approaches that of Hart or Hammerstein.

The America of Rodgers and Hammerstein -- where the good guys won, love
conquered all and progress was taken for granted -- was itself a dream, a golden
bubble of postwar hope and confidence that evaporated more than it burst.

To be as corny as Kansas in August didn't simply mean being someone who was
happy, busy and in love. It meant being one of God's chosen in the heart of the
promised land, where prayers were answered and happy endings were for everyone.



THE SOUND OF MUSIC

Rodgers and Hammerstein musicals average 2,700 productions a year around the
country, including about 600 of "Oklahoma!," their oldest show. The numbers are
likely to increase during this 50th-anniversary year, which has been marked --
and will be more so -- by many noteworthy events, including these.

* A new production of "Carousel," directed by Nicholas Hytner, that opened in
November in London to critical acclaim. Plans are under way to transfer it to
New York.

* A sumptuous studio recording by Philips Classics of "The King and I," starring
Julie Andrews, Ben Kingsley, Lea Salonga and Marilyn Horne. Issued in October,
it was nominated for a Grammy.

* Ethan Mordden's "Rodgers and Hammerstein," a lavishly illustrated study of the
team's work that offers an impressive blend of scholarship and opinion, plus a
chapter-by-chapter analysis of the musicals; it was published in October by
Harry N. Abrams.

* A commemorative stamp honoring the 50th anniversary of the opening of
"Oklahoma!" in March 1943.

* Events around the country throughout March to celebrate the beginning of the
Rodgers and Hammerstein partnership. In Manhattan on March 2, "The Rodgers and
Hammerstein Revue" will open at Rainbow and Stars, where it will run through
April 10; on March 18 at Carnegie Hall, "From Columbia to 'Oklahoma!' and
Beyond" will honor Columbia University alumni Rodgers, Hammerstein and Lorenz
Hart at a benefit, with performances by Barbara Cook, Patti LuPone and Kevin
Kline.

* A variety of remastered and repackaged recordings to be issued this spring.
Among them: the original-cast albums of "Carousel," "Oklahoma!" and "The King
and I" on MCA; "South Pacific" on Sony Broadway, and "Allegro," "Me and Juliet"
and "Pipe Dream" on RCA Victor. Sony Broadway will also rerelease a Barbara
Cook-Theodore Bikel studio recording of "The King and I," a Nelson Eddy studio
recording of "Oklahoma!" and a compilation album, "The Rodgers and Hammerstein
Song Book." MCA will release a similar compilation, "The Rodgers and Hammerstein
Collection." Earlier this week, Angel records reissued the movie soundtracks to
"Carousel," "Oklahoma!" and "The King and I."

* To be published in March: "O.K.!: The Story of 'Oklahoma!' " by Max Wilk
(Grove Press), featuring interviews with original company members. Due in the
fall, " 'The Sound of Music': The Making of America's Favorite Movie" by Julia
Antopol Hirsch (Contemporary Books), about the 1965 film version of the classic.

NAME: Oscar Hammerstein; Richard Rodgers

LOAD-DATE: January 24, 1993

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photos: Patricia Routledge, above center, in the current Royal National
Theater revival of "Carousel" in London -- Of Rodgers and Hammerstein's "big
five," the 1945 musical was the only one that approached tragedy. (Clive Barda);
Katharine Sergava, left, as Laurey (in bridal veil), and Bambi Linn, foreground,
as the child, in Agnes DeMille's dream ballet in the original "Oklahoma!" -- The
struggle between a young woman's nice and nasty impulses. (Graphic House)(pg. 6)


Drawing (Al Hirschfeld)(pg. 1)

TYPE: Biography

                   Copyright 1993 The New York Times Company

                              82 of 255 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 January 24, 1993, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

THE WORLD;
Britain Senses a Lapse in That Special Relationship

BYLINE: By WILLIAM E. SCHMIDT

SECTION: Section 4; Page 5; Column 1; Week in Review Desk

LENGTH: 954 words

DATELINE: LONDON


FOR weeks, editors and politicians here have been waging an unusual
trans-Atlantic campaign, nudging the incoming Clinton team to consider
preserving at least one holdover from the Bush Administration: Raymond G. H.
Seitz, the United States Ambassador to Britain. "If he is wise," The Times of
London advised, "Mr. Clinton will recognize that there are some virtues in
continuity."

The new Administration has not yet signaled what it will do with Mr. Seitz, a
Foreign Service officer whose appointment by President Bush in 1991 broke a
more-than-200-year tradition of naming well-heeled political appointees to the
London post.

But on this side of the Atlantic, the public testimonials on behalf of the
United States Ambassador appear to represent more than admiration for his skills
as a professional diplomat. These days there are many in Britain who have a bad
case of jitters over the transition from the Bush to the Clinton Administration,
and they perhaps yearn to hang on to Mr. Seitz as a calming influence during
what could be a bumpy ride.

At stake is the future course of what Winston Churchill called "the special
relationship," that complex bundle of shared history, values and language --
coupled with common economic and strategic goals -- that over time have made
Britain America's closest and most loyal ally, even if there are those in London
who would prefer still to regard America as the junior partner.

In some ways, the special relationship matters more now than ever. While the
United States dwarfs Britain in military prowess and global influence,
Washington has increasingly relied on the British as a loyal sidekick as they
try to police an increasingly fractious world after the cold war.

In the Persian Gulf war, in Bosnia and, most recently, in the renewed conflict
with Iraq, the United States and Britain have become the axis around which at
least part of the new world order spins. Last weekend, Prime Minister John Major
and Mr. Bush conferred by telephone six times about the military reply to Saddam
Hussein's defiance of United Nations resolutions.

But in a world in which instant telephone diplomacy is increasingly important,
the change in administrations represents a challenge to the British after 12
years of ideological compatibility between Reagan-Bush Republicans and the
Conservative Governments of Margaret Thatcher and Mr. Major.

For one thing, there is a strong sense in London that Mr. Major is setting out
with a big disadvantage. Last fall, some Clinton aides concluded that Mr.
Major's Government was pulling for Mr. Bush in the American elections. Not only
did the Conservative Party dispatch advisers to Washington to work with the Bush
campaign, they say, but British bureaucrats searched Government records to check
out spurious rumors that young Mr. Clinton had sought to renounce his American
citizenship while a student at Oxford University in the 1960's.

At the same time, candidate Clinton irked Britons during the campaign,
criticizing British policy in Northern Ireland and suggesting a harder line with
China at a time when the British already have their hands full with China's
leaders over the future of Hong Kong.

Officially, the Government plays down any friction with Mr. Clinton, or
foreboding over the relationship. An aide to the Prime Minister even suggested
that Mr. Major would get on splendidly with Mr. Clinton, not only because the
new President studied at Oxford and knows Britain, but because both he and the
Prime Minister are "self-made men" with humble backgrounds.

Over the last 40 years there have been real jolts to the special relationship.
The biggest came in 1956, when President Eisenhower angrily blocked a
British-led campaign to wrest back control of the Suez Canal from the Egyptians.
President Nixon and Edward Heath never got on well, partly because the Prime
Minister pushed British policy toward Europe. And Harold Wilson's refusal to
commit even a token British contingent to Vietnam rankled President Johnson.

Strain Over Bosnia

Despite the tandem between Mr. Major and Mr. Bush, strains were becoming evident
in their relationship, too. The biggest stumbling block, now and probably in the
future, is Bosnia, where the British have resisted stepping up military pressure
on the Serbs, as the United States has urged. The British, with 2,400 troops on
United Nations peacekeeping duty in Bosnia, are reluctant to put their soldiers
at risk.

In the end, Ambassador Seitz says, the strains in the American-British
relationship have little to do with changes in American administrations. The
larger issue is the shifting structure of European politics itself, since the
end of the cold war has erased the central fact of the trans-Atlantic alliance:
the specter of a large, hostile, military, anti-democratic power in the center
of Europe, embodied first in the Nazis and later the Communists.

In both countries, perspectives are shifting. Mr. Clinton intends to focus
inward, to secure America's economic security, and Britain is increasingly
distracted by a debate over its role within the European Community. The more
troubling question for the future is whether Britain and the United States will
be able, jointly, to continue to look at the new world in the same way.

David Reynolds, a historian at Cambridge University, says that for now Britain
and America share the same strategic goals as "status quo powers," particularly
since the British, unlike the Germans, are willing to project their power. "Like
most alliances, the cement has always been an external threat," he said,
referring to the special relationship. "The cement now is a general and alarming
threat of global instability."

LOAD-DATE: January 24, 1993

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo: Many in Britain have jitters over the transition from the Bush
to the Clinton Administration and the continuation of "the special
relationship." Prime Minister John Major met with President Bush in Washington
last month. (Associated Press)

                   Copyright 1993 The New York Times Company

                              83 of 255 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 January 24, 1993, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

Foreign Affairs;
'Chris' And Aspin And Lake

BYLINE: By LESLIE H. GELB

SECTION: Section 4; Page 17; Column 1; Editorial Desk

LENGTH: 719 words


Almost 30 years ago in the U.S. Embassy in Saigon, the lives of a young Army
lieutenant -- Les Aspin -- and three very junior Foreign Service officers in
their mid-20's -- Anthony Lake, Peter Tarnoff and Frank Wisner -- touched one
another. Today, the four sit at the pinnacle of power and, together with
Secretary of State Warren Christopher, form two interlocking triangles that will
command America's national security machinery.

In the top triangle, two rumply policy intellectuals -- Defense Secretary Aspin
and Mr. Lake, the national security adviser, will vie with each other to shape
strategy, while Mr. Christopher essentially counsels and reacts.

In the second triangle, the three old pals -- Mr. Lake, Under Secretary of
State-designate Tarnoff and Under Secretary of Defense-designate Wisner --
bureaucratic black belts all, will control interdepartmental deliberations and
tamp down internal conflicts.

Policy fights will not split these triangles into the usual hawks and doves,
conservatives and liberals. Instead, the five will maneuver in ever-changing
coalitions of activists and cautioners. One mix might want to get tough in Iraq;
another, in Bosnia. The question mark in the picture will be President Clinton.

As a history buff, Mr. Clinton will discover that his senior triangle will
resemble the Robert McNamara, Dean Rusk and McGeorge Bundy team of the Kennedy
and Johnson Administrations.

Defense Secretary McNamara was the activist and conceptualizer, trying to run
foreign policy out of the Pentagon -- and often succeeding. He generally called
the tune not only on Vietnam, but also on arms control and European and Asian
policy.

Mr. Bundy, the national security adviser, mainly played the honest broker and
remained almost out of public sight. From time to time, he would strike with his
own policy memo and carry the day -- but few knew about it.

Secretary of State Rusk was not out to change the world. He did have some strong
views and sometimes objected to the goings-on around him. Mostly, however, he
said "O.K.," or "O.K. but . . ." He saw himself primarily as the President's
adviser. He rarely took the bureaucratic lead on policy-making and generally let
the State Department bureaus fend for themselves.

In Mr. Clinton's senior triangle, Mr. Aspin -- an idea machine of staggering
proportions, judging from his paper deluge over his last 20 years as a
Congressman -- will want to be the driving force. Just like his old idol and
Pentagon boss, Robert McNamara. In the McNamara mold, he is building a high-I.Q.
team of activists who soon will be launching lightning bolts on everything from
defense policy to democratization in Russia to economic policy.

Mr. Lake will want to be the main idea-man himself and, from inside the White
House, is better positioned to press his case than Mr. Aspin. In any event, he
will be the one who personally shapes the consensus on most issues. He will be
more activist than Mr. Bundy was, but like him, he will play an inside game --
often presenting an opaque exterior.

Mr. Christopher, like Mr. Rusk, has no burning policy agenda. If Mr. Aspin and
Mr. Lake agree, he will likely go along, adding stylistic cautions and warnings.
If troubled, he can appeal to Mr. Clinton, with whom he forged a close and
avuncular relationship over the last year. His power will rise or fall on that
relationship.

Behind the scenes, the Lake-Tarnoff-Wisner network will often be as important as
the top triangle. These three are quite capable of working out policy lines
themselves, then selling them to their respective bosses. All three are also
first-class operators, able and eager to do deals with Congress and manipulate
the press.

Their power rests on their mutual trust, which goes beyond their shared Vietnam
experiences. They also worked together intimately in Cyrus Vance's State
Department. All are pragmatists. Mr. Wisner is the most conservative, Mr.
Tarnoff a curious amalgam of liberal and skeptic, and Mr. Lake ranges in
between.

Whether the two power triangles produce cautious or activist policy lines will
depend on Mr. Clinton. President Kennedy handled his advisers with
self-confidence and assertiveness. Lyndon Johnson was tentative about foreign
policy. Mr. Clinton could turn out to be either -- or both.

LOAD-DATE: January 24, 1993

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Op-Ed

                   Copyright 1993 The New York Times Company

                              84 of 255 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 January 24, 1993, Sunday, Late Edition - Final
                              Correction Appended

THE NATION;
Presidents Ask a Place in Posterity; Posterity Keeps Rearranging Them

BYLINE: By ADAM CLYMER

SECTION: Section 4; Page 3; Column 1; Week in Review Desk

LENGTH: 1203 words


AS Bill Clinton begins to seek a place in history, and George Bush wonders what
his will be, they need to remember that those places are fixed not just by their
accomplishments and their failings, but also by the values of the time when they
are judged.

For most of the 19th century, for example, Andrew Jackson was dismissed as a
backwoodsman whose populism wrecked the economy and as the forefather of the
spoils system whose excesses civil service was meant to cure. But in this
century, new times called forth different values. Old Hickory was seen by the
first Roosevelt as the exemplar of a strong Presidency, and by the second as a
great upper and lower case Democrat, and the histories have reflected those
shifts.

In the business-oriented 1920's, and in histories published in that decade and
the next, progressives like Theodore Roosevelt and Woodrow Wilson were devalued.
Their stock soared when the country, in the New Deal, revalued their approach.

But changing Presidential reputations are more than just a function of
historians following the election returns. Stephen E. Ambrose, biographer of
Presidents Eisenhower and Nixon, offers two more thoughtful reasons.

One is "how things turn out." He said Mr. Wilson was considered a disaster in
foreign affairs when he left office. By the late 1930's, he said, "the common
wisdom became World War II started because we didn't enter the League of
Nations" and his standing improved. Now, he said, history may turn again,
watching the bloodshed in Bosnia and wondering if Wilson's commitment to
self-determination in the old Austro-Hungarian Empire was at fault.

The second reason is that historians can actually learn more about the President
they study than people knew at the time, especially with the development of
serious Presidential libraries for every President, except Mr. Nixon, since
Herbert Hoover.

"The image of Eisenhower as the mumbling, grinning empty-headed President who
played golf and let Foster Dulles run the world had to give way once the
Eisenhower Library opened up," Mr. Ambrose said. For example, when Mr. Dulles
wanted to reject North Korea's proposal to resume armistice talks in 1953, the
President squelched him.

The Public Counts Hope

But the judgment of history is not the exclusive property of historians. The
American public claims a say. For example, it regards John F. Kennedy as an
ideal President even if recent histories have argued that he accomplished little
and have stressed his sex life, emphasizing his successes in domestic liaisons
more than his triumphs in foreign relations.

David McCullough, Harry Truman's biographer, says that by now Kennedy is "too
far down -- it's almost as though he had no ability at all." But the public's
view is not based on a contrary reading of the same evidence. The public focuses
on the inspiration he provided, starting with the stirring words of his
inaugural address. The hopes he raised then in young Americans, recalled last
week when one of them, Mr. Clinton, visited his grave, are too imprecise for
many historians to weigh, but the public counts them in the balance.

There was a similar disconnect on Mr. Truman when he left office. His last
Gallup Poll approval rating was 31 percent, lower than that of any who followed
him except Mr. Nixon. And he was widely scorned and disliked. But at the same
time there was a strong element of respect from the internationalist community
for his firmness against the Soviet Union.

Mr. McCullough says the rise in Truman's popularity since then has come about
partly for the wrong reasons. Merle Miller's "Plain Speaking" made him come
across as "kind of a cosmic hick," Mr. McCullough said. "The real man was much
more complicated, far more intellectual, sentimental, sensitive and certainly
much harder-working than he was generally perceived." Politically, Truman is
dragged out every four years by whatever candidate hopes to replicate his
comeback victory in 1948, with hardly a reference to the liberal domestic
program he ran on.

His reputation seems settled, and perhaps most of all by the first test Mr.
Ambrose offered, "how things turn out." For in his farewell address, on Jan. 15,
1953, Truman told the nation: "As the free world grows stronger, more united,
more attractive to men on both sides of the Iron Curtain -- and as the Soviet
hopes for easy expansion are blocked -- then there will have to come a time of
change in the Soviet world. Nobody can say for sure when that is going to be, or
exactly how it will come about, whether by revolution, or trouble in the
satellite states, or by a change inside the Kremlin. I have not a doubt in the
world that a change will occur." And he was right.

Lacking that sort of historic anchor, most of his successors' images seem less
firmly fixed. For example, Mr. Nixon's floats up, bit by bit, though his
disgrace is indelible.

The Vietnam Albatross

So is the Vietnam War's legacy to Lyndon B. Johnson. But the temper of this time
may affect his status. If Mr. Clinton seems a successful, activist President,
Johnson's reputation may rise. The public may come to remember him more for the
domestic successes of his first years in the White House -- a record it has
largely dismissed as it focuses on the war.

Historians have hardly started in on Ronald Reagan, thus far the subject of more
partisan scribbling than of serious history. Mr. Reagan, as a two-term President
of often staggering popularity, has a chance for major Presidential stature in
the future. Ultimately, his standing may come to depend fundamentally on whether
he gets credit for the end of the cold war or blame for the awesome budget
deficits he left behind. And that in turn may depend on which seems more salient
when histories are written.

As George Bush begins to write his own memoirs, a genre usually so trivial and
self-serving that it hardly ever has significant impact on a President's lasting
reputation, he goes with decent poll ratings. The last Gallup Poll measured
approval of his handling the Presidency at 56 percent. The only post-war
President with a distinctly higher rating was Mr. Reagan, at 63 percent.

But Mr. Bush seems almost certain not to be ranked above the middle range of
Chief Executives. One-term Presidents seldom are. The public viewed Mr. Bush
quite well on foreign policy, but as it made clear in the most important poll of
all, last November's election, it didn't care about foreign policy all that
much. And it is hard to foresee how the Gulf War could come to be thought of as
a central moment in the nation's history.

Mr. Bush is relatively old at 68 to expect to read the measured judgment of
history on his Presidency. But if it seems to sour, to him or his followers,
they have a consolation to contemplate: it is likely to change. As Arthur
Schlesinger Jr., the Jackson, Roosevelt and Kennedy biographer, put it in 1986
in his "The Cycles of American History":

"Revisionism is an indispensable part of the historical enterprise. 'The one
duty we owe to history,' said Oscar Wilde, 'is to rewrite it.' But second
opinions are not necessarily wiser than the first. Time in due course revises
the revisionists."

LOAD-DATE: January 24, 1993

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

CORRECTION-DATE: January 31, 1993, Sunday

CORRECTION:

A chart last Sunday with an article about the Presidents' places in history
illustrated the 1992 approval ratings of two former Presidents incorrectly. The
numbers, a 50 percent approval rating for Jimmy Carter and 48 percent for Ronald
Reagan, were correct, but the bars showing the values were not proportioned
correctly.


GRAPHIC: Photo: Citizens George and Barbara Bush arriving home in Houston
Wednesday a few hours after the Clinton inauguration. (Associated Press)

Graphs show past president's approval rating during and at the end of their
presidency and recent ratings from poll's taken between '90 and '92 (Source: The
Gallup Poll)

                   Copyright 1993 The New York Times Company

                              85 of 255 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 January 24, 1993, Sunday, Late Edition - Final
                              Correction Appended

Today's Paris Doesn't Look Back

BYLINE: MICHAEL MEWSHAW has visited Paris many times in the past two years
researching his latest book, "Ladies of the Court" (Crown).
<BYL>By MICHAEL MEWSHAW

SECTION: Section 5; Page 35; Column 1; Travel Desk

LENGTH: 1366 words


THE astringent society columnist Taki once wrote of Paris, "Nostalgia is the
city's cheapest commodity and everyone foreign gets it for free." You don't have
to be a cynic to agree that the City of Light carries such a heavy freight from
its past that visitors have difficulty seeing things here as they are because of
the way they used to be. Or at least the way they were depicted in novels,
movies and memoirs. As Janet Flanner put it, "Paris was yesterday."

I must admit that when I arrived in Paris 25 years ago as a Fulbright Fellow I
was so busy searching for the ghosts of Hemingway and Fitzgerald, so obsessed
with scenes that appeared to spring full blown from Truffaut films, I was in
danger of tripping over my own feet. But on a recent return it began to register
on me that the city no longer corresponds to my callow recollections. I think it
was the rabbits that shocked me into recognition. Landing at Charles de Gaulle
Airport after an all-night flight, I gazed groggily out the window and noticed
that the grassy patches beside the runway were aswarm with rabbits. Suddenly,
like Alice falling through the looking glass, I tumbled into an altogether new
place and realized that Paris is today.

True, there's the stock footage from a million postcards and travelogues -- the
tree-lined boulevards, imposing public buildings and labyrinthine back streets
whose wet cobblestones gleam at night like the scales of a carp. But on closer
inspection everything has altered. No longer soot-streaked and gray, famous
landmarks have been sandblasted clean and now look like cream-colored monuments
carved out of soap.

When I first hit Paris, the city was histrionically anti-American. Fed up with
the Vietnam War and universal Coca-Colonization, French students dressed in dark
corduroy trousers, black turtleneck sweaters and gray scarves. Hunched over wine
glasses at outdoor cafes -- they sat outside in weather cold enough to cause
frostbite -- they looked haggard and world-weary as they scribbled protest
poetry on graph paper. Why, I wondered, had the land of Racine and Diderot never
learned how to make lined loose-leaf paper?

These days the association for encouraging tourism seems to have decided to
brighten up the student body at the Sorbonne at the same time as it brightened
up the buildings. Gone are the gaunt, whey-faced existentialists, their shaggy
heads wreathed in cigarette smoke. Like kids the world over they now wear Levis
and Ralph Lauren, Reeboks and Nikes, Redskin jerseys and T-shirts that proclaim
them members of the Nude Coed Bungee Jumping Club. And those who have a mind to
can commit their idees to lined loose-leaf paper.

Still, this is France, and culture does count for a lot. Some T-shirts are
stenciled with quotes from celebrated authors. Yet in this arena, too,
contemporary Americana has intruded. In one shop, nestled next to Tee-shirts
festooned with the wisdom of such dead white males as Proust and Baudelaire, I
noticed a line that had been translated into French and attributed to my old Key
West buddy, the novelist Tom McGuane: "I prefer young girls. Their stories are
shorter."

In the literary pantheon represented on picture postcards, yet another American
novelist has made the grade. At a kiosk between Cafe de Flore and Aux Deux
Magots photos of James Jones glared from a rogue's gallery of immortals. This
struck me as just and fitting. A longtime resident of Paris, Jones was always
hospitable to young writers who showed up unexpectedly at his apartment on the
Ile St.-Louis.

On the back of the James Jones postcard there's a startling tidbit of
misinformation to the effect that the snapshot was taken on Key Biscayne in
1985. Would that that were true.
Jones died in 1977, and Paris is a poorer place for his absence.

Yet in almost all other respects the city seems richer and livelier than in the
past. Of course it's crowded and, in spots, paralyzed by tourists. Notre Dame, I
noticed, has highway directional signals steering pilgrims toward entrances and
exits, and there's a sort of ecclesiastical traffic cop to make sure people
don't pile up at the doors or stroll into the sanctuary bare-chested. But I like
this hurly-burly, this layer of hang-loose nonchalance that has come to mitigate
the long-entrenched logical lunacy of the French who let their dogs foul the
footpaths, then forbid people to walk on the grass. I like the skate-boarders
who whir across the esplanade at the Trocadero. Though they frighten me with
their foolhardiness, I enjoy seeing teen-agers on Rollerblades latch onto cars
at traffic lights and go rocketing through the city, half a dozen of them
hanging for dear life onto the bumper of some apoplectic bourgeois gentilhomme's
Citroen.

The sound of sidewalk entertainers used to be as distinctively French as Edith
Piaf's plangent voice. Nowadays the performers reflect the city's growing
diversity. Citizens from France outre-mer -- from Africa, Asia and the Caribbean
-- have introduced new instruments and obsessions, and polyglot kids from every
country can do pitch-perfect imitations of Madonna, Ray Charles and Garth
Brooks.

Shakespeare & Company, an English-language bookstore with a venerable history
that stretches back to its predecessor on the Place de l'Odeon, is still owned
by George Whitman, who still offers free accommodations to aspiring writers and
passionate readers. But even here there has been a cultural evolution. The day I
dropped by to browse, a Japanese girl who spoke neither English nor French was
delivering her plea for a place to live with all the choreographed skill of a
kabuki dancer. Will Paris in the 90's represent for expatriate Oriental writers
what it did for Americans in the 20's?

ONE thing Paris used to represent was sexual freedom. But in the age of AIDS (or
SIDA, as the French call it), Parisians have reacted with commendable frankness.
On almost every street corner, a billboard offers a language lesson to tourists,
informing them where to find a pharmacy and how to ask for a condom.

An organization named Eurofit Club takes a different approach to the problem. It
passes out leaflets: "C'est sympa d'etre celibataire!" (It's cool to be
celibate!). Claiming seven million members, the club invites everybody to join
in "le bonheur celibataire . . . in a healthy atmosphere of friendships and
celebrations."

On the evidence of any evening, many Parisians continue to celebrate their
friendships over a meal. But there have been changes in the notion of what
constitutes acceptable cuisine. French friends took me to a Tex-Mex restaurant.
To reach it we had to pass McDonald's, Burger King, Kentucky Fried Chicken and a
congeries of greasy imitators. Oh, where are the snows of yesteryear? And what
has become of that homesick Fulbright Fellow who had to talk his way past the
security guard at the American Embassy, risking arrest and immediate deportation
for the rare pleasure of a rare cheeseburger?

Back in those days, I frequented just one restaurant of any real cachet, La
Coupole in Montparnasse. Loud, boisterous, laced with smoke from a thousand
Gitanes, it was already famous in the 20's when Hemingway wrote about it in "The
Sun Also Rises." Although it has been renovated in the past few years, something
of the old spirit of the place persists, and whenever I'm in Paris I make a
sentimental journey to La Coupole.

On my recent visit I was seated near a young woman, one of those preternaturally
chic creatures that Paris seems to produce in such abundance. A cool blonde in a
miniskirt and patterned stockings, she was the breathing embodiment of the word
gamine -- a girl of impish appeal -- as she sat there nursing what looked to be
a tall glass of Martini over ice.

But then the waiter came and said, "Voulez-vous un autre Diet Coke?"

"I'll wait for my friend to get here," she answered in an accent straight out of
Hemingway country -- out of suburban Chicago, that is.

Oh, well, as Papa put it, "If you are lucky enough to have lived in Paris . . .
then for the rest of your life it stays with you, for Paris is a moveable
feast." And who's to say it doesn't go better with Coke?

LOAD-DATE: February 11, 1993

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

CORRECTION-DATE: January 24, 1993, Sunday

 CORRECTION:
An essay on Jan. 24 about Paris, past and present, mistranslated the phrase
"C'est sympa d'etre celiba taire." As used by the Eurofit Club, it means "It's
fun to be single," not celibate.

                   Copyright 1993 The New York Times Company

                              86 of 255 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 January 25, 1993, Monday, Late Edition - Final

The Man at Clinton's Elbow Works to Fend Off Trouble

BYLINE: By GWEN IFILL,  Special to The New York Times

SECTION: Section A; Page 14; Column 1; National Desk

LENGTH: 1009 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, Jan. 24


Bruce R. Lindsey has always been in the middle of the mix. During the most
brutal period of the primary campaign, when Bill Clinton was struggling to bat
down accusations of marital infidelity and draft dodging, Mr. Lindsey, an
Arkansas lawyer, shadowed him every day. When the public opinion polls slid,
then soared, Mr. Lindsey always had a seat at the strategy meetings.

He often delivered the bad news, to Mr. Clinton and from Mr. Clinton.

And when it came time to fill the new Cabinet and senior staff positions, Mr.
Lindsey was one of a small circle of advisers who contributed to the
President-elect's final decisions.

Now Mr. Lindsey, a 44-year-old confidant of Mr. Clinton and his wife, Hillary,
is helping the President recover from his earliest stumble by working to fill
the unpleasant void left by the failed nomination of Zoe Baird as Attorney
General.

As White House personnel director and senior adviser to the President, Mr.
Lindsey, along with Thomas F. McLarty 3d, the White House chief of staff, is
primarily responsible for hiring White House support staff and filling
sub-Cabinet jobs. But Mr. Lindsey has even more influence than his title would
suggest. And his proximity to the new President has once again thrust him into
the center of the hottest speculation game in town.

The handful of advisers who are helping Mr. Clinton debate the choices before
him include Vice President Al Gore, Mrs. Clinton, Mr. McLarty, Bernie Nussbaum,
the White House counsel, and, invariably, Mr. Lindsey.

"If Bruce was in the Army, he would be the mine sweeper," said Robert Boorstin,
a White House policy aide who worked in the campaign. "He has the ability to
find his way through thickets and dangerous situations, particularly personal
ones, and maintain enough cool and calm to defuse them before the general
arrives."

Another White House policy aide, Bruce Reed, called Mr. Lindsey "Clinton's
protector."

Bridging Clinton's Worlds

"Clinton has old friends and he has political friends and friends from different
phases in his life and the campaign," he said. "Bruce fuses all those worlds."

Mr. Lindsey has been at the nexus of nearly every important decision involving
the new President. He is prized by the Clintons for his discretion and for his
ability to be an adviser, sounding board and flak-catcher who knows what would
make the boss angry.

Mr. Clinton has surrounded himself with a cushion of hometown advisers as well
as with aides who came to understand the President's thinking during the
campaign. But the political advisers like George Stephanopoulos, the
communications director, and Rahm Emanuel, the new White House political
director, readily cede authority to Mr. McLarty and Mr. Lindsey.

"Neither one of us see ourselves as shields or translators," Mr. Lindsey said in
a recent interview. "I guess the usefulness we have is that because he knows us
and we have known him for so long and feel comfortable with each other, he knows
that our own agenda is what we think is his best interest. I think we would be,
at most, sounding boards for him."

Some of Mr. Lindsey's relatives worry how well he will adjust to the Washington
fishbowl.

"He knows the town geographically, but he doesn't know the politics of the town
at that level," said his wife, Bev Lindsey, who met her husband when they worked
as Congressional aides. They have two daughters -- Katie, who is 15, and Sarah,
16 -- who will continue to live in Little Rock, Ark., with Mrs. Lindsey while
she completes a college degree.

Mr. Lindsey is an enigmatic figure even to some who have known him for years.
Bespectacled, politically pessimistic and invariably clad in a sober blue
blazer, he comes across on first acquaintance as the nerd who worshiped the
football hero.

"He wasn't what I expected before when I had talked to him," said Mr.
Stephanopoulos, who was hired by Mr. Lindsey to help run the campaign. "I was
expecting a real flashy type."

One Serious Dancer

But closer examination reveals that he has more in common with Mr. Clinton than
it first appears. He loves to dance, plays the piano and drives a dashing red
Toyota Celica sports car in Little Rock that his wife likes to call his "midlife
crisis." Mark Gearan, the deputy chief of staff, says, "He dances like he's
arguing a case."

Like Mr. Clinton, Mr. Lindsey was trained as a lawyer (at Georgetown Law School)
but has spent most of his professional life in politics, shuttling between jobs
in Washington and Little Rock.

Over the years, Mr. Lindsey and his wife, who also worked in the Clinton
campaign as a scheduler and inaugural planner, have virtually become extensions
of the Bill and Hillary Clinton election machine.

Unlike his father, Robert, who was a prominent lawyer in Arkansas before he died
last year, Bruce Lindsey has always loved politics. His first paying job was in
1966 at a bicycle factory in Little Rock, but he was soon attracted to the
campaign of Brooks Hays, an unsuccessful candidate for governor.

"I quit my job at the bike factory, which upset my father no end," Mr. Lindsey
recently recalled. "Here was the first real job I'd ever had. And what was
worse, I'd quit it to go work for a politician."

While attending Southwestern at Memphis, now Rhodes College, he demonstrated
against the Vietnam War and on behalf of the sanitation workers who were
striking when the Rev. Dr. Martin Luther King Jr. was assassinated. When his
fraternity refused to pledge a black friend, Mr. Lindsey had the group kicked
off campus for discrimination.

Mr. Lindsey, who first met Mr. Clinton in 1968 when they were working on Senator
J. W. Fulbright's campaign, considered running for Congress once, decided he
wasn't cut out for it and abandoned the notion of elective office in favor of
remaining in the background.

"His lack of visibility is the reason the Governor trusts him," James Carville,
the highly visible Clinton political strategist, said shortly before Mr. Clinton
moved to the White House. "I think that's clear."

NAME: Bruce R. Lindsey

LOAD-DATE: January 25, 1993

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo: Bruce R. Lindsey, right, the White House personnel director and
a confidante of President Clinton, is working to help Mr. Clinton fill the void
left by the failed nomination of Zoe Baird. He attended the Cabinet's
swearing-in ceremonies on Friday. At left was Defense Secretary Les Aspin. (Paul
Hosefros/The New York Times)

TYPE: Biography

                   Copyright 1993 The New York Times Company

                              87 of 255 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                January 26, 1993, Tuesday, Late Edition - Final

Court Discourages Late Claims of Innocence From Death Row

BYLINE: By LINDA GREENHOUSE,  Special to The New York Times

SECTION: Section A; Page 1; Column 1; National Desk

LENGTH: 2073 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, Jan. 25


The Supreme Court ruled today that a state death row inmate who presents belated
evidence of innocence is not ordinarily entitled to a new hearing in Federal
court before being executed.

The Court's 6-to-3 decision left open the prospect that "truly persuasive"
evidence with an "extraordinarily high" chance of success might merit an
exception to the general rule.

But the majority found that this exception did not benefit Leonel Herrera, the
Texas death row inmate whose appeal brought the issue to the Court. Mr. Herrera,
convicted and sentenced to death in 1982 for the murder of two police officers,
tried to reopen his case 10 years later by presenting testimony that a brother
who had since died had been the killer.

Blackmun Dissents Angrily

Chief Justice William H. Rehnquist's majority opinion said the evidence fell far
short of putting in question what he called the strong proof of Mr. Herrera's
guilt.

The decision drew an angry dissent from Justice Harry A. Blackmun, who took the
unusual step of reading his opinion from the bench. Justice Blackmun said the
Court's approach sanctioned the execution of innocent people, which he called
"perilously close to simple murder." [Excerpts from the opinions, page A18.]

The majority opinion was joined by Justices Sandra Day O'Connor, Antonin Scalia,
Anthony M. Kennedy and Clarence Thomas. Justice Byron R. White did not sign the
Chief Justice's opinion but concurred separately.

Flags at Half-Staff

Justices John Paul Stevens and David H. Souter signed all of Justice Blackmun's
18-page dissent except for the final paragraph, which contained the reference to
"simple murder."

The decision was announced on a day when flags flew at half-staff to mark the
death of Justice Thurgood Marshall, whom Chief Justice Rehnquist called an
"extraordinary man" and a "champion of equal justice."

Chief Justice Rehnquist then announced three decisions upholding the imposition
of the death penalty, which Justice Marshall viewed as unconstitutional in all
instances. One was a 5-to-4 decision in a Texas case that would have had an
opposite result had Justice Marshall, who retired in 1991, still been on the
Court.

Flaw Seen in Argument

At issue in that case, Graham v. Collins, No. 91-7580, was whether the Texas
death penalty law could constitutionally be applied to those who committed
murder before the age of 18. The majority did not actually reach that question
because the decision, written by Justice White, concluded that the challenge
could not be brought through a petition for a writ of habeas corpus in Federal
court.

All three death penalty rulings concerned the Federal courts' exercise of their
authority to review state convictions and sentences through habeas corpus
petitions. These petitions, filed by state prisoners, are essentially the only
means for obtaining Federal court review of the constitutionality of a
conviction or sentence. A series of Supreme Court decisions has circumscribed
the Federal courts' ability to review these cases, and that approach was on
display in the decisions today.

Mr. Herrera, the Texas inmate with the belated evidence, argued that the
execution of an innocent person would violate the Eighth Amendment's prohibition
against cruel and unusual punishment as well as the 14th Amendment's guarantee
of due process.

Chief Justice Rehnquist said that while "this proposition has an elemental
appeal," it was a flawed and misleading formulation of the issue the case
actually presented.

Mr. Herrera's assertion of innocence was simply a "claim" without legal weight,
the Chief Justice said. He said that while a person comes to court with a
presumption of innocence, "once a defendant has been afforded a fair trial and
convicted of the offense for which he was charged, the presumption of innocence
disappears."

Mr. Herrera was before the Court, the Chief Justice said, not "as one who is
'innocent,' but on the contrary as one who has been convicted by due process of
law of two brutal murders."

Relatives in Texas have described Mr. Herrera, now 45, as a man who overcame an
impoverished childhood and the abuse of an alcoholic father to become a good
high school student and athlete. But he dropped out of school after the 11th
grade and joined the Navy in 1967.

He was discharged in 1969, and relatives said he suffered from post-traumatic
stress disorder after serving in Vietnam. By the early 1970's, he reportedly was
using and trafficking in cocaine. His behavior became more bizarre, and
relatives said he lived for a time in his car.

Nephew's Statement Cited

Chief Justice Rehnquist said that newly discovered evidence had never been
regarded as a sufficient basis for Federal court relief through habeas corpus in
the absence of some underlying constitutional violation. "This rule is grounded
in the principle that Federal habeas courts sit to insure that individuals are
not imprisoned in violation of the Constitution -- not to correct errors of
fact," he said.

Mr. Herrera's evidence consisted principally of a written statement from his
nephew, Raul Herrera Jr., who was 9 years old at the time of the killings. The
statement, dated January 1992, several weeks before Leonel Herrera's scheduled
execution, asserted that Raul Herrera Sr., who died in 1984, had told his young
son in 1983 that he had shot the police officers. Leonel Herrera also presented
statements from three other people who had earlier named Raul Herrera Sr. as the
murderer.

Texas law provides only 30 days after a conviction for filing a motion for a new
trial based on undiscovered evidence. Only 14 states provide as few as 30 days
for such a motion. New York and New Jersey impose no time limits; Connecticut
has a three-year limit, and the limit under Federal law for convictions of
Federal crimes is two years.

Mr. Herrera took his new evidence to the state courts, but his case was
dismissed. With his execution date looming, he filed a new petition for a writ
of habeas corpus last February in Federal District Court in Texas. An earlier
petition had failed, as had two previous appeals to the Supreme Court.

An Anomaly Is Created

Federal District Judge Ricardo H. Hinojosa, citing a "sense of fairness and due
process," ordered a stay of execution to enable the state courts to hear his
claim of innocence. A three-judge panel of the United States Court of Appeals
for the Fifth Circuit, in New Orleans, quickly lifted the stay.

On the night before his scheduled execution, Mr. Herrera's lawyers came urgently
to the Supreme Court with both an appeal and a request for a new stay of
execution. A stay requires five votes, and there were only four -- Justices
Blackmun, Stevens, O'Connor and Souter -- to grant one. But those four were
sufficient for the Court to hear the case on its merits.

So the Court was in the anomalous position of having agreed to hear the appeal,
some months in the future, of a man who was scheduled to die within hours. A
Texas state court then granted a stay, sparing Mr. Herrera's life while the
Supreme Court scheduled the case, Herrera v. Collins, No. 91-7328, for argument
in October.

The majority opinion today rejected Mr. Herrera's argument that the Texas
limitation of 30 days for seeking a new trial violated the Constitution's due
process guarantee. In light of the divergence among the states, Chief Justice
Rehnquist said, the Court could not conclude that the 30-day limit "transgresses
a principle of fundamental fairness rooted in the traditions and conscience of
our people."

Is Clemency the Remedy?

The Chief Justice said that Mr. Herrera could now seek executive clemency in
Texas. "Clemency is deeply rooted in our Anglo-American tradition of law, and is
the historic remedy for preventing miscarriages of justice where judicial
process has been exhausted," he said.

Justice Blackmun took sharp issue with the majority's reliance on clemency. "The
vindication of rights guaranteed by the Constitution has never been made to turn
on the unreviewable discretion of an executive official or administrative
tribunal," he said in the portion of the dissent that Justices Stevens and
Souter joined.

Chief Justice Rehnquist's majority opinion was less than clear in raising but
not elaborating on the possibility that a powerful claim of innocence in some
future case might merit a new Federal hearing. In fact, this portion of the
opinion appeared to have been the result of a compromise needed to gain or hold
the votes of Justices O'Connor, Kennedy and White. In concurring opinions, these
three stressed that Federal court relief remained at least theoretically
available.

"Nowhere does the Court state that the Constitution permits the execution of an
actually innocent person," Justice O'Connor said.

Few Assert Innocence

The vague nature of the exception the Court offered today makes it impossible to
predict the impact of the ruling. But in any event, a large majority of death
row inmates who appeal their sentences assert not their actual innocence, but
rather that their constitutional rights were violated or that they should not
have been considered subject to the death penalty.

As for Mr. Herrera, a spokesman for the Texas Attorney General, Dan Morales,
said his case would go back to trial court, where an execution date would be
set.

In the other Texas death penalty case it decided today, Graham v. Collins, the
Court ruled that the Federal courts could not consider the argument made by a
man convicted of committing a murder at the age of 17 that the Texas death
penalty law had not given the jury enough opportunity to consider youth as a
factor mitigating against a sentence of death.

In a 1989 decision, the Court held that the Texas death penalty law was
unconstitutional as applied to murderers who were retarded because the jury was
too limited in its ability to consider the impact of retardation. The Court said
today that because that decision had created a "new rule" the 17-year-old killer
in today's case, Gary Graham, could not rely on its reasoning in a habeas corpus
petition.

The Court ruled in another much disputed 1989 case, Teague v. Lane, that state
inmates could not benefit in habeas corpus proceedings from "new rules" that
were not in existence when their convictions had become final. Since then, the
Court had defined the concept of "new rule" broadly to exclude a variety of
legal arguments, as in the case today.

Thomas Offers View

Chief Justice Rehnquist and Justices Scalia, Kennedy and Thomas joined Justice
White's majority opinion. Justice Thomas also filed a separate concurring
opinion, taking issue with a fundamental part of the Court's modern approach to
the death penalty. Under his view, it would be preferable for states to have
mandatory death-penalty laws, which the Court has found unconstitutional, rather
than to permit defendants to present an unlimited array of mitigating
circumstances, as the Court essentially does now.

Justice Thomas said the use of mitigating circumstances invited juries to make
judgments based on racial discrimination or other irrational factors.

Justices Stevens and Souter filed dissenting opinions, with Justices Blackmun,
O'Connor, and Stevens signing Justice Souter's dissent as well.

Arkansas Inmate Loses

The third death penalty case today was a 7-to-2 ruling overturning a writ of
habeas corpus that a Federal appeals court had granted to an Arkansas inmate.
The case, Lockhart v. Fretwell, No. 91-1393, presented a kind of reverse image
of the new-rule issue.

The lawyer for the inmate, Bobby Ray Fretwell, had failed to make a legal
argument that was then available and that would have spared him a death
sentence. Due to a subsequent Supreme Court decision in an unrelated case, that
argument was no longer valid.

The question for the Court today was whether the lawyer's failure to make the
argument, before it became obsolete, amounted to a violation of the inmate's
right to effective assistance of counsel, as the appeals court found. In the
majority opinion today, Chief Justice Rehnquist said the appeals court's
decision gave an unjustifiable "windfall" to the defendant. In a dissent,
Justices Stevens and Blackmun said that by not permitting the inmate to rely on
the state of the law at the time it applied to him, the Court had handed a
"windfall" to the state.

LOAD-DATE: January 26, 1993

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photos: The Supreme Court ruled yesterday that a state death row inmate
who presents belated evidence of innocence is not entitled to a new hearing
before execution unless that evidence is "truly persuasive." The majority found
that this exception did not benefit Leonel Herrera, left. The Court also upheld
the death penalty ruling on Gary Graham, center, and reinstated the sentence of
Bobby Ray Fretwell. (Photographs by Associated Press); Chief Justice William H.
Rehnquist's majority opinion said the evidence fell far short of putting in
question what he called the strong proof of Mr. Herrera's guilt. (The New York
Times)(pg. A18)

                   Copyright 1993 The New York Times Company

                              88 of 255 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                January 26, 1993, Tuesday, Late Edition - Final

E. W. Kenworthy, 83, a Reporter Who Covered Capital With Flair

BYLINE: By DAVID E. ROSENBAUM,  Special to The New York Times

SECTION: Section B; Page 6; Column 1; National Desk

LENGTH: 696 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, Jan. 25


E. W. Kenworthy, a Washington correspondent for The New York Times who wrote
about government and politics with flair and erudition for 20 years, died today
at his home here. He was 83.

He died of complications from prostate cancer, his family said.

Mr. Kenworthy was 47, an advanced age to begin a new career, when he first
arrived at the Washington bureau of The Times in 1957 at the start of Dwight D.
Eisenhower's second term. But from the mid-1950's to the mid-1970's he covered
Washington with a skill and scholarship that made him a force in daily
journalism.

For example, on the White House beat in 1962, he wrote a news analysis article
about the way President John F. Kennedy was twisting the arm of labor unions to
support his anti-inflation program. The article began this way: "The man from
Boston went up to Atlantic City this week and put on a performance for the
United Automobile Workers that was one part Honey Fitz (blarney) and nine parts
Ralph Waldo Emerson ('When duty whispers low, thou must')."

In addition to the White House, over the years Mr. Kenworthy covered the State
Department, Congress and politics, and in the last years of his career he
reported on the environment. He retired from The Times in 1977.

'Most Literate Reporter'

Max Frankel, now executive editor of The Times, who was Washington bureau chief
in the late 1960's and early 1970's, said Mr. Kenworthy was "simultaneously the
most energetic and the most literate reporter in the Washington bureau, and
there can be no more potent combination in journalism."

Edwin Wentworth Kenworthy (he used his initials in his byline and went by the
nickname Ned) was born on Sept. 23, 1909, in Attleboro, Mass., and received
undergraduate and graduate degrees from Oberlin College in Ohio.

He taught English at the high school level for several years and at Indiana
University for several more. In World War II he worked for the Office of War
Information, providing daily cables to overseas embassies about developments in
the United States.

After the war Mr. Kenworthy worked briefly as an editorial writer at The
Baltimore Evening Sun and then served as an information officer in the United
States Embassy in London and worked for the Reporter magazine.

His Proudest Achievement

In 1949 and 1950 he was executive secretary on President Harry S. Truman's
Committee for Equality of Treatment and Opportunity in the Armed Services. The
committee's report led to the racial desegregation of the military; Mr.
Kenworthy always said he was prouder of the work he did on this issue than of
any other professional accomplishment.

In the summer of 1950, after the committee had disbanded, Mr. Kenworthy joined
The Times as a writer for The Week in Review. For seven years before moving to
Washington, he wrote articles for the Sunday section on subjects ranging from
the Korean War to science teaching.

In Washington, in what may have been the tour de force of his career, he covered
the 1968 insurgent Presidential candidacy of Eugene J. McCarthy, providing
unusual insights into this most complicated of politicians.

Take, for example, this paragraph: "His approach is not political, but moral and
religious. The other day, when he offered his platform plank on Vietnam, he said
he was not asking for 'repentance' from the Administration and the party.
Perhaps not, but he was asking for confession. Confession may be good for the
soul, but politicians have never believed it is good for the party."

Mr. Kenworthy's main beat in the 1970's was the environment, and he wrote about
it with the same verve he had applied to other fields. Covering the political
battle over whether to allow a power-project dam on the New River in North
Carolina and Virginia, he began one article by quoting Justice Oliver Wendell
Holmes: "A river is more than an amenity; it is a treasure."

Mr. Kenworthy's first wife, Jane Elizabeth, died in 1977. They had three
children: John, of Washington; Tom, of Vienna, Va., and Jane Schorsch, of
Alexandria, Va. Besides his children, Mr. Kenworthy is survived by his second
wife, Martha, whom he married in 1988, and seven grandchildren.

NAME: E. W. Kenworthy

LOAD-DATE: January 26, 1993

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo: E. W. Kenworthy (The New York Times, 1970)

TYPE: Biography; Obituary (Obit)

                   Copyright 1993 The New York Times Company

                              89 of 255 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                January 26, 1993, Tuesday, Late Edition - Final

A Trip Straight Out of Brooklyn To the Sundance Film Festival

BYLINE: By BERNARD WEINRAUB,  Special to The New York Times

SECTION: Section C; Page 11; Column 3; Cultural Desk

LENGTH: 889 words

DATELINE: PARK CITY, Utah, Jan. 25


Leslie Harris, the director and screenwriter of "Just Another Girl on the IRT,"
sat in a nondescript coffeehouse this morning on Main Street of this lush ski
resort, staring at the snow-covered slopes and the army of skiers parading past.

"Far cry from Brooklyn," she said with a laugh.

Ms. Harris, who is 32, edited the movie in her Fort Greene apartment.  She and
Erwin Wilson, her producing partner, who is 35, are now at the Sundance Film
Festival, being courted by Hollywood agents and studio executives.

Just the other day, Robert Redford, the founder of the festival, singled out
"Just Another Girl on the IRT" as typical of Sundance's diversity. Ms. Harris,
who spent five years struggling to make the film because she was tired of the
way black women were portrayed in movies, can't quite believe it.

"I'm just trying to take it easy, stay cool," she said with a laugh.

So are the other film makers at Sundance, the 10-day festival that has become
the nation's major showcase for independent films, which often face enormous
problems finding a distributor. Since "Sex, Lies and Videotape" was discovered
here in 1989, the festival has been a powerful and highly competitive lure for
Hollywood. This year the festival has gathered a record 5,000 producers,
directors, writers, agents, journalists and hangers-on.

"Not only is it attracting more film makers, but it's also attracting more
Hollywood sharks," observed Mark Gill, vice president for publicity at Columbia
Pictures, at the busy festival headquarters in the center of Park City. "Of
course, under the guise of finding fresh film makers and talent, everyone from
Hollywood can ski and go to an endless series of parties."

A New Generation

The endless parties produce a buzz not only on what films are hot, but also on
what the trends are. Two years ago, the trend seemed to be black film makers.
Last year it was gay film makers. This year it's twentysomething film makers.

"It's an entirely different perspective from a generation that does not remember
Vietnam," said Geoffrey Gilmore, the festival's program director. "They don't
come with ideological baggage. In other years, people were more politicized. But
you can't characterize them. They have a diverse perspective."

The festival, which began on Thursday and ends on Saturday night, is showing 80
new films. Of these, 32 are in competition, with the winners being selected by
judges over the weekend. Those judged the best are virtually guaranteed to be
selected by film companies for distribution.

Films With Attitude

The most widely discussed films at the festival so far include "Boxing Helena,"
a black comedy directed by Jennifer Lynch, the daughter of David Lynch, and
"Just Another Girl on the IRT." Ms. Harris's film focuses on Chantel, a shrewd
and popular 17-year-old with an abundance of attitude. "I was just tired of
seeing the way black women were depicted, as wives or mothers or girlfriends or
appendages," said Ms. Harris, who is black. "All from the point of view of male
directors. She's the central character. There's no male character to validate
her."

Ms. Harris, who quit her job at an advertising agency and worked as a temp so
she would have more time to make the movie, raised $130,000 through grants from
such organizations as the American Film Institute and the National Endowment for
the Arts, as well as support from the film maker Michael Moore ("Roger and Me")
and the writer Terry McMillan ("Waiting to Exhale"). The film will be
distributed by Miramax, opening in New York, Los Angeles and several other
cities on Feb. 26.

Other talked-about films include "Twenty Bucks," a collection of vignettes about
the owners of a $20 bill; "Rift," about a love triangle in New York; "Ruby in
Paradise," the story of a young woman fleeing the Tennessee hills for Florida,
and "Bodies, Rest and Motion," about a group of restless and bored men and women
in their 20's who find themselves in a small town in Arizona.

In an interview, Mr. Redford discussed the festival's role. "When we started
this, people perceived it as an insurgent group to undermine Hollywood," he
said. "It was never that. It was simply an addition to what Hollywood was doing,
championing new talent who have offbeat films."

"We want to champion film makers that have offbeat stories to tell, offbeat
visions," he said. "We know that if a guy is taken up by Hollywood too soon, he
often can't deal with that onslaught. He'll be crushed by going there too soon.
I've seen too many cases like that. The idea is to keep his vision intact."

Mr. Redford and Sundance officials express uneasiness, if not ambivalence, about
the numbers of agents and executives now tripping over one another on Main
Street or in movie houses in Park City. They say that, paridoxically, the
festival was nurtured in the 1980's to help those free-spirited and independent
film makers often ignored by Hollywood.

"Look, Sundance is not the last stop before Hollywood, like some undergraduate
course," Mr. Redford said. "In truth, we're a bridge between the independent
world and Hollywood. I'd just like it if my own industry would not look on
independent films as an illegitimate child. And if independent films didn't just
look on Hollywood as a bad guy. There's a marriage yet to be forged."

LOAD-DATE: January 26, 1993

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo: The Sundance festival has become the major showcase in the
United States for independent films. Among the top entries this year is Leslie
Harris's "Just Another Girl on the IRT," which stars Ariyan Johnson. (Miramax
Films)

                   Copyright 1993 The New York Times Company

                              90 of 255 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                January 26, 1993, Tuesday, Late Edition - Final

THE MEDIA BUSINESS: ADVERTISING -- ADDENDA;
Thompson Opens An Office in Vietnam

BYLINE: By Stuart Elliott

SECTION: Section D; Page 23; Column 2; Financial Desk

LENGTH: 126 words


In anticipation of the lifting of America's trade embargo with Vietnam, the J.
Walter Thompson Company said it had opened a representative office in Hanoi and
formed an agreement with that country's national advertising agency, Vinexad,
which has offices in Hanoi and Ho Chi Minh City.

Alex McKinnon was named to head the operation, as a liaison officer. Alan
Fairnington, president of Thompson's Asia-Pacific operation in Hong Kong,
declined to identify clients planning to advertise in Vietnam because of the
intense competition developing in that market.

Various agencies including Backer Spielvogel Bates Worldwide, Dentsu and Young &
Rubicam have also been studying the market and have begun working to establish
ties with agencies there.

LOAD-DATE: January 26, 1993

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1993 The New York Times Company

                              91 of 255 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                January 26, 1993, Tuesday, Late Edition - Final

Kissinger Averted a Distortion of History

SECTION: Section A; Page 22; Column 3; Editorial Desk

LENGTH: 308 words


To the Editor:

"Authoritative Answers on M.I.A.'s," your Jan. 14 editorial on the Senate
committee report on the fate of Americans missing since the Vietnam War, states
that allowing Henry Kissinger's lawyer to review and comment on an early draft
of the report "will damage the report's credibility." To the contrary, the
decision of the committee chairman, Senator John Kerry, to allow me to review
and comment on the portion of the draft describing Dr. Kissinger's negotiation
of the 1973 Paris Peace Accords resulted in a substantially more accurate and
balanced final report and increased its credibility.

The draft we were allowed to review was an early staff draft that had not yet
been edited by the committee's senior staff or any senator. As is often true of
early drafts, it contained factual errors and omissions and drew highly
speculative and unfounded conclusions about events that occurred 20 years ago.
When we called these problems to the attention of staff and committee members,
they agreed with a number of our objections and made revisions. The final report
was adopted by the committee unanimously.

You also state that more important public issues than Dr. Kissinger's reputation
are at stake. That is true, but when the official conduct of any former
Secretary of State is called into question in a draft of an official report, it
is natural for him to take all reasonable steps to defend his reputation. That
is all Dr. Kissinger and his counsel have done. It is what I believe you would
do if your professional reputation were attacked.

Your editorial on the signing of the Paris Peace Accords in 1973 called them "a
diplomatic triumph." The draft we saw would have distorted that appraisal, based
on Monday-morning quarterbacking 20 years after the game.

LLOYD N. CUTLER
Washington, Jan. 14, 1993

LOAD-DATE: January 26, 1993

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Letter

                   Copyright 1993 The New York Times Company

                              92 of 255 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               January 27, 1993, Wednesday, Late Edition - Final

Before We Step Into a Bosnian Quagmire

SECTION: Section A; Page 22; Column 3; Editorial Desk

LENGTH: 417 words


To the Editor:

Re "Criticized as Appeaser, Vance Defends His Role in the Balkans" (front page,
Jan. 19): Just as the Clinton State Department, heir in some ways to the Carter
State Department, takes over foreign policy, Cyrus Vance, architect of the
Carter philosophy, is under attack for doing what he does best: stalling for
time while trying to limit damage from a mess most of the world has neither the
patience nor wish to understand.

I have never been an admirer of Mr. Vance until now. As a Serbian-American
outraged by the criminal, almost suicidal policies of President Slobodan
Milosevic of Serbia and his holdover Communist henchmen, I am equally angered at
the West's shortsighted, bellicose response to the tragedy in the Balkans. The
same pundits who shuddered at United States involvement in Vietnam would drag us
into a Balkan conflict aimed at punishing the Serbs.

Only Mr. Vance, Britain's Lord Owen and Secretary General Boutros Boutros-Ghali
seem to appreciate that in the Balkans nothing is black and white. Resolving
gray areas of ethnicity, religion, geopolitics and history mired in almost
unimaginable violence and passionate hatred requires more than genuflecting to
public opinion. Haven't we learned anything? That Mr. Milosevic and many of the
Serb paramilitary leaders in Bosnia deserve to be brought up on charges of war
crimes is beyond doubt. So do Muslim and Croat leaders whose forces devastate
Serbian populations. Mr. Vance and other statesmen understand that and do not
seek to appease any of them.

But they also know that the Serbian people -- long the region's staunchest
supporters of Western pluralism and Christian values in the face of Communist
dictatorship and Muslim fundamentalism -- run the danger of being wiped out by
the Western reaction to misguided Serbian political leaders. And they seem alone
in comprehending how the West's premature, German-driven recognition of
Bosnia-Herzegovina and Croatia gave those self-serving leaders fuel for the
flames of the Serb people's nationalist and religious fears.

Mr. Vance practices the vanishing art of diplomacy with skill, eschewing the
sound-bite school of the quick fix for the laborious -- and apparently unpopular
-- world view. We who believe in the survival of the Serbs as a people can only
pray he holds sway, and that his former disciples, like Secretary of State
Warren M. Christopher, take a page from their former teacher.

NICK PETERS
Montclair, N.J., Jan. 19, 1993

LOAD-DATE: January 27, 1993

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Letter

                   Copyright 1993 The New York Times Company

                              93 of 255 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                January 28, 1993, Thursday, Late Edition - Final

Wave of Violence Threatens Election in Cambodia

BYLINE: By PHILIP SHENON,  Special to The New York Times

SECTION: Section A; Page 8; Column 3; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 1176 words

DATELINE: SDAU, Cambodia, Jan. 26


A wave of politically motivated violence ascribed to the Vietnamese-installed
Government of Cambodia is threatening to undermine plans for internationally
supervised elections in this war-shattered nation.

United Nations investigators say at least 20 people have been killed since early
November in dozens of politically inspired attacks, most of them directed
against the opposition party founded by Prince Norodom Sihanouk, the country's
former ruler.

Prince Sihanouk, who returned to Cambodia in 1991 after more than a decade in
exile and is without doubt the country's most popular political figure, is
expected to be win the presidential election this spring -- assuming that the
political violence can be brought under control sufficiently to allow elections
to take place.

Yasushi Akashi, the Japanese diplomat who is directing the 22,000-member United
Nations peacekeeping force in Cambodia, said in an interview that if the attacks
continue, the election would be a "farce -- we cannot hold elections in this
sort of atmosphere."

24-Hour Protection

He has announced a series of measures intended to stem the violence, including
the appointment of a special prosecutor to investigate politically motivated
attacks. He has also granted arrest powers to a multinational team of civilian
police officers brought to Cambodia by the United Nations.

But many diplomats in Phnom Penh say Mr. Akashi's proposals do not go far
enough.

"We need armed United Nations troops protecting some of these political offices
24 hours a day," a senior Western diplomat in Phnom Penh said.  "So far the U.N.
won't provide that."

Diplomats say the Cambodian Government appears to fear that its own party will
be badly beaten in the election and has decided to intimidate opponents through
violence, possibly with the intention of sabotaging the election.

2 Party Members Killed

"It is very dangerous for us -- every day, every night, we are frightened," said
Roeun Saroen, an organizer for Funcinpec, the French acronym for the party
founded by Prince Sihanouk and now led by one of his sons, in the western
province of Battambang.

Mr. Roeun Saroen, standing outside the party's abandoned office here in the
small village of Sdau, cupped his hands close to the ground and swung them up
furiously to show how an explosion had blown apart one wall of the office
shortly after midnight on Dec. 28, killing a Funcinpec member and his
12-year-old son as they slept inside.

The pregnant, 31-year-old wife of the Funcinpec member survived "but only
because the bodies of her husband and the boy worked like a shield to protect
her," Mr. Roeun Saroen said. United Nations investigators say they believe there
was a coordinated attack with a handheld rocket and a mine, which showered the
offices with hundreds of jagged steel pellets.

Dennis McNamara, the United Nations official in charge of human-rights
enforcement in Cambodia, said the explosion was "clearly the work of an expert."
The attack, he said, "follows the pattern we've seen before -- threats against a
political party and its officials, general harassment, followed by the attack
itself."

Limiting Public Appearances

United Nations investigators said Government soldiers, including one brandishing
a grenade, threatened Funcinpec members in the weeks before the explosion.

The Government denies any involvement in political violence, attributing it
primarily to the Khmer Rouge.

"These allegations are an attempt to smear the State of Cambodia," said Uch
Kiman, a spokesman for the Government of Prime Minister Hun Sen.

In Phnom Penh, opposition politicians say they have begun limiting their public
appearances and have been forced to scale back party recruiting efforts because
of the threat of violence.

Sihanouk Recuperates

While no nationally known opposition politician has died in the attacks -- most
of the victims have been party organizers and members outside Phnom Penh --
Funcinpec and other political parties say they fear their leaders could quickly
become targets.

"The Government knows it will lose, so it is attacking us," said Ek Sareywath, a
senior Funcinpec officer, as he showed a visitor the loaded automatic rifle he
now keeps by the bed in his Phnom Penh apartment.

Representatives of the Cambodian Government and the three rebel factions that
joined in a 1991 peace treaty are scheduled to meet Thursday in Beijing, where
they are expected to set a date in late May for elections for President and the
national assembly.

The gathering is being held in Beijing because it is where Prince Sihanouk has
been recuperating after what was reported as a mild stroke in December. Earlier
this month, the 77-year-old Prince suspended his cooperation with the United
Nations, saying too little was being done to protect Funcinpec members from
violence. He reversed the decision a few days later.

While Prince Sihanouk has turned over formal control of Funcinpec to his son,
Prince Norodom Ranariddh, and has declared himself a neutral figure of national
reconciliation, many Cambodians still associate the party with him and are
expected to vote for Funcinpec candidates as a result.

The Cambodian peace process has been in peril virtually from the day that the
Government and three rebel groups signed the peace treaty brokered by the United
Nations that was intended to end a generation of civil war and genocide.

Until now the greatest threat to the peace process had been posed by the Khmer
Rouge, the most powerful of the rebel groups, which has refused to disarm its
army, as required under the treaty, and has said it will not take part in the
election.

Now, United Nations officials and diplomats say, the chief threat to the peace
may be posed by the Government, which was installed by Vietnam after it invaded
Cambodia in 1978. United Nations officials say that in many cases they have
clear physical evidence, including the charred remains of sophisticated
explosives that appear to have come from the Government's arsenal, and witness's
accounts implicating Government and military officials in attacks on opposition
parties.

"I think we can be precise -- it's completely obvious that the military is
responsible for some of these attacks," said Jean Marie Crouzatier, a French law
professor who is serving as a United Nations public security officer in
Battambang Province, where the worst violence has occurred.

There were politically inspired attacks almost every day last month, including
several incidents in which the offices of Fundinpec and other opposition parties
were sprayed with gunfire. On Dec. 12, witnesses said, a Funcinpec member had
one of his eyes gouged out by a Government soldier in the southeastern province
of Svay Rieng.

Last week, the United Nations announced that its lawyers would prosecute a
Government police officer accused of killing a Funcinpec member in the southern
province of Kampot. A gun believed to have been used in the killing was found
along with several empty cartridges.


LOAD-DATE: January 28, 1993

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo: At least 20 people have been reported killed in Cambodia since
November in a wave of political violence ascribed to the Vietnamese-installed
Government. Roeun Saroen, an organizer in Battambang Province for a party
founded by Prince Norodom Sihanouk, showed damage done to his party's
headquarters last month in an attack that he said killed a member and his
12-year-old son. (Associated Press)

Map of Cambodia highlights location of Sdau.

                   Copyright 1993 The New York Times Company

                              94 of 255 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                January 28, 1993, Thursday, Late Edition - Final

Home Video

BYLINE: By Peter M. Nichols

SECTION: Section C; Page 20; Column 4; Cultural Desk; Word and Image Page

LENGTH: 1230 words



Custom Renting

To video dealers, the term "video on demand" conjures images of thousands of
titles fed into homes over cable and fiber-optic systems. Whether that spells
the extinction of the video store is debatable, but the lure of providing video
on demand has Blockbuster, the nation's largest chain, testing ways to offer
electronic delivery itself.

Blockbuster is developing a system that it says could turn its stores into
electronic ordering stations. First, customers would choose titles from a
computer screen. The videos they wanted, as well as audio disks and cassettes,
would then be produced on the premises. Videos, in effect, would exist as
information in data banks and not as tapes or disks until ordered by the
customer. The advantage of such a system would be that stores could offer any
title, however obscure, without having to stock it.

Blockbuster's electronic-delivery efforts are focused on the company's music
business, which it began last year. The planned system, which Blockbuster
officials say could be operating in some stores this year, will be limited to
audio compact disks and cassettes and video games because the reproduction times
are short.

"The problem with movies is that there's no way to quickly duplicate tapes,"
David Lundeen of Blockbuster said. "At present we can only go two times real
time."

That means a 120-minute movie would take 60 minutes to reproduce in the store.
Mr. Lundeen looks forward to movies on compact disks, which Sony and other
companies are working on. Disk recording rates, he said, might climb to 12 times
real time. That would cut the wait to 10 minutes.

800 Black Titles

Reaching into its list of 19,000 movies and other videos, Facets Multimedia of
Chicago has put together an 800-title "African-American Catalogue." Categories
include movies, which range from the work of Oscar Micheaux in the silent days
to Spike Lee, documentaries and biography, literature and the arts, music and
children's films.

"We're strong on political history," said Milos Stehlik of Facets. "The gaps are
in African cinema and in the huge number of independent African-American film
makers." Information: (800) 331-6197.

The Shift to Renting

More Americans are watching films at home than in theaters, a recent nationwide
survey for the Electronics Industry Association reported. In a telephone poll of
1,000 people conducted last month by the American Communications Group, 77
percent of the respondents said they rent movies and 64 percent said they go to
theaters. Last year the figures were 69 percent for renting and 66 percent for
theaters. Other findings indicated that 40 percent of people who rent do so more
frequently than they did a year ago and that a major reason was what they
perceive as a decline in the quality of television shows.

NEW VIDEO RELEASES

Monster in a Box
1992. Columbia Tri-Star. $89.95. 1 hour 30 minutes. Closed captioned. PG-13.

Seated at a table, Spalding Gray spins tales from the monster, a 1,900-page
autobiographical manuscript forever in progress. It is the source of
reminiscences that circle back to the suicide of Mr. Gray's mother in 1967. But
pathos never blunts the satire as the author slides in and out of personal
stories that, Vincent Canby wrote in The New York Times, are "full of the kind
of particular details that separate the poet from the journalist."

Single White Female
1992. Columbia Tri-Star. $94.95. Laser disk, $34.95. 1:47. CC. R.

Things get kind of weird when Allison Jones (Bridget Fonda) recruits an adoring
new roommate (Jennifer Jason Leigh) who begins to emulate Alli to the extent
that she tries to become Alli. In the hands of as sophisticated a film maker as
Barbet Schroeder, this might have led down twisted paths of identity crisis, but
laboring here for the mass market Mr. Schroeder limits the ramifications to
standard violence in a "psychological thriller far classier than -- but
essentially not very different from -- 'The Hand that Rocks the Cradle.' "
(Canby).

Robert Shaw: Preparing a Masterpiece, Vol. 2; A Choral Workshop on Beethoven's
Missa Solemnis
1992. Carnegie Hall. $39.95 (information: 212-247-7800). 1:30.

In the latest of a series of tapes, the director Robert Shaw rehearses a large
chorus for a performance of Beethoven's Missa Solemnis in Carnegie Hall.
(Carnegie Hall last year released similar tapes of rehearsals of Brahms's
"German" Requiem, and in May there will be a tape of rehearsals for Berlioz's
Requiem, which was performed in the hall this month by Mr. Shaw's chorus).

From the podium Mr. Shaw guides and prods his singers through every nuance of
the work, spicing the preparations with a wry running commentary on the music
and the reservations of its composer ("not a churchy person," Mr. Shaw says).
Most indelible is the director's fascination with the brilliance of the piece
and with the potential of his chorus as an instrument to reproduce it.

Diggstown
1992. MGM/UA. $94.99. LD, $29.98. 1:38. CC. R.

Gabriele Kane (James Woods), fight hustler par excellence, slips into a small
Georgia town intent on cleaning out the coffers of the crooked local Mr. Big
(Bruce Dern). In on the plan is Honey Roy Palmer (Louis Gossett Jr.), a club
fighter who can still sting like a bee at the age of 48 and who, says Kane, will
whip any 10 opponents Mr. Big can scare up over the next 24 hours. Although a
macho fiction, Michael Ritchie's film "somehow transcends its rather parochial
roots to become a first-rate work" (Canby).

FROM YEARS PAST

When a Golden Globe Was a Harbinger

Winners of Golden Globe Awards often go on to win the Academy Award for best
picture. (Last week, "Scent of a Woman" won the 1993 Golden Globe for drama.)
Here are some past Oscar winners, available on tape, that had won Golden Globe
Awards.

KRAMER VS. KRAMER. A father (Dustin Hoffman) and son (Justin Henry) bond after
being abandoned by the mother (Meryl Streep), only to face a child-custody
battle when she returns. 1979. Columbia Tri-Star. $19.95. LD, $34.95. 1:45. PG.

 ORDINARY PEOPLE. An upper-middle-class family comes apart after the accidental
death of its eldest son. 1980. Paramount. $14.95. LD, $35.95. 2:03. R.

 AMADEUS. Milos Forman's adaptation of Peter Shaffer's play stars Tom Hulce as
Mozart and F. Murray Abraham as his rival, Salieri. 1984. Out of distribution on
tape, but rental copies are available. LD from Pioneer, $44.95. 2:38. PG.

 OUT OF AFRICA. Sydney Pollack's film stars Meryl Streep as the writer Karen
Blixen in her Kenyan plantation days before she became known as Isak Dinesen.
1985. MCA/ Universal. $29.95. LD, $39.98. 2:44. CC. PG.

 PLATOON. Charlie Sheen, Tom Berenger and Willem Dafoe are among the grunts in
Oliver Stone's film about Vietnam. 1986. LIVE. $14.95. LD, $39.95. 1:59. CC. R.

 THE LAST EMPEROR. Pu Yi, age 3, takes over the Forbidden City in Bernardo
Bertolucci's film. 1987. New Line. $29.95. LD, $69.98. 2:46. CC. PG-13.

 RAIN MAN. A cross-country run in a 1949 Buick brings together a Los Angeles
salesman (Tom Cruise) and his autistic older brother (Dustin Hoffman). 1988.
MGM/UA. $19.95. LD, $29.98. 2:20. CC. R.

 DANCES WITH WOLVES. A burned-out cavalry officer (Kevin Costner) tries life
with the Sioux. 1991. Orion. $99.98. LD, $49.95. 3:01. PG-13.

LOAD-DATE: January 28, 1993

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photos: Claudia McNeil and Sidney Poitier in "A Raisin in the Sun," one
of the 800 titles offered in a new "African-American Catalogue"; Robert Shaw.
(Steve J. Sherman)

                   Copyright 1993 The New York Times Company

                              95 of 255 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                January 28, 1993, Thursday, Late Edition - Final

The Talk of Sundance;
At Sundance, a Yoking of Youth and Thrift

BYLINE: By BERNARD WEINRAUB

SECTION: Section C; Page 15; Column 1; Cultural Desk

LENGTH: 1431 words

DATELINE: PARK CITY, Utah, Jan. 27


"Zee Place" is the place to be every evening at 6.

A squat building on Maine Street, it is the swarming headquarters of the
Sundance Film Festival and has been known, in this ski resort's quaint version
of a French accent, as zee center of town.

Inside, on a converted basketball court, everyone is in jeans, thick sweaters
and, in the case of visiting Hollywood agents, parkas and boots that appear to
have cost more than some of the short films that are shown here.

Plenty of the 5,000 guests at the nation's major showcase for independent films
have managed to slip away for several hours of skiing. But the main order of
business is movies, day and night. And 6 P.M. is break time at "Zee Place," when
the attendees seek out tickets for the night's movies, most of which are sold
out anyway, and schmooze about what they saw in the day.

If there's a consensus this year it's that the movies here, as in Hollywood, are
not better than ever. Younger than ever, perhaps, but not better.

What has emerged starkly at Sundance, however, is that for the first time
documentaries are dominating a festival that has been known, since it started in
1981, as a haven for features.

"This is the strongest group of documentaries we've had, and their range of
issues and quality and esthetic have been remarkable," said Geoffrey Gilmore,
the director of the festival's programming. "The documentaries have become the
powerful vehicle for dealing with social and political issues. Clearly there's
been an expansion of the sense of possibility for documentaries because the film
industry just tries to avoid anything controversial."

Certainly, the documentary films here present some highly intense personal
visions. The most-discussed include "Aileen Wuornos: Portrait of a Serial
Killer," about how Hollywood and book publishers cashed in on a woman accused of
killing seven men; "Silverlake Life: The View from Here," a gruelling and
emotional chronicle of two men infected with the AIDS virus; "Saviors of the
Forest," a zany look at film makers and earth-firsters who manage to exploit the
environment; "Something Within Me," about St. Augustine's School of the Arts in
the South Bronx; "Nitrate Kisses," an artsy and experimental look at gay life,
and "On the Bridge," about the director Frank Perry's struggle with of cancer.

But the film that is perhaps attracting the most attention is "Earth and the
American Dream," made by Bill Couturie, whose earlier works included "Dear
America: Letters Home From Vietnam" and "Common Threads: Stories From the
Quilt."

Interweaving nature photography, newsreels, music and voiceovers of stars such
as Dustin Hoffman, Bette Midler, Mel Gibson and Jeremy Irons depicting
historical figures, the documentary, which was financed by HBO, is a ferocious
indictment of the nation's environmental and moral destruction.

In an interview today, Mr. Coutourie said, "People like me, people who make
documentaries, are just exploring new forms. To me, the form itself is very
pliable."

"The stigma of making documentaries is rubbing off," he said. "They used to be
like castor oil. You were supposed to take them for your own good, but it always
tasted bad. People now understand: a documentary can move you, engage you,
involve you just as much as a feature film."

A Generation Gap

If documentaries are getting the lion's share of attention, a handful of the
festival's features are nonetheless proving to be popular with festivalgoers,
some of them for reasons that have less to do with quality than how cheaply they
were made or how young their makers are.

And a question that has served as an undercurrent here is that this year's
showcase somehow proves that many of the twentysomething film makers, while
technically proficient, may not have the vision or life experiences that can
enrich a film.

"These film makers here grew up on 'Sesame Street' and video stores," said L. M.
(Kit) Carson, a Texas-based screenwriter who has written such movies as "Paris,
Texas," and the remake of "Breathless." "They haven't found a style yet, a grip.
The features here are a struggle for coherence and an authentic expression of
where these people are."

Mr. Carson, who is 50, said with a smile, "We have a generation whose
perceptions are unfinished because they learned it from television."

In contrast, Mr. Carson and others pointed out, the young film makers and films
that emerged in the 1970's, while as different as Martin Scorsese and George
Lucas, or "Five Easy Pieces" and "Easy Rider," offered a coherent vision.

"This was a generation that somehow felt they had a grasp on the world," said
Mr. Carson, who was seated in the bustling festival headquarters. "That's what
they were so upset about. They thought they knew what was right and wrong."

The young feature film makers represented here may not have the life experiences
Mr. Carson refers to, but they are united by an almost obsessive struggle to
make their often personal films, and to do it with very little money. For that
reason, they seem, at least for the moment, a decidely un-Hollywood group.

They include Steven Gomer, a low-keyed 36-year-old former New Yorker, who
directed "Fly by Night," a drama dealing with the struggles of New York rappers,
and Victor Nunez, a Tallahassee-based film maker whose movie, "Ruby in
Paradise," concerns a blue-collar woman who finds a job on the "redneck Riviera"
on the Florida panhandle. (The movie has produced the festival's one unexpected
star so far, Ashley Judd, a young actress who gives a complex and vulnerable
performance.)

There is also Michael Lessac, who ran the Colonnades Theater Lab in New York,
and spent six years struggling to direct his screenplay of "House of Cards,"
about a woman trying to deal with her talented child who is autistic. Mr. Lessac
acknowledges that he's a little luckier than many others here. The star of the
film (which will be shown here this weekend) is Kathleen Turner, who knew Mr.
Lessac from the theater lab. Initially, the lead character was a man, but after
Ms. Turner read the script, she asked Mr. Lessac to revise it for her and agreed
to have him direct.

And then there's Robert Rodriguez, who is 24 and from Austin, Tex. His funny,
action-adventure film, "El Mariachi," involves a mariachi musician who enters
the small border town at the same time as a hit man. The two men wear black and
both carry similar guitar cased.

What makes "El Mariachi" remarkable is that Mr. Rodriquez made it for a
microscopic $7,000, a feat that has made Mr. Rodriguez something of a star
himself.

After frenzied jockeying by virtually every studio in Hollywood, Mr. Rodriguez
has signed a two-year contract with Columbia Pictures that calls for a low
six-figure salary each year, with an extra fee if he directs a movie. Part of
the reason is that Columbia made "Boyz N the Hood," by John Singleton, the young
black director, which impressed Mr. Rodriguez, who is Hispanic. Another reason
is that Stephanie Allain, vice president of production at the studio, flew to
San Antonio to meet Mr. Rodriguez, his 10 brothers and sisters, his father,
Cecilio, who sells pots and pans door to door, and his mother, Rebecca, a nurse.

Mr. Rodriguez, a calm, self-assured young man who looks on his current success
with plenty of humor, is a film major at the University of Texas in Austin.
Hoping to make some quick money in the Spanish-language video market, he made
"El Mariachi" in Spanish with his friend Carlos Gallardo, the film's star. When
that attempt fell through he drove to Los Angeles from Austin.

He found the name of an agent, Robert Newman of International Creative
Management, on a list of people who had attended a meeting about making more
films in Texas, and dropped off a copy of the tape at the agency. Mr. Newman,
who is in Park City, said today that he was "amazed" by the tape. The rest, as
they say, is Hollywood history.

Mr. Rodriguez laughed. "I'm putting my money in the bank so I can send my
younger brothers to school," he said. "We've always helped each other."

Sipping coffee and sitting unshaven the other morning in his hotel, Mr.
Rodriguez said he would remain in Texas. "I grew up watching the Latinos always
being the bad guys," he said. "I want to make movies about Hispanics who happen
to be regular guys."

As for his apparent success, Mr. Rodriguez said: "Look, my stock's up now but it
could change. I've saved every paycheck I've ever gotten and put it in the bank.
That's what my father taught me. Pretend it's the last one."


LOAD-DATE: January 28, 1993

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo: Robert Rodriguez, the director of "El Mariachi," working with
Carlos Gallardo. The film, set in a Texas border town, cost $7,000 to make.
(Columbia Pictures)

                   Copyright 1993 The New York Times Company

                              96 of 255 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                January 28, 1993, Thursday, Late Edition - Final

Military People Split Over Ban on Homosexuals: Air Force;
Are Homosexuals The New Enemy?

BYLINE: By DIRK JOHNSON,  Special to The New York Times

SECTION: Section A; Page 16; Column 1; National Desk

LENGTH: 777 words

DATELINE: CHEYENNE, Wyo., Jan. 27


Angry voices rose above the twangy jukebox in a boot-stomping Wyoming bar, as
young airmen railed against homosexuals with a fervor once reserved for
Communists and other enemies of the American way.

"If homosexuals come in, I'm going out," said John Kaisner, a 22-year-old airman
from nearby F.E. Warren Air Force Base, as he slapped a fist on the table and
lifted another beer. He added darkly: "If they let gays in the military, there
are going to be physical outbreaks."

It was a warning repeated time and again by more than a dozen airmen who
gathered in the bar: homosexuals in the military would be beaten.

"People are going to go after them physically," said Jason Puderbaugh, a
21-year-old airman, who also vowed to quit the service if the ban on gays is
lifted.

But other airmen said they would stay on the job and follow orders regardless.
Nor was it clear whether their voices, and emotions, are being raised now
because of the debate going on in Washington and might subside once the issues
has been settled.

None of these Air Force troops said they would personally attack a homosexual.
But they nonetheless guaranteed that such attacks would occur.

Not Job-Related

The fear of homosexuals in the military seemed to have little to do with
job-related duties. Few members of the Air Force said they would have any qualms
about riding in a plane with a gay airman.

But they said they could not fathom taking showers around gay people, or
sleeping in a dormitory where a homosexual had a nearby bunk.

"We're all crammed together in the showers, and I don't want to worry that some
gay guy is staring at me," said Jason Alexander, a 20-year-old airman from
Thompson Falls, Mont.

But no one said they had ever refused to take showers in gym class in high
school, where some of their classmates were presumably homosexual.

"That's different," said Airman Alexander, a bit flustered by the idea that
there might have been homosexuals back in Thompson Falls. "The showers in the
military are a lot more cramped."

The troops also said they would cringe at the idea of giving mouth-to-mouth
resuscitation to a gay man. They feared being sexually harassed by gay officers.
They predicted that blood supplies would be tainted by the AIDS virus. (In fact,
all members of the armed services are tested, initially and periodically, for
the virus that causes AIDS.) And they said they were worried that homosexuals
would decorate dormitories with magazine photographs of scantily clad men.

"Now how am I going to feel if I walk in to a dormitory and see pictures on the
wall from Playgirl magazine?" Airman Puderbaugh asked.

Most of these enlisted men said they believed homosexuals were already serving
in the armed forces, usually in a brave and competent manner. But they said the
rule against homosexuals has kept them from making advances toward others.

A Fear of Change

They fear that would all change if the ban was lifted. "I couldn't sleep at
night," said Martin Jones, a 22-year-old airman from Romulus, Mich. "I'd be
worried that some homosexual is going to sneak over and make a pass at me."

It was unclear why they think military life would generate such uncontrolled
sexual behavior. Airman Jones said that in civilian life no homosexual had ever
pursued him -- not even the friend from boyhood who turned out to be gay.

Neither was it clear why the airmen feared that huge numbers of homosexuals
would suddenly flood recruitment offices to join a military so obviously hostile
toward them.

Some speculated that homosexuals would be attracted to the large pool of
physically fit young men in the military.

"Maybe they want medical benefits if they catch AIDS," said Phil Jackson, a
19-year-old airman from Marion, Ill.

The gay ban has dominated discussions in the military lately. "This is all
people are talking about," said Dave Mapus, a 23-year-old airman from Freemont,
Ohio. "And everybody -- I mean everybody -- is against it."

The name of the new Commander in Chief, President Clinton, was singed in the
angry blue streak of talk among the troops. And they shook their heads in
wonderment that Vice President Al Gore, who served in Vietnam, could support
such a wrong-headed position.

"If President Clinton had ever worn a uniform, maybe he'd know what we're
talking about," said Airman Kaisner. "But he doesn't have a clue."

They scoffed at the idea that the ban on homosexuals amounted to discrimination
of the kind that has held back blacks or women.

"That was racism against the blacks, just prejudiced thinking," said Airman
Mapus. "We're not that way at all. We just don't like homosexuals."

LOAD-DATE: January 28, 1993

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1993 The New York Times Company

                              97 of 255 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 January 29, 1993, Friday, Late Edition - Final

KHMER ROUGE TIED TO ETHNIC KILLINGS

BYLINE: By PHILIP SHENON,  Special to The New York Times

SECTION: Section A; Page 7; Column 1; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 736 words

DATELINE: PHNOM PENH, Cambodia, Jan. 28


A Khmer Rouge soldier has confessed that he and a squad of other Khmer Rouge
guerrillas killed 15 ethnic Vietnamese civilians last month in a massacre
motivated by ethnic hatred, the United Nations announced today.

The massacre in the central province of Kompong Chhnang on Dec. 27 was the worst
single instance of violence in Cambodia since United Nations peacekeeping forces
arrived here in 1991 to carry out a peace treaty.

The arrest and confession of the 25-year-old guerrilla soldier is a breakthrough
in efforts by United Nations peacekeeping forces to tie the secretive,
Maoist-inspired rebels of the Khmer Rouge to a series of violent attacks,
including at least four massacres, against ethnic Vietnamese in Cambodia. United
Nations officials have described the massacres as a Khmer Rouge attempt at
"ethnic cleansing."

Soldier Defected

United Nations officials said the Khmer Rouge soldier, Than Theuan, confessed to
his participation in the massacre after he defected from the Khmer Rouge earlier
this month and asked for protection from the United Nations.

The arrest was announced in Phnom Penh as the first details emerged of another
massacre, this one of eight ethnic Cambodians, who died after gunmen opened fire
shortly after midnight Wednesday on a village festival in the province of Siem
Reap.

No one has been apprehended in the new attack, and United Nations officials said
they were investigating assertions by villagers that the Khmer Rouge may have
been involved.

Cambodia has had two waves of violence in recent months -- the
Vietnamese-installed Government of Cambodia has been widely blamed for one,
directed against opposition political parties; the Khmer Rouge have been blamed
for one against ethnic Vietnamese.

The Khmer Rouge insist that thousands of Vietnamese soldiers are living in
Cambodia, posing as civilians, and should be forced out. The Khmer Rouge were
responsible for the deaths of hundreds of thousands, and perhaps more than a
million, Cambodians when the group controlled the central government in the
1970's.

Denied Involvement>

While they have denied involvement in the massacres, the Khmer Rouge have cited
the presence of Vietnamese in Cambodia in the group's decision to boycott
internationally supervised elections this spring.

Mr. Than Theuan, who told investigators that he had used a B-40 rocket launcher
in the attack, allowed the United Nations to videotape him reenacting the
massacre in the village where it occurred.

Another official, Dennis McNamara, the head of human rights enforcement for the
United Nations Transitional Authority in Cambodia, said that while he could not
discuss details of Mr. Than Theuan's case because of imminent court proceedings,
"the ethnically motivated attacks on Vietnamese citizens are a major human
rights concern in Cambodia today, and this is the start of a new attempt by the
United Nations to bring those responsible to account."

Hundreds of thousands of ethnic Vietnamese civilians are believed to live in
Cambodia. Many ethnic Vietnamese families have been in Cambodia for generations,
speak the Khmer language and consider themselves Cambodians, while others have
been drawn here from Vietnam over the last year by the opportunity to find jobs.


Threat of a Pogrom

United Nations officials working in Cambodia have warned of the threat of a
pogrom led by the Khmer Rouge against the Vietnamese. Vietnam is a country of
nearly 70 million people that through history has repeatedly overrun the
territory of Cambodia, which has a population of about seven million. Many
Cambodians describe their hatred of Vietnamese as almost instinctive.

In the early 1970's, hatred against the Vietnamese led army and police units in
the Government of Prime Minister Lon Nol to kill thousands of Vietnamese
civilians in Phnom Penh and nearby provinces.

The motive for the attack on Wednesday morning remained unclear.

                             --------------------


Cambodian Election Set for May

BEIJING, Jan. 28 (AP) -- The Cambodian Government and three guerrilla groups met
today and agreed to hold United Nations-supervised elections in late May, but
the Khmer Rouge guerrilla movement missed a Wednesday deadline to take part in
them.

Yasushi Akashi, who heads the United Nations force in Cambodia, said the door
"is never closed" if the Khmer Rouge decide later to join.

LOAD-DATE: January 29, 1993

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Map of Cambodia highlights the location of Kompong Chhnang.

                   Copyright 1993 The New York Times Company

                              98 of 255 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 January 29, 1993, Friday, Late Edition - Final

Abroad at Home;
The Issue Is Bigotry

BYLINE: By ANTHONY LEWIS

SECTION: Section A; Page 27; Column 1; Editorial Desk

LENGTH: 722 words

DATELINE: BOSTON


Over the last half-century Americans have come to understand that a civilized
society does not mistreat people because of what they are. It is unacceptable to
assault someone because he is a Jew, or deny him a job because he is black.

The question now is whether we are ready to apply that civilized standard to
homosexuals. Are they to be despised and rejected because of what they are --
because of a status that nature gave them?

That is the question in the dispute over President Clinton's plan to end
discrimination against homosexuals in the armed services. It is the only
question. All the rest of the noise around the issue -- the talk about service
morale and fighting effectiveness, the shrilling on talk shows -- is
demonstrable humbug, and bigotry.

Col. Margarethe Cammermeyer won the Bronze Star in Vietnam in the Army nursing
corps. She served 27 years in uniform and was chief nurse in Washington State's
National Guard when the Pentagon ordered her discharged last year. Why did it do
so? Because she had stated on a form that she was a lesbian.

Tracy Thorne, a Navy lieutenant (j.g.), was a navigator-bombardier, 25 years
old, first in his flight training class, a member of a jet combat squadron. Last
year the Navy grounded him. Why? Because he had said on ABC's "Nightline" that
he was gay.

Did the firing of Colonel Cammermeyer or Lieutenant Thorne make our armed forces
more effective? To the contrary, it removed two people of proved effectiveness.
And it did so at heavy cost. The taxpayers paid $2 million to train Lieutenant
Thorne, for example: money down the drain.

Then think of all the horror stories being told in the organized campaign of
letters to Congress: Our men in the forces will not be safe from preying
homosexuals, they will be embarrassed in the shower and so on. Did Colonel
Cammermeyer or Lieutenant Thorne harass anyone, bother anyone? No. They did
nothing except perform superbly for our country. They were punished not for what
they did but for what they are.

Or think of the story told last fall in The Washington Post by Lucian K.
Truscott 3d, a retired Army officer. He commanded an infantry rifle company in
the Korean War, and one of the company's 150 men was thought to be gay. He did
one of the toughest jobs, carrying and firing a Browning Automatic Rifle, and he
was killed. Others in the company, including some who had mocked him in life,
cried as his body was carried off.

There have always been homosexuals in the armed forces, and there always will
be. President Clinton's plans do not change that reality. What they do is to
stop officials from wasting time and money snooping out who may be gay and then
discharging soldiers who have done a good job.

The waste of money is considerable. In the last 10 years the Pentagon estimates
that it spent nearly $500 million finding homosexuals, discharging them and
replacing them. But the real cost is human.

The Clinton plan does not condone any improper sexual conduct. It just stops the
witch hunt for people who are gay.

If sexual conduct were the real concern of the critics, they would focus on the
clear and present problem. You don't have to be a genius to know what that is:
assaults on women in the armed forces.

Some of the critics are military men who are genuinely worried about change --
just as the military fiercely resisted President Truman's 1948 order
desegregating the forces. But in time the services did a superb job of fighting
racial prejudice in their ranks: the best training program of any institution in
the country. I think they will respond to clear leadership on this issue, too.

The organized opposition -- highly organized -- is political. It is coming from
conservative religious groups and others on the extreme right. The Rev. Louis
Sheldon of the Traditional Values Coalition boasts that his group shut down the
telephone lines at the Capitol with its many calls. Oliver North is appealing
for funds to stop the Clinton plan. Those who are truly religious might
understand that God made people as they are.

In Washington, all you can hear is political calculation. President Clinton
should have moved slower. He should have moved faster. That is Washington:
maneuver, not substance. Politics matters, but it is not the issue here. The
issue is bigotry.

LOAD-DATE: January 29, 1993

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Op-Ed

                   Copyright 1993 The New York Times Company

                              99 of 255 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                January 30, 1993, Saturday, Late Edition - Final

A Journalist Killed In Cambodia in '70 Buried With Honors

BYLINE: By RONALD SULLIVAN

SECTION: Section 1; Page 11; Column 6; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 352 words


Nearly 23 years after he was captured and killed in Cambodia while covering the
war, the remains of Welles Hangen, an award-winning NBC News correspondent, were
buried yesterday in a ceremony marked by a 21-gun salute at Arlington National
Cemetery.

Mr. Hangen and his television crew were seized by Viet Cong and Khmer Rouge
guerrillas in southern Cambodia on May 31, 1970. They were killed three days
later.

Mr. Hangen, who was 40 years old when he was slain, was one of more than a score
of news corrspondents who died covering the war in Southeast Asia. Moments
before he and his colleagues were captured, three members of a CBS News team led
by George Syvertsen were killed when their jeep struck a mine further up the
road.

Mr. Hangen's widow, Patricia Hangen, who set out years ago to learn the facts
surrounding her husband's death, received a folded United States flag at the
ceremony yesterday.

Search for Remains Delayed

After his disappearance, Mrs. Hangen and many of her husband's friends hoped he
would turn up later as a released prisoner. But the search for him was halted in
1975 when the Khmer Rouge came to power, and it was not until 1991, when
Cambodia was moving toward a peace accord, that an NBC News team was allowed to
return to the Cambodian village where Mr. Hangen and his colleagues were last
seen, about 30 miles south of Phnom Penh near the Vietnamese border.

The villagers reported that Mr. Hangen had been beaten to death and directed the
crew toward a riverbed in a rice field. An initial excavation last year by the
United States military failed to turn up the remains, but the Army returned and
found four skeletons a few yards away last March.

Tests confirmed two weeks ago that one of the recovered skeletons was that of
Mr. Hangen.

A former reporter for The New York Times, Mr. Hangen joined NBC in 1958. As a
newspaper and television journalist he covered stories ranging from the Middle
East to the Soviet Union to the Far East.

A collection of Mr. Hangen's audio and video tapes was installed at the Museum
of Broadcasting in Manhattan in 1978.

NAME: Welles Hangen

LOAD-DATE: January 30, 1993

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo: Welles Hangen (1964)

TYPE: Biography; Obituary (Obit)

                   Copyright 1993 The New York Times Company

                              100 of 255 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                January 30, 1993, Saturday, Late Edition - Final

Sports of The Times;
A Cowboy Returns to The Scene

BYLINE: By WILLIAM C. RHODEN

SECTION: Section 1; Page 29; Column 1; Sports Desk

LENGTH: 752 words


ASK me who I like tomorrow in Super Bowl XXVII and I'll tell you, without a
pause: I like Dallas.

After so many years of covering events and pulling either for the best story or
the most fitting angle, this is a dramatic departure.

This year, there is a team in my life.

My first connection with Dallas came in 1963, three years after the franchise
was established. The players who stood out were Eddie LeBaron, a slick
ball-handling quarterback, and Don Perkins, a slashing running back from New
Mexico. Mostly, I remember the jerseys, distinguished by clusters of stars on
each shoulder.

Dallas also marked the National Football League's first foray into the Deep
South.

My personal connection to Dallas came in 1970 when the Cowboys made cornerback
Mark Washington their 13th-round draft pick. Mark became my first close friend
to be drafted by a pro team. In time, he opened the door to a deeper
understanding of Dallas as a business, a franchise and an invention.

Today, Mark will fly to Pasadena to join the Super Bowl festivities and hopes to
cheer Dallas to its first Super Bowl victory since 1979.

"I'm excited about this team," he said Friday afternoon from his home in
Houston. "In a way they remind me of our wild-card team in 1975. The big
difference is that these guys have fun. They've finally broken through the image
of Cowboys past -- Roger Staubach, Bob Lilly, Lee Roy Jordan. This team is
different. The only image these guys reflect is their own."

We first met in high school. He was two years ahead of me, the quintessential
student athlete: National Honor Society member, captain of the football team.

We were standing in the passing line at practice one afternoon when the
quarterback told us to run sideline patterns. The person in back of me asked me
how to run the pattern. "I don't know, I guess you do anything," I said. Mark
turned around and said coldly: "Is that what you do? Anything?"

He carried that same sternness to college, frowning on any display that brought
undue attention to the individual.

He was in fact, the perfect Cowboy clone. "It's true," he said. "I bought into
it.

"We had to fit a certain image, we were all drafted by the computer and our
personality profiles were all very similar: conservative, adaptable, goal and
team oriented."

Mark played in the league for nine seasons -- eight with Dallas, one with New
England -- appeared in five Super Bowls and played on both of Dallas winning
Super Bowl teams. After retiring in 1979, he put his chemistry degree to work by
joining Du Pont. Currently he is a senior technical sales rep for Vista Chemical
in Houston.

But my leaning toward Dallas tomorrow has little to do with friendship. In fact,
my friendship with Mark led to an ambivalence toward the Cowboys as I learned
more about the organization and met teammates and heard stories.

Long after Mark retired, listening to his conversations with Calvin Hill, his
close friend and a former Dallas running back, in many ways was like listening
to Vietnam veterans discuss their experiences. There was a similar conflicting
sense of pride, disillusionment, resentment and humor.

"We did well as a team but I guess what bothers us is that we could have been
better if everybody was on the same page," Washington said. "The question we
used to ask is, 'Why didn't we do better?' "

The reasons are complicated, though a good deal of it is rooted in the racial
divisiveness that marked Texas. When the Cowboys won Super Bowl in 1971, black
players lived in Oak Cliff, white players in North Dallas. In 1973, Washington
became the first black Cowboy to buy a house in North Dallas.

Years later, black and white former Cowboys meet in reunions and bemoan the fact
that they hadn't gotten to know each other. Many suggest that race had kept
players divided.

"The Cowboys were like many old successful American automotive corporations,"
Mark said. "They became the victim of their success. They became stagnant,
predictable and didn't utilize all their resources. Ultimately they were
overwhelmed by the competition."

Now Dallas is back to doing the overwhelming. The new ownership has
distinguished itself by putting the best team on the field: the players can
dance, they can shimmy, they can do the shark, too. The only requisite is that
they perform. This is the attraction the new Cowboys hold for the old.

"We grew up in an age of symphony, and we wanted to be jazz people," Calvin Hill
said. "These guys are jazz."

I like Dallas.

LOAD-DATE: January 30, 1993

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo: Mark Washington (F. Carter Smith)

                   Copyright 1993 The New York Times Company

                              101 of 255 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                January 30, 1993, Saturday, Late Edition - Final

Observer;
It's Bidness, General

BYLINE: By RUSSELL BAKER

SECTION: Section 1; Page 21; Column 1; Editorial Desk

LENGTH: 729 words


"Twenty-One Dollars a Day Once a Month" was the title of a song popular just
before Japan's Pearl Harbor attack pushed us into World War II. It referred to
the salary of newly drafted buck privates. Even in that age of the iron dollar,
$21 a month was ludicrous pay, and the song's popularity reflected public
acknowledgment that Uncle Sam was entitled to serious sacrifice.

If this were still so, there would be no public uproar about admitting
homosexuals to the military or giving women the right to be maimed and killed in
combat. These quarrels are evils caused by turning military service into
professional careers for the millions.

In this new professional military the pay is good, the educational opportunities
are bright, socialized medicine eliminates the civilian's health-care nightmare,
and retirement benefits can be collected early in life. What's more, since
benefits are underwritten by the Government, military pensioners don't have to
worry that their pensions may be plundered by some swashbuckling capitalist.

These are highly desirable jobs. Why shouldn't homosexuals insist on getting a
fair chance at them? Women, having observed that combat qualification is
essential to reaching the top, to winning the big C.E.O. office, quite naturally
demand the right to be shot at, and possibly shot up, in combat.

Why shouldn't women have a fair chance at the top jobs with fancy
general-and-admiral salaries, swell pensions, chauffeured cars, flunkeys to snap
heels and run errands, plus the best housing on the base?

It is hard to see what logical or legal grounds the brass can claim for denying
fair and equal treatment in the workplace because of an applicant's sex or
sexual orientation. Well, there is talk about the "culture" of military life.
Changing this "culture," some say, would reduce corporate efficiency.

Really? Military "culture" is always changing. It changed spectacularly after
President Truman ordered an end to its policy of unfair and unequal treatment on
grounds of color. What's more, it has handled the change so well that it is
widely admired as an example of how large institutions may handle interracial
personnel management policy with great success.

The "culture" also changed when the Government stopped drafting reluctant
citizens for the military. In the present "culture" the ties between citizen and
military have been broken, with very unhappy results. These showed up in the
hostility that flared between military professionals and civilians while the
Vietnam War was going from bad to worse.

Once upon a time when most American civilians had served a couple of years in
the military, the professionals and the draftees developed an understanding of
each other. It was rather like a marriage. Each party had had to learn patience
with the other. Even when it was a bad marriage, draftees came out of it with
memories of a few pleasures and some understanding of the professionals, if not
sympathy.

As the citizen army dwindled, then ceased to exist, the old bonds of
understanding withered, citizen and military looked at each other in hostility,
and the military gave signs of feeling unappreciated and abused.

A military that feels isolated and misunderstood is bad business for any
country. It can start feeling betrayed by the civilians with the nasty result
France experienced after losing Vietnam and Algeria. That's no threat here, but
during the gulf war we saw a small example of Pentagon willfulness in its
successful effort to control news coverage. This flowed from the military's
conviction that a hostile press had contributed to the Vietnam defeat.

The end of citizen military service was another unhappy result of Vietnam. The
draft had become so corruptly tilted against the unschooled poor that the
educated elite, who might have profited from military service, were excused from
it. This left them with unhealthy guilt feelings about the whole thing, which
fed their hostility toward the military.

In the end somebody thought it would restore public happiness to abandon citizen
service and go corporate with the military. Now nobody understands it but the
insiders. That's bad for the country. What's bad for the military is that a
government bureaucracy with sweet jobs to offer can no longer hunker down
pleading "culture." It has to get off the beach and move inland.

LOAD-DATE: January 30, 1993

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Op-Ed

                   Copyright 1993 The New York Times Company

                              102 of 255 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 January 31, 1993, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

BEST SELLERS: January 31, 1993

SECTION: Section 7; Page 30; Column 2; Book Review Desk

LENGTH: 1344 words



          Weeks
This Last    On
Week Week  List Fiction

 1      2  25   THE BRIDGES OF MADISON COUNTY, by Robert James Waller. (Warner,
                $14.95.) A photographer and a lonely farmer's wife in Iowa.

 2      1   2   DRAGON TEARS, by Dean Koontz. (Putnam, $22.95.) Two police
                detectives try to cope with a demonic serial killer in southern
                California.

 3      3   9   DOLORES CLAIBORNE, by Stephen King. (Viking, $23.50.) After
                being accused of murdering her employer, a woman tells of
                killing her husband.

 4      5  47   THE PELICAN BRIEF, by John Grisham. (Doubleday, $22.50.) A
                woman law student probes the murder of two Supreme Court
                justices.

 5 *        1   DEGREE OF GUILT, by Richard North Patterson. (Knopf, $23.) The
                case of a woman journalist charged with killing an eminent
                novelist: was it self-defense or murder?

 6      8   3   TERMINAL, by Robin Cook. (Putnam, $21.95.) A medical
                researcher's pursuit of a treatment for cancer has
                extraordinary consequences.

 7          1   CLOSE COMBAT, by W. E. B. Griffin. (Putnam, $22.95.) In the
                sixth volume of the series "The Corps," there are new
                challenges for the Marines all over the Pacific in World War
                II.

 8      7  11   THE GENERAL'S DAUGHTER, by Nelson DeMille. (Warner, $21.95.)
                The investigation of the murder of an officer, a general's
                daughter.

 9      4  22   GRIFFIN & SABINE, by Nick Bantock. (Chronicle Books, $17.95.)
                The romance of an artist and a secret admirer, told through
                cards and letters.

10      6  11   MIXED BLESSINGS, by Danielle Steel. (Delacorte, $23.50.) Three
                couples' lives are strained by the problems of having children.

11     15  10   ALL THE PRETTY HORSES, by Cormac McCarthy. (Knopf, $21.) A
                vaquero's adventures.

12      9  16   SABINE'S NOTEBOOK, by Nick Bantock. (Chronicle Books, $17.95.)
                Continuing the epistolary romance begun in "Griffin & Sabine."

13 *   11  13   MEXICO, by James A. Michener. (Random House, $25.) A journalist
                learns about Mexico. (LP)

14          1   DEVIL'S WALTZ, by Jonathan Kellerman. (Bantam, $22.95.) The
                psychologist-detective Alex Delaware investigates the strange
                series of illnesses that befalls a small child.

15     12  30   WAITING TO EXHALE, by Terry McMillan. (Viking, $22.) The
                friendships and romances of four black women in Phoenix.

16 *   10  15   THE TALE OF THE BODY THIEF, by Anne Rice. (Knopf, $24.) Lestat
                embarks on a dangerous enterprise; "The Vampire Chronicles,"
                continued.

          Weeks
This Last    On
Week Week  List Nonfiction



 1      1  20   THE WAY THINGS OUGHT TO BE, by Rush H. Limbaugh 3d. (Pocket,
                $22.) Anecdotes and opinions offered by the talk show host.

 2      2  25   WOMEN WHO RUN WITH THE WOLVES, by Clarissa Pinkola Estes.
                (Ballantine, $20.) A Jungian analyst reinterprets myths and
                folk tales.

 3      3  17   IT DOESN'T TAKE A HERO, by H. Norman Schwarzkopf with Peter
                Petre. (Linda Grey/ Bantam, $25.) The autobiography of the
                general.

 4      6  33   THE SILENT PASSAGE, by Gail Sheehy. (Random House, $16.) The
                psychological and social significance of menopause for today's
                women.

 5      7  11   BANKRUPTCY 1995, by Harry E. Figgie Jr. with Gerald J. Swanson.
                (Little, Brown, $19.95.) The authors predict the collapse of
                America under Government debt and suggest ways to cope with it.

 6      4  19   THE TE OF PIGLET, by Benjamin Hoff. (Dutton, $16.) Aspects of
                Taoist philosophy explained through the actions of an A. A.
                Milne character.

 7      5  33   TRUMAN, by David McCullough. (Simon & Schuster, $30.) A
                biography of the 33d President.

 8     12  13   GENIUS, by James Gleick. (Pantheon, $27.50.) The life of the
                physicist Richard Feynman.

 9      8  22   EVERY LIVING THING, by James Herriot. (St. Martin's, $22.95.)
                Continuing the memoirs of the Yorkshire veterinarian.

10      9   2   NOBODY NOWHERE, by Donna Williams. (Times Books/Random House,
                $21.) The autobiography of an autistic woman.

11     13   2   LIBERATION MANAGEMENT, by Tom Peters. (Knopf, $27.50.) How
                American industry is reorganizing to deal with the problems
                wrought by changing times.

12 *        7   CARE OF THE SOUL, by Thomas Moore. (HarperCollins, $20.) A
                psychotherapist's discussion of spirituality and everyday life.

13     11  15   I CAN'T BELIEVE I SAID THAT! by Kathie Lee Gifford with Jim
                Jerome. (Pocket, $22.) The autobiography of the television talk
                show host.

14 *   10   8   JFK: Reckless Youth, by Nigel Hamilton. (Random House, $30.)
                The first 29 years of the 35th President.

15          2   WE WERE SOLDIERS ONCE . . . AND YOUNG, by Harold G. Moore and
                Joseph L. Galloway. (Random House, $25.) The war in Vietnam as
                experienced during a three-day battle in 1965.

16 *   15  10   MY LIFE, by Earvin (Magic) Johnson with William Novak. (Random
                House, $22.) The autobiography of the retired basketball
                player.

          Weeks
This Last    On
Week Week  List Advice, How-to and Miscellaneous

1       1  47   MORE WEALTH WITHOUT RISK, by Charles J. Givens. (Simon &
                Schuster, $23.) An updated and expanded volume of financial
                advice.

 2      4   2   EXCESS BAGGAGE, by Judith Sills. (Viking, $21.) A
                psychologist's counsel about conquering character traits that
                make one's life harder.

 3      3   8   CREATING LOVE, by John Bradshaw. (Bantam, $23.) Ways to
                establish healthy relationships with other people.

 4      2  29   HARVEY PENICK'S LITTLE RED BOOK, by Harvey Penick with Bud
                Shrake. (Simon & Schuster, $19.) Anecdotes and tips about
                playing golf, by a legendary teacher.

 5      5   4   YOUR MONEY OR YOUR LIFE, by Joe Dominguez and Vicki Robin.
                (Viking, $20.) How to adapt your financial situation to a more
                frugal, satisfying style of living.


These listings are based on computer-processed sales figures from 3,050
bookstores and from representative wholesalers with more than 28,000 other
retail outlets, including variety stores and supermarkets. The figures are
statistically adjusted to represent sales in all such outlets across the United
States.

*An asterisk before a book's title indicates that its sales, weighted to reflect
the book-selling industry nationally, are barely distinguishable from those of
the book above.

LP indicates that a book is available in large print.


And Bear in Mind

(Editors' choices of other recent books of particular interest)

GENIUS IN THE SHADOWS. A Biography of Leo Szilard: The Man Behind the Bomb, by
William Lanouette with Bela Silard. (Robert Stewart/Scribners, $35.) A
delightful, anecdote-rich biography of the Hungarian physicist who knew
everybody and everything but got no credit because his best friends could barely
stand him.

FREUD, JUNG, AND HALL THE KING-MAKER: The Historic Expedition to America (1909),
by Saul Rosenzweig. (Hogrefe & Huber, $27.50.) Freud, 53, got an honorary degree
from Clark University. What an occasion! Mr. Rosenzweig re-creates it.

THE GULF CONFLICT 1990-1991: Diplomacy and War in the New World Order, by
Lawrence Freedman and Efraim Karsh. (Princeton University, $29.95.) The fullest
history yet of George Bush's famous victory, by two accomplished military
scholars.

MYSTERY RIDE, by Robert Boswell. (Knopf, $22.) An irresistible novel about a
family (she given to causes, he ineffectual, their daughter a rotten kid) who
try to puzzle out their own history.

OUTERCOURSE: The Be-Dazzling Voyage, by Mary Daly. (HarperSanFrancisco, $24.)
More radical cheek from the philosopher, theologian, mythologist, explorer,
pirate, warrior, witch, fairy and leprechaun who gave us "Gyn/Ecology."

CHANCELLORSVILLE 1863: The Souls of the Brave, by Ernest B. Furgurson. (Knopf,
$25.) An account of Lee's victory in the only great Civil War battle in which
the day was carried by mobility and maneuver instead of the attrition of men by
metal.

TO THE GATES OF RICHMOND: The Peninsula Campaign, by Stephen W. Sears. (Ticknor
& Fields, $24.95.) How George B. McClellan, the general whom nobody loves, lost
the largest single campaign of the Civil War because he was unwilling to fight.

LOAD-DATE: January 31, 1993

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: List

                   Copyright 1993 The New York Times Company

                              103 of 255 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 January 31, 1993, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

New & Noteworthy

BYLINE: By LAUREL GRAEBER

SECTION: Section 7; Page 32; Column 1; Book Review Desk

LENGTH: 923 words


CELIA, A SLAVE, by Melton A. McLaurin. (Avon, $10.) For women, slavery often
included sexual servitude. Such was the case with Celia, who was purchased in
Missouri in 1850 at about the age of 14, then forced to submit to her master's
advances until she finally killed him five years later. (She was hanged for his
murder.) "Mr. McLaurin succeeds admirably in using Celia's story to raise larger
issues about the meaning of American slavery for both blacks and whites, for
both women and men," Drew Gilpin Faust said here in 1991.


MISS MACINTOSH, MY DARLING, Volumes One and Two, by Marguerite Young. (Dalkey
Archive, $15 each.) In a text that fills almost 1,200 pages, Marguerite Young
explores the nature of Miss MacIntosh, a drowned elderly governess whose
exterior was artifice (she wore a wig and a false breast) and whose interior
world remains a mystery. Vera Cartwheel, who was cared for by Miss MacIntosh in
her childhood, narrates the novel, whose Joycean monologues and
stream-of-consciousness prose created a literary sensation when it was first
published in 1965. Our reviewer, William Goyen, called the book "a mammoth epic,
a massive fable, a picaresque journey, a Faustian quest and a work of stunning
magnitude and beauty."

EDGE CITY: Life on the New Frontier, by Joel Garreau. (Anchor/Doubleday, $12.)
It isn't downtown and it isn't the suburbs. Joel Garreau examines the phenomenon
of the "edge city," which developed when Americans began bringing business into
what had been bedroom communities. The result is places like Tysons Corner, Va.,
and Irvine, Calif. Writing in these pages in 1991, Kenneth T. Jackson took
exception to Mr. Garreau's rosy view of this progression, but praised his
"ability to categorize and clarify trends before they are apparent to the rest
of us." Another author who has proved prophetic on the urban landscape is Jane
Jacobs, who published THE DEATH AND LIFE OF GREAT AMERICAN CITIES (Vintage, $12)
in 1961. This seminal work criticizes the redevelopment projects of the period
for their tendency to impose homogeneity and to obliterate the richness and
diversity of neighborhoods. "Readers will vehemently agree and disagree with the
views," Lloyd Rodwin said in The Book Review, "but few of them will go through
the volume without looking at their streets and neighborhoods a little
differently." For a historical perspective on the grimier side of just one great
American city, there is LOW LIFE: Lures and Snares of Old New York, by Luc Sante
(Vintage Departures, $14). From 1840 to 1919, as the author tells it, Manhattan
might well have been called the Wild East, as thugs, gamblers, prostitutes,
policemen and politicians all competed for ill-gotten gains. In 1991 our
reviewer, Hanna Rubin, said, "Mr. Sante reclaims an essential piece of the
city's past, one that should reassure contemporary New Yorkers."


THE LAST GOOD GERMAN, by Bill Granger. (Warner, $5.99.) Devereaux, the spy hero
of Bill Granger's November Man thrillers, here comes face to face with an old
nemesis, a former East German defector out to stage a countercoup in his
reunified homeland. He "comes through in a manner that will keep the reader
engrossed," Newgate Callendar said here in 1991.


VESTED INTERESTS: Cross-Dressing & Cultural Anxiety, by Marjorie Garber. (Harper
Perennial, $17.50.) Marjorie Garber argues that by subverting sexually defined
dress codes, transvestites threaten the existence of other codes as well -- and
it's this implicit rejection of the social order that makes their appearance so
disquieting. In 1991 our reviewer, Lucy Hughes-Hallett, said the author's
argument "is both intricate and persuasive."


XENOCIDE, by Orson Scott Card. (Tom Doherty/Tor, $5.99.) In the concluding novel
of the trilogy that includes "Ender's Game" and "Speaker for the Dead," Orson
Scott Card uses science fiction to explore a moral quandary: What do you do when
the very nature of one intelligent species puts another in danger of extinction?
"Those who choose to follow him from start to finish will find that a novel of
ideas can also be a novel of suspense," Gerald Jonas said here in 1991.


MEANS OF ESCAPE, by Philip Caputo. (Harper Perennial, $12.) Admittedly drawing
on imagination as well as memory, a reporter and foreign correspondent recalls
his life, especially the years he spent covering wars in Vietnam, the Middle
East and Afghanistan. In 1991 our reviewer, Morley Safer, objected to the
fictionalization of details, but said that "there are some good yarns to be
told, and Mr. Caputo has a fine voice for telling them."


SAMS IN A DRY SEASON, by Ivan Gold. (Washington Square/Pocket Books, $10.) In
this autobiographical novel, Ivan Gold chronicles the desperate attempts of
Jason Sams, a once-promising author, to revive the talent and creative energy he
has drowned for years in alcohol. Although the account sometimes rambles, Mr.
Gold's "portrayal of the man's self-delusions allows the reader to share an
alcoholic's viewpoint in nearly unparalleled fashion," The Book Review said in
1990. The same publisher has also brought back into print Mr. Gold's 1969 novel
about Sams's earlier life, SICK FRIENDS ($10), which our reviewer, Richard
Stern, said proves the author is "one of the few who've almost mastered the art
of seeming artless," as well as his first collection of short fiction, NICKEL
MISERIES ($10). "He creates his stories with skill and understanding," William
Peden said here in 1963. " 'Nickel Miseries' is a solid achievement."

LOAD-DATE: January 31, 1993

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo: Marguerite Young (Ellen G. Friedman/Dalkey Archive)

TYPE: Review

                   Copyright 1993 The New York Times Company

                              104 of 255 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 January 31, 1993, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

FILM;
Stop the Presses! Movies Blast Media. Viewers Cheer.

BYLINE: By GLENN GARELIK;  Glenn Garelik teaches a course called "Media and
Society in the 90's" at Georgetown University.

SECTION: Section 2; Page 11; Column 1; Arts & Leisure Desk

LENGTH: 1473 words


When the presidential candidates accused "the media" of maltreatment, they had
good reason to expect a certain amount of sympathy. All one has to do is go to
the movies -- or switch on the television -- to recognize what Americans think
of those who purvey the news. A decade and a half after Alan J. Pakula's "All
the President's Men" lionized the Washington Post reporters Bob Woodward and
Carl Bernstein for their dogged pursuit of the Watergate story, movies and
television are disgorging a generation of fictional journalists whose flaws far
outweigh their meager virtues.

The message of recent movies like "Hero" and "Bob Roberts" and television series
like "Murphy Brown," "Love and War" and "Hearts Afire" is that journalists are
not the grass-roots crusaders they used to be -- that "the media," in fact, have
become a single, monolithic institution, an aristocratic fortress whose highborn
members are not simply aloof: they eat the common people for dinner. The
old-time press stood up for the "little guy"; the "media" are likely to exploit
him.

Americans have no tolerance for that sort of thing -- no more than they did in
the overtly populist 1930's, when the first movies about journalists appeared.
To fall under the glare of "the media" today is to have attracted the evil eye,
to be peered at by countless curiosity seekers.

In the past, of course, "the media" didn't exist. Newspapers existed. The folks
who worked at the local paper were paid very little, came from the community and
pursued their work with heart. If there was one thing they couldn't abide, it
was pomposity and pretense.

Newspaper reporters in the "screwball comedies" of the 1930's were blue-collar,
salt-of-the-earth types. The important thing about them -- fast-talking,
wisecracking, chain-smoking, hard-drinking though they may have been -- is that
they shared the values of the people they were writing for.

In "The Front Page" (1931), the granddaddy of all press films (based on Charles
MacArthur and Ben Hecht's 1928 play of the same name), a glib Chicago reporter,
Hildy Johnson (Pat O'Brien), carps about the newspaper "racket" but realizes
that he's hooked on the kind of job that lets him have his kicks and read it,
too. Hildy's editor, Walter Burns (Adolphe Menjou), may be gruff but he's canny
and surpassingly wise.

In Howard Hawks's 1940 gender-switched version of that film, "His Girl Friday,"
the ace reporter Rosalind Russell thinks she'll bail out of the business by
marrying "up." In the end she stays true to the ink in her proletarian veins.
Enhancing the prototype were the wisecracking Robert Williams in Frank Capra's
"Platinum Blonde" (1931), the cocky Clark Gable in Capra's "It Happened One
Night" (1934) and the fast-talking Jimmy Stewart in George Cukor's "Philadelphia
Story" (1940).

From World War II until the end of innocence that came with the Vietnam War,
journalists enjoyed unalloyed esteem in Hollywood as heroes and democrats.
Television, when it came along, picked up the theme of the crusading reporter
and ran with it well into the 60's. In "The Adventures of Superman" (1951-57),
for example, as in the comic books that inspired it, The Daily Planet is the
obvious first place that Clark Kent would hear about a crime. The newspaper is
not only both quicker and less corruptible than the cops. Like Superman, it
helps defend truth, justice and the American way.

The 1970's saw the beginnings of a shift in the entertainment industry's view of
journalists. Those who had once seemed the quintessence of the American way
became seditious, at worst -- and intrusive at best. The flippancy that had
characterized journalists became impudence; the wisecracking, arrogance. The
enemies of pretension had become pretentious.

In switching from newspapers to television as their primary source of news, the
public was faced with a new breed of journalist -- better educated than most
viewers, better paid, more urban and more urbane.

Unlike newspapers, network news was from the beginning an Eastern affair.
Anchors and corporate bosses were in New York. In Washington they posted a
correspondent or two.

To many Americans this "federalization" of the media translated as "liberal" --
a label that in the language of those who resented it was used less as political
commentary than as a way of describing values and a world view that were alien
to their own. In the early 1970's the growing alienation was exploited by none
other than the Vice President of the United States. Journalism, jeered Spiro
Agnew, was ruled by a "New York-Washington axis."

If the institutions that broadcast the news were starting to seem distant,
heartless and (at least in Agnew's formulation) conspiratorial, for
scriptwriters it was an easy next step to imagine the people who inhabited the
newsrooms and the meeting rooms behind them as the soul-less corporate soldiers
of a philosophically alien force.

Old-time newspapermen may have been rough around the edges in Hollywood's
estimation, but they had heart; they cared about the news. Television reporters
and their bosses, on the other hand, as exponents of Marshall McLuhan's "cool
medium," were assumed to be cool themselves -- not just objective but heartless.

It was television sitcoms, not the movies, that first picked up on the
phenomenon. "The Mary Tyler Moore Show" (1970), while retaining a stock figure
like the crusty editor with a heart of gold (Lou Grant, played by Ed Asner),
also created a prototype in the character of Ted Baxter (Ted Knight), the craven
talking head.

The appearance of Paddy Chayefsky's "Network," a satire about a fourth-place
television network that would do anything to improve its ratings, made 1976 a
pivotal year for Hollywood (even though some old-style journalists did survive
through the 1970's, conspicuously in "All the President's Men," which gave a
brief but powerful boost to the image of journalists). In addition to portraying
ruthless programmers and corporate personnel, "Network" addressed a dismaying
innovation of the period: local "eyewitness" newscasts.

In "Network" a character played by Peter Finch, the "mad prophet of the
airwaves," rails against the phenomenon. "TV's a circus," he declares, "an
amusement park. We're in the boredom-killing business."

(In a vivid example of art anticipating life, "repugnant media circus" was the
way Bill Kovach, head of the Nieman Foundation for Journalists at Harvard,
described the melee that greeted the landing of American troops on the beaches
of Somalia.)

That circus aspect was also stressed in "The Right Stuff" (1983), the film
version of Tom Wolfe's saga of the early space program, in which masses of
faceless reporters hound the astronauts and their wives.

In other film reporters of the 80's and 90's, heartless ambition consistently
overpowers ethics and empathy. "Die Hard" (1988), busy as it is with violence
and special effects, is not too busy to include a television reporter who's so
pushy he's finally punched in the face. Audiences cheered.

More damning was Sydney Pollack's "Absence of Malice" (1981). A young Miami
reporter (Sally Field) is duped into writing an article that discredits an
innocent man (Paul Newman) and causes his friend's suicide. The paper coolly
hides behind the First Amendment while the damage is done. The Newman character
complains: "You say somebody's guilty, everybody believes you. You say
somebody's innocent, nobody cares."

In "The Big Chill" (1983), the self-absorbed writer of fluff played by Jeff
Goldblum is a classic jerk. James Brooks's "Broadcast News" (1987) resurrected
the blow-dried anchorman -- only this time with a dash of treachery -- in the
character played by William Hurt. A drunken, self-serving reporter (Bruce
Willis) in "The Bonfire of the Vanities" (1990) exploits a hit-and-run accident
to get his career back on track.

With relish, television also turns the estrangement between journalists and the
public to its advantage: Murphy Brown, Jack Stein (of "Love and War") and
Georgie Anne Lahti (of "Hearts Afire") hold values and views that much of their
audience find inimical. This season, in "Hero," Hollywood has given us a
television reporter (played by Geena Davis) who is a caricature of ambition and
professional cool. In "Bob Roberts," the mainstream press, superficial and swept
along on a bandwagon of hype, is easily manipulated by a crypto-fascist
candidate for the Senate (Tim Robbins).

Journalists who are cut off from the common man are as much a staple of today's
scripts as the rough-and-ready newspapermen were in the 30's and tough,
determined crusaders were in the 50's and 60's. Because the change mirrors
changes in who tells the news and how they tell it, there is no reason to expect
many heroes among Hollywood journalists any time soon.

LOAD-DATE: January 31, 1993

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photos: Cary Grant as a devious editor and Rosalind Russell as his ace
reporter in "His Girl Friday" (1940) -- In the end, she stays true to the ink in
her proletarian veins. (Culver Pictures)(pg. 11); Geena Davis as a caricature of
an ambitious reporter and Andy Garcia as an impostor in "Hero" (Columbia
Pictures); below, Tim Robbins in "Bob Roberts," playing a crypto-fascist
candidate for the Senate who easily manipulates the press -- A philosophically
alien force. (Sam Jones/Paramount Pictures)(pg. 18)

                   Copyright 1993 The New York Times Company

                              105 of 255 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 January 31, 1993, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

Defending Izzy

SECTION: Section 7; Page 34; Column 3; Book Review Desk

LENGTH: 142 words


To the Editor:

I loved Izzy and I treasure the memory of him. I'm his kid brother. That's why,
though I have not yet read Robert Cottrell's biography, I must take to task this
Mr. Judis, who has written what to me is not a review but just another
right-wing attack on I. F. Stone.

According to Mr. Judis, Izzy's "underlying political philosophy [ran] from
uncritical admirer of Soviet and American Communism to anti-anti-Communist to
self-described 'liberal' opponent of the war in Vietnam."

I strongly protest. Izzy was never an "uncritical admirer of Soviet and American
Communism." All who knew him knew how very critical he was of any dictatorship,
left or right. What's more, his eyes were open as well to the machinations and
maneuverings of people who felt we should be the world's policeman.

LOUIS F. STONE
Glenside, Pa.

LOAD-DATE: January 31, 1993

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Letter

                   Copyright 1993 The New York Times Company

                              106 of 255 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 January 31, 1993, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

The Word Police

BYLINE: By MICHIKO KAKUTANI

SECTION: Section 9; Page 1; Column 4; Styles of The Times

LENGTH: 2293 words


THIS month's inaugural festivities, with their celebration, in Maya Angelou's
words, of "humankind" -- "the Asian, the Hispanic, the Jew/ The African, the
Native American, the Sioux,/ The Catholic, the Muslim, the French, the Greek/
The Irish, the Rabbi, the Priest, the Sheik,/ The Gay, the Straight, the
Preacher,/ The privileged, the homeless, the Teacher" -- constituted a kind of
official embrace of multiculturalism and a new politics of inclusion.

The mood of political correctness, however, has already made firm inroads into
popular culture. Washington boasts a store called Politically Correct that sells
pro-whale, anti-meat, ban-the-bomb T-shirts, bumper stickers and buttons, as
well as a local cable television show called "Politically Correct Cooking" that
features interviews in the kitchen with representatives from groups like People
for the Ethical Treatment of Animals.

The Coppertone suntan lotion people are planning to give their longtime cover
girl, Little Miss (Ms?) Coppertone, a male equivalent, Little Mr. Coppertone.
And even Superman (Superperson?) is rumored to be returning this spring,
reincarnated as four ethnically diverse clones: an African-American, an Asian, a
Caucasian and a Latino.

Nowhere is this P.C. mood more striking than in the increasingly noisy debate
over language that has moved from university campuses to the country at large --
a development that both underscores Americans' puritannical zeal for reform and
their unwavering faith in the talismanic power of words.

Certainly no decent person can quarrel with the underlying impulse behind
political correctness: a vision of a more just, inclusive society in which
racism, sexism and prejudice of all sorts have been erased. But the methods and
fervor of the self-appointed language police can lead to a rigid orthodoxy --
and unintentional self-parody -- opening the movement to the scorn of
conservative opponents and the mockery of cartoonists and late-night television
hosts.

It's hard to imagine women earning points for political correctness by saying
"ovarimony" instead of "testimony" -- as one participant at the recent Modern
Language Association convention was overheard to suggest. It's equally hard to
imagine people wanting to flaunt their lack of prejudice by giving up such words
and phrases as "bull market," "kaiser roll," "Lazy Susan," and "charley horse."

Several books on bias-free language have already appeared, and the 1991 edition
of the Random House Webster's College Dictionary boasts an appendix titled
"Avoiding Sexist Language." The dictionary also includes such linguistic
mutations as "womyn" (women, "used as an alternative spelling to avoid the
suggestion of sexism perceived in the sequence m-e-n") and "waitron" (a
gender-blind term for waiter or waitress).

Many of these dictionaries and guides not only warn the reader against offensive
racial and sexual slurs, but also try to establish and enforce a whole new set
of usage rules. Take, for instance, "The Bias-Free Word Finder, a Dictionary of
Nondiscriminatory Language" by Rosalie Maggio (Beacon Press) -- a volume often
indistinguishable, in its meticulous solemnity, from the tongue-in-cheek
"Official Politically Correct Dictionary and Handbook" put out last year by
Henry Beard and Christopher Cerf (Villard Books). Ms. Maggio's book supplies the
reader intent on using kinder, gentler language with writing guidelines as well
as a detailed listing of more than 5,000 "biased words and phrases."

Whom are these guidelines for? Somehow one has a tough time picturing them
replacing "Fowler's Modern English Usage" in the classroom, or being adopted by
the average man (sorry, individual) in the street.

The "pseudogeneric 'he,' " we learn from Ms. Maggio, is to be avoided like the
plague, as is the use of the word "man" to refer to humanity. "Fellow," "king,"
"lord" and "master" are bad because they're "male-oriented words," and "king,"
"lord" and "master" are especially bad because they're also "hierarchical,
dominator society terms." The politically correct lion becomes the "monarch of
the jungle," new-age children play "someone on the top of the heap," and the
"Mona Lisa" goes down in history as Leonardo's "acme of perfection."

As for the word "black," Ms. Maggio says it should be excised from terms with a
negative spin: she recommends substituting words like "mouse" for "black eye,"
"ostracize" for "blackball," "payola" for "blackmail" and "outcast" for "black
sheep." Clearly, some of these substitutions work better than others: somehow
the "sinister humor" of Kurt Vonnegut or "Saturday Night Live" doesn't quite
make it; nor does the "denouncing" of the Hollywood 10.

For the dedicated user of politically correct language, all these rules can make
for some messy moral dilemmas. Whereas "battered wife" is a gender-biased term,
the gender-free term "battered spouse," Ms. Maggio notes, incorrectly implies
"that men and women are equally battered."

On one hand, say Francine Wattman Frank and Paula A. Treichler in their book
"Language, Gender, and Professional Writing" (Modern Language Association), "he
or she" is an appropriate construction for talking about an individual (like a
jockey, say) who belongs to a profession that's predominantly male -- it's a way
of emphasizing "that such occupations are not barred to women or that women's
concerns need to be kept in mind." On the other hand, they add, using masculine
pronouns rhetorically can underscore ongoing male dominance in those fields,
implying the need for change.

And what about the speech codes adopted by some universities in recent years?
Although they were designed to prohibit students from uttering sexist and racist
slurs, they would extend, by logic, to blacks who want to use the word "nigger"
to strip the term of its racist connotations, or homosexuals who want to use the
word "queer" to reclaim it from bigots.

In her book, Ms. Maggio recommends applying bias-free usage retroactively: she
suggests paraphrasing politically incorrect quotations, or replacing "the sexist
words or phrases with ellipsis dots and/or bracketed substitutes," or using
"sic" "to show that the sexist words come from the original quotation and to
call attention to the fact that they are incorrect."

Which leads the skeptical reader of "The Bias-Free Word Finder" to wonder
whether "All the King's Men" should be retitled "All the Ruler's People"; "Pet
Semetary," "Animal Companion Graves"; "Birdman of Alcatraz," "Birdperson of
Alcatraz," and "The Iceman Cometh," "The Ice Route Driver Cometh"?

Will making such changes remove the prejudice in people's minds? Should we
really spend time trying to come up with nonmale-based alternatives to "Midas
touch," "Achilles' heel," and "Montezuma's revenge"? Will tossing out Santa
Claus -- whom Ms. Maggio accuses of reinforcing "the cultural male-as-norm
system" -- in favor of Belfana, his Italian female alter ego, truly help banish
sexism? Can the avoidance of "violent expressions and metaphors" like "kill two
birds with one stone," "sock it to 'em" or "kick an idea around" actually
promote a more harmonious world?

The point isn't that the excesses of the word police are comical. The point is
that their intolerance (in the name of tolerance) has disturbing implications.
In the first place, getting upset by phrases like "bullish on America" or "the
City of Brotherly Love" tends to distract attention from the real problems of
prejudice and injustice that exist in society at large, turning them into mere
questions of semantics. Indeed, the emphasis currently put on politically
correct usage has uncanny parallels with the academic movement of deconstruction
-- a method of textual analysis that focuses on language and linguistic
pyrotechnics -- which has become firmly established on university campuses.

In both cases, attention is focused on surfaces, on words and metaphors; in both
cases, signs and symbols are accorded more importance than content. Hence, the
attempt by some radical advocates to remove "The Adventures of Huckleberry Finn"
from curriculums on the grounds that Twain's use of the word "nigger" makes the
book a racist text -- never mind the fact that this American classic (written in
1884) depicts the spiritual kinship achieved between a white boy and a runaway
slave, never mind the fact that the "nigger" Jim emerges as the novel's most
honorable, decent character.

Ironically enough, the P.C. movement's obsession with language is accompanied by
a strange Orwellian willingness to warp the meaning of words by placing them
under a high-powered ideological lens. For instance, the "Dictionary of
Cautionary Words and Phrases" -- a pamphlet issued by the University of
Missouri's Multicultural Management Program to help turn "today's journalists
into tomorrow's multicultural newsroom managers" -- warns that using the word
"articulate" to describe members of a minority group can suggest the opposite,
"that 'those people' are not considered well educated, articulate and the like."

The pamphlet patronizes minority groups, by cautioning the reader against using
the words "lazy" and "burly" to describe any member of such groups; and it
issues a similar warning against using words like "gorgeous" and "petite" to
describe women.

A S euphemism proliferates with the rise of political correctness, there is a
spread of the sort of sloppy, abstract language that Orwell said is "designed to
make lies sound truthful and murder respectable, and to give an appearance of
solidity to pure wind." "Fat" becomes "big boned" or "differently sized";
"stupid" becomes "exceptional"; "stoned" becomes "chemically inconvenienced."

Wait a minute here! Aren't such phrases eerily reminiscient of the euphemisms
coined by the Government during Vietnam and Watergate? Remember how the military
used to speak of "pacification," or how President Richard M. Nixon's press
secretary, Ronald L. Ziegler, tried to get away with calling a lie an
"inoperative statement"?

Calling the homeless "the underhoused" doesn't give them a place to live;
calling the poor "the economically marginalized" doesn't help them pay the
bills. Rather, by playing down their plight, such language might even make it
easier to shrug off the seriousness of their situation.

Instead of allowing free discussion and debate to occur, many gung-ho advocates
of politically correct language seem to think that simple suppression of a word
or concept will magically make the problem disappear. In the "Bias-Free Word
Finder," Ms. Maggio entreats the reader not to perpetuate the negative
stereotype of Eve. "Be extremely cautious in referring to the biblical Eve," she
writes; "this story has profoundly contributed to negative attitudes toward
women throughout history, largely because of misogynistic and patriarchal
interpretations that labeled her evil, inferior, and seductive."

The story of Bluebeard, the rake (whoops! -- the libertine) who killed his seven
wives, she says, is also to be avoided, as is the biblical story of Jezebel. Of
Jesus Christ, Ms. Maggio writes: "There have been few individuals in history as
completely androgynous as Christ, and it does his message a disservice to
overinsist on his maleness." She doesn't give the reader any hints on how this
might be accomplished; presumably, one is supposed to avoid describing him as
the Son of God.

Of course the P.C. police aren't the only ones who want to proscribe what people
should say or give them guidelines for how they may use an idea; Jesse Helms and
his supporters are up to exactly the same thing when they propose to patrol the
boundaries of the permissible in art. In each case, the would-be censor aspires
to suppress what he or she finds distasteful -- all, of course, in the name of
the public good.

In the case of the politically correct, the prohibition of certain words,
phrases and ideas is advanced in the cause of building a brave new world free of
racism and hate, but this vision of harmony clashes with the very ideals of
diversity and inclusion that the multi-cultural movement holds dear, and it's
purchased at the cost of freedom of expression and freedom of speech.

In fact, the utopian world envisioned by the language police would be bought at
the expense of the ideals of individualism and democracy articulated in the "The
Gettysburg Address": "Fourscore and seven years ago our fathers brought forth on
this continent a new nation, conceived in liberty and dedicated to the
proposition that all men are created equal."

Of course, the P.C. police have already found Lincoln's words hopelessly
"phallocentric." No doubt they would rewrite the passage: "Fourscore and seven
years ago our foremothers and forefathers brought forth on this continent a new
nation, formulated with liberty, and dedicated to the proposition that all
humankind is created equal."



SAY WHAT? BIAS-FREE SUBSTITUTIONS

ABOMINABLE SNOWMAN: yeti.
BULL MARKET: rising, improving, escalating, buy or favorable market.
DON JUAN: sexually aggressive/sexually active person.
DUTCH TREAT: separate checks or say, "I insist on paying for myself."
GLOOMY GUS: spoilsport.
JAVA MAN: early human found in Java.
MAN IN THE MOON: face in the moon.
MAN'S BEST FRIEND: use the devoted dog, our faithful canine friends.
MASTER BEDROOM: main, owner's, principal or largest bedroom.
NERD: square, wimp.
NO-MAN'S-LAND: limbo, wasteland, nowheresville.
NOT A FIT NIGHT FOR MAN OR BEAST: "not a fit night to be out" and "for
two-legged creatures nor four-legged ones either."
QUEEN BEE: big wheel.
WAITRESS: waitron, waitperson.
(Adapted from "The Bias-Free Word Finder" by Rosemary Maggio (Beacon Press,
1992).)

LOAD-DATE: January 31, 1993

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1993 The New York Times Company

                              107 of 255 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 January 31, 1993, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

Conversations/Walt Whitman Rostow;
A Vietnam Hawk's Battle Plan For a City's Mean Streets

BYLINE: By ROBERTO SURO

SECTION: Section 4; Page 7; Column 1; Week in Review Desk

LENGTH: 1163 words

DATELINE: AUSTIN, Tex.


WALT WHITMAN ROSTOW recalls coming home at 3 A.M. from the White House during
the 1962 Cuban missile crisis to find his wife, Elspeth, a history professor,
sitting cross-legged in bed, grading papers. He remembers exactly what she said:
"You haven't been so cheerful since the Second World War."

Now, some 30 years later, Mr. Rostow, who was a foreign policy adviser to
Presidents Kennedy and Johnson, is experiencing a not dissimilar good cheer,
born of clear purpose and a sense of optimism about overcoming an ominous
threat.

The economist-diplomat-warrior heads a civic organization called the Austin
Project, which immodestly intends to solve the problems of urban America,
starting with the capital of Texas. Mr. Rostow, a professor of economics at the
University of Texas, has not been a notable figure in local politics, but in
little more than a year the project has attracted public officials, foundations,
private social service agencies and business leaders.

The City Council voted unanimously last September to begin the first phase of
the project's strategy, which calls for greatly expanding and coordinating
programs, both private and public, aimed at prenatal care and at aiding
disadvantaged children up to the age of 8. This month Mayor Bruce Todd promised
to try to double the local spending on those programs in 1993, with help from
foundations and the state and Federal governments.

Mr. Rostow, 76 years old, says his approach to the cities is colored by the same
optimism that he and others of his generation brought to government when John F.
Kennedy became President. As another generation takes over Washington in an era
bedeviled by deficits and mistrust of government, Mr. Rostow insists that a
robust sense of possibilities is the key to success.

"We were a generation that had seen very bad times in the Depression and during
the war, in 1942," he said, "when the nation faced great military danger, and we
had become used to saying to ourselves, 'O.K., suck up your gut and get at it,
we'll win because we have to.' That wasn't cheap optimism in the Kennedy days,
and that spirit has not been lost in this country. You see it today in people
young and old when they are committed to an idea."

Fighting Pessimism

He readily acknowledges that years of "cumulative failure and chronic stagnation
have left people both in the inner city and outside profoundly pessimistic about
these problems, but it is not in the American character to sit by passively and
watch the ship go down."

Mr. Rostow proposes a disarmingly simple solution. That may help explain why it
has quickly won wide acceptance in Austin.

"You rapidly and drastically increase your prevention efforts with the young
until they are equal to the scale of the problem," he said, "and in a short time
the investment will pay for itself because you'll pay less for damage control."

An effective prenatal care program that reaches every teen-age mother, for
example, will save much more than its cost by reducing the number of low
birth-weight babies who need expensive neonatal care. Similarly, programs that
succeed in reducing dropout rates produce huge savings in lowered welfare and
law enforcement costs.

"It's just a problem of transition," he said. "How are you going to get the
investment in prevention high enough to where the level of pathology begins to
fall and still keep up the damage control? If you can get through that interval,
money won't be a problem."

Things seem simpler in Austin (pop. 465,000) because of its size. Doubling local
spending on the programs for children sounds ambitious, but in Austin that only
means raising $2.6 million, which the Austin Project reasonably plans to
accomplish in a year. And problems still seem to be manageable. Sure, there are
street gangs in the black and Hispanic neighborhoods on the east side of town,
but the police counted only 37 murders throughout the city last year.

Austin's small scale also makes it easier for a coalition to form. "This
country's inherent strength is that it is a highly diffuse society with many
points of initiative," he said. "If you can get everyone to agree on a common
strategy, then you have a chance of orchestrating all these marvelously
variegated elements so each does its part. Whether you are in Austin or New
York, there are plenty of dedicated people with good ideas for saving the
cities, but usually they do not function together as a unit."

By means of illustration, Mr. Rostow said that earlier that day during a board
meeting of the Austin Project, a police officer, a social worker, a university
professor and a computer company executive each addressed aspects of the
project's strategy.

As in the Atlanta Project, organized by former President Jimmy Carter, and
similar efforts in other cities, Mr. Rostow says, the fundamental goal in Austin
is "to see how you create an operational unit out of a community." By getting
many public and private agencies to agree on a program, he hopes the project
will reduce duplication and expenses. But more important is his conviction that
a common purpose greatly multiplies ingenuity and commitment.

The Good War

Asked if he had any models, he answered without hesitation, "The extreme model
is this country waging a war that commands overwhelming support." No doubts
about the strategy and everyone doing their part.  The images he drew came from
one war in particular: "women working in factories, not buying new automobiles,
rationing."

Certain ironies were unavoidable during an afternoon spent with Mr. Rostow. His
office at the Lyndon B. Johnson Library is just down the hall from a replica of
the Oval Office, where he spent many hours helping direct the Vietnam War.

For someone of a younger generation it was impossible not to ask how that war
fit into his model of strategic consensus. After stumbling and digressing a bit
he said: "The way we fought the war in Vietnam reminds me of the way we are
trying to deal with the cities, running after all the symptoms and putting
Band-Aids on them instead of going for the cause." Instead of getting sucked
into a guerrilla war in South Vietnam, he says, we should have massed enough
ground troops and air power along the Ho Chi Minh trail "because they would have
had to stand and fight there or be dead."

As things turned out, he admits, "It was a harrowing way to fight a war."

Mr. Rostow shifts much more readily to that earlier conflict, vividly recalling
events like the liberation of Paris. Of a friend from that time he says, "he
really had a gallant war."

His visitor, denied such memories and instead recalling frustration and dissent,
asks how someone whose war was Vietnam could summon that same bold faith in
common purpose typical of the World War II generation.

Mr. Rostow, that rare combination of intellectual and optimist, pauses and a
cloud passes over his face. "I just don't know," he says. "It's a mystery to
me."

NAME: Walt Whitman Rostow

LOAD-DATE: January 31, 1993

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo: Walt Whitman Rostow in his Austin, Tex., office last week. (Zigy
Kaluzny for The New York Times)

TYPE: Biography

                   Copyright 1993 The New York Times Company

                              108 of 255 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 January 31, 1993, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

Marshall's Assessments of Nation's Notables

BYLINE: By The Associated Press

SECTION: Section 1; Page 31; Column 1; National Desk

LENGTH: 657 words


Thurgood Marshall thought that Robert F. Kennedy was "a cold, calculating
character" and that the Rev. Dr. Martin Luther King Jr. was a great leader but
not "worth diddley squat" as an organizer. And he considered Lyndon B. Johnson
"a lovely guy," for whom he had profound sympathy.

Those were among the assessments, offered by Justice Marshall 16 years ago in
audiotaped interviews with the Oral History Project at Columbia University, of
the many public figures he had met in his long career as civil rights hero,
Federal appeals judge, Solicitor General and Supreme Court Justice. Transcripts
of the tapes, sealed by agreement until Justice Marshall's death, were issued by
the university last week, the day after he died of heart failure at the age of
84.

The transcripts are filled with colorful reminiscences, including those of the
civil rights battles of the 1960's.

'No Warm Feelings'

Although speaking fondly of Dr. King for the most part, Justice Marshall did
find fault with him. "I thought he was great as a leader," the Justice said. "As
an organizer, he wasn't worth diddley squat. But very few leaders are."

Justice Marshall expressed some bitterness at what he saw as Dr. King's
willingness to delegate his legal battles to the NAACP Legal Defense and
Educational Fund, which Justice Marshall had served as director-counsel for more
than 20 years.

"With Martin Luther King's group, all he did was to dump all his legal work on
us, including the bills," the Justice said.

Justice Marshall called President John F. Kennedy "a very sweet man" but said of
his brother Robert: "Bobby was like his father. He was a cold, calculating
character. 'What's in it for me?' I mean, not like his brother. He had no warm
feelings. None at all."

Justice Marshall recalled that early in the Kennedy Administration he was close
to being appointed to his first Federal judgeship and that he hoped to serve on
an appeals court. Robert Kennedy, the Attorney General and the President's
closest adviser, offered him a post only as a district judge, who, unlike an
appeals judge, must preside at trials.

'My Fuse Was Too Short'

"I told Bobby Kennedy that I was not district judge material," the Justice said,
"because my fuse was too short. I lose my temper. And that wasn't good."

Justice Marshall said that Kennedy had responded: "You don't seem to understand.
It's this or nothing."

"I said, 'Well, I do understand,' " the Justice recalled. " 'The trouble is that
you are different from me. You don't know what it means, but all I've had in my
life is nothing. It's not new to me, so goodbye.' "

The prospective judge got what he wanted: a seat on the United States Court of
Appeals for the Second Circuit, in Manhattan.

'He Died of a Broken Heart'

Justice Marshall expressed both admiration and sympathy for President Johnson,
who appointed him Solicitor General in 1965 and to a seat on the Supreme Court
in 1967.

"I think if he'd been re-elected, he'd have been still alive today," Justice
Marshall said in the interview, recorded four years after the President's death.
"He died of a broken heart. What a lovely guy."

Johnson was forced to abandon his hopes for re-election in 1968 because of
public protest over the Vietnam War. Justice Marshall recalled that after
leaving the Presidency in January 1969 Johnson occasionally telephoned him,
sometimes depressed.

"He would call me for the express purpose of getting out of it," the Justice
said. "He would say, 'No moaning at the bar,' or something like that. And then
he'd say, 'O.K., now, go have a drink.' I'd say, 'Providing you do.' "

Absent from the transcripts are Justice Marshall's thoughts about the Supreme
Court. But he did say that decisions in voting rights cases would be extremely
important for blacks.

"I think that's the only wave of the future," he said. "I shouldn't talk too
much about it, because we have many cases on it."

LOAD-DATE: January 31, 1993

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1993 The New York Times Company

                              109 of 255 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 January 31, 1993, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

His Life as a Panther

BYLINE: By Adam Hochschild;  Adam Hochschild is the author of "Half the Way
Home: A Memoir of Father and Son" and "The Mirror at Midnight: A South African
Journey."

SECTION: Section 7; Page 6; Column 1; Book Review Desk

LENGTH: 1178 words



THIS SIDE OF GLORY
The Autobiography of David Hilliard and the Story of the Black Panther Party.
By David Hilliard and Lewis Cole.
Illustrated. 450 pp. Boston:
Little, Brown & Company. $24.95.

FOR a stable society, the United States has been home to a remarkable number of
millenarian sects. Some, like the Jehovah's Witnesses or the Communist Party,
have lasted, even though the apocalypse they predict has not yet come. Others
have flashed across the sky and gone down in flames. Few of those groups had a
more spectacular rise and fall than the Black Panther Party, which captured the
national imagination for a brief few years starting at the end of the 1960's.

At the beginning, if you didn't mind their paramilitary style, it was easy to
feel some sympathy for the Panthers. Then, as now, millions of American blacks
lived in decaying slums where schools were poor, jobs were scarce and the police
were often brutal and mostly white. By the start of the 1970's, Washington had
largely turned its back on these problems, and instead was pouring money and
lives into the war in Vietnam.

Why, asked the charismatic Panther leader Huey Newton, shouldn't black people in
the United States, harassed by the police, arm themselves in self-defense, as
the Vietnamese guerrillas were doing? It was a defiant message for a restless,
angry time. And, unlike black separatists, the Panthers sought alliances with
radical whites. So the famous poster of Newton, sitting sternly on a huge,
thronelike peacock chair, with a rifle in one hand and a spear in the other,
looked down from the walls both of desolate apartments in black ghettos and of
dormitory rooms in elite, predominantly white colleges.

Then, almost as quickly as it had soared into prominence, the party collapsed.
Some 19 Panthers were killed in shootouts with one another, the police, the
F.B.I. or other black revolutionaries. Various party activists went to jail, on
charges ranging from drug dealing to murder. In Oakland, Calif., where the party
was born, an embezzlement scandal engulfed some of the Panthers' community
betterment programs. Newton took on ever more grandiose titles -- Minister of
Defense, Supreme Commander, Supreme Servant. Like Stalin, he began booting
"enemies of the people" out of the party. He and a shrinking core of loyalists
turned to running an extortion racket, gunning down those who got in their way.

On top of all this, the Panthers were the target of what seems to have been one
of the largest campaigns of disinformation and destabilization ever mounted
against an American political group. F.B.I. agents made anonymous phone calls,
mailed out hate letters over forged signatures, printed up a fake Panther
coloring book for children that was filled with incendiary rhetoric and
infiltrated the group with agents provocateurs, whose job was to sow suspicion
and incite violence.

Was the main reason for the Panthers' failure that Newton and other leaders
never broke free of their petty-criminal backgrounds? Or did the vicious F.B.I.
destabilization campaign do them in? Or does the very nature of an armed,
undemocratic sect make it fatally prone to influence by the reckless, whether
F.B.I. spies or hotheads out for their own gain?

Readers in search of answers will find some raw material, but not much
reflection, in "This Side of Glory," the autobiography of David Hilliard, who
was one of the Panthers' top officials in the early days of the party. The book
is disappointing on two counts.

First, it lacks the sound of a human voice. That Mr. Hilliard enlisted Lewis
Cole, who teaches screenwriting at Columbia University, to help him is not in
itself the problem; plenty of "as told to" stories -- such as "The Autobiography
of Malcolm X" -- have an authenticity and passion that gain our trust. But this
book is too facile, its prose like processed cheese. The entire story is in the
present tense. The overheated text is peppered with one-sentence paragraphs.
There is much melodrama: for example, the authors do not know exactly how Huey
Newton met his death in 1989, apparently in a drug deal gone sour on the streets
of Oakland, and so they imagine the scene, complete with a page or so of made-up
dialogue.

The other problem is that although "This Side of Glory" describes both the
growth and the collapse of the Black Panther Party, it does not relate the one
to the other. The Panthers' brief time in the spotlight is treated too
reverently. Even though he was abruptly, unfairly expelled by the increasingly
paranoid Huey Newton, Mr. Hilliard calls Newton "a peerless intellectual force"
who "has changed history." He calls the party "the best thing in my life." There
is something sad about this intense nostalgia for the party that once promised
so much; some of those expelled by Stalin felt the same emotion. But it leads
Mr. Hilliard to make various heroic claims for the Panthers that the evidence
does not bear out -- for instance, that the exposure of how the Chicago police
initiated an attack that killed two Panthers helped lead to the "overthrow" of
Mayor Richard J. Daley. Daley died in office, in his sixth term.

In the last section of the book, Mr. Hilliard emerges in the mid-1970's from
several years in prison on charges stemming from a shootout between Panthers and
police. Looking around him, he feels understandably depressed: in his familiar
world of the Oakland ghetto all the young men who previously would have been
drawn to politics now deal drugs instead. But should he have been so surprised?
When the Panthers had been on the rise, Mr. Hilliard mentions in passing, he and
Newton had raised money for the party by selling drugs. The party also operated
a bar that was supposed to serve as a center for community organizing.

Drugs? A bar? How baffled the Vietnamese revolutionaries Mr. Hilliard so admired
would have been to see the Panthers trading in drugs and alcohol -- the very
things ravaging their community. In the end, perhaps the main lesson of the
Panther experience is that to succeed, any movement of the oppressed must make a
clean break from the culture of its oppression. In this sense, paradoxically,
the Panthers were not revolutionary enough. The Black Muslims, despite many
criticisms one could make of their beliefs, were -- and their movement has
lasted.

To his credit, Mr. Hilliard acknowledges his own personal battle with drink and
drugs. The final pages of his story chronicle a shattered life that has slowly
been put back together with the help of Alcoholics Anonymous and other programs.
In these passages, in his vivid description of the brutality of California
prisons, and in some scenes of his Alabama childhood in a family of 12 children
who had to scrounge for leftover food in the garbage of a nearby hospital, we
get a few glimpses of the human suffering that provided such eager recruits for
groups like the Black Panthers -- and that will do so again and again, as long
as so many millions of Americans live in harsh want amid promises of plenty.

NAME: David Hilliard

LOAD-DATE: January 31, 1993

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo: David Hilliard, 1968. (Pirkle Jones/From "This Side of Glory")

TYPE: Biography; Review

                   Copyright 1993 The New York Times Company

                              110 of 255 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                February 2, 1993, Tuesday, Late Edition - Final

Bill Is Passed By Assembly On Gay Rights

BYLINE: By KEVIN SACK,  Special to The New York Times

SECTION: Section B; Page 1; Column 5; Metropolitan Desk

LENGTH: 836 words

DATELINE: ALBANY, Feb. 1


After a round of dramatic and often moving speeches, the New York State Assembly
passed a gay-rights bill today with an unexpectedly large majority and sent it
to a wary State Senate.

The 90-to-50 vote marked the first passage of such a bill by either house of the
Legislature in the 23 years it has been considered. Nine Republicans joined 81
Democrats in voting for the bill, giving its supporters a measure of hope for
its prospects in the Republican-controlled Senate.

"It's more than I had thought we would get before the vote," said Dick Dadey,
the executive director of Empire State Pride Agenda, a gay and lesbian lobbying
group. "It allows us to continue to have hope that more and more Republicans
will come to support this bill."

Thirty-six Republicans and 14 Democrats voted against the bill, which has the
support of Gov. Mario M. Cuomo.

An Emotional Debate

Although the bill's fate in the Assembly was known long before members cast
their votes, the debate proved to be as emotional as any in recent memory. It
included a highly personal testimonial from the Assembly's first and only openly
gay member, Deborah J. Glick, a Manhattan Democrat who received an unusual
ovation after her speech. It also included eloquent tributes to the equal-rights
protections afforded by the state and Federal constitutions.

The bill's sponsor, Assemblyman Steven Sanders, a Manhattan Democrat, appealed
to the ethnically diverse Assembly by characterizing the legislation as an
effort to outlaw the same kind of discrimination experienced by black, female,
Jewish, Catholic, Hispanic, Irish and Italian New Yorkers. "Today what we do is
not unique," he said. "We are securing the freedoms and the liberties for yet
another group of Americans, people who are gay or lesbian, in the same way that
we did for 200 years."

An aide to the Senate majority leader, Ralph J. Marino, said today that the bill
"would appear to face a close vote" among the 35 Republicans who form the
majority in the 61-member Senate. Mr. Marino, a Republican from Oyster Bay,
L.I., said last week that he would allow the bill onto the Senate floor for a
vote only if a majority of the Republican members favored doing so during a
closed-door conference. That decision negates the influence of the majority of
Senate Democrats who support the bill, leaving the legislation at the mercy of
the Senate Republicans. Senate aides said they did not know when a conference
would be held to discuss the bill.

Today's Assembly debate included a number of references to the national
discussion about allowing gay people to serve in the military. Before the bill
could be passed, its supporters had to defeat an amendment that would have
exempted the state National Guard from the bill's provisions. The amendment was
proposed by Assemblyman John L. Behan, a Suffolk County Republican who lost both
legs in the Vietnam War.

But the most tender moment belonged to Ms. Glick, who began her speech by saying
she had "faced discrimination as a Jew, as a woman, as a lesbian." Later she
added, "There are people who think they know me because they know one thing
about me and all of their misconceptions come into play." As she spoke, the
normally noisy Assembly chamber gradually grew hushed.

Ms. Glick said that before going public about her sexual preference 20 years
ago, she had "tried very hard not to be gay because I understood hatred and I
heard people say to be lesbian or to be gay is unnatural. It is only unnatural
if you are not lesbian or gay. It is very natural for me."

"It is incredibly important for this society to finally rid itself of the last
vestiges of ignorance," she said, "because it is ignorance that leads to
prejudice and bigotry."

Some opponents of the bill said they were voting against it despite their
acceptance of its good intentions. Others were more pointed.

"What about my rights?" asked Assemblyman Anthony S. Seminerio, a Queens
Democrat who first announced that he was speaking in support of the bill, then
corrected himself to say he opposed it. "I own a house. I own a two-family
house. I should have the right to see who's going to live there or not. Come on.
Wake up. I broke my back to support that house, worked three jobs to pay the
mortgage, and some clown in here is going to tell me that I can't discriminate
on who I want to live in my apartment?"

In fact, the bill exempts two-family owner-occupied dwellings, as well as
religious organizations.

The bill would add sexual orientation to the classes now protected from
discrimination by the state's civil rights law -- age, race, creed, color,
national origin, sex, disability and marital status. Those found guilty of
discrimination in employment, housing, public accommodations, education or
credit would be subject to civil rulings and compensatory damages, but not
punitive damages.

Seven states, including four that border New York, have similar laws, as do New
York City and 12 other local governments within New York.

LOAD-DATE: February 2, 1993

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photos: Before the New York State Assembly overwhelmingly passed a
gay-rights bill yesterday, Assemblyman Steven Sanders, a sponsor of the
legislation, joined his colleagues in acknowledging Assemblywoman Deborah J.
Glick, the Assembly's only openly gay member, after she spoke of the
discrimination she faced as a Jew, a woman and a lesbian. (David Jennings for
The New York Times)(pg. B1); Assemblyman John L. Behan, a Republican who lost
both legs in the Vietnam War, proposed an amendment to the gay-rights bill that
would exempt the state National Guard from the bill's provisions. (David
Jennings for The New York Times)(pg. B4)

                   Copyright 1993 The New York Times Company

                              111 of 255 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                February 2, 1993, Tuesday, Late Edition - Final

CAMBODIA ATTACKS THE KHMER ROUGE

BYLINE: By PHILIP SHENON,  Special to The New York Times

SECTION: Section A; Page 7; Column 1; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 627 words

DATELINE: PHNOM PENH, Cambodia, Feb. 1


The Cambodian Government has mounted its largest military offensive since United
Nations peacekeepers arrived here in 1991 and is threatening to overrun a Khmer
Rouge rebel stronghold in western Cambodia, United Nations military observers
said today.

United Nations officials condemned the offensive, which they described as a
clear violation of cease-fire agreements binding the Government and three rebel
groups. The United Nations warned that the fighting could disrupt planning for
internationally supervised elections under the treaty the four parties signed in
1991.

Eric Berman, a civilian spokesman for the United Nations in Phnom Penh, said
that there had been "troubling reports" of both forcible conscription and forced
labor by the Government and that returning refugees from Thailand were said to
be among the conscripts.

Acknowledged Offensive

Cambodian Government officials acknowledged today that Government forces had
begun an offensive against the Khmer Rouge, but denied they were trying to seize
Pailin, the western city held by the Khmer Rouge. The officials said the
Government had not forcibly conscripted men into the armed forces.

Lieut. Col. Richard Palk, an Australian who is a spokesman for the United
Nations peacekeeping force in Cambodia, said that while no figures were
available today on the number of Cambodian troops involved in the new fighting,
"we're confident that this is the most significant military offensive since the
United Nations has been here."

The offensive began Friday and was reported to have spread to large areas of
north-central and western Cambodia that are controlled by the Khmer Rouge, the
most powerful of the rebel factions.

The Khmer Rouge were blamed for repeated cease-fire violations last year, and
they have violated the peace agreement by refusing to disarm or demobilize any
of their troops. They have announced they will boycott the elections, which are
scheduled for May.

Many Clashes Small

United Nations officials said that although the clashes were numerous, many had
involved only small bands of soldiers and that initial reports suggested that
casualties were few. Peacekeeping troops and civilian workers were reported to
be outside the line of fire.

Peacekeepers said Government troops had advanced to positions within 12 miles of
the Khmer Rouge headquarters in Pailin, a gem-mining center close to Cambodia's
border with Thailand.

The loss of Pailin could disrupt, although it would almost certainly not end,
the multimillion-dollar gem trade between the Khmer Rouge and Thai dealers -- a
business that has long helped underwrite the rebels' weapons purchases.

Khieu Kanharith, a senior adviser to Prime Minister Hun Sen, said in an
interview that the Government had no intention of overrunning Pailin.

Harvest is Cited

He said the offensive was intended to reclaim territory that had been lost to
the Khmer Rouge since the peace treaty was signed and also to force Khmer Rouge
artillery out of areas where it might disrupt farming.

He denied that the Government was forcing young men, including returning
refugees, into the army. "We already have enough soldiers," Mr. Khieu Kanharith
said. "We don't need to force anybody to fight."

The Cambodian Government was installed by Vietnam after the Vietnamese Army
invaded Cambodia in 1978. The invasion toppled the Khmer Rouge, and the
Vietnamese-installed Government has been linked by United Nations officials to a
wave of politically motivated violence in recent weeks, most of it directed
against the political party founded by Prince Norodom Sihanouk, the nation's
former ruler and its most popular political figure. Prince Sihanouk is widely
expected to win the presidential election.


LOAD-DATE: February 2, 1993

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Map fo Cambodia highlights location of Pailin.

                   Copyright 1993 The New York Times Company

                              112 of 255 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                February 2, 1993, Tuesday, Late Edition - Final

J. Thompson Ruger, Firearms Executive, 48

SECTION: Section A; Page 17; Column 1; Metropolitan Desk

LENGTH: 247 words


J. Thompson Ruger, an executive of Sturm, Ruger & Company, a manufacturer of
firearms, died on Sunday at the Mount Sinai Medical Center in Manhattan. He was
48 and lived in Bedford, N.Y.

The cause of death was leukemia, said his wife, Hedi Kravis Ruger.

At the time of his death, Mr. Ruger was vice president for marketing at Sturm,
Ruger, which has its headquarters in Southport, Conn. Mr. Ruger was also a
member of the board of directors of the National Shooting Sports Foundation.

He was born in Southport, Conn., to Mary Thompson Ruger and William B. Ruger,
who became a co-founder of the company and is its chairman.

The younger Mr. Ruger grew up in Southport, graduated from Salisbury School in
Salisbury, Conn., and attended the University of Denver.

After service in the Army Security Agency in the Vietnam War, he joined Sturm,
Ruger in 1971. Over the years, he was also active in organizing nonprofessional
national and international marksmanship competitions.

His marriage to his first wife, the former Claudia Lee Mathewson, ended in
divorce a few years ago.

In addition to his wife, whom he married in 1991, Mr. Ruger is survived by three
children from his first marriage, Charles B., Adrienne A. and Amy T., all of
Manhattan; a stepson, Robert S. Kravis, and a stepdaughter, Kimberly R. Kravis,
both of Bedford; his parents, who live in Croydon, N.H.; a sister, Carolyn R.
Vogel of Harrisville, N.H., and a brother, William B. Ruger, of Newport, N.H.

LOAD-DATE: February 2, 1993

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Obituary (Obit); Biography

                   Copyright 1993 The New York Times Company

                              113 of 255 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               February 3, 1993, Wednesday, Late Edition - Final

State Told To Free Man In Hospital

BYLINE: By RONALD SULLIVAN

SECTION: Section B; Page 3; Column 6; Metropolitan Desk

LENGTH: 616 words


Larry Hogue, the homeless man who residents of the Upper West Side accuse of
terrorizing them and their neighborhood, was ordered released from a state
mental hospital yesterday on the grounds that he was not mentally ill and only
had what a judge described as an "attitude problem."

But the release order, by Justice Richard Rutledge of State Supreme Court in
Queens, was effectively stayed for five days while the state Attorney General,
Robert Abrams, files an emergency appeal of the order with the Appellate
Division of State Supreme Court.

Lisa Lehr, a West Side resident, said Mr. Hogue had terrorized her neighborhood
since 1985, with his violence increasing sharply in the last 18 months.

Roaming an area centered on West 96th Street, residents said, Mr. Hogue would
menace pedestrians, often striking some of the older ones; attempt to set fires
to cars and trash cans; expose himself, and throw heavy objects like stone
benches through plate glass windows. Most often, he was arrested for disorderly
conduct or some other minor offense and released.

All told, he has been arrested nine times since 1972 and has served six terms in
prison ranging from five days to a year.

State lawyers who fought Mr. Hogue's release from Creedmoor Psychiatric Center
in Queens quoted Justice Rutledge as saying that Mr. Hogue apparently did not
have a mental illness and thus could not be kept involuntarily committed by the
state any longer.

"What he has is an attitude problem," the judge said, according to the state
lawyers. Justice Rutledge could not be reached for comment last night.

Release Called Disservice

Mr. Abrams denounced the judge's statement, calling it an "insult to the
community." In a statement, Mr. Abrams described the order releasing Mr. Hogue
as a "'disservice to the community he has terrorized for the past few years."

The ruling, Mr. Abrams said, "flies in the face of testimony from experts that
Mr. Hogue's behavior becomes frightening and dangerous when he fails to take
medication, and assertions by residents of Manhattan's Upper West Side that he
spends his government disability checks on crack."

Justice Rutledge was apparently convinced during a four-hour hearing yesterday
that Mr. Hogue had regained his mental composure during nearly two months of
involuntary confinement and that he had agreed to live with his son in
Connecticut.

Mr. Hogue's commitment nearly two months ago underscored a growing fear in New
York City over the potential danger posed by some mentally ill homeless people
whose illnesses are worsened by drug use and who grow violent when they fail to
take medications.

That fear was heightened last month when Christopher Battiste, the homeless drug
addict who has been in and out of shelters, prisons and psychiatric hospitals,
was charged with killing an 80-year-old Bronx woman who was on her way to
church.

Menacing Recalled

The killing increased the demands by many residents for a tougher policy for the
violent mentally ill who become more dangerous when using drugs.

At his hearing in court yesterday, Mr. Hogue, who is 48 years old and a stocky
six feet tall, testified that his problems began when he was a soldier in
Vietnam, and that he suffered "flashbacks" that were prompted by his exposure to
the toxic chemical, Agent Orange.

Social workers testified that Mr. Hogue's son in Connecticut had agreed to take
him in and that Mr. Hogue's former wife had agreed "to look in after him."

But Dr. Kussim Kathpolia, the psychiatrist who treated Mr. Hogue at Creedmoor,
testified that Mr. Hogue "does have a mental illness" and that if he was
released he would revert to his destructive behavior.

LOAD-DATE: February 3, 1993

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1993 The New York Times Company

                              114 of 255 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               February 3, 1993, Wednesday, Late Edition - Final

Moscow Insists It Must Sell the Instruments of War to Pay the Costs of Peace

BYLINE: By STEVEN ERLANGER,  Special to The New York Times

SECTION: Section A; Page 6; Column 1; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 1635 words

DATELINE: MOSCOW, Feb. 2


Struggling to earn hard currency and preserve jobs, Russia and the other
republics of the former Soviet Union are selling arms and technology to Iran,
China and other countries whose military buildups are causing great concern in
the West.

The Russian arms exports in particular rankle Washington even though they are
down sharply from cold-war days and appear to have little ideological
motivation. Critics of the sales also concede that Moscow has extensive control
over high-technology arms sales and that it tries to adhere to United Nations
arms embargoes.

Defending the sales, Russians point out that American arms sales are also
extensive, now accounting for more than half the world market. Indeed United
States officials, mindful of the vulnerability of President Boris N. Yeltsin and
of Moscow's need for cash, are loath to criticize Russia too loudly.

Where the Arms Are Going

Among the transactions causing concern are sales of submarines to Iran,
Patriot-style surface-to-air missiles and advanced fighter-interceptors to
China, T-72 tanks to Syria and advanced rocket engines to India. Other buyers
include North Korea and Libya.

These sales pose a quandary for the Clinton Administration.

"Anybody can sell arms," a senior Western diplomat said. "But Russia's list of
buyers is essentially our list of nasties."

Of even more concern, the diplomat suggested, is the danger that dangerous new
technologies will spread as Russian factories win more freedom to seek customers
and as highly trained military scientists and engineers are offered large
amounts of money for their expertise. Russian officials say a group of missile
engineers -- not nuclear engineers, as originally reported -- were detained at
the Moscow airport last fall on their way to North Korea.

Meanwhile, in Ukraine

Newly independent states, like Ukraine and Georgia, are seeking their own
customers outside the Russian system, and impose few export controls on low-tech
weapons like rifles, artillery and ammunition. There are also persistent reports
that Ukraine, for instance, is seeking Greek and other buyers for ships of the
Black Sea Fleet, which is under the joint control of Moscow and Kiev.

But Russian officials say, and Western diplomats agree, that factories outside
Russia were designed to make routine parts or to assemble weapons, while highly
sensitive parts were almost all made in Russia and still come under Russia's
export controls.

Washington Does Likewise

And for all the anxiety about proliferation, Russia has a fairly well-defined
system to approve sales of advanced arms. Western diplomats say there has been
little cause for concern thus far about unauthorized sales or exports of complex
technology.

Russian officials make no apologies for selling arms abroad or seeking to sell
more, stressing a system of oversight to prevent sales that might destabilize
countries. They also note that despite the smaller world market, the United
States has maintained the level of its arms sales abroad while Russian sales
have fallen sharply.

Russian officials acknowledge that much of the Soviet Union's arms revenues were
on paper, since allies like Vietnam, Cuba and others rarely paid what they owed.
According to the newspaper Komsomolskaya Pravda, arms credits constitute more
than 40 percent of the $146 billion owed to Moscow, and are considered
uncollectible.

Russia now demands hard-currency cash from purchasers, while the United States
is able to grant concessionary credits. Russian officials also acknowledge that
enormous problems in supplying spare parts and servicing have diminished their
competitivity, especially for aircraft.

Problems for Old Customers

The collapse of the Soviet Union has also meant big problems for traditional
customers like Syria and India. No longer able to deal with a single Soviet
ministry for parts, they must now run from factory to factory, from republic to
republic, trying to arrange separate contracts, or they simply cannibalize new
planes, tanks and machinery.

Because of the parts problem, Western diplomats suggest that old Soviet
customers will soon find it hard to keep their armies functioning, making them
reluctant to buy new weapons from Russia despite their technical excellence and
lower prices.

An adviser to Mr. Yeltsin, Mikhail Malei, also complains that adherence to
United Nations arms embargoes on Libya, Iraq, Bosnia, Croatia and Yugoslavia
cost Russia $7 billion last year.

The Soviet arms industry suffered an embarrassment during the Persian Gulf war,
when American and allied forces destroyed the Iraqis' Soviet equipment. But
Viktor K. Glukhikh, chairman of the Russian Defense Industries Committee, said
that for security reasons, Iraq did not get top-of-the-line arms, and that many
of the arms were old or used poorly.

Desperate for Sales

All these difficulties add to the desperation of Russian officials and factories
to sell arms to any country within reason if it has the cash, or to fulfill
older Soviet contracts, like Iran's purchase of three Kilo-class submarines for
some $750 million.

Much-ballyhooed plans for the widespread conversion of military enterprises to
civilian production, first announced by President Mikhail S. Gorbachev in 1988,
were largely ignored by managers who are only now beginning to take structural
change seriously. Even now, managers of sophisticated plants resist making
non-stick pots and prefer to talk of advanced products like microwaves that they
cannot yet make efficiently and that most Russians cannot afford.

Mr. Glukhikh said that with more than six million people dependent on more than
1,700 military-dominated enterprises, the Government must help them to find
buyers in order to keep them in work and to earn the hard currency necessary to
convert to making more civilian goods.

Yeltsin Vents Resentment

Russian officials also say they resented the Bush Administration's often
undiplomatic efforts to restrain Moscow's freedom to sell its arms as the United
States does.

President Boris N. Yeltsin gave vent to that frustration recently when he said
"it would be shameful" not to fulfill Russia's agreement to supply rocket
engines to India, despite complaints by the Bush Administration that the
technology could be used for anti-ballistic missiles. He said future policy
"depends on the reason and common sense" of the Clinton Administration.

This resentment is reinforced by criticism in Parliament that Russian policies
are dominated by Washington.

"If we sell SU-27's to China, and it's our legal business, the United States
objects," said Pyotr G. Litavrin, head of export control for the Foreign
Ministry. "Then they sell F-16's to Taiwan -- 150 aircraft! And then they say
it's their response! It's ridiculous -- two dozen SU-27's versus 150 F-16's!"

More delicacy is particularly required now, he suggested, when Mr. Yeltsin and
Foreign Minister Andrei V. Kozyrev are being criticized so strongly by opponents
of his economic policies and by self-styled nationalists.

Mr. Glukhikh said: "There is resentment, but it's subjective. My resentment is
one thing; for someone who loses his job, it's another. But there is a
competition for arms sales, and when we win, as we did for the Indian rocket
engines, the United States complains that we cheat or destabilize."

Bush Administration officials respond that Washington was conscious of Mr.
Yeltsin's difficulties; otherwise they would have reacted more harshly.

'People Depend Upon It'

Mr. Malei argues that defense industries must earn hard currency to finance
their own conversion. "The lives of people depend upon it," he has said. "If we
have to choose between the life of a child and the sale of a cannon to Qaddafi,
we will choose the life of the child."

In the next year or so, officials see Russia's main customers as China, Iran,
Syria and India, which now account for 80 percent of arms exports, and possibly
Taiwan and Malaysia. Malaysia is considering 30 MIG-29's to balance recent
purchases by Singapore and Thailand of the more expensive F-16's. But Malaysia
is said to be concerned about servicing and the supply of parts, and annoyed by
would-be "mediators" who arrived from Russia seeking commissions.

Cuba also continues to buy as much as $200 million a year in weaponry.

Mr. Glukhikh said he is also looking to the Middle East, with special emphasis
on Persian Gulf states like the United Arab Emirates, which are watching Iraq
and Iran with unabated fear. "The United States is much interested in our
position there," he said, "but I can assure you we will be competitive."

Leading Buyers of Russia's Arms in 1992

CHINA

Some $1.4 billion for 24 top-of-the-line SU-27 fighter-bombers. Also advanced
S-300 surface-to-air missiles. Exploring the purchase of an aircraft carrier,
MIG-31 fighter planes, diesel-powered submarines, bombers and rocket engines.

 IRAN

Three diesel-powered submarines, worth about $250 million each, under a
two-year-old contract signed with the Soviet Union. The first has been
delivered. Twenty-four Su-24 bombers, spare parts for Iraqi planes flown to Iran
for "safekeeping" during the Gulf War and never returned. Unconfirmed reports of
50 MIG-29 fighter planes, MIG-31s and SU-27s, and 200 T-72 main battle tanks.

SYRIA

Reports of a $2 billion sale of 24 MiG-29s, 12 SU-27s, 300 T-72 and T-74 tanks,
S-300 surface-to-air missiles and SA-14 shoulder-fired surface-to-air missiles.

 TURKEY

Report of $75 million sale of MI-17 troop transport helicopters and BTR-60
armored personnel carriers. Also rifles.

Graph shows weapons export sales by the United States and the Soviet Union,
1988-1991. (Source: Stockholm International Peace Research Institute)

LOAD-DATE: February 3, 1993

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo: Russia and the other former Soviet republics have sold arms and
technologies to countries whose military buildups are causing great concern in
the West. Western diplomats are worried that dangerous new technologies will
spread. Arms were sold at a fair in Vladimir, Russia. (Viktor Korotayev for The
New York Times)

                   Copyright 1993 The New York Times Company

                              115 of 255 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               February 3, 1993, Wednesday, Late Edition - Final

CAMBODIANS HALT ATTACKS ON REBELS

BYLINE: By PHILIP SHENON,  Special to The New York Times

SECTION: Section A; Page 7; Column 1; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 516 words

DATELINE: PHNOM PENH, Cambodia, Feb. 2


Prime Minister Hun Sen said today that he had ordered an end to a major military
offensive against the Khmer Rouge rebels and had asked the United Nations to use
international peacekeeping troops to create a buffer zone between the
Maoist-inspired guerrillas and Government soldiers.

"If we can create a buffer zone, there is no problem," the Prime Minister said
after a meeting here with United Nations peacekeepers, who had protested the
Government's new offensive as a major cease-fire violation. "Our intention is to
withdraw our forces."

He insisted that the Government had no plans to overrun the nominal Khmer Rouge
headquarters in the western Cambodian city of Pailin, although he acknowledged
that Government soldiers had moved to positions close to the gem-mining city.

"It is one in 1,000 that we will attack Pailin," he said. "We have no intention
of attacking Pailin. We are only exercising our right to self-defense."

The Japanese diplomat who is leading the 22,000-member United Nations
peacekeeping operation in Cambodia, Yasushi Akashi, said after the meeting with
Mr. Hun Sen today that the Government's request for creation of a United Nations
buffer zone was an "interesting proposal" that required additional study.

The United Nations has described the Government's new attacks on Khmer Rouge
forces as the largest military offensive in Cambodia since United Nations
peacekeeping forces arrived here in 1991, and Mr. Akashi joined in condemning
the Government today, saying the offensive "clearly goes beyond self-defense."

Mr. Hun Sen said the Government had mounted coordinated attacks against the
Khmer Rouge to protect farmers as they harvested their crops in north-central
and western Cambodia, and to take back land that the Khmer Rouge had occupied
since October 1991, when the Government and the Khmer Rouge signed a peace
treaty brokered by the United Nations.

"We want only to destroy the Khmer Rouge ability to expand further," Mr. Hun Sen
said. "If we do not fight, I don't think the farmers can go back to their farms
and harvest their rice." The Government said 51 Khmer Rouge soldiers and 5
Government troops had died in the recent fighting.

Sporadic Gunfire Exchanged

United Nations military officials said that while sporadic exchanges of gunfire
continued today between the Government and the Khmer Rouge, the offensive did
appear to be largely over. United Nations officials and diplomats in Phnom Penh
had been worried that had the offensive continued, it would interrupt planning
for internationally supervised elections in May.

The Khmer Rouge, responsible for the deaths of hundreds of thousands and perhaps
more than a million Cambodians when they controlled the central Government in
the 1970's, are boycotting the elections and have refused to order their
soldiers to disarm, as required under the peace treaty.

Mr. Hun Sen, a Khmer Rouge defector, and his colleagues in the Cambodian
Government were installed by Vietnam after the Vietnamese Army invaded Cambodia
in 1978 and toppled the Government of the Khmer Rouge.

LOAD-DATE: February 3, 1993

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Map of Cambodia showing location of Pailin.

                   Copyright 1993 The New York Times Company

                              116 of 255 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               February 3, 1993, Wednesday, Late Edition - Final

Paul Anderson, 85, Educator Who Led Temple Amid Strife

BYLINE: By BRUCE LAMBERT

SECTION: Section A; Page 21; Column 3; National Desk

LENGTH: 328 words


Paul R. Anderson, the retired president of Temple University and Chatham
College, died on Sunday at his home in Ponte Vedra Beach, Fla. He was 85.

The cause of death was cancer, his family said.

Dr. Anderson became Temple's president in 1967 as students on campuses across
the nation were protesting the Vietnam War and demonstrating on behalf of civil
rights.

His own inauguration at the Philadelphia campus was disrupted when hundreds of
students, many bearing signs, walked out. In 1970 he was criticized by Frank
Rizzo, then the city's police commissioner and later its mayor, for offering
meeting space at Temple for a national convention of the Black Panthers.

Dr. Anderson weathered the tumult and was credited with guiding Temple through
it. He retired in 1973.

Teacher and Administrator

In his career as a professor and administrator, he taught at MacMurray College
for Women in Jacksonville, Ill.; Lake Erie College in Painesville, Ohio; Oberlin
College in Ohio; American University in Lebanon, and Lawrence College in
Appleton, Wis., where he was also a dean.

In 1945 he was appointed president of the Pennsylvania College for Women, a
Pittsburgh institution that was renamed Chatham College in 1955. In 1960 he
became vice president for academic affairs at Temple.

Dr. Anderson served as president of the Pennsylvania Association of Colleges and
Universities and the Pennsylvania Foundation of Independent Colleges. He was
chairman of the Governor's Commission on Higher Education, the Penn Center
Academy and the American Council on Education's Committee on Measurement and
Evaluation.

A native of Akron, Ohio, he graduated from Ohio Wesleyan University in 1929. He
earned his doctorate in philosophy at Columbia in 1933.

Dr. Anderson, who was previously married to Betty Ann Brown and Ruth Kelly, is
survived by his wife of two years, the former Mern Anthony; a son, Bayard D., of
Newtown Square, Pa., and two grandchildren.


NAME: Paul R. Anderson

LOAD-DATE: February 3, 1993

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo: Paul R. Anderson. (1967)

TYPE: Biography; Obituary (Obit)

                   Copyright 1993 The New York Times Company

                              117 of 255 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               February 3, 1993, Wednesday, Late Edition - Final

Books of The Times;
Success and Failure, All From the Same Source

BYLINE: By HERBERT MITGANG

SECTION: Section C; Page 20; Column 3; Cultural Desk

LENGTH: 957 words



Promise and Power The Life and Times of Robert McNamara By Deborah Shapley
Illustrated. 734 pages. Little, Brown. $29.95.

Every biographer of a public figure faces a daunting challenge because image
makers often erect an official fence around their liege. Nevertheless, after all
the research in the library stacks, the personal interviews and the self-serving
declarations by friends and foes, an author must stop, weigh everything and then
try to discover the answer to a fundamental question: What makes this person
tick?

In "Promise and Power," her biography of Robert Strange McNamara, Debra Shapley
gives it a good shot, but despite her voluminous notes, sources and
bibliography, her subject remains an elusive personality. At excessive length,
Ms. Shapley, a Washington journalist who specializes in military, arms-control
and technology issues, conveys more about Mr. McNamara's familiar times than
about the V-8 engine driving his enigmatic life.

This may not be the author's fault. As portrayed by the Ms. Shapley, her subject
-- former president of the Ford Motor Company, former Secretary of Defense under
Presidents John F. Kennedy and Lyndon B. Johnson, former president of the World
Bank -- appears as a Janus-faced individual on almost every controversial issue.

There is the Detroit whiz kid able to make tough business decisions, but doing
so in an impersonal if not offensive way with his underlings. There's the
charts-and-pointer civilian leader valiantly placing budgetary controls on the
military establishment, yet thinking that Harvard Business School management
methods can win a peasant war for a corrupt ally against a dedicated enemy.
There's his sincere effort to improve the conditions of the poor in
underdeveloped lands, but the reality that the programs he engineers frequently
fall short of his claims.

Secretary McNamara was considered intelligent but insensitive by his
contemporaries in Washington. Yet he was sometimes openly emotional when
toughness was considered the proper public face for the Kennedys and their spear
carriers. He carried conflict like a concealed weapon in his briefcase, but why
and to what end?

Ms. Shapley writes: "It was his nature to be wedded to large organizations while
mistrusting and fighting them. He made the same inner choice many times -- at
Ford, over Vietnam and at the Bank -- always at the center and alone, with
secret insights and plans, maneuvering the machinery he had built, playing
against his corporate self. Yet to redirect a faltering organization, a leader
needs the trust of subordinates. So his past manipulations kept coming back to
haunt him."

In her own area of expertise, the author praises Mr. McNamara for his
intellectual leadership in nuclear strategy, arms control and third-world
development. She believes he made a major contribution in the closed meetings
that resolved the Cuban missile crisis. And she says he was also able to whip
the World Bank into shape, even though his subordinates there often feared him.

Any McNamara biography must be centered on his role in the Vietnam War. Ms.
Shapley's main contribution is a series of interviews she conducted with him
about his loyal wartime stance in the Kennedy and Johnson Administrations and
his reported doubts about the success of the war. The interviews indicate that
like the fellow hawks whose advice widened the war -- Dean Rusk, McGeorge Bundy,
William P. Bundy, Walt W. Rostow, Henry Kissinger, all of whom are covered in
the book -- Mr. McNamara still doesn't seem to get it. In light of history and
the debatable domino theory about the future of Southeast Asia, the question was
not how to turn Vietnam into a winnable war but whether it was a justifiable
war.

In one of the interviews, Mr. McNamara says: "If I didn't believe we had a
chance of progressing on the political track as a result of our military
pressure . . . I should have strongly recommended withdrawing from Vietnam, and
if the Government wouldn't do it, I should have resigned. There's no question
about that in my mind." He continues, "So the fighting was not in vain, even
though I was pessimistic about how well we were doing in the field."

Ms. Shapley writes that Mr. McNamara "says here for the first time publicly that
he and Kennedy planned to withdraw all U.S. advisers by the end of 1965, even if
the South Vietnamese 'were going to be defeated.' "

"I know for a fact that John Kennedy would have withdrawn from Vietnam," she
quotes Mr. McNamara as saying.

She continues: "Thus he adds his name to the list of former Kennedy advisers who
have made this assertion, and like them, he has offered no proof. He has not
said what evidence he has: On this most sensitive issue of all, his habit of
glimpse and concealment goes on."

"Promise and Power" is a diligent, often outspoken biography. Even though Ms.
Shapely was granted interviews -- and, incidentally, allowed Mr. McNamara to
review the quotes directly attributed to him -- she does not pull her punches.
She observes that "the same qualities that made McNamara sincerely work to help
society and brought success led to failure as well." And in a harsh judgment,
she says that the paradox of his legacy is that he is "a pivotal figure in the
weakening and decline of America, despite the many virtues of the American
Century he embodies."

The book does include material about Mr. McNamara's personal background, his
children and late wife, and his companionable relationship with a married woman.
But if there's a key that unlocks the mystery of this strange public
personality, it would probably have to be found in the autobiography that Mr.
McNamara promises never to write.

LOAD-DATE: February 25, 1993

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo: Robert S. McNamara.

TYPE: Biography; Review

                   Copyright 1993 The New York Times Company

                              118 of 255 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                February 4, 1993, Thursday, Late Edition - Final

Books of The Times;
The Cold War Is Over, But Spies Will Be Spies

BYLINE: By CHRISTOPHER LEHMANN-HAUPT

SECTION: Section C; Page 21; Column 1; Cultural Desk; Word and Image Page

LENGTH: 870 words



Point of Impact
 By Stephen Hunter
 451 pages. Bantam Books. $21.95.

The Last Spy
 By Bob Reiss
 300 pages. Simon & Schuster. $20.

Where will the spy thriller go now that the Soviet Union has collapsed? To judge
from these two unusual novels, there is still so much equipment and personnel
left over from the cold war that it will take innumerable plots to use them all
up.

For instance, in Stephen Hunter's gripping "Point of Impact," there's Bob Lee
Swagger, a master sniper in Vietnam, still hanging around, and a secret
organization called RamDyne Security, with mysterious connections to the C.I.A.
The sinister people at RamDyne want Swagger to do a special job for them. But
Bob the Nailer, as he is known for his marksmanship, has given up killing and
retired to the Ouachita Mountains of Arkansas to live as a recluse and hunt deer
with disintegrating bullets that only stun his prey.

So the RamDyne people decide to challenge the good in Swagger by hiring him to
figure out how a potential assassin might strike at a prominent public figure
whom they think may be threatened. Knowing everything there is to know about the
arcane art of long-distance shooting, Swagger performs brilliantly, picking the
perfect spot for a killing and writing extensive reports on how to do it.
Inevitably, it is all part of a trap, and soon Swagger becomes the hunted man,
chased through the swamps of Louisiana and the mountains of Arkansas by the
various police organizations RamDyne has managed to corrupt.

A former book-review editor and present film critic for The Baltimore Sun, and
the author of four previous novels, "The Master Sniper," "The Second Saladin,"
"The Spanish Gambit" and "The Day Before Midnight," Mr. Hunter is good at
writing about both weapons and topography. The tension of "Point of Impact"
never lets up, and despite his slightly excessive admiration for the strong,
silent, Southern country-boy type (and his corollary disdain for wordy
Northeastern intellectuals), he keeps you pulling for Bob Lee Swagger to
overcome the impossible odds against him.

It should probably not go unmentioned in this season of courtroom dramas that
"Point of Impact" winds up with a highly satisfying legal turnabout that hinges,
naturally enough, on the mechanics of gunsmithing.


"The Last Spy," by Bob Reiss, is even cleverer in exploiting the end of the cold
war. In its prologue, set in 1967, a young boy, James, is being ridiculed by his
fifth-grade schoolmates because, during a class on the difficulty of finding
targets in the jungles of Vietnam, he asked why it wouldn't be possible to use
bombs with cameras.

As the children dissolve in laughter, James gets up and leaves the classroom. He
runs through his hometown of Smith Falls, Mass., to the very outskirts, where he
comes to a fence being guarded by a Soviet soldier. It turns out the town is a
facsimile of its American original, and that the children are gifted orphans
from all over the Soviet Union being trained to form the perfect spy ring. James
often exasperates his mentors by asking too many questions, but he is also
uncanny in his ability to read people.

The story then moves forward to August 1991. The Soviet Union is falling apart.
Washington is going through a heat wave. A reporter from The Washington Post,
identified at first only as Ash, puzzles over why he has been directed by his
spymaster to steal a satellite photograph of logging activity in Sarawak,
Malaysia. He decides to pay a call on the superior who requested the photograph
and ask why he wants it. This is a violation of the most basic rule of the
so-called teen-agers' spy ring. James Ash is asking questions again. This time,
he will have to be eliminated.

Told largely from Ash's viewpoint, "The Last Spy" gets off to an irresistible
beginning. Powerfully evoking the espionage agent's mind-set of distrust, it
piles the insecurity created by the Soviet military coup onto the already
treacherous state of being a spy within a system of spying.


Unfortunately, Mr. Reiss fails to recognize the point at which he could have
stopped explaining things and let his action take over. For instance, near the
story's climax, when things are most tense, a Soviet Embassy official calls his
wife, Ivana, to alert her to the danger they are in, and mentions "Cousin Irma."
The text then wordily explains: "'Cousin Irma' was code between them, dating
back more than 10 years. Neither of them could stand Ivana's cousin Irma.
Whenever one them wanted to escape from a dinner party conversation, they'd
bring her up. They'd say 'I saw Cousin Irma' or 'Did you hear from Cousin Irma'
or 'That woman looks like Cousin Irma.' Anything with the words Cousin Irma.
Then the other one would know the speaker needed help."

Sensing that his plot is somehow losing its momentum, Mr. Reiss then begins to
exaggerate, piling violence on top of coincidence on top of cornball sentiment.
That the reader continues to the end of "The Last Spy" is a testament to what a
strong idea the plot was to begin with. It also suggests that in the rubble of
the cold war, there are dozens of other good stories still lying around, waiting
to be told.

LOAD-DATE: February 4, 1993

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photos: Bob Reiss (Sigrid Estrada); Stephen Hunter (Weyman Swagger)

TYPE: Review

                   Copyright 1993 The New York Times Company

                              119 of 255 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 February 5, 1993, Friday, Late Edition - Final

Secret Kennedy Tapes May Be Made Public

BYLINE: By FOX BUTTERFIELD,  Special to The New York Times

SECTION: Section A; Page 12; Column 1; National Desk

LENGTH: 796 words

DATELINE: BOSTON, Feb. 4


After years of frustration for scholars, audio tapes made in President John F.
Kennedy's White House office may finally be made public.

The tapes may become available if new sound equipment that the Kennedy Library
here is buying improves the quality of the recordings enough for the National
Security Council to understand and declassify them, library officials say.

In the early and mid-1980's, the Kennedy Library made public 34 hours of tape
recordings out of a total of 248 hours, mostly relating to domestic affairs. But
since then the process has been held up by the National Archives, which oversees
all the Presidential libraries. It has forbidden the Kennedy Library to spend
time and money on making transcripts of the bulk of the recordings.

Poor Sound Quality

That restriction has made it difficult for the National Security Council, which
has sole authority to declassify White House documents, to open the way for
making public the contents of the remaining tapes. A Government official
involved in the declassification said that because the sound quality of the
tapes is so poor, it is often unclear who is speaking or what is being said.

Frank Rigg, a spokesman for the library, said today that the new equipment
should enable the library to enhance the sound and to send a first batch of 10
tapes to the National Security Council by the end of the month.

Library officials who have examined the tapes say they contain no extraordinary
revelations about the Kennedy Administration, but they add considerable detail
about foreign policy matters like the Cuban missile crisis, the American
military intervention in Laos and talks among top officials about Vietnam during
the last four months of Kennedy's life.

The continued inaccessibility of the tapes is one of several issues that have
annoyed some researchers about the library. They have complained that the
library's staff is much more cautious than the staffs at other Presidential
libraries, and that it has shown favoritism to scholars friendly with the
Kennedy family.

Kennedy Library officials say such accusations are incorrect and based on
misunderstandings about the library's collections, which include not only
Kennedy's papers but also those of his father, Joseph P. Kennedy, and Senator
Robert F. Kennedy, the President's brother. Members of the Kennedy family
donated the papers under separate deeds of gift with different sets of
restrictions.

The dispute about the library broke into public light last month in an Op-Ed
page article in The New York Times by Nigel Hamilton, the author of the current
best seller "J.F.K.: Reckless Youth," an unflattering portrait of the young Jack
Kennedy and his father and mother, Rose Kennedy.

Mr. Hamilton has been engaged in a public war of words with the Kennedy family,
but the accusation about favoritism at the library has also been made by other
researchers.

"If one compares it to the Johnson Library, it's stuck, a roadblock to good
research," said Thomas G. Paterson, a history professor at the University of
Connecticut, whose book "Kennedy's Quest for Victory" (Oxford University Press,
1989) is a critical of Kennedy's foreign policy.

"Too many of the collections are closed and too many of the files relating to
national security are closed," Professor Paterson said. By contrast, he said,
the Johnson Library in Austin, Tex., had opened many of the richest sources for
understanding foreign policy.

Johnson Library Policies

"The Johnson Library has a style about it which is open," he said, while the
Kennedy Library's staff is more cautious. "They are concerned about the family's
image without a doubt," he said.

The Johnson Library does have restrictions, however. They were imposed by
President Johnson himself, who directed that tapes of telephone conversations
and Cabinet meetings in the Oval Office be withheld from the public until 50
years after his death.

Mr. Paterson said some scholars on good terms with the Kennedy family had
received access to valuable material that was denied to him and other
researchers. He cited the use of Joseph Kennedy's papers in Doris Kearns
Goodwin's best seller, "The Fitzgeralds and the Kennedys" (Simon & Schuster,
1987), and the use of Robert Kennedy's diary by Arthur M. Schlesinger Jr. in his
book, "Robert Kennedy and His Times" (Houghton Mifflin, 1978).

Mr. Rigg said that both the Joseph Robert Kennedy papers "are on deposit here,
but the library does not own them," and "access for now is at the discretion of
the owners."

Mr. Schlesinger, who was a White House assistant under President Kennedy, said
he had been given access to Robert Kennedy's diary by Ethel Kennedy, the
Senator's widow, before the material was deposited at the library.


LOAD-DATE: February 5, 1993

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1993 The New York Times Company

                              120 of 255 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 February 5, 1993, Friday, Late Edition - Final

Reviews/Film;
Husband Back From War: Too Good to Be True?

BYLINE: By VINCENT CANBY

SECTION: Section C; Page 8; Column 1; Weekend Desk

LENGTH: 1170 words


Jodie Foster has already won two Academy Awards, but nothing she has done to
date is preparation for the romantic, resolute, elegant performance she gives in
"Sommersby," a handsome period film set in the post-Civil War South of the
Reconstruction. As Laurel Sommersby, a Tennessee farm woman who welcomes home a
long-lost husband who may or may not be hers, Ms. Foster is so strong,
passionate and mysterious that she seems almost to be a new actress or, at
least, an actress of entirely new dynamism.

"Sommersby" is both about the cyclical nature of the universe, where matter can
be neither created nor destroyed, only changed in state, and a demonstration of
that law: the film is an updated Americanized adaptation of "The Return of
Martin Guerre," Daniel Vigne's fine 1982 French film starring Gerard Depardieu.
Even "The Return of Martin Guerre" is something recycled, being a reworking of a
true story that has long fascinated the French public in various novels, plays
and even an operetta.

Richard Gere, one of the film's two executive producers, stars as Jack
Sommersby, the Confederate equivalent to Martin Guerre, the wandering
16th-century French peasant who was twice tried for passing himself off as
someone he wasn't. In this latest incarnation, as in Mr. Vigne's film, the
one-time soldier, having been away for six years and presumed dead, shows up at
his farm one day to claim his wife, property and money.

Sommersby says that he has been at the Union prisoner-of-war camp at Elmira,
N.Y., a place as notorious for its hardships as the Confederate prison near
Andersonville, Ga. The experience has taken its toll. He is physically altered.
Even his shoe is two sizes smaller. His memory sometimes plays tricks on him. He
remembers some things with uncanny accuracy, while others are inexplicably lost.

Possibly out of fear for their livelihoods, his sharecroppers immediately accept
him. His son, Rob (Brett Kelley), is too young to remember Sommersby, but his
old dog, Jethro, growls at his first approach. Not long after, Jethro is found
dead. Sommersby's wife is the key to his reinstatement.

At first Laurel can't believe that he is the husband who gambled, swore and
brawled, and who ignored her ever after she became pregnant. The boor has been
returned to her miraculously transformed. He is polite, hard-working,
considerate and loving. His first night home he asks her to shave his beard. He
soon becomes the ardent answer to dreams she might not acknowledge even to
herself. By embracing this man, she makes her universe secure.

The story of Martin Guerre is true, but it's also the kind of myth that is
modernized at a certain risk. Its concerns with love, sex, money and property
are timeless. Yet the story only makes sense in a time that is simpler, more
dour, more superstitious and more swiftly brutal than that of even the
post-Civil War South, especially in a Reconstruction tale that has a late
20th-century sensibility.

Jon Amiel, the director, and Nicholas Meyer and Sarah Kernochan, who wrote the
screenplay, have transformed the Martin Guerre character into a 1990's man who
behaves as if he had been shaped by the counter-culture of the Vietnam era.

It isn't simply greed that leads Sommersby's old friends, neighbors and family
members to denounce him as an impostor. It's racial bigotry. He has a visionary
plan to revitalize his farm by setting up a co-op.  After the harvest of their
first crop of tobacco, Sommersby's sharecroppers, black as well as white, will
be allowed to purchase the land they work. The white sharecroppers have no
choice but to go along with him.  Soon the Ku Klux Klan is burning a cross in
front of his house.

The co-op would not be an anachronism in the South of the Reconstruction, but
it's not in character for either Sommersby or the ne'er-do-well Confederate Army
deserter he's accused of being. The co-op is in character for the man Mr. Gere
plays, a fellow who doesn't have much relation to the man described by everyone
else in the movie. His Sommersby is an endearing cipher, composed of mannerisms
that suggest someone who has recently left his commune and is still tentative
about how to behave in the outside world. He's a man full of love, working in
his own naive way to let the sun shine in.

The sun never does shine in to explain the circumstances surrounding the death
of Jethro, the dog. Once he's buried, he's never mentioned again. It must be
assumed he had a bad heart.

Though the film becomes a courtroom drama near the end, Sommersby is of such
nobility that the fundamental question about his identity becomes moot in the
course of his two trials. The revelations about Sommersby's past, combined with
Laurel's contradictory testimony, may confuse audiences so thoroughly that they
will leave the theater thinking that "Sommersby" is about worn-out land, crop
rotation and fertilizer.

Though there is a near vaccuum at the center of the film, "Sommersby" is never
boring, largely because of Ms. Foster's beautifully self-possessed presence. The
once-abandoned, now-reclaimed wife becomes the focus. Is it possible to sleep
with a man who says he's your husband and not know that he's lying? What degree
of longing might lead a comparatively innocent woman to accept a stranger in her
house? Has she been fooled? Is she an accomplice? Or, in fact, does she know him
to be a scoundrel reborn? These are the operative questions. They give
"Sommersby" its drive and cohesion. Everything else is superfluous.

Heading the supporting cast are Bill Pullman, as the angry farmer who had hoped
to marry Laurel before her husband's return, and James Earl Jones, who plays the
presiding judge at Sommersby's trials. The film, photographed on location in
western Virginia by Philippe Rousselot, looks authentic. The production is not
helped by the kind of old-fashioned soundtrack score that instructs the
emotions. Mr. Amiel is best known as the director of Dennis Potter's great
English mini-series, "The Singing Detective," in which music functioned as
satiric counterpoint to everything else. He seems to have picked up a lot of
American movie-making habits. But perhaps the music in "Sommersby" wasn't his
decision.

"Sommersby," which has been rated PG-13 (Parents strongly cautioned), has some
violence and sexual situations.

Sommersby

Directed by Jon Amiel; screenplay by Nicholas Meyer and Sarah Kernochan; story
by Mr. Meyer and Anthony Shaffer, based on the film "The Return of Martin
Guerre," written by Daniel Vigne and Jean-Claude Carriere; director of
photography, Philippe Rousselot; edited by Peter Boyle; music by Danny Elfman;
production designer, Bruno Rubeo; produced by Arnon Milchan and Steven Reuther;
released by Warner Brothers. Running time: 110 minutes. This film is rated
PG-13.

Jack Sommersby . . . Richard Gere
Laurel Sommersby . . . Jodie Foster
Judge Isaacs . . . James Earl Jones
Orin Meecham . . . Bill Pullman
Reverend Powell . . . William Windom

LOAD-DATE: February 5, 1993

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo: Jodie Foster (Warner Brothers)

TYPE: Review

                   Copyright 1993 The New York Times Company

                              121 of 255 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 February 5, 1993, Friday, Late Edition - Final

$25 and Under

BYLINE: By Eric Asimov

SECTION: Section C; Page 21; Column 1; Weekend Desk

LENGTH: 723 words


Slender, winding Baxter Street, which runs along the western edge of Chinatown,
is nowadays most interesting as an entryway into the cool, vibrant cooking of
Vietnam.

Vietnamese restaurants have never established much of a foothold in New York
City, but there are now several on Baxter Street. One of the newest is Nha
Trang, named for the city in central Vietnam that was home to the owner, Ha
Binh, before he fled his country after the war. Mr. Binh had owned a restaurant
in Nha Trang, and worked in several New York City restaurants before opening Nha
Trang last March with his wife, Lam Huong, who oversees the cooking, and a
partner, Thinh Chau.

There's nothing fancy about Nha Trang. It's just a plain storefront with
linoleum tile floors, mirrored walls and glass-top tables, each equipped with an
aluminum napkin dispenser, for about 90 people. There's little to indicate that
Nha Trang is any different from the many other nondescript restaurants jammed
together in these winding streets like so many piles of books in a dusty
second-hand shop.

But then menus arrive, and little dishes of nuoc mam, the fermented fish sauce
integral to Vietnamese cooking, and nuoc leo, a peanut dipping sauce, are placed
on the table. Then comes a dish of tiny red peppers that seem to radiate heat.
The friendly waiters are quick to help diners overwhelmed by the volume of
choices on the menu. More than 100 dishes are offered, with translations as
simple as "barbecued beef" and as mysterious as "beef rice noodles on tomato
sauce with tendon and navel."

It's hard to go wrong starting with a plate of the Vietnamese spring rolls
($3.50), six perfectly fried little cylinders packed with pork and shrimp and
served with a platter of vegetables. Wrap a roll in a lettuce leaf along with
basil and mint leaves, strips of carrot and bean sprouts, and dip the package in
the tangy fish sauce. Or try the soothing fresh spring rolls ($2.75), shrimp and
rice noodles snuggled in a rice wrapper, which go with the peanut sauce. Another
excellent appetizer was the steamed ravioli ($3.50), glistening paper-thin rice
noodle crepes wrapped around minced pork and ground mushrooms and served with
slices of smooth, mild Vietnamese pork sausage.

Vietnamese rice noodle soups like pho tai ($4), a huge bowl of noodles and
tender slices of beef in a coriander-scented broth, are big enough to be an
entire meal. Another delicious appetizer that was big enough to be a main course
was barbecued shrimp on sugar cane ($5.25), actually a paste of shrimp and
spices wrapped around the cane, which can be gnawed or sucked afterward for a
sweet treat.

There is no let-up with the main courses. Barbecued pork chops ($6.50) are cut
into pieces, marinated in a sweet sauce, pounded thin, grilled and served with
rice. Chicken with lemongrass ($6.50) is refreshing and lemony with a peppery
undercurrent. Grilled jumbo shrimp ($7.50) went beautifully with a sweet oyster
sauce. Slices of beef, marinated and grilled ($6.50), are topped with crunchy
shredded peanuts. Even a grilled whole red snapper ($13.50, serves at least
two), marinated in garlic, ginger and other herbs and spices, was tasty, though
it was slightly overdone.

All of these dishes go well with cold beer. While there is not much in the way
of dessert (green bean with coconut milk is an acquired taste), caphe sua
($1.25), iced coffee made with sweetened condensed milk, tasted like a delicious
coffee milkshake. It's one of the many unexpected pleasures of Nha Trang.

 Nha Trang

87 Baxter Street, Chinatown, (212) 233-5948.

Best dishes: Spring rolls, steamed ravioli, rice noodle soup with beef,
barbecued shrimp on sugar cane, barbecued pork chops, chicken with lemongrass,
grilled shrimp.

Price range: $3.50 to $12.

Credit cards: Cash only.

Hours: Daily, 10 A.M. to 10 P.M.

Wheelchair access: Entrance is one step down; restrooms and dining room on one
level.

Ratings:

Poor
Satisfactory
Good
Very Good
Excellent
Extraordinary

Ratings are based on the reviewer's reaction to food and price in relation to
comparable establishments.

The Times Restaurant Line offers capsule reviews by cuisine, price and location
(in New York City and suburbs), published in the last 18 months. Touch-line
telephones only: 1-900-988-0101 (75 cents a minute).

LOAD-DATE: February 5, 1993

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Review

                   Copyright 1993 The New York Times Company

                              122 of 255 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 February 5, 1993, Friday, Late Edition - Final

Largest-Ever Toxic-Waste Suit Opens in California

BYLINE: By NICK MADIGAN,  Special to The New York Times

SECTION: Section B; Page 16; Column 1; National Desk; Law Page

LENGTH: 1276 words

DATELINE: GLEN AVON, Calif.


It has taken eight years of pretrial planning and maneuvering, millions of
dollars in expenses and the screening of almost 2,000 potential jurors to get
what may be the nation's largest civil lawsuit over toxic waste into court.
After countless motions, countermotions and rulings, the first expert witness
took the stand on Monday in the case of the Stringfellow hazardous waste site.

The case involves about 4,000 plaintiffs, all of them residents of this rural
community 50 miles east of Los Angeles. Sheer numbers make it larger than the
case involving Love Canal, the upstate New York town that became synonymous with
toxic chemicals after 710 families were evacuated from there in 1978; larger
even than the case involving Times Beach, Mo., which was abandoned by its more
than 2,000 residents in 1982-83 after being contaminated by dioxin.

"It's got to be among the top five civil cases in the history of American
jurisprudence," said Howard L. Halm, a lawyer representing the State of
California, one of 13 defendants. Other defendants include Riverside County and
some of the nation's largest high-technology companies, among them Rockwell
International, Northrop, McDonnell Douglas and Montrose Chemical.

200 Chemicals Involved

Even the 1984 settlement of the Agent Orange case, with its 250,000 plaintiffs
-- Vietnam veterans who had been exposed to the herbicide during the fighting in
Southeast Asia and their families -- was less complicated because it involved a
single chemical. "We have about 200," Mr. Halm said, almost with pride.

Among the 34 million gallons of chemicals dumped into an unlined 20-acre canyon
at the Stringfellow site were sulphuric and hydrochloric acid; volatile organic
compounds, including methylene chloride used in paint strippers; a number of
pesticides, many containing D.D.T.; caustic chemicals like sodium hydroxide;
solvents like trichloroethylene, which is used in dry cleaning but is now
banned; and heavy metals, including lead, manganese, nickel, cadmium and
chromium.

The plaintiffs say the chemicals, dumped from 1956 to 1972, polluted aquifers,
sickened residents and caused property values to plummet.

Schoolchildren Exposed

Their suit also contends that in 1978, six years after the dump was closed, when
heavy rain threatened a dam that was holding the waste in the canyon,
Stringfellow employees channeled the canyon's overflowing toxic brew into a
canal that runs through the town.

Among the defendants are children who, unaware of the danger, created beards
with chemical foam that flooded part of their elementary school playground.

Several plaintiffs say they developed cancer from exposure to the toxins, and
that the community as a whole is experiencing higher-than-normal rates of cancer
and other diseases. Kyle Mestas, who is shorter than most other 14-year-olds,
claims that his skeleton was affected while he was still in his mother's womb.
Other residents trace emotional distress, nosebleeds, eye problems, insomnia and
shortness of breath to the Stringfellow dump.

Douglas F. Welebir, a lawyer for the plaintiffs, said in opening arguments that
the uncovered site had allowed toxic waste to evaporate and that noxious vapors
had often descended into Glen Avon. Local wells were contaminated by pollutants
that had seeped from the Stringfellow site into the water table, Mr. Welebir
said. Although some of the pit's clients were modern industrial giants, their
toxic trash was disposed of "in the same way cave men got rid of their waste,"
he told jurors.

"They dug a hole and dumped it in," Mr. Welebir said.

Defense Cites Studies

Mr. Halm said that any liquid that might have escaped from the site had been
"extremely dilute" and that no one in Glen Avon had been harmed. He and other
defense lawyers cite a survey of 2,000 residents conducted from 1983 to 1986 by
the University of California at Los Angeles. The study concluded that the rates
of cancer, brain damage and birth defects in neighborhoods around the site were
no higher than in the rest of rural California.

"There was no blind eye turned to any of the citizens of Glen Avon," Mr. Halm
said in an interview. "For every decision made about whether or not to establish
the dump, the public had ample input. The Regional Water Quality Control Board
held public hearings prior to establishing the dump in the 1950's."

In the wake of those hearings, Riverside County issued a land-use permit
defining the conditions under which the dump could be operated. The State of
California issued an operator's license to the owner of the site, James B.
Stringfellow Jr. "But it's like issuing a driver's license," Mr. Halm said. "The
government cannot be held liable for the conduct of a person to whom that
license or permit is issued."

'A Very Tough Burden'

The plaintiffs are learning it is difficult to hold any person or agency
responsible for their ills. "They've got to prove what got to where and how it
affected whom," said Thomas A. Kearney, another of the state's lawyers. "That's
a very tough burden to sustain."

In a decision last spring, a Federal court ruled that the state of California
bore as much as 85 percent of the liability for cleaning the site, which has
already cost about $150 million since the cleanup began in 1980. Lawyers cite
studies estimating that final cleanup costs could run as high as $800 million.

The Federal court also found the state negligent in choosing, designing and
supervising the Stringfellow dump. California is appealing the ruling. In court
documents, lawyers for the state warned that California could be "exposed to
astronomical liability" if appeals fail.

Glen Avon residents have already won out-of-court settlements totaling more than
$50 million from Mr. Stringfellow and about 100 companies that used the site.
The residents pooled their money to go after the other corporations in the
current civil case. But now, after spending $22 million, the plaintiffs are
running into trouble.

The trial was suspended for a week after Judge Erik Michael Kaiser of Riverside
County Superior Court ruled on Jan. 22 that the plaintiffs' first expert witness
could not testify about the air pollution from the dump because, the judge said,
his data were unreliable. The hearings resumed Monday with the testimony of a
geologist, who described the rock strata of Pyrite Canyon, the site of the dump.


Trial in Installments

Given the huge pool of plaintiffs, the case will be tried in installments. Only
17 plaintiffs are represented in the current trial, which could last eight
months or more. When this trial is over, the lawyers and the judge will take a
45-day rest before letting another group of plaintiffs take its turn, and so on
until the cases are settled, possibly years from now.

The trial is being held in a former assembly room for jurors, the only space
large enough to accommodate all that the trial will entail: more than 30 lawyers
and 24 jurors, including 12 alternates; 300,000 pages of court records, and
13,000 defense exhibits and 3,600 plaintiffs' exhibits, mostly scientific data,
diagrams and soil samples, all of them to be displayed on 18 computer-linked
video screens that have been placed throughout the room. Plaintiffs and
defendants jointly spent $150,000 to equip the room with the electronics.

"Your normal trial doesn't have all this stuff," Mr. Halm said. "We all agreed
it would be very difficult otherwise to convey the kinds of scientific ideas
that would be necessary for both the plaintiff and the defense. I don't think a
piece of paper and a felt-tip pen would have done the job."

LOAD-DATE: February 5, 1993

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo: The case of the Stringfellow hazardous waste site, above, in
Glen Avon, Calif., involves about 4,000 plaintiffs and 200 different chemicals.
The plaintiffs say the chemicals, dumped from 1956 to 1972, polluted aquifers,
sickened residents and caused property values to plummet. (Liliana Nieto del Rio
for The New York Times)

Map of California showing location of Glen Avon.

                   Copyright 1993 The New York Times Company

                              123 of 255 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 February 7, 1993, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

ARTS/ARTIFACTS;
For African Art Treasures, a Place to Spread Out

BYLINE: By RITA REIF

SECTION: Section 2; Page 33; Column 1; Arts & Leisure Desk

LENGTH: 843 words


The move last year by the Center for African Art from the Upper East Side to
SoHo signified far more than a change of address. When it opens on Saturday at
593 Broadway, the decade-old institution will occupy a site three times larger
than its former home and will bear a new name: Museum for African Art.

"Our identity remains very much the same," said Susan Vogel, the founder and
executive director. "We've always been a museum, and our principle activity was
and is art exhibitions."

In keeping with the intellectually ambitious shows presented uptown, the
inaugural exhibition, "Secrecy: African Art That Conceals and Reveals," explores
complex relationships between art, covert rituals and society as seen in about
100 objects of the 19th and 20th centuries from sub-Saharan Africa. In addition
to masks, figures and textiles, there are architectural sculptures from a house
facade and a nine-foot-square fenced enclosure -- an outsize playpen for secret
dances. The show remains through Aug. 15.

The expansion of the museum, one of New York's smallest and more vigorous, is an
outgrowth of the 1980's boom in African art studies and collecting. This
facility and the Smithsonian's National Museum of African Art in Washington are
the only two museums in the country specializing in sub-Saharan art.

The kind of large-scale artworks in the new museum's first show will be better
accommodated than was possible in the low-ceilinged, intimate interiors of the
19th-century town house on East 68th Street, west of Park Avenue, where the
museum opened in 1984.  Behind its cast-iron facade, the new quarters afford a
spacious 17,000 square feet on two floors. Designed by Maya Lin, the architect
of the Vietnam Veterans' Memorial in Washington, the museum replaces an 1860's
store that later served as a Rogers-Peet haberdashery.

The three galleries will be used for changing exhibitions, to maintain the brisk
schedule of shows Ms. Vogel established at 68th Street: she presented 16
exhibitions in seven years, most of which traveled.

Ms. Vogel said that Ms. Lin's conception of the space was "less institutional,
more personal and idiosyncratic" than most museums. "We are using color in ways
other museums do not," she added. "There'll be no white walls here."

Although the museum owns a small permanent collection for study, Ms. Vogel
continues to resist amassing large holdings of African art because, even on the
new premises, space is limited and a collection involves maintenance and
overhead. "I'd be just as happy," she said, "if we don't get a collection now,
but I'd be very unhappy if we never get one."

Indeed, Ms. Vogel's personal interest in African art came through acquiring it.
"I really began as a collector," she said, "as somebody who was in love with the
art and then learned about it." Widespread travel during childhood prepared her
for her first visit to Africa in 1964. Born in Detroit, the daughter of an
executive in the overseas division of General Motors, Ms. Vogel grew up in
Beirut and finished high school in Puerto Rico. "I was always an outsider, a
foreigner," she said. In fact, at the age of 12, when her family moved for two
years to Greenwich, Conn., "it was very exotic for me," she recalled.

After graduating from Georgetown, she married Jerome Vogel and went with him on
a teaching Fulbright to the Ivory Coast capital of Abidjan. (The couple have
since separated.)

"I fell in love with the place and with the art," she said. "I would go from the
market to the museum to the books we had at home." Returning to the United
States in 1966, she went to work in Manhattan at Nelson Rockefeller's Museum of
Primitive Art. She became an assistant curator while completing her doctorate in
art history. After Rockefeller donated the museum's holdings to the Metropolitan
Museum of Art, she moved there and remained as an associate curator until the
Rockefeller Wing was finished.

Realizing that, once the wing opened, the Met would probably not present as many
shows as the Museum of Primitive Art had, she founded the center. "If you are
really small, you are light on your feet," she said. "The big institutions have
to spend more to do the many exhibitions we do."

With a staff of 16, the new museum is operating on an annual budget of about
$1.5 million. A third of its finances comes from its nearly 900 members and
individual gifts, another third from government and foundation grants and the
rest from traveling shows, exhibition catalogues and organized tours to Africa.
The $1 million cost of the expansion was paid for by individual donors,
including Daniel Shapiro, a lawyer specializing in art cases, and Adriana and
Robert Mnuchin, the art collectors and innkeepers.

Ms. Vogel is confident the uptown museum's attendance of 20,000 visitors
annually will be surpassed. "This is a much more trafficked neighborhood," she
said. "It's also less intimidating. Uptown only an insignificant number of
Hunter College students dropped by. Park Avenue was like the Grand Canyon."

LOAD-DATE: February 7, 1993

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photos: A painted wood mask from Gabon is part of the inaugural
exhibition. (Detroit Institute of Arts/The Museum for African Art); Susan Vogel,
director of the Museum for African Art, now in SoHo -- "This is a much more
trafficked neighborhood." (Jim Estrin/The New York Times)

                   Copyright 1993 The New York Times Company

                              124 of 255 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 February 7, 1993, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

A DIRECTORY CRUISES WORLDWIDE;
Record Bookings in a Buoyant Year

BYLINE: By EDWIN McDOWELL;  EDWIN McDOWELL reports on travel and tourism for The
Times.

SECTION: Section 5; Page 14; Column 1; Travel Desk

LENGTH: 1671 words


THE first two weeks of the year are always the cruise industry's busiest, but
reservations during that period this year broke all records. Carnival and Royal
Caribbean together booked more than 125,000 passengers in the first week, 8,000
more than last year's record, and other cruise lines also reported big
increases. The main reasons for the booking surge, according to industry
executives, were pent-up demand and an improving economy.

Reservations have since returned to normal, but if the economy continues to
improve and potential world trouble spots stay quiet, the industry expects
almost five million passengers this year, 10 percent higher than 1992. At least
five new ships are scheduled for delivery this year, at least six others are
planned by 1996 -- which, despite the increased bookings, may be too much of a
good thing from the industry point of view.

While spring and summer itineraries feature few new destinations, some of the
more exotic ports of call include Ho Chi Minh City, Warnemunde in the former
East Germany, and two of the Baltic states: Riga, Latvia, and Tallinn, Estonia.
And Premier will be the first cruise line with regular stopovers at Port Lucaya
on Grand Bahama Island.

Many destinations will experience a marked increase in cruise ship visits,
including Waterford, Ireland, where Royal Viking will be joined by six other
lines, and Dominica, in the Windward Islands, where several ships will be
calling at Cabrits, its new port. American Hawaii recently resumed cruises to
Kauai, which was closed to cruise ships after Hurricane Iniki tore through last
year.

One of the biggest traffic increases will occur in the Panama Canal; 15 ships
will cross it this year. Carnival's Tropical will make a series of transcanal
sailings from San Juan, marking Carnival's first departure from the Caribbean
and Mexico. Sun Line has scheduled three 12-day canal cruises in March,
originating in Galveston, Tex. Royal Caribbean, which crossed the canal 10 times
last month, will offer two 11-night passages in April.

In the aftermath of the Persian Gulf war, some cruise line officials began
referring to the Mediterranean as the Dead Sea. But it is on the itineraries of
17 lines this year, including spring or summer cruises by Windstar, Crown
Odyssey and Seven Seas (which will enter European waters for the first time
after three seasons in Alaska).

The Mediterranean is often at the mercy of world events, but that area is not
alone. Bowing to customer complaints, Seawind Cruise dropped its scheduled port
call in Caracas, after two attempted coups rocked the Venezuelan capital last
year -- one of them involving shooting in the streets.

Moreover, only a handful of ships will call at sub-Saharan Africa. Part of the
reason is lack of the necessary infrastructure to handle large numbers of
tourists, but cruise line officials also say many of their passengers generally,
if unfairly, equate Africa with famine and civil unrest.

However, Princess Cruises will visit Africa this year for the first time. In
November it will offer a 16-day trip between Mombasa, Kenya, and Singapore, with
stops at Zanzibar and the Seychelles, as well as a 14-day trip from Athens to
Mombasa. Next year its 19-day cruise will stop at Dakar, Senegal, in west
Africa.

A record 24 ships will call at Alaska between May and September, at fares for
the 7- to 15-day cruises ranging from about $1,000 per person to $4,000. While
many ships promote their casinos, fitness centers, sports bars and similar
amenities, World Explorer, entering its 16th year in Alaskan waters, says its
accent is on learning -- it bills the 12,000-volume library aboard its Universe
as the largest afloat.

Regency Cruises also sails to Alaska, as well as South America and the
Caribbean. On June 7 it will launch the first of 30 seven-day cruises this year
between New York and Montreal -- the most of any line, and double the number it
ran previously.

Although still small in numbers of visitors, Asia is the fastest growing cruise
destination. The number of ships calling at Singapore more than doubled last
year over 1990, and later this year Windstar will be the first cruise line to
establish year-round operations there.

At least six cruise lines will call this year at China, the most since the
Beijing Government killed and imprisoned protestors in Tiananmen Square in 1989.
SeaQuest Cruises alone offers three different itineraries to China this spring,
from 11 to 15 days. Ocean Grace, a luxury Japanese cruise ship, will put in at
four mainland Chinese cities during an eight-night tour in May. And Pearl
Cruises, which claims to have pioneered cruising to China in 1982, will be back
again this year and will also visit Vietnam on five different sailings.

Several lines, including Seabourn, will enter Malaysia, Thailand and Indonesia
for the first time. Others, including Cunard, Sagafjord, Seven Seas, Orient and
Pearl, will expand itineraries in the region.

"Unlike some other parts of the world, Asia is stable," said Herb Goodfellow,
president of The Travel Company of Atherton, Calif., one of the oldest and
largest all-cruise agencies. But future growth will be hampered by inadequate
port facilities in the region and high air fares.

While American travelers are not yet flocking to Ukraine, Odessa America Cruise
Company ("The Cruise Line of the Czars") offers a seven-day cruise each Saturday
from St. Petersburg, Fla., to Honduras, Belize and Cancun.

Those cruises -- aboard the 400-passenger Gruziya ("Georgia"), which is
registered in Odessa, Ukraine, and has a Ukrainian and Russian crew -- sail only
through May, at which time the ship is repositioned to Montreal for five months.

While exotic destinations usually require two or more weeks, the two- to
five-day cruise market continues to be the fastest growing. This summer, for
example, for the first time, Regency will offer five "cruises to nowhere" from
New York, each of them last two to three days at sea. Majesty is offering
four-night cruises from Miami that stop at Playa del Carmen and Cozumel, Mexico.

Prices are about the same as last year, especially to such competitive
destinations as the Caribbean, which accounts for more than 60 percent of all
cruises, and from West Coast ports to Mexico. Moreover, at least six new ships
are scheduled to join the fleet this year, including Carnival's Sensation (2,600
passengers), the CostaRomantica (1,350), Norwegian's Windward (1,246), the Crown
Dynasty (820), and two from Holland America -- the Statendam (1,266) and its
sister ship, the Maasdam (1,266). The 7,869 new berths will bring the industry
total to well above 100,000 for the first time, but they will also add to what
critics complain is the overcapacity that has driven fares on many East Coast
cruises to the Caribbean and West Coast cruises to Mexico to levels below $100 a
night per person, includng air fare.

And there appears to be little let-up. Carnival and Holland America (a
subsidiary of Carnival) each has a new ship scheduled for delivery next year,
while Carnival has yet another one scheduled for 1995, by which time industry
officials had hoped the shipbuilding binge would pause to let demand (and higher
prices) catch up with supply. Last month Carnival announced plans for a
2,600-passenger ship, for delivery in 1996, while Princess said it would build a
1,950-passenger ship to enter service in the fall of 1995.

A new Miami-based line, American Family Cruises, recently announced that in
December it would begin seven-day Caribbean cruises for families with children,
adding Alaska in the summer of 1994. While its two ships are refurbished rather
than new, its 2,800 berths will add to the competition. And while not a direct
competitor, the Delta Queen Steamboat Company, the New Orleans-based line that
plys America's inland rivers, also expects to take delivery of a new paddlewheel
late next year, its third boat.

The care and feeding of children is on the minds of many in the industry, not
just the marketing officials at American Family Cruises. While cruises often
include movies and menus for the younger set, Celebrity's 1993 cruises to
Bermuda have expanded the offerings to face painting, scavenger hunts, dance
lessons, video tournaments and photo contests. Dolphin's cruises feature Fred
Flintstone and Yogi-bear characters. Holland America will provide youth
counselors aboard its cruises during spring break, and will offer activities for
teenagers and preteens.

SUCH new approaches are important in the current highly competitive market.
"Overcapacity is making it hard for the cruise industry," said Mr. Goodfellow.
He characterized last year's discounted fares to Mexico and the Caribbean as "a
bloodbath," and said he expected a repetition in 1993.

To avoid such a fate, many cruise lines now give their biggest discounts to
passengers who book earliest, then reduce the discount as departure dates near.
Royal Caribbean pioneered the concept last year, and at least a half-dozen other
lines have adopted similar programs. This year, as part of a $40 million
advertising campaign, Royal Caribbean has a toll-free number for potential
customers to request brochures and videos.

Holland America is offering early booking discounts of up to 10 percent for its
cruises to Europe, starting from New York in May, and savings of up to $400 per
couple on its cruises to Alaska. Seabourn passengers booking two successive
cruises totaling 21 days or more can save up to 50 percent for one of the two
cruises. Celebrity is offering 50 percent off for the second person on selected
10- and 11-night cruises to the Caribbean. And Radisson is offering 50 percent
off the published tariff rates on its Caribbean trips in March.

But travel agents say many passengers are still likely to wait for, and get,
last-minute deals on the most competive cruises.

And discounting remains so rampant that several lines are considering omitting
the rate sheet from future brochures.

LOAD-DATE: February 7, 1993

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photos: The 4,250-ton Sea Goddess I, seen here at Monemvasia, Greece,
will be cruising in the Mediterranean. (Dave Bartruff)(pg. 14); Children's room
aboard Celebrity's Meridian. (Celebrity Cruises)(pg. 37)

                   Copyright 1993 The New York Times Company

                              125 of 255 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 February 7, 1993, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

Our Original Sin in Vietnam

SECTION: Section 7; Page 24; Column 4; Book Review Desk

LENGTH: 249 words


To the Editor:

In his review of Peter Macdonald's biography of Gen. Vo Nguyen Giap (Jan. 10),
Col. Harry G. Summers Jr. states that "a 1954 Geneva conference divided Vietnam
in two" and quotes the author of the book to the effect that the North
Vietnamese could not accept "a capitalist Vietnamese half-brother state as their
neighbor."

Omitted is the important statement in the Final Declaration of the Geneva
Conference (July 21, 1954) "that the military demarcation line is provisional
and should not in any way be interpreted as constituting a political or
territorial boundary." Unification was to be achieved at a general election to
be held in July 1956.

When the North Vietnamese Government approached the South Vietnamese Government
to organize these elections, it was rebuffed and the elections were never held.

The United States, while not a signatory to the Geneva agreement, did indicate
that "in the case of nations now divided against their will, we shall continue
to seek to achieve unity through free elections." However, the United States did
nothing to induce our South Vietnamese clients to take part in free elections.

It was only after this that the Vietcong started the civil war in the South,
which led to widespread American involvement. In my opinion, it was this refusal
to support the prescribed democratic process that was the original sin, the
foundation of the immorality of our intervention in Vietnam.

IRVING N. WOLFSON
Worcester, Mass.

LOAD-DATE: February 7, 1993

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Letter

                   Copyright 1993 The New York Times Company

                              126 of 255 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 February 7, 1993, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

Labor's Showdown at Federal Express

BYLINE: By AGIS SALPUKAS

SECTION: Section 3; Page 1; Column 2; Financial Desk

LENGTH: 2617 words


BY most measures, Don Wilson has realized the American dream. As a 20-year pilot
for the Federal Express Corporation, he has worked his way up to the senior
ranks and now earns more than $175,000 a year. He lives in a comfortable house
in Memphis, the company's home base. And he even likes his boss, Frederick W.
Smith, the man who founded the company and revolutionized the air express
industry by making overnight delivery a dependable, nationwide service. Mr.
Smith cares about his employees, Mr. Wilson says.

Yet Mr. Wilson has become a dyed-in-the-wool union man. As good as the company
has been to him, he is worried about a yawning gap in pension benefits compared
with those at unionized carriers. Even more important, he says, is the need to
have a larger voice in dealing with management at a time of industry turmoil and
retrenchment.

"While I'm appreciative of the things I have," he said, "I would be more
comfortable to have a say if things begin to change."

So along with a small group of colleagues, Mr. Wilson led an organizing drive
among the company's 2,300 pilots that paid off last month with a close vote to
join the Air Line Pilots Association.

ALPA has represented pilots at many airlines for many years, but never at
Federal Express. Indeed, only a smattering of the company's 78,000 workers in
this country are unionized.

For that reason, the vote is being seen by many in labor, and some outside it,
as a much-needed shot in the arm not only for ALPA, whose membership rolls have
been hurt in recent years by the bankruptcies of several big airlines, but for
the embattled union movement as a whole.

"It shows that even with progressive companies, employees want some of the
service and voice that a union offers," said Joseph Blasi, a professor at
Rutgers University who is an expert on labor issues in the aviation industry.

Added Edward Wytkind, the executive director of the transportation trades
department of the A.F.L.-C.I.O., "The notion that unions are only needed in
companies that have a horrible labor situation is just not the case."

Enlarging the Possibilities

The Federal Express vote is encouraging, said Mr. Wytkind, whose department
works with 28 unions in such major industries as aviation, auto manufacturing
and trucking. While the victory does not mean that these unions will begin to
make a major shift in their organizing drives, it does widen their
possibilities, he said.

Already, the United Automobile Workers union, in an effort to diversify its
membership, has begun to distribute leaflets at some Federal Express facilities
to see whether other employee groups are interested.

Buoyed in part by the vote, a number of officials at the A.F.L.-C.I.O. and such
major unions as the teamsters are even starting to think that the pendulum may
be swinging their way again after a painful period marked by recession, a loss
of jobs to foreign markets and 12 years of a less-than-friendly Republican White
House.

Just last Monday, President Clinton revoked two Bush Administration orders that
were strongly opposed by labor. And on Wednesday, the White House said it was
considering lifting the ban against rehiring the air traffic controllers who
were fired by President Reagan in 1981.

But whether the Federal Express vote signals a long-term breakthrough, or turns
out to be just a short-lived victory, is far from clear.

Federal Express has filed objections to the vote, charging harassment by the
organizers. The objections are being considered by the National Mediation Board,
which supervised the vote.

In any case, the victory was hardly lopsided. "Almost 1,000 pilots did not vote
for a union," said Theodore L. Weise, the company's chief pilot and a senior
vice president. "This did not constitute a bandwagon. They won by a whisker."

And if the vote stands, and ALPA is certified as the pilots' bargaining agent,
the union presence promises to set off a dogfight among the company's pilots
that could mirror the increasingly ambivalent attitude toward organized labor
that has helped to sap its strength in recent years. Only 16 percent of the work
force was unionized in 1991, the last year for which figures are available,
compared with 20.7 percent 10 years ago, according to Barry Hirsch, a professor
of economics at Florida State University.

Opponents of ALPA say the union will bring an end to the camaraderie,
flexibility and cost efficiencies that enabled Federal Express, which started
operations in 1973, to become a Fortune 500 company.

Unions "drive a wedge between employees and management," said one pilot, Ed
Lyons, and they hamper management's ability to shift quickly at a time of
intense competition. "You have to have the attitude that the customer is No. 1,"
he added. "When unions come in, management often takes its eye off the ball and
that's the customer."

'Uphill Sledding'

Avenues are already available to resolve problems directly with management, say
the union opponents. After all, they say, Federal Express is one of "The 100
Best Companies to Work For in America" in the new edition of the book by that
name.

The bottom line is that many Federal Express pilots will never give their
allegiance to a union, said Mark Lombardo, who helped organize a group opposed
to the ALPA effort.

The union leaders "are in for some uphill sledding," he said. "They are not
going to come in here and dictate anything."

There has been a strong tradition at Federal Express, he said, of workers making
sacrifices to help the company, particularly during its early period when
survival was in doubt.

During those years, Mr. Smith, the founder, faced the danger of banks seizing
his planes, uncertainty over Wall Street financing and a dearth of customers
interested in shipping small packages by air.

Mr. Lombardo, who has been at the company since 1979, recalls loading containers
on planes and getting a ladder and a broom to sweep snow off the wings.

"What happens with a union," he said, "is that you give your allegiance to a
third party."

The union managed to win, its opponents say, only because Federal Express bought
Flying Tiger, a competitor, in 1989, and inherited about 940 pilots who had been
ALPA members.

Ripe for a Change

Mr. Wilson and other organizers note, however, that the union was defeated in a
vote taken soon after the merger -- and that the initiative to try again came
largely from veteran Federal Express pilots.

The company had simply reached a size that made it ripe for an organizing
effort, said Professor Blasi.

In a new and growing company, it is easier to have a team feeling between
workers and management, he said. But in a huge company that is rapidly adding
workers, he added, a union may bring a measure of order and predictability as
management becomes more distant.

"Unions can not only be adversarial but can play a nurturing and advocate role,"
Professor Blasi said.

Indeed, what some workers at well-managed companies like Federal Express are
saying, according to Randolph Babbitt, the president of ALPA, is that they would
"like to have someone to bargain for me just like the stockholders who are
represented by a board of directors."

Making the Move

Mr. Wilson and his fellow organizers came to Mr. Babbitt with that request two
years ago, a short time after the first vote ended in a union defeat by a margin
of 60 percent to 40 percent.

But the anti-union mood started to change, Mr. Wilson recalled, as the industry
entered a period of turmoil. Pilots at Federal Express began to worry about
their own future, he said, as they watched the liquidation of Eastern Airlines
in 1990, the collapse of Pan American World Airways a year later and the
beginning of cutbacks on plane orders and staff by even such strong carriers as
American, Delta and United.

The pilots had reason to worry. Federal Express bought Flying Tiger to get its
international routes, particularly to Europe. But the company's expansion there
was hardly a smooth one because of the recession. Saddled with excess capacity,
the European business produced big losses that put a drag on the company's
overall earnings and sent its stock price plummeting.

The operating loss last year in the international division totaled $613 million,
compared with losses of $419 million in 1991 and $221 million in 1990.
Meanwhile, operating earnings for the company as a whole fell to $22 million
last year, from $252 million in 1991 and $387 million in 1990. And the stock
went from a high of $58 in 1990 to about $31 a year later.

Federal Express responded by cutting about 3,000 jobs and reducing the fleet of
Boeing 747's that it inherited from Flying Tiger to 8, from 21. Two more of the
planes are to be retired this summer. Because of this restructuring, and signs
of an economic recovery and rebound in the overnight delivery business, the
company's stock surged in the past year. It closed Friday at $60.75, a 52-week
high.

Even though no pilots were laid off, those with less seniority began to feel
that their chances to advance to captain were dwindling.

There were also some gnawing pocketbook issues, in particular the lag in pension
benefits behind unionized carriers.

The inequity was not so much the fault of the company as it was a provision in
Federal pension law that allows unionized pilots to bargain for special
benefits. Federal Express has made efforts in recent years to have the provision
repealed.

Federal Express pilots also lagged on salaries, although not to the same degree.

Over the course of a typical 30-year career plus retirement, the difference in
average earnings for pilots at Federal Express and at unionized carriers can
amount in some cases to millions of dollars, according to a study last year by
AIR Inc., a consulting firm based in Atlanta. At Federal Express, the average
career earnings, including pension payments, come to $4.6 million, the study
found. At United, the most generous of the seven carriers analyzed in the study,
that figure is nearly double, $8.9 million, in great part because of the pension
differential.

The shift in sentiment in favor of the union was also helped, of course, by the
presence of the Flying Tiger pilots. Sharing cockpits with their new nonunion
colleagues, they were the ideal messengers for ALPA to use to hand out
literature and spread the word.

Mr. Wilson recalled that it was not easy to sway some longtime Federal Express
pilots, who saw union membership as an act of betrayal against a company for
which they had a deep sense of loyalty.

The bond, he said, reached beyond the corporate walls into the Memphis area,
where Federal Express had become the largest employer and the company's success
was a source of local pride.

"It had become more than just a company," he said. "Employees were very proud of
being part of such a group."

As the organizing drive took hold, management began a counterattack. It handed
out its own literature and also made video presentations and held employee
meetings.

In August 1991, a second vote was held and the union was again defeated, but
this time by just a 1 percent margin. ALPA protested the outcome, contending
that the company had interfered too much in the election. The mediation board
agreed and ordered still another vote, the one that was held last month.

This time the union won -- even though it attracted less than half the votes. Of
2,279 eligible pilots, 1,015 voted for ALPA and 271 for a competing independent
union, the United States Pilots Association. Under board rules, if a majority of
eligible employees votes for any union in a contested election, then the union
getting the most votes wins.

Looking Back

Paradoxically, the company's own success left a fertile field for the union
drive, said Mr. Lombardo, the dissident leader.

He recalled that he and many other young pilots, including Mr. Wilson, joined
Federal Express in its early years. At first they flew Falcons, small corporate
jets that were ideal for the company's startup phase, when few customers saw the
merit of overnight delivery.

As the carrier grew, it bought or leased a big fleet of larger planes, including
30 McDonnell Douglas DC-10's and recently 11 MD-11's. That meant there was
plenty of room for pilots to rise quickly to captain status. By flying
international routes, some began to be paid more than $200,000 a year.

The plain fact is that many pilots got spoiled, Mr. Lombardo said.

At a time of lower earnings and industry consolidation, he said, "there was no
way for the company to meet their expectations."




THE PILOTS WHO JUST SAY NO

AT age 42, Mark Lombardo, captain of a DC-10 at Federal Express, has reached the
top of his profession, flying his jumbo cargo jet on mostly international
routes. The former Marine helicopter pilot and Vietnam veteran got there without
the help of a union and he firmly believes that he does not need one now to
protect what he has achieved.

That's why he and about 10 other pilots became known as the "no group" during
the past two years, battling another group of Federal Express pilots who were
trying to unionize their ranks.

While Randolph Babbitt, president of the victorious Air Line Pilots Association,
had nothing but good words for the way Federal Express management fought back in
the election campaign that ended last month, he felt otherwise about Mr.
Lombardo's group. It used distortions and scare tactics in its attempt to defeat
the union, he said.

For their part, Mr. Lombardo and his group feel that it was the union side that
was guilty of such behavior.

Clearly, there is now a deep gulf between the two camps even though many of the
leaders of each group go back to the company's beginnings, when there were just
350 pilots, compared with nearly 2,300 now.

Most felt a kinship in helping to build the company, Mr. Lombardo recalled. "We
did not have the divisiveness," he said. "We knew that we were on the cutting
edge of something that was going to explode."

Now, he no longer talks to Don Wilson, a leader of the pro-union group and an
acquaintance from the early days. Indeed, Mr. Lombardo is relieved that he does
not have to fly with Mr. Wilson, since they are both captains, although he added
that if they had to, they would be professionals and do their jobs.

Such frictions have taken their toll at other carriers, however. At defunct
Eastern Airlines, the fight between management led by Frank Lorenzo and the
unionized pilots became so intense at one point that the Federal Aviation
Administration warned that the bitterness posed a safety risk.

Mr. Lombardo and the opposition group are determined to fight on, even though
the National Mediation Board may soon certify ALPA as the pilots' bargaining
agent.

Mr. Lombardo wants to be free to continue to make his own deals with the
company, having prospered so far by getting in near the ground floor of what has
become one of the great success stories of American business.

When he joined in 1979, his pay as co-pilot of a small Falcon jet was $12,000,
but it jumped to $32,000 in the second year. He bought a modest house for his
family and began to accumulate company stock. Over the years, his pay rose
quickly -- he now gets more than $200,000 -- and so did his rank. He made
captain in 1985.

By the mid-1980's, he and his wife, Cheryl, an artist, had enough money to build
a home in one of the wealthier suburbs of Memphis. There, Mr. Lombardo has put
together a modest collection of ceramic plates by Picasso and several prints by
Jim Dine, the American artist.

"This is as good as it's going to get for me," Mr. Lombardo said.


LOAD-DATE: February 7, 1993

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photos: A Federal Express pilot for 20 years, Don Wilson is a
dyed-in-the-wool union man who makes more than $175,000 a year. (Rollin Riggs
for The New York Times) (pg. 1); Don Wilson, a leader in the union's organizing
drive; Mark Lombardo, a key member of the "no group." (Photographs by Rollin
Riggs for The New York Times) (pg. 6)

                   Copyright 1993 The New York Times Company

                              127 of 255 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 February 7, 1993, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

THE WORLD;
Now It's the Jungle That the Khmer Rouge Decimates

BYLINE: By PHILIP SHENON

SECTION: Section 4; Page 4; Column 1; Week in Review Desk

LENGTH: 910 words

DATELINE: BATTAMBANG, Cambodia


ALONG Cambodia's long, semicircular border with Thailand, stretches of what had
been dense tropical jungle now resemble a strip mine. And in that newly bleak,
slate-gray landscape lies an explanation of how the fanatical guerrillas of the
Khmer Rouge have managed to survive -- even prosper -- as they attempt to
sabotage a United Nations-sponsored peace plan in Cambodia.

When they controlled the central Government in the 1970's, the rebel group's
Maoist-inspired leaders punished free-market commerce by death. Today, the Khmer
Rouge functions to a large degree as a business venture, granting lucrative
concessions to companies, most of them from Thailand, involved in gem-mining and
logging.

The cross-border timber trade is barred under a United Nations-backed moratorium
that took effect last month, yet the commanders of the multinational
peacekeeping force in Cambodia acknowledge that it is virtually impossible for
them to monitor compliance with the lumber ban in Khmer Rouge-held areas, where
the United Nations does not have access.

Ravaged Forests

The moratorium -- intended to halt the ravaging of Indochina's forests -- was
imposed by Cambodia's Supreme National Council, a negotiating body formed as
part of the peace plan that includes members from the Cambodian Government, the
Khmer Rouge and two other, smaller rebel groups. Of the four factions, only the
Khmer Rouge formally opposed the logging ban.

"In areas where we don't have control, we can only have some indication of
what's going on," said Michael Ward, an economic affairs officer of United
Nations Transitional Authority in Cambodia. "And there have been a number of
times we've picked up indications of violation in these no-go zones."

Mr. Ward said the United Nations was pleased with the cooperation it has
received from the Thai Government. But Cambodians living along the border report
that each night, large flatbed trucks head across the border under cover of
darkness, bearing tons of tropical hardwood bound for lumber mills in Thailand
and elsewhere in Asia. Thai military leaders are widely believed to profit
personally from the timber exports, sometimes as secret partners in the logging
companies.

There are no sanctions on gem mining, and each day thousands of Thais cross the
border into Khmer Rouge-held areas to mine for precious gems. Khmer Rouge
businesses are believed to earn the rebels millions of dollars a month.

Enough of the proceeds are believed to have been stored away in overseas bank
accounts, with most of the money funneled through Thailand, to allow the Khmer
Rouge to survive for years without any other assistance; this has enabled it to
continue to ignore terms of a 1991 peace agreement that was supposed to end
Cambodia's long civil war.

Claiming that thousands of Vietnamese troops remain in Cambodia, the Khmer Rouge
has refused to disarm its troops, as required under the peace treaty its leaders
signed two years ago.

It has also said it will boycott internationally supervised elections this
spring, and many Cambodians say they fear the Khmer Rouge will try to disrupt
the elections with violent attacks on polling stations.

In its dependence on cross-border trade -- some of it legal, some of it illegal
-- the Khmer Rouge has much in common with rebel groups elsewhere.

During civil wars in Central America in the 1980's, insurgents of every
political stripe were reported to pay for weapons purchases through the
smuggling of cocaine and marijuana. Christian and Muslim militias in Lebanon
helped finance their civil war by imposing informal taxes on everything from
toothbrushes to land-to-air missiles as they were smuggled through the seaports
of that tortured nation.

Within Cambodia, the Khmer Rouge is not alone in profiting from the economic
devastation wrought by the lumber trade. Although the new moratorium on timber
exports was meant to apply to all factions in Cambodia, the two smaller,
non-Communist rebel groups and the Cambodian Government itself are reported also
to be violating the ban.

The Government, which was installed by Hanoi after a 1978 Vietnamese invasion
toppled the Khmer Rouge, may actually be the worst offender in the timber trade.
In the first week after the ban took effect, the Government was reported to have
allowed Japanese and Taiwanese loggers to push huge quantities of timber across
the border to transshipment points in Vietnam, and onto barges headed into the
Gulf of Thailand.

Aerial surveillance videotapes taken from United Nations helicopters show that
loggers working in Government-held areas have destroyed thousands of acres of
viable land by burning off the underbrush to make it easier to harvest the
trees. Robert Hull, a United Nations civilian administrator in charge of customs
enforcement in Cambodia, has toured the areas and said that "they're cutting
down everything -- there's no regrowth possible."

Satellite imagery shows that nearly 5 million acres of forest, including more
than one-fifth of the nation's tropical hardwood growth, have been destroyed
over the last three years.

The deforestation means the loss of valuable topsoil, which is washed during the
annual rainy season. A recent United Nations report on the problem in Cambodia
said that "the present pace of exploitation is much faster than in other Asian
countries."

If the rapacious logging is not stopped, it said, "in 5 or 10 years there will
be nothing left."

LOAD-DATE: February 7, 1993

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo: Rubies mined by Thai prospectors in Khmer Rouge-held Cambodia
are sold in a town on the Thai-Cambodian border. (Figaro Magazine/Gamma-Liaison)

                   Copyright 1993 The New York Times Company

                              128 of 255 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 February 7, 1993, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

As Ethnic Wars Multiply, U.S. Strives for a Policy

BYLINE: By DAVID BINDER with BARBARA CROSSETTE,  Special to The New York Times

SECTION: Section 1; Page 1; Column 3; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 2012 words


At the height of World War I, Woodrow Wilson argued that self-determination for
Europe's myriad ethnic minorities, suddenly freed by the collapse of the
Austro-Hungarian and Ottoman Empires, would provide stability in the postwar
environment. But even as the concept of self-determination was being born,
President Wilson's own Secretary of State, Robert Lansing, worried that the idea
might make the world more dangerous.

"Will it not breed discontent, disorder and rebellion?" Lansing wrote. "The
phrase is simply loaded with dynamite. It will raise hopes which can never be
realized. It will, I fear, cost thousands of lives.

"What a calamity that the phrase was ever uttered! What misery it will cause!"

Now as the cold war gives way to dozens of smaller wars over ethnic dominance,
diplomats, scholars and world leaders alike are coping with the legacy Lansing
cautioned against in the second decade of the century.

Policy makers say that the current ethnic conflicts are actually the third wave
of this century, with the first two having taken place after World War I and the
explosion of anticolonial movements in Africa and Asia after World War II. But
the newest wave is seen as even more complex, potentially more threatening to
international peace and almost certain to grow in the years ahead.

Indeed, diplomats and scholars inside and outside the Clinton Administration
have begun studying options to deal with the new kinds of conflicts that range
from enhancing the role of the United Nations to establishing a new
international tribunal to listen to grievances by ethnic minorities in various
countries.

Citing what he called "the surfacing of long-suppressed ethnic, religious and
sectional conflicts" in the world, Secretary of State Warren Christopher said
before taking office that the task of heading off such rivalries would be a
primary objective for the United States.

"If we don't find some way that the different ethnic groups can live together in
a country, how many countries will we have?" Mr. Christopher said at
confirmation hearings before the Senate Foreign Relations Committee. "We'll have
5,000 countries rather than the hundred plus we now have."

Mr. Christopher called for "preventive diplomacy" to keep the conflicts from
spreading. He also endorsed "new dispute resolution techniques," including some
form of international arbitration, and increased use of United Nations forces to
monitor and enforce agreements.

"We can't afford to careen from crisis to crisis," Mr. Christopher said. "We
must have a new diplomacy that can anticipate and prevent crises, like those in
Iraq and Bosnia and Somalia, rather than simply manage them."

The Secretary's testimony might be seen by some as contradicting one
Administration policy -- namely, its refusal to endorse the plan put forward by
a joint mediation effort led by Cyrus R. Vance, the United Nations negotiator,
and Lord Owen, the European Community envoy, to end the war in Bosnia and
Herzegovina. The Clinton Administration is concerned that the negotiators' peace
plan to divide Bosnia into 10 regions might reward the Serbian side for its
campaign of "ethnic cleansing" against Muslims and Croats.

Enshrined in U.N. Charter

President Wilson's original proposals for self-determination have influenced
American policy for generations and were eventually enshrined after World War II
in the United Nations Charter. Many diplomats say that the concept is unlikely
to be discarded even though there are rising fears that it may be carried to
extremes.

"The defining mode of conflict in the era ahead is ethnic conflict," said
Senator Daniel Patrick Moynihan, the New York Democrat. "It promises to be
savage. Get ready for 50 new countries in the world in the next 50 years. Most
of them will be born in bloodshed."

The biggest factor in unleashing the conflicts has been the end of the cold war,
in which the superpowers mostly succeeded in suppressing ethnic rivalries within
their spheres of influence.

"The nation-state as a European concept has brought together all kinds of
elements of diversity, kept in check by state power and hooked into global
structures," said Francis M. Deng, a former Foreign Minister in Sudan and now a
senior associate at the Brookings Insitution.

"Once you remove the cold war factionalism, there is the euphoria of freedom,
everyone asserting the identities that were previously suppressed," he said. "We
are now witnessing the desire of people to fall back on that which is authentic
to them."

Old Grievances at Issue

In many of the conflicts today, Muslims are under attack by other groups -- like
Serbs in the former Yugoslavia or Hindu militants in India -- who assert a sense
of grievance nursed after Muslim conquests many centuries ago. But at the same
time Islamic fundamentalists are on the attack in Central Asia, the Middle East
and Africa, where last week Pope John Paul II appealed to Muslims not to use
force to press their doctrines on non-believers.

The question facing policy makers in light of the tensions is how the United
States decides where its interests lie. Scholars and others say that little work
has been done to try to assign priorities of where to intervene and where not
to.


"I don't think we have a doctrine for the complicated set of circumstances we
face," said Michael Krepon, president of the Henry L. Stimson Center, which
conducts policy research on arms control and peacemaking. In some cases, he
said, warring parties in such conflicts would welcome the presence of an
American or other outside intermediary, but in other cases they would oppose
such a force.

A new idea is evolving among diplomats to the effect that the international
community may have a right to intervene in the affairs of a country simply
because that country is mistreating its minority groups. At the very least, some
say, nations should withhold diplomatic recognition of such countries.

"The international system is at a crossroads on the concept of what is a nation
state," Madeleine K. Albright, the United States representative to the United
Nations, said in an interview before her appointment. "We need to make sure that
when a country declares independence, individual as well as minority rights are
guaranteed before granting recognition."

U.N. Activities Mushroom

The United Nations is certain to be the focus of stepped-up efforts to deal with
international conflicts. Since 1988, 14 new United Nations peacekeeping
operations have been established, more than in the previous 40 years of its
history. The number of soldiers wearing the United Nations blue berets has risen
fourfold this year and the budget for peacekeeping operations jumped from $700
million in 1991 to $2.8 billion in 1992.

In the early years of its activities, the United Nations' main function was to
send observer missions or forces to monitor cease-fires. On the new world stage,
the United Nations has begun deploying forces as part of political settlements,
in some cases helping to disarm the parties in conflict and organize elections
to try to bring stability to the war-torn nations. It has carried out such
activities in El Salvador, Namibia, Mozambique, Western Sahara, Angola and, in
its biggest operation, Cambodia.

"It is fairly clear in some parts of the world that the nation-state is not an
adequate expression of the political framework when minorities are automatically
disenfranchised," said a senior State Department official involved in such
operations. "To a large degree, we have to get away from the the idea of total
respect for sovereignty that was once sacrosanct."

This official said that Cambodia, Bosnia and Somalia were "states not capable of
governing themselves," and that in each, the United States and other United
Nations members had begun to "take government powers out of the hands of
indigenous peoples."

In all past situations, though, the United Nations or outside forces went in
with the full consent of the parties in conflict. What is facing it now is
whether to go into cases where it might forcefully have to disarm one side.

An Old Idea Is Revived

Others suggest that the United Nations should go even further and in effect run
countries that have failed to control their disparate forces from within. Such a
role would revive the concept of United Nations trusteeships, an instrument
employed after World War II to administer former colonies until they were ready
for independence.

Some diplomats say that Bosnia and Somalia might be early candidates for United
Nations trusteeships, but no move in that direction has begun. And many experts
worry about the precedent of the United Nations or any other instrument of the
international community intervening where it may not be wanted, turning the
United Nations into the new world's colonial power.

"We are at the point of claiming that the larger community has more rights of
intervention," Senator Moynihan said. But he added: "I don't want a proposition
that has the U.N. General Assembly deciding how we are handling our affairs in
Elmira, N.Y."

The modes of possible future cooperation between the United States and the
United Nations are only in the earliest stages of discussion.

For example, last summer, Secretary General Boutros Boutros-Ghali proposed a
separate and permanent United Nations military force to intervene on behalf of
the international community, either to prevent or stop ethnic conflicts within
member states.

U.S. to Study 3 Options

Mr. Boutros-Ghali's idea was quietly rebuffed by the Bush Administration, but
the Clinton Administration may be more receptive. At his own confirmation
hearings, Defense Secretary Les Aspin said the new Administration would be
studying three possibilities of some new kind of force with the United Nations.

In one option, he said there could be a permanent force assigned to the United
Nations to intervene in other countries. In the second, various different
countries might designate their own forces as available when needed by the
United Nations.

The third option, he said, would be to establish a voluntary force for which
Americans or individuals from any country could volunteer "like you could sign
to join up in the French Foreign Legion." Mr. Aspin said he found all these
ideas "interesting" and worth exploring.

On the other hand, Mr. Aspin ruled out allowing American troops to take part in
a force under the command of the United Nations, saying such an arrangement
would create "very serious and obvious constitutional problems" because the
American units would be under the Secretary General.

New Institutions Suggested

Beyond the United Nations, some experts urge the creation of new institutions
altogether to deal with ethnic conflict. Such an institution might be an
outgrowth of existing units, including the United Nations, the European
Community, the North Atlantic Treaty Organization and the Conference on Security
and Cooperation in Europe.

Mr. Christopher proposed consideration be given to setting up some kind of
"international tribunal" to listen to claims on aggrieved minorities in
countries. The tribunal's work would go beyond that of the International Court
of Justice, which is confined to adjudicating claims between countries.

Mr. Moynihan asserts that the two dominant philosophical views of the century
blinded officials into not recognizing that ethnic identity was going to be one
of the most powerful historical forces of the century.

The first philosophical view was Marxism, which predicted that ethnic identity
would give way to conflict over ownership and production among economic classes.
The second view was what Mr. Moynihan calls "the liberal expectancy" -- the view
of liberals from the time of Adam Smith in the 18th century that nations would
get bigger for economic reasons and that ethnic factors would fade in
significance.

"Both were wrong, and yet we have lived through the century seeing the world in
these two perspectives," Mr. Moynihan said.

LOAD-DATE: February 7, 1993

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Map/Chart: Map shows location of ethnic strife; chart describes nature
of conflicts. (pg. 14)

Europe

1. BOSNIA AND HERZEGOVINA: Serbian forces have captured about 70 percent of the
country and carried out an "ethnic cleansing" campaign that has expelled and
killed Muslims and Croats and brought widespread condemnation. Tens of thousands
of people have been estimated as killed -- perhaps as many as 150,000 killed or
missing -- and 1.5 million uprooted from their homes.

2. CROATIA: Serbian separatists control about a third of Croatia's territory. An
estimated 25,000 have been killed since Croatia declared independence in 1991.

3. SPAIN: Nationalists saying they represent three million Basques seek an
independent state on the border of Spain and France. Since 1968, 717 people have
been killed in Spain and 49 in France.

4. BRITAIN: The Protestant majority in Northern Ireland favors continued union
with Britain while the Catholic minority wants to join with the rest of Ireland.
More than 3,000 people have been killed in fighting between British troops,
Protestant paramilitary groups and the Irish Republican Army since 1969.

Britain has also seen a surge in attacks by whites on black and Asian
immigrants.

5. GERMANY: An influx of 650,000 foreigners seeking asylum from Bulgaria,
Romania, the Balkans and other areas has stirred anger in the last two years
among right-wing groups. According to German authorities, right-wing and
neo-Nazi groups carried out more than 2,000 attacks last year on asylum-seekers,
resulting in 17 deaths and nearly 600 injuries.

6. ROMANIA: Romania's ethnic Hungarians, mostly in Transylvania, want greater
autonomy and the right to educate children in their language. There have been
sporadic attacks on Gypsies.

7. RUSSIA: Chechenya and Ingushetia have broken apart and seek greater autonomy
within Russia. But Ingushetia and Northern Ossetia are fighting over territory
in clashes that have killed more than 300 people.

8. MOLDOVA: Moldova's mainly Romanian population seeks economic, political and
cultural ties with Romania. The Dniester region in eastern Moldova, where most
of the population is of Russian and Ukrainian origin, declared independence in
1990, fearing that Moldova will unite with Romania. About 800 people have been
killed and 4,000 others have been displaced by fighting.

9. GEORGIA: Abkhazia, dominated by Muslims, seeks independence or union with
Russia. From 700 to 1,500 people are estimated to have been killed and 80,000
displaced in the fighting. Southern Ossetia, also dominated by Muslims, seeks
union with Northern Ossetia, an autonomous republic in Russia. About 1,500 are
estimated to have died in the fighting.

Middle East and North Africa:

10. AZERBAIJAN: Troops from Muslim-dominated Azerbaijan, aided by Russian
forces, are fighting to end a rebellion by Nagorno-Karabakh, an enclave within
Azerbaijan populated largely by Christian Armenians, who favor independence or
affiliation with Armenia. An estimated 3,000 people on both sides have been
killed since 1989, and 350,000 Armenians and 500,000 Azerbaijanis have been
displaced.

In addition, Kurds in western Azerbaijan are demanding autonomy and have fought
Azerbaijani forces.

11. TURKEY: Kurdish separatists represented by the Marxist Kurdish Workers Party
have sought a separate Kurdish state in fighting that has killed 2,500 since
1984.

12. IRAQ: In the north, two major Kurdish parties rule in an enclave protected
militarily by the United States and its allies. Several hundred have died in
clashes with Iraqi forces since the 1991 Persian Gulf war. In the south, leaders
of a rebellion by Shiite Muslims say that tens of thousands of Shiites have been
killed by forces of the Sunni-dominated Baghdad Government since the end of the
Persian Gulf war.

13. ISRAEL: The intifada, a popular uprising of Palestinians against Israeli
occupation of the West Bank of the Jordan River and the Gaza Strip, erupted in
1987. About 1,000 Palestinians have been killed by Israeli soldiers, 500 have
been killed by fellow Palestinians, and about 100 Israelis have been killed in
Palestinian attacks.

14. ALGERIA: A revolt by Islamic militants has led to about 150 deaths in
clashes with Government forces since the military canceled the second round of
elections a year ago when Islamic parties were on the brink of winning a
majority.

15. EGYPT: More than 70 people have been killed in clashes between Islamic
militants and Government security forces and in attacks by militants on
foreigners and Coptic Christians.

16. SUDAN: The Government, dominated by Arab Muslims from the north, is fighting
a longstanding insurgency by black Christians and animists in south. Thousands
have been reported killed and millions displaced.

Africa South of the Sahara:

17. MAURITANIA: Government security forces under the Arab-dominated regime of
Col. Maawiya Ould Sid Ahmed Taya have clashed with opposition groups angry over
expulsions and oppression of the black minority.

18. MALI: A demand for sovereignty by ethnic Tuaregs, a light-skinned nomadic
people living in both Mali and neighboring Niger, has led to fighting in both
Mali and Niger.

19. CHAD: President Idriss Deby, who ousted President Hissen Habre in 1990, has
faced sporadic rebellions in the west and south of Chad. Some have reportedly
involved clashes between Mr. Deby's Zakawa tribe and members of Mr. Habre's
Gourane tribe.

20. SOMALIA: Clan fighting escalated into full-scale civil war in which 300,000
died and a million were made homeless from war or starvation. An American-led
military force has intervened and tried to establish stability.

21. SENEGAL: In Casamance, a coastal region mostly populated by the Diola tribe,
there is opposition to Muslim domination in the government. Hundreds have been
killed and thousands have been displaced in clashes with Government forces.

22. LIBERIA: At least 20,000 have been killed and hundreds of thousands have
been uprooted in a civil war. Drawing support from the Gio and Mano ethnic
groups, the guerrilla leader Charles Taylor controls most of the country.
President Samuel K. Doe, from the Krahn ethnic group, was killed in 1990, and
Monrovia is held by an interim government installed by West African nations as
part of a regional peace effort.

23. TOGO: Scores were killed last year as Government forces loyal to Togo's
leader, Gen. Gnassingbe Eyadema, of the Kabiye tribe, are battling opposition
forces, including those from the rival Ewe tribe.

24. NIGERIA: Nigeria, with about 200 ethnic groups, has many conflicts, but
violence has been the sharpest in fighting between the Hausas, a predominantly
Muslim group in the north, and the mostly Christian Yorubas in the south. Strife
involving the Ibos in the east has been dormant in recent years.

25. UGANDA: The army under President Yoweri K. Museveni, composed principally of
members of the Baganda and Banyarwanda tribes, continues to wage sporadic
warfare with northern rebels, mainly from the Acholi and Langi tribes.

26. RWANDA: Fighting is continuing between the Government, dominated by Hutu
tribes, and an invading force led by the minority Tutsi tribe, despite an
agreement between the Government and the rebels in July 1992. Tens of thousands
have died in ethnic fighting in the last 30 years.

27. BURUNDI: Ethnic clashes between the majority ethnic group, the Hutus, and
the minority Tutsis have led to thousands of deaths in recent years.

28. KENYA: Clashes among tribes in 1991 and 1992 have reportedly killed 1,000
people and uprooted 50,000 and led to charges that the Government of President
Daniel arap Moi was fomenting such conflict to discredit moves toward democracy.

29. ZAIRE: Thousands have died in the last year in a civil war between forces
opposing and loyal to President Mobutu Sese Seko, and the fighting has ethnic
overtones because various forces are from competing ethnic groups or tribes.

30. ANGOLA: Renewed fighting between the Government and guerrilla forces led by
Jonas Savimbi of the National Union for the Total Independence of Angola, or
Unita, has left thousands dead and forced large numbers from their homes in the
last few weeks. The struggle is ideological and political in nature, with ethnic
overtones because Mr. Savimbi's strongest support comes from ethnic groups that
have long felt disenfranchised by the leftist Luanda Government. There is also a
violent secessionist movement in Cabinda, an oil-producing area that is
geographically separated from the rest of Angola.

31. SOUTH AFRICA: Since 1984, about 15,000 have been killed in political
violence related to a black insurrection against the white South African
Government. About 3,000 were killed in 1992, many in clashes between Zulus and
rival black groups.

Asia:

32. TAJIKISTAN: Tens of thousands of Tajik Muslims have been driven from their
land by resurgent Communist armies seeking to suppress Islamic political power.
More than 25,000 have been killed and 500,000 displaced since 1991.

33. AFGHANISTAN: After the withdrawal of Soviet troops and the overthrow of the
Soviet-installed leader, Najibullah, last year, the country has collapsed into
civil war among competing ethnic factions. The Hazars control central and
western areas near Iran, the Pathans are largely in control in the east and the
Tajiks largely control the north. Thousands are estimated to have been killed in
recent fighting, and millions of Afghans remain in refugee camps in Pakistan and
in Iran.

34. PAKISTAN: Thousands have died in conflicts between government forces and
groups of secessionists and dissidents in Sindh and the Northwest Frontier
Province. There has also been rioting in Karachi involving descendants of
Muslims who emigrated from India at the time of partition with Pakistan in 1947.

35. INDIA: Tensions between Hindus and Muslims exploded in December when Hindu
militants razed a mosque in the northern state of Uttar Pradesh. Rioting that
followed in many places across India led to 2,000 killings by official count,
and many more by unofficial estimates. Killings by Muslims and Hindus continue.
In Kashmir, 5,000 militants, civilians and Indian troops have been killed since
a rebellion by the largely Muslim population began in 1990. An estimated 120,000
people, mostly Hindus, have fled Kashmir for other parts of India. In Punjab,
about 20,000 Hindus and Sikhs are estimated to have been killed since a
rebellion by Sikh militants erupted in 1982. In Assam, more than 200 have been
reported killed as an insurgency by secessionists erupted in 1990. In Nagaland,
insurgent Bodos have been fighting for a separate state; about 300 people have
been killed.

36. BHUTAN: A revolt by ethnic Nepalese against the Government and reprisals by
Government forces have led to thousands of Nepalese fleeing the country in the
last two years.

37. SRI LANKA: An insurgency by mostly Hindu Tamils in the north and east has
been carried out against the Government, which is dominated by the mostly
Buddhist Sinhalese. Since 1983, an estimated 28,000 people have been killed in
the Tamil rebellion, and another 50,000 in the Government's crackdown on
Sinhalese militants.

38. BANGLADESH: A migration by members of the country's Muslim majority into the
thinly populated Chittagong Hill Tracts region in the south has led to an
insurgency by the area's Chakmas, a mainly Buddhist people, leaving hundreds
dead and tens of thousands displaced.

39. MYANMAR: In the last two years, more than 250,000 Muslims, charging
harassment, have fled across the western border to Bangladesh. Hundreds are also
believed to have died in clashes between Burmese soldiers and separatist Karen
and other rebels along the Thai-Burmese border in the last two years.

40. CHINA: Tibetans rebelled against Chinese rule in 1959, with an estimated
87,000 Tibetans killed. After an easing of Chinese rule, Beijing cracked down in
1987. Several dozen people are believed to have been killed in various
incidents. In Xinjiang, China suppressed a rebellion among Muslims of Turkic
descent in 1990 in which an estimated 50 people died.

41. CAMBODIA: Rebel factions signed a peace accord ending a 13-year civil war. A
Supreme National Council made up of the rebel factions and the Cambodian
Government is to advise the United Nations, which administers the country's
affairs until a new government can be formed after elections this year. Various
sides are constantly threatening to walk away from the agreement.

Khmer Rouge soldiers, who blame Vietnam for many of Cambodia's problems, have
been carrying out attacks on 100,000 Vietnamese living in Cambodia.

42. INDONESIA: A civil war broke out in East Timor in 1975 after Portugal
withdrew, and Indonesia crushed the pro-independence rebellion. Human rights
groups charge that 100,000 to 200,000 of the 600,000 mostly Roman Catholic East
Timorese have died of starvation, disease or execution since Indonesia annexed
the area.

A separatist movement also exists in northern Sumatra, where Indonesian forces
are said by Amnesty International to have killed 2,000.

43. PAPUA NEW GUINEA: Rebels on the island of Bougainville declared independence
in 1990. The Papua New Guinea Government subdued the rebellion in 1991 after
fighting in which 3,000 died.

44. FIJI: Violence erupted after the Indian-dominated Government was elected in
1987. The Government was overthrown and the current Government consolidates
ethnic Fijian dominance.

Latin America:

45. GUATEMALA: An essentially political conflict between the Guatemalan
Government and leftist guerrillas has had ethnic overtones because of the long
history of repression of Indians in Guatemala. At least 43,000 Guatemalan
refugees have fled into Mexico, but some are beginning to return.

46. COLOMBIA: A group representing rights of Indians, Quintin Lamee, suspended
an armed rebellion in 1991, but other Marxist groups claiming to represent
peasants are continuing guerrilla attacks on the government.

47. PERU: Since 1980, a Maoist guerrilla group known as Shining Path has waged
war and won control of about a third of Peruvian territory, drawing support from
largely Indian or mixed-race populations resisting the control of the mostly
Hispanic elite in Lima. About 26,000 people have been killed in the war and an
estimated 600,000 have fled their homes to other parts of the country. Thousands
more have emigrated.

48. BRAZIL: Indian tribes in the Amazon region are pressing the Government in
Brasilia to recognize their traditional homelands. In the northern Amazon state
of Roraima, the federal Government is campaigning to expel gold miners from the
lands of the Yanomami tribes. (pg. 14)
; Photo: In one of dozens of continuing ethnic conflicts worldwide, Abkhazian
refugees last year fled violence in the former Soviet republic of Georgia.
(Agence France-Presse) (pg. 1);

                   Copyright 1993 The New York Times Company

                              129 of 255 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 February 7, 1993, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

THEATER REVIEW;
Lilting Junket Down Memory Lane

BYLINE: By LEAH D. FRANK

SECTION: Section 13LI; Page 14; Column 4; Long Island Weekly Desk

LENGTH: 649 words


"BEEHIVE," a finger-snapping, hand-clapping, toe-tapping trip down memory lane,
is at Theater Three in Port Jefferson through Feb. 20.

A retrospective of the music of the female singers and "girl groups" of the
60's, "Beehive" is a cornucopia of songs made memorable by people like Patty
LaBelle and the Bluebirds, Brenda Lee, Connie Francis, Petula Clark, the
Supremes and many others.

It is not necessary to have lived through the 60's to recognize hits like
"Downtown," "My Boyfriend's Back," "Where the Boys Are" or "It's My Party."
Aside from the fact that they seem to have entered our cultural consciousness,
they are great songs to exercise by. But it is probably necessary to have lived
through that decade to understand the care and concern that hairstyles like the
beehive really involved.

Without question, contemporary high school dances have shy students in
attendance. But do the boys still line up along one side of the gymnasium and
the girls on the other, the way they used to? In the yet-to-be-written nostalgic
musical about music from the 80's and 90's, will every generation in the
audience be able to recognize the songs the way they do in "Beehive"?

The musical unfolds attitudes from the 60's by a careful selection of songs.
Perky, pretty, giggling girls open the show with silly songs like "The Name
Game," in which the artists create lyrics that rhyme with names of people in the
audience. They coyly request that people not give them names like "Rich" or
"Chuck."

It is all cute and funny at the beginning. But as the decade progresses, women
stop being girls when the effects of events like Vietnam, civil rights struggles
and the Kennedy and King assassinations take their toll.

Many of the songs are sung in the style of the entertainers who made them
famous, and this cast, under the sophisticated direction of Carolyn Droscoski,
is not only vocally talented, but is also able to recreate some magical moments.

Deborah Formosa is one of the group in Act I, but in the second act she stomps
on stage as Janis Joplin in concert. Ms. Formosa is electrifying as she sings
Joplin hits like "Piece of My Heart," "Try" and "Me and Bobby McGee."

Her vocal imitation of Ms. Joplin is right on target to the point where only a
very finely tuned ear could tell immediately the difference. Ms. Formosa not
only sounds like Ms. Joplin, but also moves like her and begins to look like
her. An evening of Ms. Formosa's doing her Joplin renditions was all the
audience wanted by the time that segment of "Beehive" was finished.

Another standout in the cast is Selena Nelson. She serves as the quasinarrator
who holds the thin thread that ties the songs together. Ms. Nelson is a flawless
gem of sparkling personality and warmth as she connects the women's music like a
string of perfect pearls.

Kelly Johnson, Norita Rochester, Debbie Silver and Tara M. Squazzo complete the
first-rate cast. Each woman sings, dances and interprets the songs of the 60's
in a way that celebrates that music the way that fireworks finish the Fourth of
July.

Ms. Droscoski, a memorable performer and singer in her own right, has directed
with a professional sense of timing and a sensitivity to the female singers of
the 60's.

The one major flaw in the production has no excuse. The costumes, which are
credited to Brent Erlanson, are mostly ill fitting and wrinkled. Uneven
hemlines, hanging threads and exposed bra straps are not the fault of
insufficient funds or the lack of a professional costume staff. Rather, the
problems are a result of an inexcusable, haphazard, careless preshow effort.

Quibbling aside, "Beehive" is nothing less than a delightful evening of theater.

Theater Three, which is also producing a hilarious version of Charles Ludlam's
"Mystery of Irma Vep" in its small Second Stage Theater, now has two top-notch
shows running simultaneously.

LOAD-DATE: February 7, 1993

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo: Members of the cast of "Beehive," playing at Theater Three in
Port Jefferson. (Theater Three)

TYPE: Review

                   Copyright 1993 The New York Times Company

                              130 of 255 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 February 8, 1993, Monday, Late Edition - Final

NEWS SUMMARY

SECTION: Section A; Page 2; Column 5; Metropolitan Desk

LENGTH: 1108 words



International    A3-11

U.S. STRATEGY ON EX-SOVIETS

The Clinton Administration intends to create a supercommittee in the State
Department to shape a unified strategy toward Russia and the other former Soviet
republics, but has no intention of immediately increasing foreign aid to the
area, Administration officials say.  A1


For President Clinton, foreign policy seems to be a low priority.  A9

SCOTLAND CURBS PERIL OF AIDS

By giving oral versions of drugs sought by addicts, Edinburgh has sharply
reduced the number of people who have been infected with the AIDS virus by way
of contaminated needles.  A3

AUSTRALIA PLANS VOTE IN MARCH

Prime Minister Paul Keating of Australia called for a general election on March
13. It is expected to be a tight race with the faltering economy as the main
issue.  A6

U.S. PROTESTS TO ISRAEL

The U.S. has protested to Israel over the treatment of three
Palestinian-Americans who have been jailed on suspicion of having ties with a
militant Islamic group in the occupied territories, a U.S. Embassy spokesman
said.  A7

SECRETS OF SOVIET ARCHIVES

In the last 18 months, the Communist Party's main archive has provided a steady
stream of revelations. Yet for every piece fitted into the vast puzzle of Soviet
history, another gap becomes more glaring. Many answers may be lurking in files
that remain closed.  A8

U.N. PLAN ON BOSNIA IS STALLED

International mediators on the Balkans failed to make any progress in their
effort to make peace among Bosnia and Herzegovina's three factions, in part
because the leader of Bosnia's Serbs again rejected a proposal to divide the
country into 10 semi-autonomous provinces.  A10

The plan on Bosnia may have set off new "ethnic cleansing." A10

NEW ALLIES FOR SIHANOUK

Twenty-three years after his ouster as Cambodia's head of state, Prince Norodom
Sihanouk is moving to reclaim power, this time with the aid of nations that he
once considered his enemies to the death.  A11

The Pope, in Uganda, urged chastity as the only defense for AIDS.  A5

Cape Town Journal: The site of Parliament and its attractions.  A4

National    A12-15

WOOD BACKS WHITE HOUSE

Judge Kimba Wood issued a statement supporting White House assertions that
before President Clinton settled on her as Attorney General she had not
explicitly told the Administration of hiring an illegal immigrant as a baby
sitter. The statement sought to "correct the impression conveyed" in an earlier
article.  A1

A DITHER IN THE CAPITAL

News analysis: The capital is running a fever, gripped by the frenzy that sets
in every so often when morality and expediency get tangled up. This time, Bill
Clinton is in the soup.  A1

FIRST LADY SHOWS HER HAND

White House Memo: After Hillary Rodham Clinton swept through Capitol Hill the
other day, any shard of doubt that Bill and Hillary Clinton would run the
Government in tandem disappeared.  A14

Republicans criticized plans for a short-term stimulus.  A14

NOW SEE WHO'S IN CHARGE

Representative Ronald Dellums of California, who began his career as a Vietnam
war protester, has become chairman of the House Armed Services Committee. His
constituents can hardly believe it.  A12

GETTING BACK IN GEAR

Much of the nation's industrial sector is shifting into higher gear. The
companies enjoying a surge in business are not suddenly putting out the call for
thousands of new workers, but they have stepped up production lines and some
have turned on the green lights for expansion.  A1

U.S. BUILDS AMID OFFICE GLUT

Congress is spending several billion dollars building offices for Federal
workers around the country even though the commercial real estate market remains
glutted with vacant space.  A12

STALKING: A LAW TO FIT A CRIME

In 1990 California made following, harassing or threatening someone a crime and
gave it a name: stalking. Since then, 30 other states have passed similar laws
and hundreds of arrests have been made.  A1

PEROT'S HAPPY TRAILS

Ross Perot visited three cities in Maine to thank voters for their support last
November and sounded very much like a man who has his eyes fixed on the White
House.  A13

The E.P.A. chief recused herself from an incinerator dispute.  A13

Metro Digest    B1

A NOD TO ASHE'S LEGACY

If ever a place in New York City evoked Arthur Ashe's spirit, it was surely on
the makeshift tennis courts at the Harlem Tennis Center. There, dozens of young
athletes talked about the imprint that Mr. Ashe, who died on Saturday, had left
on their lives.  A1

TAX DELAY THREATENS HOUSING

Since the late 1980's, money from a Federal tax break for corporations has put
thousands of low-income New Yorkers into new homes. Now legislation that would
renew the financing is stalled in Washington, and that, coupled with state
budget cuts, threatens plans for affordable housing developments in the state.
A1

Sports    C1-9

Basketball: Knicks wallop the Heat.  C1

King sees the erractic Nets win.  C1

The breakup of Manning and Brown C7

Iowa women succeed in TV's spotlight.  C9

Boxing: Bowe won it without a scratch.  C3

Columns: Vecsey on Ashe C4

Anderson on boxing C3

Dog show: Caring for a champion.  C2

Golf: Australian rookie wins Pebble Beach Pro-Am.  C2

Horse Racing: Kentucky Derby prospect falters on dirt.  C7

Sports People C6

Tennis: Ashe's gift of inspiration C1

Ashe's death was unexpected.  C1

Business Digest    D1

Neediest Cases    B5

Arts/Entertainment    C11-18

Power struggle at Brecht's newly privatized Berliner Ensemble.  C11

Junkets and Golden Globes.  C11

Spassky faces a 16-year-old.  C14

Music: Of the Focus festival.  C11

New Lutoslawski work.  C11

Rodgers and Hart at the Algonquin.  C13

Emerson, Lake and Palmer.  C18

Star Star at the Limelight.  C18

Dance: From wheelchairs.  C13

In Review C13

Word and Image:

Reality intrudes on TV.  C16

Book on a murderer.  C18

Obituaries    B8-9

Arthur Ashe, tennis star and human rights activist.  B9

Editorials/Op-Ed    A16-17

Editorials

Next: Campaign finance reform.

Mr. Mobutu's long goodbye.

Belarus shows the way on arms.

David C. Anderson: Crack house.

Letters

Anthony Lewis: It's gender, stupid.

William Safire: The Clinton direction.

Chalmers Johnson: Where's Clinton on Asia?

Alan Lightman: A brief version of time.

"Oh, yipe!" said Thurgood Marshall.

LOAD-DATE: February 8, 1993

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Summary

                   Copyright 1993 The New York Times Company

                              131 of 255 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 February 8, 1993, Monday, Late Edition - Final

INSIDE

SECTION: Section A; Page 1; Column 1; Metropolitan Desk

LENGTH: 116 words



No Progress in Bosnian Talks

Mediators struggled, but two factions refused to accept a peace plan for Bosnia
on the eve of a United Nations Security Council session. Page A10.

U.S. Builds Amid Office Glut

Congress is spending billions of dollars building Federal offices even though
the commercial market is glutted with vacant space. Page A12.

Scotland Curbs AIDS Threat

By giving oral versions of drugs sought by addicts, Edinburgh has sharply
reduced the number of people who have the AIDS virus. Page A3.

The Capitalists Return

Americans are trickling back to Vietnam, hoping to employ their former enemies
and ready the country for a corporate invasion. Page D1.

LOAD-DATE: February 8, 1993

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Summary

                   Copyright 1993 The New York Times Company

                              132 of 255 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 February 8, 1993, Monday, Late Edition - Final

Critic as Chairman Gets Praise as Both

BYLINE: By JANE GROSS,  Special to The New York Times

SECTION: Section A; Page 12; Column 1; National Desk

LENGTH: 901 words

DATELINE: OAKLAND, Calif., Feb. 7


"Onward, Christian Soldiers" is not in the hymnal at the Allen Temple Baptist
Church here. An influential parishioner, Congressman Ronald V. Dellums,
complained that it was too bellicose.

Now Mr. Dellums, who began his political career as a Vietnam War protester and
remains a vocal opponent of military intervention and costly new weapon systems,
has taken on the unlikely post of chairman of the House Armed Services
Committee. And his constituents in this overwhelmingly liberal district,
birthplace of the Free Speech Movement and countless other left-wing crusades,
say they can hardly believe that the quintessential outsider has moved inside.

"It's incredible," said Lindy Graham, the chief of staff to Supervisor Don
Perata of Alameda County. "In their wildest imaginings, had the armed services
people 20 years ago ever thought his guy would be in charge, with his Afro and
his bell-bottoms, they'd have croaked."

Being passed from hand to hand here is an editorial cartoon that captures the
fox-in-the-henhouse quality of Mr. Dellums's chairmanship, which he won with a
198-to-10 vote from the House Democratic Caucus after the confirmation of Les
Aspin as Secretary of Defense. Mr. Aspin, a Wisconsin Democrat, had called for
much more modest reductions in the military budget than Mr. Dellums espouses and
also differed from his successor in support for the Persian Gulf war.

Praise From Many Quarters

In the cartoon, an admiral and general stand outside the door of the Armed
Services Committee room, which is draped with a banner reading "Under New
Management." Inside, Mr. Dellums sits behind the chairman's desk, brandishing a
meat ax. "Call security," one military man says to the other.

But even military types in the 9th Congressional District, which has included
the Navy town of Alameda since 1992, are applauding Mr. Dellums's 22-year
journey from freshman radical to committee chairman, in part because he helped
save the Alameda Naval Air Station when it was scheduled to close.

Mr. Perata, who represents Alameda on the county governing board, said he had
heard from scores of people at the Alameda Naval Air Station, "from wrench
turners to retired admirals," all praising the new chairman.

Like Mr. Dellums's colleagues in Washington and many defense experts he has
dealt with, local military people commend his approach. "Even though his views
may differ from mine, he's always fair, consistent and professional," said
Robert Toney, a retired Navy admiral who now heads the Oakland Chamber of
Commerce. "He never undercuts you. A man respects another man like that."

Political Gifts

In this district, home to California's flagship university, the most casual
encounters with constituents yield an understanding of Mr. Dellums's gifts as a
lawmaker. "Even those who disagree with his views take him seriously," said
Glenna Matthews, a visiting associate professor of history at the University of
California at Berkeley.

Many supporters spoke of how isolated Mr. Dellums had been when he arrived in
Washington in 1970, written off as on the fringe. But while others came to
Washington to march and then returned to the sympathetic confines of towns like
Berkeley, Ann Arbor, Mich.  or Cambridge, Mass., Mr. Dellums, a 57-year-old
former Marine and the son of a Pullman porter, stayed.

'Another Whippersnapper'

"Instead of this Afro, dashiki-dressed guy on the Mall, he chose to be a
double-breasted, articulate man with a gavel in his hand," Mr. Perata said.

Sheila Daar, an environmentalist, remembered Mr. Dellums's "unbelievably awful"
welcome to the Armed Services Committee in 1973, when he and Representative
Patricia Schroeder of Colorado, "another whippersnapper" were told there was
only one chair left and they would have to share it.

A few of Mr. Dellums's supporters worry that the demands of leadership will
still his fiery oratory, like the floor speech in 1991 against the use of force
in the Persian Gulf.

"He certainly can't function as a flame-throwing critic at the same time he is
forging compromise," said James Vann, an Oakland architect who has worked in
liberal political campaigns here for 30 years. "I do fear we will miss something
by not having that outspoken voice."

Promise of Continuity

But many more expect that Mr. Dellums will remain a crusader for peace and
justice. "Ron Dellums is going to be Ron Dellums," said the Rev. J. Alfred Smith
Sr., pastor of the Allen Temple Baptist Church in Oakland, "wherever and
whatever he is."

At a news conference the day of his election as chairman, Mr. Dellums promised
to remain steadfast. "I came here as an advocate of peace and I am going to
continue to do so," he said.

Supporters see Mr. Dellums as a man who ascended at the right moment, when the
cold war was over and America's economic revival seemed to depend on converting
a military economy to civilian purposes. "The right person at the right place at
the right time," said Loni Hancock, the Mayor of Berkeley.

Mr. Perata elaborated on the new order: "The world has changed in exactly the
way Dellums had hoped 20 years ago. We are not titans in a battle of
superpowers. Everyone now recognizes we cannot pump disproportionate amounts of
money into armaments.

"It's Ron's time. There's a certain historical heft to how right this feels. In
the old days, you'd hear it and say, 'Right on!' "

NAME: Ronald V. Dellums

LOAD-DATE: February 8, 1993

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo: Ronald V. Dellums (Associated Press)

TYPE: Biography

                   Copyright 1993 The New York Times Company

                              133 of 255 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 February 8, 1993, Monday, Late Edition - Final

SIHANOUK MOVING TO REGAIN POWER

BYLINE: By PHILIP SHENON,  Special to The New York Times

SECTION: Section A; Page 11; Column 1; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 870 words

DATELINE: PHNOM PENH, Cambodia, Feb. 5


Twenty-three years after his ouster as Cambodia's head of state, Prince Norodom
Sihanouk is moving quickly to reclaim power here, this time with the support of
nations that he once considered his enemies to the death.

The United Nations is on the verge of revising the 1991 Cambodian peace accords
to allow the election of a President as well as a legislature, a move that would
all but guarantee the Prince's return to power this spring or summer.

Even before the revisions, the 70-year-old Prince has announced that he is a
presidential candidate, although he insists his decision is not final. Friends
say that his uncertainty appears to be a negotiating ploy. In a nation that has
known only civil war or terror for a generation, there is no other figure in
Cambodia with enough broad popular support to challenge him.

The prince is to return here within the next few days from Beijing, where he has
been receiving medical treatment after a mild stroke in November.

'The Essential Cement'

"Sihanouk is the only answer," said John Gunther Dean, a former American
ambassador to Cambodia who has known Prince Sihanouk since the early 1950's and
visits Cambodia frequently. "I have been known all my career as a defender of
Sihanouk. I know that he is the essential cement in Cambodia."

The nations tacitly supporting him include the United States, which the prince
has long suspected was involved in the 1970 coup that put his handpicked Prime
Minister, Lon Nol, in charge.

Diplomats and other students of modern Cambodian history say there is reason to
be concerned about Prince Sihanouk, saying his mercurial personality, political
misjudgments and reluctance to share authority were at least partly to blame for
the coup and the subsequent rise to power of the Maoist-inspired rebels of the
Khmer Rouge.

The Khmer Rouge overran Cambodia in 1975 under the nominal patronage of Prince
Sihanouk, setting off a four-year reign of terror that left at least several
hundred thousand and perhaps more than one million Cambodians dead from
starvation, disease and execution.

Alliance With Khmer Rouge

Even after the Khmer Rouge were toppled by Vietnamese troops in 1979 -- and
after the mass killings of the Khmer Rouge years were fully exposed -- the
Prince aligned himself with the Khmer Rouge against the Hanoi-installed
Government.

"It's a matter of there being nobody else; there is only Sihanouk," said a
senior Asian diplomat here. "When Sihanouk ruled, he didn't tolerate the rise of
a new generation of leaders. He didn't want rivals. And when the Khmer Rouge
took over, anyone with leadership skills or talent was killed."

Whatever their misgivings, many in Cambodia agree that the Prince is the best
hope for national reconciliation.

Operating from his homes in exile in Beijing and North Korea, Prince Sihanouk
was the moving force behind years of negotiations that led to the October 1991
peace treaty. In November 1991, after spending most of a generation in exile
from Cambodia, the Prince returned to Phnom Penh and took up his new role as
chairman of the Supreme National Council created as part of the peace settlement
to represent all factions.

Without a coalition government, Cambodia will face de facto partitioning, with a
separate state under the control of the Khmer Rouge and the likelihood of
continued fighting.

The Prince's hopes of returning to power may yet be dashed by either the
Government, which is believed to be responsible for recent violence against the
royalist political party led by one of Prince Sihanouk's sons, or by the Khmer
Rouge, who are boycotting the election to protest what they call the continued
presence of Vietnamese troops in Cambodia.

The United Nations, which maintains 22,000 peacekeepers here seems determined to
go ahead with the election, whatever the threats.

The Khmer Rouge boycott has raised fears that the guerrillas will attempt to
sabotage the balloting with violence. But Lieut. Gen. John Sanderson, an
Australian who is the United Nations military commander in Cambodia, said that
he believes the elections will be largely peaceful.

"They might be able to stop the election in certain places -- but not across the
country," he said.

Opposition to Sanctions

Some diplomats here are equally hopeful about the intentions of the Khmer Rouge,
saying that it is in the guerrillas' best interests to allow the vote, then see
what offer is made to them. The prince recently spoke out against proposals in
the United Nations to impose new sanctions on the rebel group, insisting that
the sanctions were of no use.

In an in interview conducted last month in Beijing with The Far Eastern Economic
Review, Prince Sihanouk, who is rarely accused of understatement, lashed out at
all four factions in Cambodia and suggested that he was the only hope for peace
in this war-shattered nation.

"Everybody is rotten, everybody," he said. "People are very upset. They say only
Sihanouk is clean; the only one is Sihanouk. He should be made to come back and
take charge of everything."

He continued, "I absolutely wish, my only ambition before dying, before becoming
senile, is to render a last service to my country."

LOAD-DATE: February 8, 1993

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1993 The New York Times Company

                              134 of 255 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 February 8, 1993, Monday, Late Edition - Final

Soviet Archives: Paper Trail of a Rigid, Authoritarian System

BYLINE: By SERGE SCHMEMANN,  Special to The New York Times

SECTION: Section A; Page 8; Column 1; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 3751 words

DATELINE: MOSCOW, Feb. 7


On any given day, a dozen or so people can be found huddled over vintage metal
table lamps in the hushed reading room of the Communist Party's main archive,
plunged into what has become one of the more intriguing and frustrating
exercises in Moscow: culling the millions of files for pieces to the vast puzzle
of Soviet history.

Now called the Storage Center for Contemporary Documentation, the building in
the old Central Committee complex on Staraya Square is only one depository for
204 million separate files now controlled by the Russian Government.

In the 18 months since President Boris N. Yeltsin placed all K.G.B. and
Communist archives under Russia's control, a steady stream of revelations large
and small has already come out: confirmation that the Soviet Union ordered the
killing of 20,000 Polish officers and others, including about 5,000 found in the
Katyn Forest, in 1940; details of Soviet behavior around events like the Cuban
missile crisis, the Chernobyl nuclear disaster and the Afghan war; tapes from
the "black box" of Flight 007; documentation of annual contributions of $2
million to the American Communist Party.

Yet for every piece fitted into the puzzle, another gap becomes more glaring.
Was Moscow behind the assassination attempt on the Pope? What did it know about
Lee Harvey Oswald? Why did the Soviets move nuclear weapons to Cuba in 1962? Why
was Raoul Wallenberg seized by the Soviets?

Many answers may never be known. Untold volumes of files have been destroyed.
But most answers may be lurking in files that remain closed. After initial hints
of greater openness, the K.G.B.'s successor agencies have sealed their files
tight, and the military never gave access to its. As a result, there is nothing
new to report on the question of possible American prisoners of war in Russia.

More frustrating for scholars, most of the sensitive files remain sealed in the
Presidential Archive, despite occasional leaks or promises of declassification.

At a recent conference in Moscow, Russian and American scholars gathered to
report on what they had culled from the mountains of declassified Soviet-era
archives and on what they still could not find.

James G. Hershberg, coordinator of the Cold War International History Project at
the Woodrow Wilson International Center for Scholars in Washington, one of the
organizers of the conference, concluded that "logistical, technical, political,
bureaucratic, psychological and fiscal obstacles will inevitably hamper a smooth
and rapid transition to archival transparency and accessibility. "

One of the scholars who has delved into mountains of archives in Russia and
Eastern Europe, Mark Kramer of Brown University, cautioned fellow scholars
against a "tendency to look for the keys where the streetlight is," or to
exaggerate the importance of more accessible files, like those of the Foreign
Ministry or the Central Committee.

Many of the trails he tried to follow, he said, led to the Presidential Archive,
and the only items released from it up to now, "including documents about the
Katyn Forest massacres, the 1983 downing of a Korean airliner, and a few other
events, have been declassified mainly for political rather than scholarly
reasons: in some cases to improve relations with foreign countries, and in other
cases to provide evidence before the Constitutional Court."

The former case includes many files released to Poland, Czechoslovakia and
Hungary on Soviet interventions there. The latter includes various files whose
main purpose seemed to be to embarrass Mikhail S. Gorbachev and intended to
demonstrate the deviousness of the Communist Party throughout its history.

However frustrating, the scholars acknowledged that the files have been
invaluable in plugging many holes in their research, or in corroborating many of
the presumptions they had about the Soviet Union.  However restricted the
access, a few hours spent under the dour gaze of huge portraits of Marx and
Lenin in the reading room of the Storage Center for Contemporary Documentation,
or in the shrinelike repository of party documents up till 1952 now known as the
Russian Center for the Preservation and Study of Contemporary Historical
Documents, is never dull.

In a system that was obsessed with control and secrecy, these reports, minutes,
orders and plans were the communications of the initiated. They are the records
of men who knew and understood one another and the iron system they ran.

Following is a sampling culled from documents used at the conference or from
other sources:

The Bloody Suppression Of the 1962 Meat-Price Riots

In June 1962, the raising of prices on meat led to several days of rioting by
workers in Novocherkassk, in southern Russia. The disorder was not reported in
the press at the time. Army units were finally ordered to suppress the uprising.
Twenty-two people were killed, 87 wounded. A detailed report on the incident was
made to the Central Committee by Vladimir Semichastny, then head of the K.G.B.

"When the crowd came to the city party headquarters, the more frenzied hooligans
and instigators began throwing rocks and sticks at the doors and windows, they
broke through the resistance of the guards and got inside the building, broke
windows, smashed the furniture, ripped portraits down and destroyed them, beat
party and Soviet workers and K.G.B. officers who were in the building. Several
hooligans got to the balcony and with provocatory aims hung a red banner and set
up a portrait of V. I. Lenin."

The rioters then broke into police headquarters:

"In the process of giving them resistance and preventing the seizure of secret
documents and arms there occurred a hand-to-hand struggle.

"Some hooligans were armed with knives and sticks. One criminal who burst in
attacked a soldier and seized his automatic rifle and tried to shoot from it. In
this connection fire was opened on the attacking criminals. A part of them was
seized, the rest fled from the building."

Mr. Semichastny did not describe the actual suppression of the riot. He reported
only that the soldiers were issued arms, and continued:

"After the liquidation of the mass unrest, 20 bodies were picked up, including 2
women, which were buried in various places."

Gorbachev Plans Revenge For Limiting Soviet Officials

In October 1986, shortly after Mikhail S. Gorbachev held a summit meeting with
President Ronald Reagan in Reykjavik, Iceland, the United States ordered the
Soviet Union to curtail sharply the number of its official personnel in the
United States. The following excerpts from the Politburo meeting of Oct. 22,
1986, show Mr. Gorbachev furious and the Soviets planning revenge.

GORBACHEV -- We have to exchange opinions on measures in connections with the
new hostile action by the U.S.A. administration. The development of events since
Reykjavik demonstrate that our "friends" in the U.S.A. have no constructive
program and do everything to inflame the atmosphere. And in this they act
extremely crudely, they behave as bandits.

[MIKHAIL S.] SOLOMENTSEV -- Yes, they behave like highway bandits.

GORBACHEV -- We cannot expect any constructive actions or proposals from the
U.S.A. administration. In the resulting situation, we must gather propaganda
points and continue our offensive of clarification oriented on the American and
world public. Washington officials are afraid of this. For three days now the
[U.S.] customs have been holding up materials with my statements at a press
conference in Reykjavik and on Soviet television."

Mr. Gorbachev proceeded to report on the United States' decision to expel 55
Soviet diplomats.

"This hostile anti-Soviet action cannot be left unanswered. We must not stop
before the most decisive measures. Americans are issuing threats and declare
that if we take retaliatory measures, they will take more actions in regard to
our diplomatic personnel in the U.S.A. Well, so be it, I think that in view of
the limited character of Soviet-American ties in this case also our embassy in
the U.S.A. will manage with its tasks."

Mr. Gorbachev proposed to pull all Soviet workers from the United States Embassy
and to limit the number of Americans permitted to visit the Soviet Union,
measures that were soon announced to the world. The Politburo continued with
angry demands to suspend the opening of a United States Consulate in Kiev, to
stop buying grain in the United States, to expel all American military attaches.
Then the K.G.B. chief, Viktor Chebrikov, spoke up:

CHEBRIKOV -- We have at our disposal a reserve move, which we can use if
necessary. As I already reported to the Politburo, we found many listening
devices in our buildings in the U.S.A. We could air this fact in order to reveal
American espionage, giving a press conference to demonstrate American espionage
surveillance.

Foreign Minister Andrei Gromyko was the most cautious throughout the meeting:

GROMYKO -- How many of our listening devices did they find in their offices?

CHEBRIKOV -- One. So the ratio in our favor is 1:150.

Mr. Gorbachev then discussed how to go public about American "lying and
cheating" since the Reykjavik summit.

GORBACHEV -- Yes, Reagan appears a liar. We have to find an appropriate
formulation for this.

Discussing Sakharov's Wife And Her Influence Over Him

At an earlier Politburo meeting, on Aug. 29, 1985, Mr. Gorbachev and his
colleagues discuss allowing the dissident physicist Andrei D. Sakharov's wife,
Yelena Bonner, to go abroad for medical treatment. The conversation reflected
the perception among Communists that Dr. Sakharov was controlled by his second
wife, whose mother was Jewish.

The proposal to let Miss Bonner travel was made by Mr. Chebrikov of the K.G.B.:
"But we cannot release Sakharov abroad. Min- sredmash [the Ministry of Medium
Machine-building, which made nuclear weapons] is against this, since Sakharov
knows in detail all the steps in the development of our atomic weapons. In the
opinion of specialists, if Sakharov is given a laboratory, he could continue
work on military research. The behavior of Sakharov is formed under the
influence of Bonner."

GORBACHEV -- "That's what zionism is."

Nixon and Khrushchev Meet On Eve of 'Kitchen Debate'

On July 24, 1959, Vice President Richard M. Nixon and President Dwight D.
Eisenhower's brother, Milton Eisenhower, met with the Soviet leader, Nikita S.
Khrushchev. The meeting was on the eve of the celebrated "kitchen debate" at an
American exhibition in Moscow. It also came on the heels of a resolution adopted
by the United States Congress critical of Soviet policies, a resolution that
seemed to infuriate Mr. Khrushchev and dominated much of the conversation.

N. S. KHRUSHCHEV -- Your arrival in the Soviet Union is seen as a step toward
achieving mutual understanding and establishment of contacts with Soviet
leaders. But in connection with the resolution adopted by Congress and the
publication of a declaration by the President, you received a sendoff that
complicates your situation in the Soviet Union. We, of course, guarantee you
against any harm, but we cannot safeguard you against barbs from Soviet people.

R. NIXON -- Perhaps that's for the better.

N.S. KHRUSHCHEV -- You want an escalation? Maybe you need to orchestrate a cats'
concert and thus provide an excuse for your press to say that you are badly
received in the Soviet Union?

R. NIXON -- I have some experience in that regard.

N.S. KHRUSHCHEV -- I know what you are hinting at. But I do not want a repeat of
that in the Soviet Union.

After a long discussion, Mr. Nixon tried to shift the talk away from the
resolution, arguing that neither he nor the President were so "stupid" as to
orchestrate such a measure on the eve of his trip.

N.S. KHRUSHCHEV -- You said that Eisenhower and you are not so stupid as to push
such a resolution. I would like to ask you in this connection, what is your
opinion of a Congress that would adopt such a resolution? You said that I give
the resolution too much attention. Please forgive me, Mr. Nixon, but I would
like to use a strong peasant's word to elucidate the situation. Fresh manure
always smells more. You laid it and the stench is spreading through the whole
world. More attention is paid to it now. But time will pass, the stench will
dissipate, the manure will cover with a crust and less attention will be paid to
it.

After the comment was translated, Mr. Nixon continued: "I also grew up on a
farm. They used to say that pig manure is worse than horse."

Assessing Kissinger: Erudite, Intelligent and Vain

On June 12, 1969, President Nixon's national security adviser, Henry A.
Kissinger, asked to meet with the Soviet Ambassador, Anatoly F. Dobrynin, before
the Ambassador leftfor Moscow. In a long report to the Politburo, Mr. Dobrynin
said that Mr. Kissinger had used the unofficial channel to urge a new,
"constructive" phase to American-Soviet relations. Among other proposals, Mr.
Kissinger urged that summit meetings be held regularly to avoid the heightened
expectations of occasional meetings.

In the course of the conversation, Mr. Dobrynin reported, Mr. Kissinger said,
"President Nixon takes into account the Soviet Union's special interests in East
Europe and does not intend to do anything there that would be assessed in Moscow
as a 'challenge' to its position in this region. That is Nixon's basic approach
to this question and there is no need, affirmed Kissinger, to pay great
attention 'to separate public critical statements by the president on one East
European country or another, since this is only tribute to some layers of the
U.S. population which play a role in American elections."

The conversation ranged over agreements on antiballistic missiles, on the Middle
East and on Vietnam, on which Mr. Kissinger urged the Soviets to take a larger
role in breaking the deadlock in peace talks in Paris.

Mr. Dobrynin concluded his report with "Several words about Kissinger":

"Observing the work of Nixon and his main foreign-policy advisers (and I know
practically all of them by now), one can say with some certainty that at present
the basic, actually dominating influence on the President in the field of
foreign policy comes from Kissinger.

"Kissinger himself, an intelligent and erudite man, is at the same time vain and
prone in conversations with me (we have formed decent personal relations),
especially  when we have dinner alone, to brag of his influence. At our last
conversation, for example, he declared without excess modesty that in all
Washington only two people can answer precisely at any given moment about the
U.S. position on this or that issue:  President Nixon and he, Kissinger."

Sanatorium for Party Leaders Gets Special Treatment

In January 1971, the chairman of the K.G.B., Yuri V. Andropov, later briefly the
head of the party, proposed to build a sanatorium outside Moscow for "the rest
and cure of leaders of the Communist Party and Soviet Government."

The request was approved, and resulted in a detailed three-page list of orders
to various ministries on urgently supplying everything necessary.

The list ended:

"11. To authorize the use of limited quantities of nonferrous metals to
fabricate nonstandard equipment, and also hardwoods, marble and granite for the
sanatorium in question.

"12. The Ministry of Health is to prepare the necessary services and medical
personnel for the opening of the sanatorium no later than the fourth quarter of
1972.

"13. The Ministry of Defense is to appropriate from May 1, 1971, to Dec. 15,
1972, 150 soldiers to work on the construction of the sanatorium, and to house
them in the region of Semyonovskoye.

"14. Control over the project and construction is to be placed on the Committee
of State Security of the Council of Ministers  (K.G.B.)."

'Politics of Terror': Secret Lenin Documents

In December 1990, long after the Communist party had shed its "leading role" and
several months before the abortive putsch, the director of the Institute of
Marxism-Leninism, Georgi Smirnov, sent a note to the deputy head of the Soviet
Communist party, Vladimir Ivashko, urging him against publishing about 3,000
documents attributed to Lenin, part of 7,000 that had never been published.

"Reference is above all to documents of the period of heightened class conflict,
civil war.

"Various documents reveal some secret methods of state organizations of the
Soviet republic (about concentration camps for foreign citizens, about
surveillance over foreign delegations, about campaigns to discredit them, how
this was done -- for example with a delegation of English trade unionists.

"Lenin's notations appear on materials sent him showing the Red Army in a bad
light (for example, participation of units of the First Mounted Army in pogroms
against Jews etc.). In several documents there is talk of taking advantage of
inter-ethnic conflicts by state organs (in the trans-Caucasus; on attempts to
'sovietize' Lithuania, Hungary, Czech, Romania; on combating separatism in
Karelia through executions and so forth).

"In some documents, politics of terror and repression are condoned (for example:
'secretly prepare terror: necessary and quickly'; 'try to punish Latvia and
Estonia by military means, for example, "on the shoulders" of Balakhovich breach
the border somewhere at least by one mile and hang 100-1000 of their bureaucrats
and  wealthy."

Bracing for an Onslaught Of American Reporters

A great amount of time appears to have been spent by the Central Committee
devising the official position to be fed through Tass, Pravda and other Soviet
papers and to be disseminated abroad. One sample is a memo in March 1972 to
Leonid I. Brezhnev from Leonid Zamyatin, head of the information department of
the Central Committee, about the impending state visit by President Nixon. Mr.
Zamyatin warned that Mr. Nixon would bring with him as many as 350 reporters,
and he urged that the Soviets set up their own press center.

"The press center could be used for propaganda on our Soviet reality, to
organize a series of meetings with scientists, writers. (Otherwise the arriving
correspondents will be sneaking around to all sorts of dissidents.)"

Khrushchev's Legacy: Crimes and Punishments

Records of Politburo meetings were not kept under Leonid I. Brezhnev, but they
were under his successor Konstantin U. Chernenko. At the meeting of July 12,
1984, Mr. Chernenko noted that Vyacheslav M. Molotov, Stalin's Foreign Minister,
had been readmitted at his request into the Communist Party, from which he was
expelled by Nikita S. Khrushchev. Mr. Chernenko then reported that similar
requests had come from two other disgraced Communists, Georgi M. Malenkov and
Lazar M. Kaganovich. That prompts some surprising comments from Dmitri F.
Ustinov, the Minister of Defense, and Nikolai Tikhonov, the Prime Minister, both
veterans of Stalinist times.

USTINOV -- In my view, Malenkov and Kaganovich should be restored to the party.
These were all activists, leaders. I will speak directly: if not for Khrushchev,
they would not have been expelled from the party. In general there would not be
that outrageous infamy which Khrushchev permitted in relation to Stalin. Stalin,
whatever you might say, this is our history. Not one foe brought us so much
grief as Khrushchev with his policies in relation to the history of our party
and state, and in relation to Stalin..."

TIKHONOV -- Yes, if not for Khrushchev, they would not have been expelled from
the party. He dirtied us and our policies and blackened them before the whole
world."

CHEBRIKOV -- (the K.G.B. chief): Apart from that, under Khrushchev a whole
series of people were rehabilitated illegally. The fact of the matter is that
they were punished entirely justly. Take, for example, Solzhenitsyn."

The Propaganda Mill Deals With 'Prague Spring'

After Mr. Gorbachev came to power, Aleksandr N. Yakovlev became one of the most
dedicated advocates of change. But at the time of the "Prague spring" in 1968,
he was acting head of the Propaganda Department of the Central Committee,
charged with developing propaganda about the Soviet action in Czechoslovakia.
The following is from his report to the Central Committee on the first nine days
after the Soviet invasion:

"The propaganda group, fulfilling the dir ectives of the Central Committee,
completed the following work in the period from 21 to 30 August: prepared more
than 20 texts for leaflets, of which 2.5 million were printed and distributed,
published 3 issues of newspapers (1 "Rude Pravo," 2 "Novosti"), organized
24-hour radio broadcasts and broadcasts on two television channels."

Mr. Yakovlev went on to give some proposals for further propaganda measures in
Czechoslovakia and abroad:

"2. Organize in conjunction with party and government organs of a socialist
country (preferably East Germany or Poland) a radio station of a semilegal
character, which would broadcast in the name of ideological workers of
Czechoslovakia who are dedicated to socialism, in order to generate propaganda
and counterpropaganda aimed at reactionary antisocialist forces in
Czechoslovakia.

"8. The K.G.B. of the Council of Ministers U.S.S.R. should prepare and publish a
series of articles in the foreign press on connections between the antisocialist
underground in Czechoslovakia and foreign intelligence, above all with
intelligence organs of the U.S.A. and F.R.G. [West Germany]."

"The Czechoslovak reaction is trying by any means to blow up a propaganda
campaign, glorifying the memory of Czechs and Slovaks killed while acting with
weapons in their hands against our troops, raising them almost to the rank or
national heroes and martyrs (leaflets are printed with photographs; around
photographs of victims, decorated with flowers, honor guards maintain 24-hour
watch with lowered standards; in several cities memorial plaques are being
raised, etc.).

"In this connection it is necessary to mark the memory of our soldiers and
journalists, who gave their life in the struggle against counterrevolutionary
forces."

LOAD-DATE: February 8, 1993

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photos: Moscow, 1959: Vice President Richard M. Nixon with the Soviet
leader, Nikita S. Khrushchev, before they held a debate that was recorded for
American television. (Associated Press); Prague, 1968: A Czechoslovak youth
waved a flag during invasion. (Associated Press); Boston, 1986: Yelena Bonner
entering the hospital for surgery. (Associated Press); Reykjavik, Iceland, 1986:
Ronald Reagan and Mikhail S. Gorbachev during their meetings. (Agence
France-Presse); Moscow, 1993: The cover of a secret Communist Party document.

                   Copyright 1993 The New York Times Company

                              135 of 255 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 February 8, 1993, Monday, Late Edition - Final

Vatican Envoy Is Optimistic About Relations With Hanoi

BYLINE: Reuters

SECTION: Section A; Page 5; Column 5; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 90 words

DATELINE: HANOI, Vietnam, Feb. 7


A Vatican envoy expressed optimism today about relations between the Roman
Catholic Church and Vietnam .

"I think we are on the good road and the road is wider," the envoy, Bishop
Claudio Celli, said after ending a week's visit.

He met with Government and church officials on issues including the filling of
vacant archbishop posts and on increasing the number of trainees for the
priesthood.

Of Vietnam's population of about 70 million, 10 million are Catholic, a legacy
of French colonial rule, while the majority are Buddhist.

LOAD-DATE: February 8, 1993

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1993 The New York Times Company

                              136 of 255 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 February 8, 1993, Monday, Late Edition - Final

BUSINESS DIGEST

SECTION: Section D; Page 1; Column 1; Financial Desk

LENGTH: 588 words



The Economy

A growing number of factories are shifting into higher gear, piling overtime on
workers to handle the upswing. The stepped-up production is sometimes hard to
discern in the dust kicked up by wounded corporate giants like G.M., Sears and
I.B.M. And the companies enjoying a surge in business are not suddenly putting
out the call for thousands of new workers. [Page A1.]

Bankers are running into increasing skepticism about the merits of their plan to
loosen bank regulations, after being cheered by the Clinton Administration's
initial interest. [D1.]

Congress is spending several billion dollars to build offices for Federal
workers in several U.S. cities, even though the commercial real estate market
remains glutted with vacant space. [A12.]

Companies

General Motors plans an aggressive corporate response to a liability problem
stemming from pickup truck fuel-tank fires. It plans to announce today that it
will sue NBC and several consumer groups, contending that they rigged crash
tests. Last week, an Atlanta jury held G.M. liable for $105 million in damages
in the case of a teen-ager's accident death. [D1.]

G.M. may not join its American rivals in filing "dumping" complaints against the
Japanese, its chief executive says. [D2.]

A start-up company, General Magic, is introducing software technology that it
hopes will create a standard for transmitting messages among any machines that
compute. [D1.]

A dinosaur glut seems to be developing as toy companies gather for the American
International Toy Fair in New York. [D1.]

International

The Administration intends to create a supercommittee in the State Department to
shape a unified strategy toward Russia and other former Soviet republics. But it
has no intention of immediately increasing foreign aid, officials say. [A1.]

Capitalists are returning to Vietnam, hoping to employ former enemies and ready
the country for a corporate invasion. [D1.]

Bureaucrats who managed Japan's economic success seem to be groping for a
handhold on the slippery slope of eroding confidence. Old remedies don't seem to
be working. News analysis. [D1.]

The Media Business

American Express is embarking on an aggressive marketing campaign for the
overhaul of Travel & Leisure, even as it prepares to turn its magazines'
mmanagement over to Time Inc. [D8.]

NBC has charged Don Ohlmeyer with reviving a gasping lineup of prime-time
programs. [D8.]

Life magazine has bit the bullet and decided to remain a monthly, after more
than two years of self-examination. [D8.]

The man who wants to buy The New York Post offered his first correction, saying
his call for an end to negative articles was a mistake. Now, he promises New
York the "dirtiest, strongest and most mud-slinging" paper. William Glaberson:
Press Notes. [D8.]

A longtime quartet is becoming a trio at Citron Haligman & Bedecarre in San
Francisco. Stuart Elliott: Advertising. [D9.]

Today's Columns

President Clinton has found big fans in a surprising place: the bond market. To
the surprise of many investors and traders, the Administration has been saying
all the right things. Jonathan Fuerbringer: Credit Markets. [D7.]

An "intelligent" road system, which would tell drivers how to avoid jams, has
been patented. Edmund L. Andrews: Patents. [D2.]

Retrenchments may be difficult at once-dominant companies, but the news couldn't
be any better for investors looking for good deals. Kurt Eichenwald: Market
Place. [D6.]

LOAD-DATE: February 8, 1993

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Summary

                   Copyright 1993 The New York Times Company

                              137 of 255 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 February 8, 1993, Monday, Late Edition - Final

U.S. Businesses Turning to Vietnam

BYLINE: By JEANNE B. PINDER

SECTION: Section D; Page 1; Column 3; Financial Desk

LENGTH: 1209 words


Almost 18 years after United States diplomats fled Saigon before the advancing
Communist troops, American capitalists are trickling back, hoping to employ
their former enemies and ready the country for a corporate invasion.

A trade delegation of about 30 American business people arrived in Hanoi this
weekend, one of the first concrete results of a Bush Administration decision in
December to permit American companies to open offices in Vietnam.

The decision allows companies to obtain licenses from the Treasury Department,
which permits them to open offices and take the first steps toward doing
business in Vietnam. The companies may hire staff and sign contracts that could
be put into effect only when Washington ends the embargo that was imposed after
the war.

Licenses have been granted to about 15 companies, the Treasury says, and about
two dozen more are in the pipeline.

With Japan, Singapore and South Korea bursting with international corporations
elbowing each other for market share, American companies are looking hungrily at
Vietnam as an emerging market. The attraction of Vietnam for corporations is
simple: The country's 70 million people are one of the last unexplored consumer
markets in Asia -- as well as a well-educated, hard-working and extraordinarily
inexpensive labor pool.

Taiwan, Hong Kong and France have taken the lead in investing, followed by
Australia, Britain and Japan. Tokyo reopened broad economic ties in November,
leaving the United States as the only nation that preserves an embargo against
Vietnam.

While investment is not risk free, because of Vietnam's deteriorating
infrastructure and widespread corruption among officials, American companies
have been pressing for an end to the embargo. They say they are at a terrible
disadvantage in a nation that opened up to investment in earnest in 1988. But
some think the game is not yet completely lost, partly because of a somewhat
paradoxical Vietnamese admiration for Americans and also because of Vietnam's
history.

"It is clear that the Vietnamese have set aside a range of projects for American
business, not only to hopefully enjoy beneficial access to our market, but also
because they have very strong and not positive resonances with respect to
centuries of French, Japanese and Chinese colonial influence," said Donald
Alford Weadon Jr., a senior partner at Dickstein, Shapiro & Morin, a
Washington-based law firm that is opening an office in Vietnam.

Several of the American companies -- advertising agencies, law firms, real
estate brokers -- that have received licenses will not be offering services or
products to the Vietnamese. Rather, they are positioning themselves to provide
help for corporate giants when the embargo ends. That awaits a decision in
Washington that Vietnam is cooperating fully in the search for servicemen still
missing from the war.

Among the large American companies believed to be hoping to explore business in
Vietnam are Mobil, Chevron, Amoco and Exxon; Northwest and United Airlines;
Citicorp, Chase Manhattan and Bank of America; Hewlett-Packard, Compaq Computer
and Honeywell, and Bechtel, Boeing, General Motors, Caterpillar, Pepsico and
Coca-Cola.

The December decision set telephones ringing off the hook at trade organizations
with contacts in Vietnam. "Since the announcement, the flow of calls seeking
information on questions like who would be a potential partner in Vietnam has
tripled," said Virginia B. Foote, director of the U.S.-Vietnam Trade Council, a
Washington group that coordinates information on investment.

Among the businesses that have received licenses to open offices in Vietnam are
the Channel Marketing Corporation of Dallas, an international sales and
marketing consulting firm; the J. Walter Thompson advertising agency; Vatico, a
small consulting company based in Washington; Dickstein Shapiro & Morin, and
Colliers International, a real estate group based in Boston.

Relations between Vietnam and the United States are governed by a "road map" the
Bush Administration gave to Vietnam in April 1991, which uses a carrot-and-stick
approach to gain Vietnamese cooperation on a number of issues, like fully
accounting for the war's missing, in return for American steps to lift
restrictions on political and economic activity in Vietnam.

The Clinton Administration is not expected to change the road map, which at this
stage requires that Vietnam give full cooperation in the search for the 2,264
American servicemen still listed as missing.

Ann Mills Griffith, director of the National League of Families, POW/ MIA, said
that while the Vietnamese are increasing cooperation, for her group to support
an end to the embargo, Hanoi needs to "fulfill the criteria specified in the
road map -- rapidly resolving repatriation of remains, and resolving cases of
last sighting" when a serviceman was seen alive.

At least one very small and vocal group, the National P.O.W. Strike Force, has
gone much further in opposing trade with Vietnam, sending facsimile messages to
some of the 30 or so companies that planned to join the trade mission that
arrived in Vietnam this weekend.


'Destroy Your Company'

Joe Jordan of Houston, the head of the strike force, said in a telephone
interview that he told the businesses, "We will go out of our way to destroy
your company because you want to do business with filthy Communists who are
holding American prisoners."

Irwin Jay Robinson, the director of the Vietnam-American Chamber of Commerce and
a senior partner in the law firm of Phillips, Nizer, Benjamin, Krim & Ballon in
New York, said two companies had dropped out of the trip but he declined to name
them.

Many business representatives who fear that other nations' companies are
snapping up all the opportunities in Vietnam felt that the Bush Administration
moved far too slowly on the issue. And now, there is concern that the Clinton
Administration, with its plans to focus sharply on domestic issues, could well
do the same.

Bill Beddow, a spokesman in Washington for Caterpillar, the big equipment
manufacturer, said his company believed the embargo should be ended.


'Difference of Opinion'

"I think everybody is interested in putting to bed remaining questions over the
fate of the missing and the P.O.W.'s," he said. "There is a difference of
opinion on the best way to make that happen. Caterpillar believes that when a
country has been isolated, its Government has been able to remain more hard
line, more restrictive and less forthcoming than countries that have not been
kept isolated."

Some business representatives and diplomats say the question of the embargo may
well be decided before the meeting of the International Monetary Fund and the
World Bank in April, when Washington will again be called upon to reconsider its
veto of financial aid for Vietnam from these institutions. This veto, which the
United States maintains alone, has blocked hundreds of millions of dollars in
aid to Vietnam, which would be used for infrastructure projects.

Any end to the moratorium on lending would be accompanied by opportunities for
extensive contracts, which would go to foreign companies if the American embargo
were not lifted.

LOAD-DATE: February 8, 1993

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Graphs: "Investing in Vietnam"

Countries with the largest direct investments (in millions, Jan. 1, 1988,
through Nov. 6, 1992. In all, $4.06 billion was invested)

Taiwan -- $789.3
Hong Kong -- $606.0
France -- $475.8
Australia -- $308.4
Britain -- $305.2
Japan -- $305.2
The Netherlands -- $268.6
C.I.S. (former U.S.S.R) -- $176.3
South Korea -- $152.9
Canada -- $117.4

Breakdown of Investments

Industry -- $1,215.3
Oil and gas -- $1,078.3
Hotel and tourism -- $778.9
Agriculture and forestry -- $262.0
Services -- $281.6
Fishing -- $204.0
Communications and transportation -- $175.8
Other -- $128.1

(Source: Vietnamese State Committee for Cooperation and Investment)

                   Copyright 1993 The New York Times Company

                              138 of 255 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 February 8, 1993, Monday, Late Edition - Final

Hailing Grit of an Injured Firefighter

BYLINE: By DOUGLAS MARTIN

SECTION: Section B; Page 5; Column 1; Metropolitan Desk

LENGTH: 1227 words


A year ago at a funeral, a husky firefighter introduced himself to Patricia
McTigue and said: "I admire your husband. He's everything I'm striving to be."

She next saw the firefighter on Tuesday, when he was watching from the curb as
her husband -- his 6-foot-1 body savagely transmogrified by burns that eight
operations have only begun to heal -- was released from the hospital. He gave a
thumbs-up sign.

"He's just somebody who needs a hero," Fire Capt. Martin McTigue said of his
colleague, managing to make a slight smile though not managing to make it seem
easy.

We all need heroes, and it was so profoundly apparent on Tuesday when Captain
McTigue was released from the burn unit of New York Hospital-Cornell Medical
Center.

Celebrating Survival

He had been in the hospital since November 1992, after suffering severe burns
when he was caught in a blast of steam responding to an explosion at the
Consolidated Edison Plant in Manhattan.

For Captain McTigue's release on Tuesday, there were speeches, crowds and a
white stretch limousine to take him home to Baldwin, L.I. A police escort and
bagpipes, too.

All this was immensely appreciated, but for this 48-year-old child of Brooklyn,
things hit home when his motorcade passed the Learn About Nursery School where
his four daughters, now ages 14 to 21, had learned to print their names. Today's
children screeched, jumped wildly and waved a big banner. It was precisely then
that he comprehended.

"This is really something special," he said he thought at the time. "This is
more than I expected."

What Captain McTigue realized was that people, on a fundamental level, were also
celebrating themselves, celebrating the miracle of surviving another day,
celebrating the inescapable truth that we are all in the same boat.

"They were just feeling good about being alive, and I really believe we have all
conquered death in some sort of way," he said in a whispery gritty voice caused
by the burns inside his lungs. "It was a form of love."

Not that Captain McTigue ever aspired to special mention. Indeed, Firefighter
Frank McCabe, who grew up with him and is now a department spokesman after being
injured in a fire, noted that Captain McTigue, until his accident, had never
received an official commendation for his courage. "Say, he rescued a baby," he
said. "He'd come out and hand it to somebody and walk away."

Bags of Letters

Now Captain McTigue is at home, a comfortable two-story place where the
needlepoint asks God to "Bless This House" and the many framed photographs are
of generations of family. His first fire helmet, which began to leak after years
of wear, hangs on the wall in the den. Letters of support fill brown grocery
bags.

He has begun physical therapy in the neighborhood, besides returning to New York
Hospital once a week, Since his wife works and his daughters are gone much of
the time, he is often alone.

He is hardly singular. In 1991, the International Association of Fire Fighters
says, 93,963 of the nation's 225,000 career firefighters suffered some form of
injury. There were 32 deaths from injuries in the line of duty, while 31
firefighters died from occupational diseases like exposure to chemicals or
stress.

Captain McTigue's previous serious injury was two and a half years ago, when
another firefighter fell through two floors and landed on Captain McTigue's
head. Six of his teeth were broken. He has been painfully burned more times than
he can recall. "It's pretty easy to get injured at a fire," he said.

He grew up in the Flatbush section of Brooklyn, one of "tons of kids" who
delighted in doing one thing for a week or two, then something else for the
next. There was a time when everyone was making rickety vehicles from old
rollerskates and fruit cartons. Then there was stoop ball, roasting potatoes in
a vacant lot, and on one magical long ago afternoon, seeing Hopalong Cassidy on
a white horse at Ebbets Field.

Marty McTigue always knew what he wanted to be. His high school yearbook had
nothing more than this to say about him: "Hopes to become a New York City
Firefighter."

At 17, he went to work in the Brooklyn Navy Yard, contributing in this way to
the Vietnam War. He had wanted to fight, until he saw too much of it on
television. When the yard wound down, he was sent to the yard at Norfolk, Va.,
to build more ships.

When that ended in 1965, the city transit police were hiring, so he took the
test and did that for four years. The experience heightened his ambition to be a
firefighter. It is the perilous uncertainty of police work that he found
unsettling, the realization that anybody might be a killer. For a firefighter,
by contrast, fire itself is the only enemy and all people deserve to be rescued.

"No matter how bad a person might be, in a fire he is just a person who needs
help," he said.

Learning the Craft

Then came the evening of Nov. 10, 1992.

It was 10 or so, just as the firefighters of Queens Rescue Company No. 4 were
finishing a leisurely dinner. A bell rang and the rescue unit was ordered to the
Consolidated Edison plant at First Avenue and East 39th Street, where there had
been an explosion.

Arriving at the plant, they were greeted by a deafening, eerily high-pitched
roar. Things happened very fast, though Captain McTigue remembers details.

He and another firefighter found themselves on a metal landing looking for
people. At first the gusting steam was bearable. Suddenly, it turned exceedingly
hot, 500 degrees Fahrenheit. Captain McTigue somehow shoved the other
firefighter to safety. But he was trapped on the landing, paralyzed by heat. "I
was being baked alive," he said.

Firefighters dashed toward him only to be repelled. It seemed like hours, but in
six or seven seconds his unconscious form was dragged from the immobilizing
steam bath.

He came to immediately, and begged for cold water to be dumped on his body. He
knew drinks were impossible until he was under a doctor's care. Pain?

"It was there," he said. "It's not so much the present pain. It's the pain
you're afraid is going to come in the future."

Captain McTigue was taken to New York Hospital's burn center. He stayed
conscious for hours, communicating with Mayor David N. Dinkins and the other
visitors by scribbling notes. Several hours later, he passed out and entered the
world of darkness in which he lived for much of the next 12 weeks. The bandages
made him look like a mummy, and a tangled skein of tubes pumped things in and
out of his motionless body.

He began to draw spiritual strength from the people who would come to his room
to lay a hand on his back and say something. The letters also helped. "If I had
to do that all on my own, I don't think I could have done it," he said.

The family came every day to see him, and held together like glue. Not everybody
could handle visiting, though, particularly the firefighters. "They could put
themselves in the same situation," Captain McTigue said, "and they didn't like
to see it.

"It took me a long time to look in the mirror," he said. "Let's face it, nobody
would trade places with me."

And now he is at home, trying to get better. He said he would hate it if his
career with New York's Bravest ended this way.

"I'd like to do a little bit more," Captain McTigue said. "You don't want the
fire to win."


LOAD-DATE: February 8, 1993

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo: "If I had to do that all on my own, I don't think I could have
done it," said Fire Capt. Martin McTigue, who had been in the hospital since
November 1992. He sat next to his wife, Patricia, at their home in Baldwin, L.I.
(Vic DeLucia/The New York Times)

                   Copyright 1993 The New York Times Company

                              139 of 255 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                February 9, 1993, Tuesday, Late Edition - Final

Eliot Janeway, Economist and Author, Dies at 80

BYLINE: By KENNETH N. GILPIN

SECTION: Section B; Page 7; Column 1; Metropolitan Desk

LENGTH: 858 words


Eliot Janeway, the political economist and author whose career spanned seven
decades, died yesterday at Columbia-Presbyterian Medical Center in Manhattan. He
was 80.

Mr. Janeway had been in declining health for some years, suffering from diabetes
and heart problems, his son Michael said.

Mr. Janeway was a vigorous critic of economic policies adopted by American
Presidents from Franklin D. Roosevelt to Ronald Reagan, a stock market
forecaster whose gloomy predictions earned him the nickname "Calamity Janeway"
on Wall Street, and a tireless commentator on the changing business scene.

Linked Economics and Politics

Although he majored in economics at Cornell University and did graduate work at
the London School of Economics in the early 1930's, Mr. Janeway did not champion
any branch of economic theory. Rather, his writings stemmed from the hypothesis
that political pressures determine economic and market trends.

"I'm the last person who could be accused of practicing economics in any sort of
computerized vacuum," he once told an interviewer. "Political economy is not a
science, it's a clinical art, like medicine."

Henry Kaufman, the former chief economist for Salomon Brothers who now runs his
own money management firm, said: "He always tried to link politics and
economics. I always found him very interesting and provocative."

'Colorfully Irreverent'

Indicative of Mr. Janeway's ability to arouse attention is a recommendation in
his last book, "The Economics of Chaos," published in 1989, in which he urged
the Treasury Department to invest Social Security and other Government trust
funds more aggressively, to generate greater benefits in the future. Such
greater benefits, Mr. Janeway said, would in turn coax millions of workers in
the underground economy to pay their taxes in order to reap the rewards of
Government-sponsored programs.

Reviewing the book for The New York Times, Jeffrey E. Garten, an investment
banker, said he found most of the suggestions unworkable but called the book "a
colorfully irreverent and passionate essay."

Mr. Janeway's analysis and criticism of President Lyndon B. Johnson's handling
of the Vietnam War was considerably more prescient. As an informal adviser
during Mr. Johnson's career in the United States House of Representatives and
the Senate, Mr. Janeway urged him to run for the presidency in 1956 and was an
active fund-raiser for Mr. Johnson during the 1960 Democratic Presidential
primary.

Breakoke With JohnsonLBJ Over Vietnam

After Mr. Johnson became President in November 1963, Mr. Janeway disagreed with
him on many points of fiscal policy, and broke irrevocably with the President
when Mr. Johnson escalated the war in Vietnam in 1965.

"I was not arguing against the war itself; that is not my field of expertise,"
he once told an interviewer. "I said that putting it on the back of the economy
without raising taxes and instituting controls would bring on disaster."

Mr. Janeway's writing career began at 24, when he wrote a series of articles for
The Nation magazine predicting the 1937-1938 inventory recession and proposing a
massive program of government investment in transportation and power equipment
to cure it.

Hired by Luce

"The Depression transformed economics from a subject of study into an obstacle
to be overcome," Mr. Janeway said in the 1988 interview.

The articles attracted interest in the Roosevelt Administration and brought him
some influence within its policy-making councils.

Another interested reader was Henry R. Luce, who hired Mr. Janeway to write
part-time for Time and Fortune magazines. Mr. Janeway worked for the magazines
until 1944, but for the next four years he worked directly for Mr. Luce, writing
a private weekly economic and political advisory letter.

In 1948, he quit to write his first book, "Struggle for Survival," a study of
the Roosevelt Administration's war-mobilization policies, published in 1951.

Economic Advisory Newsletters

In 1955, Mr. Janeway started two weekly economic advisory newsletters that
formed the heart of the Janeway Publishing and Research Corporation, a business
he operated out of his five-story town house on East 80th Street.

In addition to his newsletters, in the 1960's and 1970's Mr. Janeway was a
syndicated columnist for The Chicago Tribune-New York News Syndicate.

Over the years, Mr. Janeway never actually wrote his views. He dictated them.

"I don't think of myself as a writer," he once said. "I'm a talker who reduces
some of what he says to writing."

Voracious Reader

He tended to begin his days about 9 A.M. by reading a dozen newspapers,
magazines and trade publications, and to finish around 3 A.M. by reading
history, economics, biographies or novels.

His wife, the former Elizabeth Hall, is a novelist and essayist. They married in
1938.

Mr. Janeway was born in New York City on Jan. 1, 1913, the son of Meyer Joseph
Janeway and the former Fanny Siff.

In addition to his wife, Mr. Janeway is survived by two sons, Michael C. of
Evanston, Ill., and William H. of Manhattan, and three grandchildren.

NAME: Eliot Janeway

LOAD-DATE: February 9, 1993

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo: Eliot Janeway (The New York Times, 1975)

TYPE: Biography; Obituary (Obit)

                   Copyright 1993 The New York Times Company

                              140 of 255 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               February 10, 1993, Wednesday, Late Edition - Final

NEWS SUMMARY

SECTION: Section A; Page 2; Column 5; Metropolitan Desk

LENGTH: 1083 words



International A3-14

MORE MIGRANTS FOR EUROPE

Poverty and civil war, from Yugoslavia to Somalia to Sri Lanka, have led
hundreds of thousands of people to flee to Western Europe. In the last 10 years,
the number of migrants seeking asylum in Western Europe has risen tenfold.  A1
U.S. WEIGHS BOSNIA FORCE

The Clinton Administration intends to announce later this week, possibly as
early as Thursday, the broad outline of a peace plan for Bosnia and Herzegovina
that could include the use of United States ground troops, a senior White House
official said.  A6
U.N. CHIEF FAULTS MUSLIMS

The United Nations Secretary General threw his weight behind the Bosnia peace
initiative President Clinton has criticized as favoring the Serbs and blamed the
lack of progress in the peace talks mainly on the intransigence of the Muslim
side.  A7
GAY RUSSIANS STILL THREATENED

After decades of enduring persecution and intimidation in the old Soviet Union,
homosexuals are emerging into the open for the first time in Russia even though
they say they continue to feel mistreated and threatened by hostile public
attitudes and by longtime laws.  A3
YELTSIN BOWS TO PRESSURE

Bowing to growing pressure from all but the dwindling minority of democratic
reformers, President Yeltsin announced hat he was prepared to scrap a
constitutional referendum if other means could be found to resolve the
paralyzing power struggles with Parliament.  A5
EUTHANASIA FOES IN NETHERLANDS

Though the Netherlands has approved euthanasia under strict medical and ethical
guidelines, about 11 percent of Dutch doctors remain opposed to the practice of
ending a terminal patient's life.  A10
LABOR VS. TORIES ON SOCIAL PACT

Britain's Labor Party has decided to oppose the Conservative Government on a key
point on social issues that could complicate and even threaten Britain's
ratification of the treaty to achieve monetary and political unity in Europe.
A11
UGANDA'S POOR SEE THE POPE

They came across the Uganda bush with more hope than shoes to see the Pope in a
place where faith might seem a tenuous proposition at best, denied by calamities
tumbling one upon the other.  A9

Mitterrand became the first Western leader to visit Hanoi since 1975.  A8
Brazilian satellite launched from B-52 bomber.  A13
Haiti dropped opposition to rights observers.  A14
Vitry-aux-Loges Journal: A spiritual center ran afoul of townsfolk.  A4

National A16-21, D21

POWELL PLANS EARLY DEPARTURE
The Chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff has told the Defense Secretary that he
wants to leave office before the end of his term in September, in part because
he and the Secretary disagree on budget policy.  A1
CLINTON ANNOUNCES STAFF CUTS
The President kept his campaign promise to trim his staff by 25 percent, but
only by defining the White House in unusually narrow terms and having the ax
fall most heavily on the lowest-paid employees.  A1
Clinton reorganized the drug-war office, and won praise.  A20
Clinton travels to Detroit today for a televised "town meeting." A20
A female prosecutor is a candidate for Attorney General. A20
The Baird-Wood episode is no hot topic at the A.B.A. convention.  A20
NBC SETTLES TRUCK TEST DISPUTE
NBC News announced that it had settled a defamation lawsuit brought by General
Motors over the network's demonstration of a fiery pickup truck crash test on
the "Dateline NBC" program.  A1
COMMUNICATIONS-RACE MILESTONE
For the first time a telephone company has acquired a cable television system,
signaling the coming competition between the two industries to dominate the
delivery of communications services of all kinds to the home.  A1
PROTOTYPE IN HEALTH-CARE DRIVE
Of all the approaches advanced for controlling health-care costs, perhaps none
is more hotly debated than "managed competition," the notion that costs can be
controlled by forcing providers to compete with one another under government
supervision. Now the success of a California agency known as Calpers suggests
that the approach may hold great promise.  A1
A study cited enormous costs in life-prolonging cancer treatment.  D21
WHEN THE AX FALLS ON THE POOR
Researchers found that cash-starved states had made sharp cuts in welfare
programs in the last two years, weakening society's safety net and in some cases
even promoting homelessness.  A16
A BESIEGED VETERAN LAWMAKER
In nearly 40 years in politics, Dan Rostenkowski has usually known where he is
going. Now, subjected to the scrutiny of a Federal grand jury, he cannot be sure
even which path he is on.  A21
MANHUNT IN SHOOTINGS AT C.I.A.
The F.B.I. said it had undertaken a worldwide search for a Pakistani immigrant
identified as the prime suspect in shootings that killed two people outside
C.I.A. headquarters last month.  A17
HEARING IN DEATH OF GAY SAILOR
A sailor charged with the fatal beating of a gay shipmate entered no plea at the
first hearing of his closely watched case. The Navy, meanwhile, said the
defendant was contending that he had been fending off an unwelcome sexual
advance.  A18
The Navy has found evidence of cheating by 28 midshipmen.  A18

Los Angeles Journal: A museum that defies hate.  A16
Education Page B10
Neil L. Rudenstine has persuaded Harvard to begin changing its shape.
Campus Journal: Brigham Young offers study in 54 languages.

Metro Digest B1

THE FIGHT OVER FERNANDEZ
With the fate of Schools Chancellor Joseph A. Fernandez hanging in the balance,
his supporters and opponents waged a last-minute campaign through public
demonstrations and private persuasion to influence votes on the Board of
Education.  A1
Neediest Cases B4
Business Digest D1
Living Section C1-10
For Julia Child, an intimate dinner for 500.  C1
Odd couples of the kitchen: when sweet marries spice.  C1
At lunch with Carol Vaness: it's not over till the slim lady sings.  C1
Health Page C12-13
Anger may not underly heart risks after all, big study says.  C12
Personal Health: New health worries for DES offspring.  C12
Arts/Entertainment C14-20
Sports B11-16
Obituaries D22-23
Editorials/Op-Ed A22-23
Editorials
Congress, untie yourself.
Time, at last, to recognize Angola.
Topics: The Rose Garden rondo.
Letters
Anna Quindlen: Asking the questions.
Erica Jong: Conspiracy of silence on child care.
Judith Resnik: Minor child care slips, big gains.
Mary Frances Berry: The father's hour.

LOAD-DATE: February 10, 1993

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Summary

                   Copyright 1993 The New York Times Company

                              141 of 255 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               February 10, 1993, Wednesday, Late Edition - Final

JOINT CHIEFS' HEAD IS SAID TO REQUEST EARLY RETIREMENT

BYLINE: By ERIC SCHMITT,  Special to The New York Times

SECTION: Section A; Page 1; Column 6; National Desk

LENGTH: 1159 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, Feb. 9


Gen. Colin L. Powell, the Chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff, has told
Defense Secretary Les Aspin that he would like to leave office two or three
months before the end of his term, in part because he does not want to defend
budget cuts that he believes are too big, several close associates said today.

General Powell told former Defense Secretary Dick Cheney months ago that he
wanted to leave before his term expired on Sept. 30, explaining then that he
wanted to give his successor more influence this summer in shaping the
Pentagon's long-term budget, associates said. He had also told Mr. Cheney he
would not serve a third two-year term as chairman, even if President George Bush
was re-elected.

Public Disagreements

But friends and associates said General Powell's desire to retire early, while
partly for personal reasons, was reinforced by several extraordinary public
disagreements between the Joint Chiefs and President Clinton over homosexuals in
the military and reductions in military spending and troop levels. Mr. Clinton
wants to cut spending by $60 billion more than Mr. Bush had recommended by 1997
and troop strength by 200,000 more than General Powell favors.

While General Powell will have to testify on the next Pentagon budget in April
and May even if Mr. Clinton ultimately grants his request to retire early, the
general's associates and friends said he was more concerned about having to
testify during the summer about long-term spending plans.

"There's no question Colin will be confronted repeatedly with having to carry
out new policy guidance that may be at odds with his previous public positions,"
said one close associate. "He's the consummate good soldier, but he'll have a
lot of Congressmen asking why he is recanting his earlier positions. He'll get
tired of that real fast."

A Denial Is Issued

Col. F. William Smullen, General Powell's spokesman, insisted today that the
general intended to serve out his term.

A senior aide to Mr. Aspin said, "Any conversations between the Secretary and
General Powell are private." But he did not deny that General Powell had asked
to leave his job early.

General Powell's friends and associates said there was no personal rancor
between General Powell and Mr. Clinton or between the general and Mr. Aspin.

Mr. Aspin is considering General Powell's request, but has not decided how long
to recommend to Mr. Clinton that the general should stay, associates said.
General Powell serves at the President's discretion and has made it clear he
will serve as long as Mr. Aspin and Mr. Clinton want.

Only 3 of the 11 Chairmen of the Joint Chiefs preceding General Powell have left
office before their terms expired since the office was created in 1949.

General Powell's friends and associates would not say today whether he wanted to
leave office before July 15, when Mr. Aspin is to produce for Mr. Clinton an
executive order lifting the ban on homosexuals in the military, which the
general has strongly opposed.

The general's supporters bristle at any suggestion that General Powell wants to
leave office early to avoid difficult decisions that could tarnish his record.
They say he simply wants to depart with his professional integrity intact, and
to allow his successor a greater say in decisions affecting the military's
future.

Termed 'a Personal Thing'

"This has nothing to do with the gays issue," said one close friend of General
Powell. "This is a personal thing that he decided last year. He's told Aspin
he'll serve at the President's pleasure, but if it's convenient with them, he'd
rather leave in late spring or early summer."

But the last few weeks have not been the happiest for General Powell, who though
officially nonpartisan has been closely identified with the national security
policies of the administrations of Ronald Reagan and Mr. Bush.

General Powell, 55, served as deputy national security adviser and national
security adviser to President Reagan.  President Bush appointed him Chairman of
the Joint Chiefs of Staff in October 1989.

The most popular and politically powerful Chairman of the Joint Chiefs in recent
history has been pilloried in editorials in several newspapers for opposing so
forcefully Mr. Clinton's plan to abolish the ban on homosexuals.

Less Fun at Work?

And on Friday, General Powell is expected to announce a plan to reduce
overlapping roles and missions in the military. But it is a proposal that comes
up far short of what Mr. Clinton had endorsed in his campaign.

"Having put his base force in place, what fun will it be for him to come to work
and see another part sawed off?" said one associate.

The likelihood that General Powell will exit early is certain to focus attention
on candidates to succeed him.

While not written in law or regulation, the chairman's job traditionally rotates
among the services, and it would be the Air Force's turn to provide General
Powell's successor. Mr. Clinton will make that choice, based on Mr. Aspin's
recommendation.

One contender is Gen. Lee Butler, 53, the head of the United States Strategic
Command, which controls the nation's nuclear arsenal. General Butler's cerebral
style meshes with Mr. Aspin's academic approach to issues, but some Pentagon
officials say the waning importance of nuclear forces may work against him.
General Butler, wary of saying anything that could hurt his chances, has
declined interviews since last summer.

Another candidate is Gen. Merrill A. McPeak, 57, the Air Force Chief of Staff.
An F-100 fighter pilot in the Vietnam War, General McPeak is said to be more
willing than the other Joint Chiefs to work out a mutually acceptable solution
to the issue of homosexuals. But as a strong advocate of air power, he might be
seen as too parochial to head the Joint Chiefs, Pentagon officials said.

Two Army officers have not served as chairman in consecutive terms since the
1960's, but Gen. John Shalikashvili, 56, the head of NATO forces in Europe, may
break tradition. A Polish-born artillery officer, General Shalikashvili
commanded the humanitarian relief operation in northern Iraq after the Persian
Gulf war.

The Navy's Candidate

Adm. Paul David Miller, 51, commander of all American and NATO forces in the
Atlantic, is the Navy's leading candidate. A strong proponent of interservice
cooperation, Admiral Miller was one of the youngest officers ever promoted to
four-star admiral, a rank he reached in 1991. The assaults on as many as 50
women at a convention of naval aviators might weigh against a Navy candidate,
even though Admiral Miller had nothing to do with the incident.

A Marine Corps officer has never been named chairman, largely because the Corps
is a part of the Navy Department. Gen. Carl E. Mundy Jr., 57, the Marine Corps
Commandant, has a forceful personal presence but is also one of the most ardent
opponents of lifting the ban on homosexuals.


LOAD-DATE: February 10, 1993

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1993 The New York Times Company

                              142 of 255 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               February 10, 1993, Wednesday, Late Edition - Final

Mitterrand Is First Western Leader to Visit Vietnam Since 1975

SECTION: Section A; Page 1; Column 3; Foreign Desk

LOAD-DATE: February 10, 1993

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo: During a visit to Hanoi yesterday, President Francois Mitterrand
shared a toast with Gen. Vo Nguyen Giap, who defeated French forces at the
battle of Dien Bien Phu in 1954 and ended French colonial rule. Page A8. (Agence
France-Presse)

TYPE: Caption

                   Copyright 1993 The New York Times Company

                              143 of 255 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               February 10, 1993, Wednesday, Late Edition - Final

Mitterrand, in Vietnam, Links Aid to Democracy

BYLINE: AP

SECTION: Section A; Page 8; Column 4; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 438 words

DATELINE: HANOI, Vietnam, Feb. 9


President Francois Mitterrand today became the first Western leader to visit
Vietnam since 1975 and promised to double aid to the former French colony as
long as Hanoi improved human rights.

Mr. Mitterrand also expressed hopes at a state dinner that Washington would end
its economic embargo against Vietnam, saying it had "no raison d'etre."

France normalized relations with Vietnam in 1989, ending a boycott led by the
United States and imposed after the Communists took over South Vietnam nearly 18
years ago. France resumed relations after Vietnam withdrew its troops from
Cambodia, which it invaded in 1978 to overthrow the Khmer Rouge Government.

Vietnam, Cambodia and Laos were French colonies until the 1950's, but despite
the bitter colonial legacy, economic and cultural ties between Vietnam and
France run deep. Many older educated Vietnamese speak French, and France is a
preferred destination for Vietnamese studying abroad.

Economics and Tolerance

On the first day of his visit, Mr. Mitterrand stressed the need for an economic
opening to the West, accompanied by increased civil liberties.

"The respect for human rights has become a universal demand," he said, "with its
inseparable companion, economic development. Democracy and development are
inseparable," the 76-year-old French leader said at the dinner, offered by
President Le Duc Anh.

Vietnam has allowed foreign investment in order to revive a sluggish economy
hamstrung by Communist bureaucracy. France is the third-biggest foreign investor
in Vietnam, after Taiwan and Hong Kong, and French aid to Vietnam was more than
$30 million last year.

The Vietnam radio said Mr. Mitterrand's visit showed that "at last the West has
acknowledged Vietnam's open-door policy, the policy of renovation and its will
to join the mainstream economy."

Presidential Schedule

A 200-member delegation accompanied Mr. Mitterrand, ranging from Air France's
president, Bernard Attali, to the film maker Pierre Schoendoerffer and Foreign
Minister Roland Dumas. The streets were decorated with French flags and
welcoming banners in Vietnamese and French.

Mr. Mitterrand is to visit Dien Bien Phu, where 14,000 French soldiers were
killed, wounded or captured in 1954. The loss signaled the death knell for
French colonialism in the region. He is also to fly on Wednesday to Ho Chi Minh
City and on Thursday to Phnom Penh, Cambodia, for talks with the head of state,
Prince Norodom Sihanouk, returning to Paris on Friday.

His wife, Danielle, a human rights advocate, was not traveling with Mr.
Mitterrand because she is suffering from angina.

LOAD-DATE: February 10, 1993

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1993 The New York Times Company

                              144 of 255 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               February 10, 1993, Wednesday, Late Edition - Final

COMPANY NEWS;
COKE SIGNS ACCORD AND MAY BOTTLE IN VIETNAM

BYLINE: Bloomberg Business News

SECTION: Section D; Page 5; Column 1; Financial Desk

LENGTH: 85 words


The Coca-Cola Company has signed an agreement with Vietnam that could lead to
the establishment of bottling operations there. Coca-Cola said yesterday that it
had entered into the agreement with a Government-controlled food and produce
company, Vinalimex, and with the Chuong Duong beverage factory, a one-time
Coca-Cola bottler. In December, the United States eased restrictions on doing
business with Vietnam. Shares of Coca-Cola lost 37.5 cents on the New York Stock
Exchange yesterday, closing at $40.75

LOAD-DATE: February 10, 1993

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1993 The New York Times Company

                              145 of 255 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               February 10, 1993, Wednesday, Late Edition - Final
                              Correction Appended

Topping Leaving Times Co. To Administer the Pulitzers

BYLINE: By WILLIAM GLABERSON

SECTION: Section C; Page 19; Column 1; Cultural Desk

LENGTH: 337 words


Seymour Topping, the director of editorial development for The New York Times
Company and a former managing editor of The New York Times, has been named the
administrator of the Pulitzer Prizes.

The appointment was announced yesterday by Michael I. Sovern, the president of
Columbia University, which awards the annual prizes in journalism, drama,
letters and music. The administrator for the 19-member Pulitzer Prize Board
supervises the selection of jurors and the judging of entries.

Mr. Topping, who will assume his new duties on Nov. 1, succeeds Robert C.
Christopher, who was administrator of the prizes from 1981 until his death last
June. This year the dean of the Graduate School of Journalism at Columbia, Joan
W. Konner, has been the acting administrator.

In his current position at the Times Company, Mr. Topping is responsible for the
journalistic quality of the company's 31 regional newspapers in 11 states. He is
also the president of the American Society of Newspaper Editors.

William K. Adler, a spokesman for the Times Company, said Mr. Topping would
sever all ties with the company in October. He said the company had not yet
named a successor.

Mr. Topping, 71 years old, was managing editor of The Times for 10 years ending
in 1987, when he was named to his current position.

A graduate of the University of Missouri School of Journalism, Mr. Topping began
his journalism career as a foreign correspondent for International News Service
and The Associated Press and worked in China, Vietnam, London and Europe.

He joined The New York Times in 1959 and was a metropolitan reporter and chief
correspondent in Moscow and Southeast Asia. He was appointed foreign editor in
1966, deputy managing editor in 1976 and managing editor in 1977.

Mr. Topping will also be a professor at Columbia University's Graduate School of
Journalism beginning in 1994.

The Pulitzer Prizes, awarded since 1917, were established at Columbia University
by the newspaper publisher Joseph Pulitzer .

NAME: Seymour Topping

LOAD-DATE: February 10, 1993

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

CORRECTION-DATE: February 12, 1993, Friday

CORRECTION:

An article on Wednesday about the appointment of an administrator of the
Pulitzer Prizes referred incompletely to the Pulitzer Board's relationship to
Columbia University. The president of the university awards the prizes on the
recommen


GRAPHIC: Photo: Seymour Topping (Audrey Topping)

TYPE: Biography

                   Copyright 1993 The New York Times Company

                              146 of 255 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               February 11, 1993, Thursday, Late Edition - Final

CLINTON'S TOWN MEETING;
With a Cue From Larry, Phil and Franklin D.

BYLINE: By R. W. APPLE Jr.,  Special to The New York Times

SECTION: Section A; Page 1; Column 2; National Desk

LENGTH: 1097 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, Feb. 10


Presidents since Andrew Jackson have used whatever means they had to go over the
heads of journalists and other intermediaries to speak directly to "the people,"
especially when beleaguered.

Bill Clinton did so to good effect during his campaign last year, and tonight he
demonstrated his skills again in an electronic town meeting that owed much to
Ross Perot, Larry King, Phil Donahue and the latest satellite technology.

He got more questions on subjects he would rather have avoided -- Haiti, Bosnia,
homosexuals in the military and his difficulties in finding a successful
candidate for Attorney General -- and fewer on subjects he wanted to emphasize
-- jobs and the economy -- but he seemed thoroughly in command.

Themes of Campaign

The President had to defend himself against an accusation that he was reneging
on his promise not to raise taxes on the middle class, and he had to field a
demand from Mr. Perot's campaign coordinator in Michigan that he back a
balanced-budget amendment. But the exchanges sounded genuine, they showed him
talking with voters, and they made for lively television.

Perhaps most important of all, Mr. Clinton found ample room to voice his
concerns about sick people and people facing economic difficulties, echoing
themes of 1992 that have been drowned out during the last few weeks.

Like Franklin D. Roosevelt's fireside chats during the New Deal and Lyndon B.
Johnson's televised appeals during the Vietnam War, President Clinton's
question-and-answer sessions are intended to build a constituency in the country
at large for programs resisted by entrenched interests or a skeptical press
corps in Washington.

Mr. Clinton mounted both direct and indirect attacks on the news media. He said
that Kimba M. Wood, the Federal district judge from New York who withdrew her
name from consideration for Attorney General, had been treated "quite unfairly,"
but blamed that largely on erroneous press reports suggesting that she was about
to be nominated. Those reports were based in large part on disclosures from his
own Administration.

He also deplored public attention to the homosexuality question, saying, "I
spent very little time on the issue myself." It was he, nonetheless, who pledged
in his campaign to do away with the military ban on gay men and lesbians and
pressed forward on it in the first hours of his Presidency.

The President's appearance in a television studio in a Detroit suburb marked the
start of a politically crucial effort to sell a package of tax increases and
cuts in benefits to a nation notably resistant to sacrifice. Once again, as in
1992, Mr. Clinton beamed his message on unconventional channels.

Ducking a Question

He said at the very end of the broadcast that he planned many such appearances,
and he ducked a question about formal news conferences in the future. So far he
has held none.

Journalists complain now, as they have before, that they are being circumvented.
But in the long run Mr. Clinton is no more likely than his predecessors to
completely avoid news conferences, with their more searching interrogation, and
the professionals do not always ask the most revealing questions anyway.

Perhaps the question that most damaged George Bush last year, for example, was
the one asked by a young woman in the audience during a debate in Richmond about
the impact of the recession on his friends and acquaintances. The question put
Mr. Bush on the defensive by making him look unfeeling in his reaction to
economic privation. His response was the equivalent, in its way, of Michael S.
Dukakis's seemingly passionless response to a newsman's question in 1988 about
how he would react if his wife were raped and murdered.

Mr. Clinton, by exposing himself tonight to the questions of a carefully
screened group of ordinary voters, apparently sought to turn the tables on those
who have tormented him the most in recent days. The Administration made no
secret of that; Jeff Eller, a White House spokesman, said members of the
audience had been told, "The President would like to focus on jobs and the
economy."

Angry callers to radio talk programs and to Capitol Hill offices have had a
major impact on the opening phase of Mr. Clinton's Presidency, as have many
commentators in Washington who have given him poor grades. Neither represents a
true cross section of American opinion, as the White House argues with
considerable force. Programs like tonight's give Mr. Clinton a forum that is
considerably more deferential, if no more balanced.

As the President arrived in Detroit, he took a bit of poetic license. Glossing
over all the other problems he has had to deal with in a jam-packed 21 days, he
told the crowd that welcomed him that he had been "doing almost nothing but
focusing on the economy."

On the Public's Mind

The country will no doubt welcome a return to a discussion of the economy and
jobs. Those were the issues that won the election for Mr. Clinton, and opinion
surveys suggest that they remain the issues most on people's minds.

But all the electronic magic in the world counts for nothing if the public feels
it is being cheated or deceived.  Johnson's pleas to voters to support "your
President" went for naught when television showed voters a war they judged
unjust; Richard M. Nixon's insistence that he was not a crook paled against the
evidence that his Administration was caught in a huge lie.

Mr. Clinton will have to convince people on the merits that the sacrifices he
calls for are equitably distributed. It is a question of sharing the pain
broadly among older citizens and young, between the rich and the middle class,
between cities and suburbs and between various industrial sectors.

"Listen to what I say next week, decide whether it's fair," the President told a
questioner tonight.

Having lost some of the populist momentum of his campaign in the appointment of
wealthy lawyers to major positions and in the largely inadvertent early emphasis
on social issues that won him little mass sympathy, Mr. Clinton is seeking to
get it back. Cuts in White House staffing levels, increased taxes on the very
rich and tonight's talk with the folks are intended to do that.

His supporters are hopeful that things are entering a new phase.

"I admit that I see eerie parallels to the Carter Administration," said a
prominent Democrat who served in that Administration. "There have been too many
mistakes. But the core of what Bill Clinton stood for in the campaign remains
intact, and we will soon see whether he can deliver on it."


LOAD-DATE: February 11, 1993

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: News Analysis

                   Copyright 1993 The New York Times Company

                              147 of 255 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               February 11, 1993, Thursday, Late Edition - Final

Gunmen Kill Two in a Cambodian Tourist Center

BYLINE: By PHILIP SHENON,  Special to The New York Times

SECTION: Section A; Page 10; Column 1; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 532 words

DATELINE: PHNOM PENH, Cambodia, Feb. 10


Unidentified gunmen wearing military uniforms killed two Cambodians and wounded
a Portuguese tourist and nine other people today in an attack on a Cambodian
tourist center that President Francois Mitterrand of France is scheduled to
visit this week.

Although United Nations peacekeepers said there was insufficient evidence to
identify the gunmen or to suggest a motive for the violence, the Cambodian
Government attributed the attack to the Khmer Rouge and warned of a possible
Government counterstrike against the Maoist guerrillas.

The attack began about 1:30 A.M. in the center of the city of Siem Reap, which
borders on the fabled ruins of the ancient Cambodian capital, Angkor, about 140
miles northwest of Phnom Penh. The Portuguese tourist was said to have been
grazed in the head by a bullet as he watched the attack from the window of his
hotel room.

The United Nations said that none of its troops or civilian workers were hurt in
the attack, although the gunmen were reported to have fired at buildings that
house United Nations troops and at United Nations vehicles.

Officials of the French Embassy in Phnom Penh said they expected Mr. Mitterrand
to go ahead with his planned Friday visit to Siem Reap, where French troops are
based as part of the United Nations peacekeeping force, and to the Angkor ruins.

Mr. Mitterrand is scheduled to begin a two-day trip to Cambodia, a former French
colony, on Thursday. His visit is being described by Cambodian leaders and by
United Nations officials as a valuable demonstration of Western support for the
troubled peacekeeping operation in Cambodia.

The attack at Siem Reap was the latest in a series of violent incidents that
have shaken support for the United Nations-brokered peace settlement.

Most of the recent violence has been attributed to the Cambodian Government or
to the Khmer Rouge leadership, which signed the 1991 peace agreement but which
has since refused to disarm its troops or allow United Nations inspection of its
territory.

According to the United Nations account of the attack in Siem Reap today, 20 to
30 gunmen rampaged into the city center with guns, hand grenades and hand-held
rocket launchers.

The gunmen were reported to be wearing military uniforms of different styles,
including the types commonly worn by Cambodian Government soldiers and by the
Khmer Rouge.

"We do not know who the attackers are," said Eric Falt, a spokesman for the
22,000-member United Nations peacekeeping force in Cambodia.

The Cambodian Government immediately asserted that the Khmer Rouge, its chief
nemesis, were behind the attack, although it offered no proof.

                             --------------------


Mitterrand in Hanoi

HANOI, Vietnam, Feb. 10 (AP) -- Seeking to heal old wounds, President Mitterrand
made a pilgrimage today to the battleground where Vietnamese rebels crushed
French forces. The Indochina War "appeared to me to be a mistake," he said.

The visit to Dien Bien Phu, site of a two-month siege in 1954, was the emotional
centerpiece of Mr. Mitterrand's trip. He later flew to Ho Chi Minh City, which
in its former identity as Saigon was once a French colonial capital.


LOAD-DATE: February 11, 1993

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Map of Cambodia highlights the location of Siem Reap.

                   Copyright 1993 The New York Times Company

                              148 of 255 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               February 11, 1993, Thursday, Late Edition - Final

COMPANY NEWS;
MOBIL JOINS OIL-EXPLORATION VENTURE IN VIETNAM

BYLINE: Reuters

SECTION: Section D; Page 5; Column 1; Financial Desk

LENGTH: 124 words


The Mobil Corporation said yesterday that it had signed an option agreement with
the Arabian Oil Company to explore for oil in Vietnam once the United States
trade embargo against the country was lifted. If Mobil exercises its option, the
company would be returning to a country where it abandoned drilling sites when
American forces evacuated in 1975.

John Lord, a Mobil spokesman, said the agreement gave the company the right to
invest in 25 percent of an offshore project held by Arabian Oil, which is based
in Japan. He said the agreement, which will be valid until June 1996, was signed
on Jan. 18. Mobil is stressing overseas exploration because of stringent United
States restrictions on domestic production, Mr. Lord said.

LOAD-DATE: February 11, 1993

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1993 The New York Times Company

                              149 of 255 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               February 11, 1993, Thursday, Late Edition - Final

Connecticut's Strategy: Ingenuity and Investment

BYLINE: By KIRK JOHNSON,  Special to The New York Times

SECTION: Section B; Page 1; Column 2; Metropolitan Desk

LENGTH: 2053 words

DATELINE: HARTFORD, Feb. 10


Connecticut's struggles to heal its economy and stop the loss of jobs caused by
military cutbacks have not turned the tide.

Economists say that while the end of the recession may yet lift the state's
other industries, like insurance, banking and real estate, military contractors
are unlikely ever again to require the number of workers they needed even five
years ago. The implications of that fact resonate through just about every
aspect of life in the state.

Along With Aid, More Setbacks

"If you took Connecticut's difficulties and blew them up to the national level,
you'd have social revolt in the streets," said Edward J. Deak, a professor of
economics at Fairfield University.

Government has not given up.

Gov. Lowell P. Weicker Jr., for example, has begun one of the boldest efforts in
the nation to help industry, including direct investments of state money to help
military contractors develop new products. And the state's Congressional
delegation is fighting on several fronts to win President Clinton's help, both
in preserving weapons programs and in financing conversion efforts.

Continuing Layoffs

Yet every day, it seems, there are more layoffs.

Just last month, Pratt & Whitney, the jet-engine maker, said it would dismiss a
third of its Connecticut work force of 20,000 over the next two years. Pratt &
Whitney had successfully cut its dependence on military sales to 30 percent of
its overall sales, relying instead on a bustling commercial business -- until
those orders fell off abruptly because of the airlines' continuing troubles.

Staggering, but Coping

"It's almost like a boxer receiving two body blows," said Paul Getman, managing
director of Regional Financial Associates, an economic research firm. Just like
Pratt & Whitney, he said, the whole Connecticut economy has been hit from two
sides: by military cutbacks and the recession. "They can survive one, but
surviving two is very tough -- that's what they've got, two very severe body
blows."

The Challenge
 Using Old Skills For New Demands



Unlike the situation in some states with big Air Force or Navy bases, a high
proportion of Connecticut's military workers hold manufacturing jobs: skilled,
high-technology manufacturing jobs making products for aerospace and undersea
warfare. That group of skills is the state's great hope. If it is lost, economic
development officials say, a whole segment of Connecticut's future could slip
away with it.

Connecticut gave the world the Colt Peacemaker, known as the gun that won the
West, and the Nautilus, the world's first nuclear submarine. Connecticut
supplied cannons to George Washington, trench mortars to the doughboys of World
War I, and M-16 rifles to the troops in Vietnam. Tank engines built in
Connecticut drove the mechanized forces of the United States in the war in the
Persian Gulf.

Now the race is on to save what can be saved. From the State Legislature, to the
local communities that have banded in new alliances, to business executives and
workers in plants across the state, the sense of urgency has ignited public
debate about where Connecticut goes from here.

There are signals of change, if not outright hope.

"These people are New Englanders, they understand change, they live with the
seasons," said John C. Markowicz, president of Sonalysts Inc., a diversified
military contractor in Waterford. "People here still believe if you put your
shoulder to the wheel, good things will come."

State as Venture Capitalist

The State Department of Economic Development has received national attention for
doing what in most states, and certainly in the Federal Government, would be
considered taboo: investing taxpayer dollars directly in companies that the
state believes are growing in the right direction.

Although only $9 million has been invested so far in three companies, the
underlying ideas, and the risks, are large indeed. Just like venture capitalists
on Wall Street, the state could make a handsome return on its investments, or
lose everything.

"It's industrial policy," said the state's Commissioner of Economic Development,
Joseph G. McGee. "We're trying to use these years to change public perception.
We're saying that this will take a sustained commitment of Connecticut tax
dollars in order to create an alternative industrial base."

"As long as we have winner investments, it's a home run," he said. "As soon as
we blow $5 million on a deal that goes bad, all hell's going to break loose."

The state's first direct investments began early last year, with a $3 million
infusion of tax money in Textron Lycoming, a military tank-engine maker that was
seeking a commercial jet engine contract. Then Pratt & Whitney received $3
million to help re-engineer its aircraft jet engines as gas turbine generators
to produce electricity. The Kaman Corporation, a helicopter parts maker just
outside Hartford, got $3 million to help it market a new commercial
heavy-payload helicopter.

A Daunting Crusade

The state has also issued more than $200 million in loans, loan guarantees, and
outright grants to manufacturers that might otherwise have left the state.

But time and time again, small steps forward have been overshadowed by walloping
layoffs and plant closings. Even Governor Weicker's boundless optimism has
seemed to flag.

Mr. Weicker, who has made a second career of appearing on shop floors around the
state, announcing new grants and help for manufacturers, was cornered by
reporters at the State Capitol just hours after Pratt & Whitney's most recent
layoff announcement. Asked for his reaction, he paused. The silence continued as
he stared down, lost in thought, until it seemed he would not speak at all.

"Obviously, first of all, one of sadness," he said, finally.

Other organizations have tried to help. The Naugatuck Valley Project, a
nonprofit industrial development group, has helped arrange employee buyouts of
some small military-dependent companies that were in danger of closing. In 1991
it induced a team of consulting engineers to work without pay on a plan to turn
Textron Lycoming's tank engines into electrical generators that could run on
methane gas from landfills. Company officials say the plan is under
consideration.

Pockets of Job Growth

Community leaders in southeastern Connecticut, the most military-dependent
corner of the state, have banded together to ponder the region's future and
decide the distribution of state and Federal grants. The Legislature has turned
a corner, passing sweeping changes in how manufacturing is taxed and regulated.

Not all is gloom. Companies like Pfizer, the pharmaceutical company, continue to
expand in the state. Tourism has also expanded since the opening last year of
the Foxwoods High Stakes Bingo and Casino in Ledyard, owned by the Mashantucket
Pequot Indian tribe. And many small companies in fields as diverse as
computer-disk manufacturing and biotechnology are growing as well. Exports at
some companies have also soared.

But economists say none of those things can drive the Connecticut economy. Wages
in tourism are lower than in military work, and the smaller companies, though
they might yet grow into giant employers, do not have the weight to ride to the
rescue this time around.

'A Wake-Up Call'

And the workers may not be there when those companies do grow. Although the
unemployment rate was 7.4 percent in December, only one-tenth of a percentage
point above the national December unemployment rate of 7.3 percent, economists
say that one explanation may be that there are simply fewer people to count.
Connecticut was the only state in the nation to lose population last year,
according the Census Bureau. Between July 1, 1991, and July 1 1992, the number
of residents shrank by 8,000, or two-tenths of 1 percent.

"Everyone has received a wake-up call within the last two years in Connecticut,
and my sense is that there is some initiative that makes me more optimistic than
I otherwise would have been," said the Rev. Kevin D. Bean, an Episcopal priest
who has studied the military industry and who helped found the Naugatuck Valley
Project in the 1980's.

"But the fact is," he added, "the ongoing and inevitable down-sizing of the
whole Pentagon procurement system is going to have major impact on communities
from East Hartford to Southington, Stratford and Bridgeport."

The Strategy
Asking for Help, Relying on Hope

Connecticut's Democratic-led delegation in Congress waged a guerrilla war last
year, calling in enough political debts to push through -- over the objections
of President Bush -- approval for a second $2 billion Seawolf submarine to be
built in Connecticut.

Now comes the hard part.

Having worked for the election of President Clinton, they face the task of
getting the new Administration, however friendly it might seem, to focus on the
type of multilayered problems that affect military-dependent areas like
Connecticut.

"I haven't seen anything yet that indicates a real strategy," said Senator
Christopher J. Dodd, a Democrat who led the Seawolf fight last year. "But at
least they're interested in doing it."

The nine-member delegation -- six Democrats and three Republicans -- claims to
have its own battle plan, hammered out in weekly meetings: get Connecticut as
many military contracts as possible, while pushing for every possible dollar of
a $1.8 billion economic conversion and relief fund, passed by Congress and
likely to enter the Federal budget pipeline this spring.

Competition on All Fronts

Another track is to push exports, to both military and civilian markets around
the world, while fighting off other states with similar aims.

California, for example, has begun an effort to organize its huge delegation in
Congress -- one-fifth of the House of Representatives -- to try to get its
share, or more, of Federal military contracts and economic conversion aid.

Arizona has begun an aggressive effort to lure military companies, with national
advertisements about the benefits of lower taxes and dry desert climates. The
pitch has worked. Hamilton Standard, a unit of Hartford-based United
Technologies, said late last year it would expand in Mesa, Ariz., where it will
manufacture pneumatic valves now made in Windsor Locks.

Mr. Clinton's every utterance is being analyzed. During the campaign, he
supported building a second Seawolf. But members of the Connecticut delegation
believe the President has not closed the door on building even a third Seawolf.

Comments by Defense Secretary Les Aspin have also inspired vague hopes. Mr.
Aspin favors bolstering the Navy's capacity to move troops and cargo by sea.
That means more ships, which would probably be built at Newport News, Va., the
Navy's main shipbuilding center. But if Virginia gets all that new business, the
Pentagon might, out of fairness, shift to Connecticut some of the submarine
maintenance work now going to Virginia, or so the thinking goes.

More Cooperation

Military experts also say that Mr. Clinton has shown no inclination to deviate
from his campaign promise to concentrate cuts on operational and maintenance
accounts in the military budget rather than hardware purchases, a strategy that
could favor Connecticut.

But Mr. Aspin's goals of beefing up the Navy's transport capacities could hurt
the state, because Connecticut produces few products related to the building or
maintenance of surface supply or troop ships.

"Aspin will buy different things than Cheney would," said Gregory A. Bischak,
executive director of the National Commission for Economic Conversion and
Disarmament, a nonprofit research group. "Connecticut is not well positioned to
get those contracts."

There are signs, however, that the delegation may be at least getting the
attention of the military contractors themselves, some of whom in the past have
shown little inclination to discuss their affairs.

Officials of United Technologies, for example, said on Wednesday that they had
agreed to a meeting next week in Washington with the Congressional delegation to
discuss the job cuts at the company's Pratt & Whitney unit, and "whether there
are things we can do together to focus attention on the condition of the U.S.
aerospace industry."


LOAD-DATE: February 11, 1993

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

SERIES: Peace Penalty: Connecticut's Morning After -- Last of three articles

GRAPHIC: Photos: The race is on to save Connecticut's highly skilled workers,
with companies like Pratt & Whitney being hit both by military cutbacks and the
recession. The state is now investing in private research and development.
Workers at Pratt & Whitney assembled experimental turbine generators, with the
help of $3 million in state funds. (pg. B1); "These people are New Englanders,
they understand change, they live with the seasons," said John C. Markowicz,
president of a Connecticut military contractor. "People here still believe if
you put your shoulder to the wheel, good things will come." (Joyce Dopkeen/The
New York Times) (pg. B8)

Graphs: "Jobs: Manufacturing's Rapid Decline" tracks annual percent change in
total employment and manufacturing jobs in Connecticut since 1985.

About a third of the states' manufacturing jobs are related to military
industries. Connecticut is second only to the District of Columbia in the
percentage of work force (6.0%) employed in jobs related to defense. (Source:
New England Economic project; Arthur D. Little Inc., from Defense Department and
Census Bureau information) (pg. B8)

"The Impact: When Military Demand Dries Up" tracks approximate number of
military aircraft engines under construction at Pratt & Whitney since 1981. Also
tracked are figures concerning the company's jobs in Connecticut at the end of
each year since 1981. (Source Pratt & Whitney) (pg. B8)

TYPE: Series

                   Copyright 1993 The New York Times Company

                              150 of 255 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                February 12, 1993, Friday, Late Edition - Final

Europe Welcomes U.S. Policy, Especially the Arms

BYLINE: By JOHN DARNTON,  Special to The New York Times

SECTION: Section A; Page 10; Column 3; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 860 words

DATELINE: LONDON, Feb. 11


European leaders today applauded the Clinton Administration's initiative on
Bosnia and Herzegovina, seeing it as proof that Washington had abandoned a
hands-off policy and was ready to lead the search for a solution to end the
fighting there.

Publicly, governments issued statements welcoming the new approach; privately,
diplomats and policymakers were even more generous.

The Europeans feel they have done a lot to bring the three warring factions in
Bosnia to the negotiating table, but they recognize that they lack the muscle to
force them into an agreement.

Even more, they had worried that once a peace agreement was struck, European
nations alone would not be able to bear the costs or provide sufficient troops
to police it.

With Washington on board, that worry diminishes considerably, they noted.

A Yes to the Troops

"The provision of United States ground troops in implementation is absolutely
vital," said one British official. This point was part of a six-step plan
announced Wednesday by Secretary of State Warren Christopher, who emphasized
that troops could only be committed after an accord was reached.

Most diplomats here believe that Washington would send troops only under the
command of the North American Treaty Organization, although they would nominally
be there under the auspices of the United Nations.

"Basically, NATO would fit in as a subcontractor to the United Nations," said
one NATO official. "In the past the United States has insisted on a NATO command
structure, and my guess is the United States military would argue very strongly
for that."

NATO is already active in the former Yugoslavia, with eight or nine ships in the
Adriatic to help sustain a blockade and two Awacs surveillance planes to monitor
air traffic over Bosnia. There are also NATO personnel in Zagreb to assist the
headquarters of the United Nations Protection Force in Croatia.

If NATO sends troops to Bosnia, it will be the first time such forces have
operated outside the borders of its European members.

Counting Soldiers

Officials at NATO said numerous plans had been drawn up, and they refused to
confirm that strategists were concentrating on a plan for 40,000 troops, of
which about 10,000 would be American. Senator Richard G. Lugar cited those
figures Wednesday.

Washington has also appointed Reginald Bartholomew, a career diplomat now
serving as Ambassador to NATO, as a special envoy to expand on the work done by
Cyrus R. Vance, representing the United Nations, and Lord Owen, representing the
European Community.

The Vance-Owen plan would divide Bosnia into 10 autonomous, ethnically based
provinces. Though Croatian representatives have agreed to the plan, the Serbs
and the Muslims have not.

Mr. Bartholomew, who is going to Moscow Friday for talks with President Boris N.
Yeltsin, said today, "The idea in sending me there was to underscore and work
further on the need for cooperation between the United States and Russia in
reaching a substantive and sustainable agreement."

Asked if he would ask Russia to pressure the Serbs, its historical allies, to
accept the plan, he replied, "We think that anybody who has a special
relationship in the area, we would like to see them use it. The same is true for
us."

3 Pluses and a Welcome Minus

Diplomats welcomed four particular aspects of Washington's proposal:

*The pledge to back an accord with troops;

*The expressed desire to build on the Vance-Owen plan rather than to come up
with an entirely new one;

*The prospect of powerful Washington pressure on the Muslims, who feel
especially short-changed in territory under the Vance-Owen plan; and,

*The absence of any suggestion to end the arms embargo in order to assist the
Muslims, or to bomb Serbian artillery positions in an effort to ease the siege
of Sarajevo, the capital. Both Britain and France, which have 2,700 and 4,800
troops, respectively, in Bosnia, fear the Serbs might retaliate against them if
such action were taken.

Before Mr. Christopher announced the proposals, President Clinton spoke by
telephone with Prime Minister John Major and Chancellor Helmut Kohl, and sent a
written message to President Francois Mitterrand, who is on a tour of Vietnam
and Cambodia.

'New Momentum'

The statements from the European capitals had a uniformly welcoming sound. Mr.
Major said, "The willingness of the United States to participate in the
implementation of a fair and workable agreement will give confidence,
particularly to the Bosnian Muslims, that a lasting settlement is now a real
prospect."

Chancellor Kohl said the initiative would "give new momentum to efforts by the
international community towards peace in former Yugoslavia." The German Foreign
Minister, Klaus Kinkel, said Washington had now adopted the European policy of
negotiation rather than a reliance on force.

The French Foreign Ministry also praised the initiative, saying, "It is very
positive that the United States statement favors peaceful means, since it rules
out direct military intervention before an agreement has been reached." rule

                             --------------------

LOAD-DATE: February 12, 1993

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1993 The New York Times Company

                              151 of 255 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                February 12, 1993, Friday, Late Edition - Final

Review/Architecture;
Crossing Cultural Boundaries

BYLINE: By HERBERT MUSCHAMP

SECTION: Section C; Page 1; Column 1; Weekend Desk

LENGTH: 1399 words


NOT for the first time, Maya Lin walks a calm path through an ideological
minefield. A decade ago, Ms. Lin's design for the Vietnam Veterans Memorial in
Washington invited a divided nation to share tears of reconciliation. At the
Museum for African Art, which opens tomorrow in SoHo, Ms. Lin traverses even
bumpier cultural terrain. How to create a common ground within a space dedicated
to cultural difference? How to devise a setting for works of art that are
non-Western in origin but that are, at the same time, an important part of the
black American heritage and therefore integral to the West's own cultural
evolution?

Ms. Lin's response to this challenge is understated: within a flowing sequence
of galleries, unfolding on two floors, she uses subtle gradations of color to
suggest a passage through time as well as space. Her design will not settle the
controversies that have erupted in recent years over the display of non-Western
art in Western settings. The debate over multi-culturalism continues, and even
those who support an ideal of pluralistic culture may find their minds wrenched
apart by its disorienting implications.

Here, for instance, is a museum of art that seeks to educate audiences about
people for whom "museum" is an alien concept and art has not detached itself
from religion. Here, Western frames of reference -- galleries, art-historical
scholarship, even a smart SoHo address -- introduce viewers to objects whose
meaning lies outside such frames, raising once again the question whether
Western efforts to understand African or Asian art inadvertently perpetuate
patterns of colonial domination.

The museum's move to 593 Broadway, near Houston Street, in SoHo from East 68th
Street and its decision to change its name from "center" to "museum" are, in a
sense, polemical statements. They convey the museum's position that there is
nothing objectionable about displaying as art various objects that were created
for religious ceremony. But there is still no consensus that an esthetic
approach is preferable to the ethnological one that used to govern the West's
view of African culture. But if not art, and not ethnology, then what? Should
this place be called the X for African X? Or, since no one can be certain that
the chain of connotations released by any word won't take an ideologically taboo
turn, the XXXX?

By any name, the museum's opening is an occasion for anxiety, over nomenclature,
cultural mission, civic responsibility. It couldn't happen any other way. An
uncertain atmosphere may well be the most supportive context for a place that
invites viewers to reconsider their familiar points of reference. It has fallen
to Maya Lin to give this atmosphere physical substance. Using color, space,
materials and form, she's devised a visual essay in good will: a design
dedicated to the idealistic proposition that people can cross cultural
boundaries without violently transgressing them.


Don't come here expecting the Vietnam Memorial. This project is an interior
remodeling of two floors in an old loft building, not a stone monument on the
Washington Mall. Ms. Lin has worked with a modest budget of half a million
dollars, using plaster board, paint and fabrics. Instead of sweeping across one
bold, commanding form, the visitor's eye is drawn here to details: a random
scattering of star bursts in a room hung with indigo damask, an arrangement of
copper tubes fashioned into a staircase railing, benches carved from planks of
pine that were removed from the museum's floor when the staircase was inserted.

And don't go looking for hidden African motifs. Here and there, some symbolism
crops up. There's a cluster of seven poles by the museum's entrance, a reference
to an African symbol for humanity. And the offices, a suite of half-enclosed
rooms ranged around a communal work space, reflect a collective way of working
that the staff finds consistent with African example. But Ms. Lin does not
reproduce and only scantly alludes to African ideas of shelter.

Yet she has tried to create a place discernibly non-Western in spirit.  Like
Frank Gehry, who was briefly Ms. Lin's instructor at Yale, Ms. Lin works
intuitively. Her methods more nearly resemble those of painters and sculptors
than the analytic process typical among architects. For the past few weeks, Ms.
Lin has been virtually in residence on the site, hand-fitting elements that
appear sculptured, not designed: a reception desk, a curving stairwell, two
canopies of copper mesh. Ms. Lin drew plans for some parts of the design
free-hand, believing that a more empathic environment would result by freeing
her eye from rigid geometric order.

Ms. Lin's design, developed in collaboration with the museum's staff and the New
York architect David Hotson, harks back to the Vietnam Memorial in some subtle
ways, notably in its knowing play with context. In Washington, the black stone
wall, sunk partly into the ground, offers a powerful contrast to its neighboring
monuments with their white marble walls, their neat rows of vertical columns. At
the Museum for African Art, Ms. Lin plays counterpoint to the basic white cube
with the rectilinear walls and natural wood floors: the standard SoHo version of
the ideal viewing space.

Ms. Lin's departure from the formula is immediately evident in her use of color.
Deep grays and blues dominate the dark palette of the galleries and a
special-events room adjacent to them. Glints of copper, splashes of sun color --
pale yellows, a rich orange -- intensify it. Lighting further dissolves the
ideal of a colorless, neutral space in a warm solution of color, curve and
shadow.


Here, as in Washington, Ms. Lin lays stress on procession, though the museum's
circulation is naturally more fluid. Movement through the space, a rhythmically
modulated loop that unfolds on the ground and basement floors, eddies gently
around free-standing panels. Small gaps between these and the side walls enhance
the sensation of fluid space.  Objects are displayed in conventional Plexiglas
boxes, mounted on square pedestals. But they float on the aqueous surface of
deep blue-green floor, orienting the eye to the ground plane in accord with
African custom.

Descent and ascent are given prominent treatment, by curved walls that surround
the staircases and the colors chosen for these walls: dark gray for the
descending stair at the rear of the museum, yellow and orange for the ascent
that returns visitors to the reception and museum shop up front. The colors
suggest a journey and a time cycle, an incremental progression through night and
day.

Ms. Lin takes a risk by following an intuitive path and using dark tones to
convey it. She veers perilously close to the stereotype of Africa as the
primitive continent where emotions dominate intellects. And isn't the voyage
into darkness an old colonial cliche? What saves the project from these hazards
is Ms. Lin's understatement. The design serves the work on view. Because these
objects express volume over line or silhouette, their formal properties are seen
to best advantage against a dark background. And while the museum maintains that
esthetic contemplation need not rob these works of meaning, they are not
presented here as pure exercises in visual form.

On the contrary, the museum's goal is to show that African art is an
intellectual achievement of the highest order. Susan Vogel, the museum's
director, points out that while Western art has traditionally represented the
visible world, African art represents ideas. It does not show scenes of people
eating or fighting, as we might see them in daily life. Rather, it depicts
concepts of appetite, fullness or anger in nonrealistic form. The art links
daily experiences to abstract beliefs and thus helps to order them.

Ms. Lin's task has been to foster receptivity to this way of making art. Her
goal is not to open up African art for Western viewers, but to open the museum's
visitors to African art. She uses recognizably Western ideas -- intuition,
empathy and handicraft are no more specifically African than track lights and
Plexiglas boxes -- to create a place with the potential to transform Western
ways of seeing and knowing. This is a hushed atmosphere, not a place for tears.
People won't be leaving flowers here. But they may leave behind some
preconceptions and perhaps even some fears.

LOAD-DATE: February 12, 1993

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photos: Sculptural approach: Overhead view of Maya Lin's staircase at
Museum for African Art. (Philip Greenberg for The New York Times) (pg. C1); Maya
Lin, at left with the architect David Hotson, drew a design freehand for curved
museum reception desk. (Philip Greenberg for The New York Times) (pg. C26)

TYPE: Review

                   Copyright 1993 The New York Times Company

                              152 of 255 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                February 14, 1993, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

Business Diary/February 7-12

BYLINE: By Hubert B. Herring


COMPANIES



And Now, the News: G.M., G.M., Then a Word on G.M.

SECTION: Section 3; Page 2; Column 3; Financial Desk

LENGTH: 1483 words



Even with the battering it's taken in recent years, General Motors remains
larger than life. And last week, true to form, it dominated the news -- a
public-relations bull's-eye one day, a mind-boggling loss the next. First,
refusing to just lick its wounds after a jury held it responsible for a
teen-ager's death in a G.M. pickup, the company roared onto the offensive, suing
NBC for tampering with a truck in a news report. It scored a direct hit, as NBC
-- to settle the suit -- issued a stunningly long (three-and-a-half-minute)
on-air apology. Then, with no qualms about kicking the downed network, the auto
maker suspended advertising on all NBC News programs. (After just a day,
however, saying it was satisfied with the apology, it rescinded that ban.) And
to thicken the plot, a judge dealt G.M. a setback in its grand plan to close
numerous plants -- and gave at least a temporary reprieve to 2,500 auto workers
whose jobs are threatened. Saying that by accepting tax abatements G.M. had
effectively promised to keep its Willow Run plant, in Ypsilanti, Mich., open
through the 1990's, the judge blocked it from closing the plant. G.M. had
planned to close it this summer and consolidate operations in Arlington, Tex.
Calling the ruling "unprecedented and contrary to both the facts and the law,"
G.M. said it would appeal. The company had tried to forfeit the tax breaks, but
Doug Winters, the Ypsilanti city attorney, said, "We want the jobs, not the
money. G.M. is not above the law."

Sprinting for the Red

Has Carl Lewis gone into accounting? He must have, the way records are getting
broken. But corporate America surely hopes these records will last. First, Ford
reported a $7.4 billion loss for 1992, mainly because of its retiree accounting,
erasing I.B.M.'s recent record for the nation's largest loss. But its title
lasted just a day, as General Motors came in with a stunning $23.5 billion
figure. Without the special charges, though, there were signs of improving
operations. G.M. stock did well, ending the week at $40.625, while Ford shares
slipped to $49.25.

A Poorer Sears, a New Sears

Another fixture of the corporate landscape dumped some hefty numbers onto its
balance sheet last week. In reporting a $3.9 billion deficit, Sears, Roebuck
cited hurricane-related losses at its Allstate Insurance unit and the costs of
scrapping its catalogue. Not to mention its charge for retiree benefits -- $1.87
billion. Later in the week, after pausing to let the news sink in, the retailer
looked squarely at the future, vowing to spend $4 billion to give its stores
face lifts.

More Shrinkage at I.B.M.

It may have to rename itself I.B. if it gets any smaller. I.B.M. only recently
said it would cut its work force by 25,000, but word spread last week that it
could be more like 40,000. The numbers tell the tale of the incredible shrinking
company. Workers: 407,000 in 1986, 300,000 at the end of '92 . . . and 260,000
at the end of '93? Stock price: over $100 last summer, $50.75 on Friday.

Short Chapter at Random House

Joni Evans has had a bumpy ride at Random House. In 1987 she was recruited to
start her own imprint. Then she was named to head the adult trade division. That
lasted just a few years, and she then created Turtle Bay Books. But now Turtle
Bay is no more. Ms. Evans said she always thought "it would be three to four
years before we broke even, and I thought he did, too." But "he" -- Alberto
Vitale, Random House chairman -- said, "Conditions have changed."

Survival of the Techiest

It makes the head spin. You're slogging through the evening's cable offerings --
the 12 talk shows, the 15 football games -- when some long-distance company
calls to explain its convoluted advantages. Now it's all getting mixed up
together; the cable and phone businesses are cross-breeding, embarking on an odd
Darwinian struggle. Last week, in the first deal of its kind, Southwestern Bell
agreed to buy two cable systems from Hauser Communications -- the onset of a
race to deliver all manner of communications services, like more cable offerings
than you'll ever keep track of. Soon, perhaps, you'll reach for the phone to
turn on a movie, or turn on the set to call Aunt Nellie -- or finally, in
low-tech despair, sit down and read a book.

Hello, Phone -- Get Me Rewrite

Meanwhile, phone technology moves relentlessly on. In Nynex's latest bid to
improve the human lot, you can say "Mom" and the phone calls your mom. And only
yours, mind you. Other voices get other moms. In the system Nynex will soon
begin testing, each household member compiles a separate voice directory of
dozens of names. Is the system perfect? Well, no. Nynex officials concede that
if Dana Carvey barked out "Barbara," the former First Lady's phone could easily
ring.

HB>THE ECONOMY



Clinton Works the Crowd

President Clinton laid it out succinctly. "With all these economic improvements,
we aren't generating new jobs," he said at his "town meeting." And the deficit,
he said, "is about $50 billion a year bigger than I was told." Questioners
veered to other topics, but Mr. Clinton kept steering back to the economy. On
Wednesday he will propose higher taxes and painful budget cuts, and he wanted to
soften up his audience -- to assure them his plan would be "fair to all
Americans." He did offer one specific: he will seek to raise the corporate tax
rate -- a message he then gave to 200 executives and lobbyists at the White
House.

Read Their Lips: 'Don't Touch'

In casting about for a billion here, a billion there, to hack from the deficit,
Mr. Clinton will have to look hard at many sacred items. But some things are
more sacred than others -- like Social Security cost-of-living increases. His
budget director, Leon Panetta, had proposed a one-year freeze, but Mr. Clinton
-- possibly with visions of irate retirees at the White House barricades -- put
his machete away. A freeze, falling hardest on the poor, is a far cry from
soaking the rich. But he has not ruled out increasing taxes on benefits, since
that would not affect low-income people.

Inflation Stays in Check

 Inflation is well under control even as economic growth gains momentum. Prices
at the wholesale level rose a modest 0.2 percent in January. Over the past year
the Producer Price Index has risen just 1.8 percent -- a minor gain for an
expanding economy.

Detroit vs. Japan: No Contest

Detroit was armed for battle. Thinking the time was right and the new
Administration sympathetic, it had spent serious money preparing to file
complaints seeking steep duties on imported cars. But once its plans leaked out,
the rock-throwing started. Cries of protectionism filled the air, foreign auto
makers and governments trained their heavy lobbying guns on Detroit, and even
Mickey Kantor, the top American trade official, voiced qualms. The final blow
came when General Motors, bombarded by Japanese pressure, defected. The auto
makers, while insisting they had a strong case, saw that without a united front
they had no chance and backed off. The move was a reprieve for the
Administration, which would have been forced to resolve this sticky issue
quickly.



INTERNATIONAL



Speed. Freedom. . . . Tolls?

Autobahn. The very word spits out images of untamed horsepower, foot to the
Porsche floor, the ultimate open road -- in short, freedom. With no tolls, and
long stretches with no speed limits, the network of superhighways has deep
resonance for Germany, and the world. But again, yesterday's sacred cow becomes
today's hamburger. The realities: severe congestion and a German economy whose
horsepower is dwindling. So Bonn plans the unthinkable: charging user fees on
the Autobahn and eventually privatizing it. Well, there are still video games.

Bonjour, Vietnam

On the first visit by a Western leader since 1975, Francois Mitterrand promised
to double aid to Vietnam -- if human rights improve -- and urged Washington to
end its economic embargo. Local radio said the visit showed that the West saw
Vietnam's "will to join the mainstream economy."

Tax the Other Guy, Not Saudi Oil

Saudi Arabia is worried. There's a lot of talk about taxes to cut oil use. And
now that Saudi Arabia has replaced Russia as the largest oil producer, the
Saudis have the most to lose. This threat also comes just as Saudi Arabia is
trying to pare OPEC output to push prices higher. So the Saudi oil minister,
Hisham M. Nazer, in Houston last week, pulled out all the stops. Citing
"constant discrimination against oil," he called environmentalists' policies
"alarming." Oil import fees "defy the logic of geology and economics." And,
citing the crying need for global economic growth, he said, "Abject poverty is
indeed the worst environmental pollutant."

LOAD-DATE: February 14, 1993

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photos: A judge blocked G.M. from closing its Willow Run plant in
Michigan. (Reuters); Social Security Card ; Autobahn drivers face user fees
(Camera Press); Joni Evans.

Graphs track Ford and General Motors' profits and losses, 1989-1992 (Source:
Company reports); percent change in producer price index, Jan. 1992-Jan. 1993
(Source: Commerce Department); breakdown of world oil production by oil
producing countries (Source: Petroleum Intelligence Weekly)

TYPE: Summary

                   Copyright 1993 The New York Times Company

                              153 of 255 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                February 14, 1993, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

Rapwear. Soulwear. Hipwear.

BYLINE: By DIANE CARDWELL

SECTION: Section 9; Page 5; Column 1; Styles of The Times

LENGTH: 1220 words


WHILE the rest of the nation watched the Buffalo Bills lose the Super Bowl for
the third year in a row, the post-soul generation went to Madison Square Garden
to see Bobby Brown. Before Dallas had scored its first touchdown, Seventh Avenue
was already thick with young black teen-agers waiting to pass through any one of
11 metal detectors at the entrance. Some, dressed in North Face ski jackets,
Timberland boots, thermal face masks and baseball caps, stood silently in
classic poses of roughneck cool. Others, wearing silk and leather or cashmere
and fur, ate chicken, drank beer and chatted like it was some kind of down-home
open house.

On 33d Street and Eighth Avenue, meanwhile, the luminaries of the black pop
world were jousting to get in. Heavy D., the rapper, was quickly whisked past an
extremely harassed phalanx of security guards and was escorted backstage, where
Patrick Ewing, Queen Latifah and Andre Hurrell were gripping and grinning.
Inside, Kay Gee and Vinnie of Naughty by Nature worked the V.I.P. section in the
audience, while an assortment of young men in gold-studded black leather paced
around, shouting into cellular phones.

Just about any pop music event these days looks like a big cocktail party and
fashion show, but the excuse for all this posturing was the quadruple billing
for Bobby Brown's "Humpin' Around the World" concert, which featured Shabba
Ranks, T.L.C. and Mary J. Blige. With three Billboard top-10 new jack swing
artists and America's only dance-hall reggae superstar on the bill, this evening
promised a showcase of the black pop fashion esthetic in all its glorious
permutations.

"That's exactly why I went," said Monica Lynch, president of Tommy Boy Records
and a noted trend-watcher. "There are so few major concerts in New York. In
sheer numbers you get to see a whole lot of people parading through."

Not just people, though. Style cults. Several of them. Each roughly
corresponding to a particular artist or musical genre and each with its own
distinct look.

"There are these different subsets of aspirations in the black community," said
Nelson George, author of "B-Boys, Buppies, Baps & Bohos: Notes on Post-Soul
Black Culture," due out this month from HarperCollins. "And style is a very big
part of how they project who they are or who they want to be."

The Bobby Brown sound, with its fusion of soul-style crooning and hip-hop
production, attracts both hard-core rap fans in rugged street gear and a more
mature, middle-class audience in suits and dresses. T.L.C., which has a brightly
colored, playful look and attitude, appeals to the youngest segment of this
group: pre-teens and teen-agers who project a sweet but edgy innocence. Mary J.
Blige, who mixes rap totems like combat boots and baseball caps with
body-hugging bustiers and skintight leather pants, oozes a more sophisticated
and aggressive sexuality. So while these new jack swing artists may sound like
the Dells or the Whispers (sort of), they still act and dress like rappers (sort
of).

"Clothing can identify people as somehow supporting the status quo or resisting
the status quo," said Tricia Rose, a cultural critic and instructor of American
studies at Rutgers University. "Obviously, black culture in general works
against some sort of mainstream norm."

So what does it mean, then, if a young black male Bobby Brown fan shows up in
jeans, a black turtleneck, a thick gold chain and a full-length mink?

"Those are your sort of goofy, old-school, uptown players," Ms. Lynch said.
"There are always those male peacocks who are styling and showing how much money
they got." Like the fossil record, you can read the layers of fashion history at
these shows, where the cutting edge slices into holdovers from the previous age
and old looks are constantly recycled.

"In 1985, the B-boy esthetic was easy to crystalize," Mr. George said. "It was
Adidases unlaced, sweat suit, Kangol hat, numerous gold chains, big
ghetto-blaster box. But because the music and culture of B-boys has fragmented,
so have the styles."

Of course, nothing's ever too neat and tidy, but a few basic archetypes hold:

THE SURVIVALIST B-BOY -- There's still an athletic-wear consciousness visible in
the B-boy esthetic, but Timberland and combat boots have replaced sneakers, and
tucked-in jeans or camouflage pants have replaced sweats (a look that, as usual,
went straight from the streets to the men's wear collections a few weeks ago).
North Face ski jackets, fishing vests and thermal half-face masks are essential
these days, though the silhouette has a precedent in punk, in which British
youths express disenfranchisement through music and sartorial warfare.

As Ms. Rose explained, the look taps into a post-Vietnam understanding of the
urban terrain as a daily guerrilla war. "These clothes have always been about
camouflage," she said. "On the one hand, it's like the Bigfoot they're looking
for: Homeboy's got a crazy-size jacket on, big shoes, a big ski mask that makes
him look like Jason in 'Friday the 13th.' How can you miss him? On the other
hand, you can't see him, can you?"

THE ASPIRING B.A.P. -- a k a the Black American Prince or Princess. A
silky-smooth, tasteful look that says, "I am not a B-boy. I am not 17 hanging
out at high school. I got a job, I got an apartment, I drink Courvoisier and I
am out for a nice evening." Epitomized by Bobby Brown in an orange and white
pin-stripe zoot-inspired suit with spats (a la Cotton Club), it's all about silk
shirts and matching trousers, high heels and a slinky dress and never, never too
much gold.

THE GANGSTA (FEMALE) -- Most recently popularized in Apache's "Gangsta Bitch"
and Bel Biv DeVoe's "Gangsta," the term describes an AK47-wielding woman who is
tough and a sex object. She's dressed identically to her male counterpart
(bandanna 'do-rag, Army field jacket, plaid flannel shirt, boots) except for her
big gold door-knocker earrings.

Since there's not a lot of respect for femininity in hip-hop culture, men tend
to gravitate to women who don't have any perceived frailties -- women who seem
more like them.

There is a connection between the gangsta look and that of T.L.C. and its style
adherents. This look represents a different kind of cross-dressing, one whose
charged graffiti colors and layers of huge clothing says, "I don't have to wear
a tight dress to be sexy." Simultaneously, the look is infantilizing, suggesting
children playing a game.

THE NUBIAN GRUNGER -- Though it involves a flannel shirt and long, straight hair
parted down the middle, Nubian grunge is, well, cleaner than its Caucasian
counterpart. "That used, Salvation Army esthetic doesn't tend to fly," Ms. Lynch
said. "I suppose you could call it Newbian grunge. From a status point of view,
most kids don't want to be wearing somebody else's clothes."

THE NUBIAN COWBOY -- Characterized by a Western fringed jacket. It plays into
that rugged, urban frontier thing B-boys love and recontextualizes a
traditionally white look. "They take an idea that's firmly rooted in a period of
history and reinterpreted by a guy like Ralph Lauren for the upscale, and then
turn it inside out again for the kid from Brooklyn," Ms. Lynch explained. "It's
20 times removed from the origin."

And, perhaps more importantly, it moves.

LOAD-DATE: February 14, 1993

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photos: Bobby Brown, left, doing his version of a survivalist B-boy,
attracts both hard-core rap fans in rugged street gear, far left, and a more
mature, middle-class audience in dress shirts and dresses, above. The Western
fringed jacket, the flag of the Nubian cowboy, plays into the rugged,
urban-frontier thing that B-boys love. (Photographs by Ozier Muhammed/The New
York Times); T.L.C.'s highly colored, infant look appeals to teen-agers who
project an edgy innocence. It's the flip side to the "gangsta" look that so many
young black women are appropriating. (Michael Benabib)

                   Copyright 1993 The New York Times Company

                              154 of 255 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                February 14, 1993, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

LETTERS TO THE LONG ISLAND EDITOR;
Yes, Massapequa Has A Fine Side, Too

SECTION: Section 13LI; Page 17; Column 6; Long Island Weekly Desk

LENGTH: 236 words


"Live, and in Sizzling Color, the Trashing of the Island" [Jan. 24] struck a
nerve. As a lifelong resident of Massapequa, I especially take offense at your
subtitle "Sodom, Gomorrah and Massapequa."

Are we really to believe that no bizarre or absurd situations occur elsewhere in
the nation? Sure, Massapequa may be credited with Jessica Hahn and Joey
Buttafuoco (who, we should remember, is a victim in his own Kafka-esque
situation), but many other famous and not-so-famous fine people hail from here
as well. How about Ron Kovic, Vietnam veteran and author of "Born on the Fourth
of July"? What about actors Alec Baldwin and all of his brothers, Jerry Seinfeld
or Steve Guttenberg? Does the name of weatherman Dr. Frank Field ring a bell? Or
maybe former Secretary of Labor Peter Brennan? Then, of course, you have the
hundreds of unsung heros working right in the community such as the Little
League and soccer coaches, Boy and Girl Scout leaders and my personal favorites,
the civic-association volunteers. Long Island in general, and Massapequa in
particular, is alive and well, thank you. The good things to come out of our
suburban enclave always seem to get dwarfed by the bizarre and lewd activities
of a small minority. Of course, bizarre and lewd sell newspapers; civic and
social accomplishments do not.

RAYMOND G. RUSSOLILLO
President, Nassau Shores (Massapequa) Civic Association


LOAD-DATE: February 14, 1993

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Letter

                   Copyright 1993 The New York Times Company

                              155 of 255 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                February 14, 1993, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

Mitterrand Sets Foot in Vietnam and Makes an Offer

SECTION: Section 4; Page 2; Column 3; Week in Review Desk

LOAD-DATE: February 14, 1993

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo: President Francois Mitterrand of France, the first Western
leader to visit Vietnam since 1975, promised last week to double aid to its
former colony if it improved human rights. Mr. Mitterrand and Gen. Maurice
Schmidt, France's armed forces chief, visited Dien Bien Phu, site of the battle
where Vietnamese rebels crushed French soldiers in 1954. (Agence France-Presse)

TYPE: Caption

                   Copyright 1993 The New York Times Company

                              156 of 255 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                February 14, 1993, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

THE WORLD;
Japan Fears the U.S. Is Its Postwar Pal No More

BYLINE: By DAVID E. SANGER

SECTION: Section 4; Page 4; Column 1; Week in Review Desk

LENGTH: 1148 words

DATELINE: TOKYO


ODDLY enough, one reason Japan worries about Bill Clinton is that unlike John F.
Kennedy he never captained a boat that was sliced in half by a Japanese warship,
and unlike George Bush he was never shot down over the Pacific. In the
iconography of American Presidents as seen from Tokyo, the World War II veterans
who went on to occupy the Oval Office never bore a grudge. Instead, they were
magnanimous victors who, after vanquishing the old Japan, took an almost
fatherly pride in its reconstruction. They remembered the occupation, and
regarded the Japanese as a bright, industrious ward who grew into America's
strongest ally in the Pacific. Most important, they were usually indulgent of
the country's mercantilist tendencies, viewing them as a problem that should not
be allowed to threaten the relationship.

The new President, as Japanese have reminded themselves time and again, grew up
with a very different Japan. He was a boy in Arkansas when Akio Morita began
putting Sony radios into American homes. By the time Mr. Clinton reached law
school, Nissans and Toyotas were beginning to jam the streets. As a governor, he
frequently took the red-eye to Tokyo in search of Japanese investments and
factories for his state. His Japan is first and foremost an economic competitor,
hardly in need of America's help.

"In the eyes of many Japanese, it seems like a very big generational leap," said
Yukio Satoh, who heads North American affairs for Japan's Foreign Ministry.
Another senior Government official was more blunt, suggesting that for people of
Mr. Clinton's generation, Japan was no longer a "special country."

That alone may explain why, even before Mr. Clinton has said much about trade
and economic policy, the Japanese are rushing to redefine their relationship
with the United States. They think they have to move fast.

The problem is that visions of what the relationship should look like --
especially in the sudden absence of a common enemy lurking out of Vladivostok --
are being churned out faster than Hondas, and in as many models.

Everyone wants America to remember that, as Foreign Minister Michio Watanabe
said in an interview last week, "trade is not the only relationship we have."
But on Thursday, no sooner had Mr. Watanabe settled into a chair in the Oval
Office than Mr. Clinton started a pointed discussion about cutting Japan's newly
ballooning trade surplus with the United States and said removing more trade
barriers is to be the first order of business. "That is my job," Mr. Clinton
said. Not exactly the warm words about unshakable alliances that Japan had in
mind for the first meeting.

Like England, Japan has always spoken enthusiastically about its "special
relationship" with the United States. But it is one that was forged first by the
occupation and later by mutual economic dependence, rather than by shared
culture or even much of a deeply felt meeting of minds. In fact, the United
States first promoted Japan's industrial accomplishments largely to channel its
energies into something other than militarism. And Japan's role as a vital
military base meant security always took precedence over the economic costs.

Reversing Priorities

That began to erode in the late 1980's, during disputes like the one over
Congress' attempt to restrict the transfer of aviation technology to Japan. With
a President in office who now talks about seven strategic technologies America
must preserve, Tokyo is bracing for more of that. While Mr. Clinton seems
unlikely to tinker much with the American troop presence here, especially now
that Japanese contributions make it cheaper to station soldiers here than at
home, there is little question the old priorities are being reversed.

That leaves Japan with some tough choices: Whether to veer harder toward Asia --
a trend that has to some extent begun already with new overtures to China,
Vietnam and the rest of Southeast Asia -- and whether to try to mollify or
modify its old mentor. In recent months, Japanese officials have been trying
them all out, tentatively sketching three different faces of their country:

The Thin-Skinned Retaliator In public, few politicians or diplomats will admit
to advocating a don't-push-me policy with the new Administration. But privately,
some senior officials say Japan is frustrated that it has grown big but earned
insufficient respect. This is the Japan that wants to remind Mr. Clinton of his
campaign observation that three-quarters of America's competitive problems must
be fixed at home. At their most extreme, such views seem nationalistic. But in
the mainstream, they are reflected in recommendations, like one from Japan's
biggest business group in December, that Japan prepare to retaliate if the
United States unilaterally moves to restrict imports. This is also the Japan
that warns America not to be intoxicated by its military power. In an essay this
month, Hisashi Owada, Vice Minister of Foreign Affairs (and father of Japan's
soon-to-be princess) noted Japan's $13 billion contribution during the Gulf
crisis and said "it is perfectly clear that the United States could not have
fought the gulf war without assistance of this kind."

The Reluctant Superpower This is the Japan that finally lives up to its talk of
being America's equal partner, even though its citizenry seems allergic to
taking action that might single Japan out. Advocates of this approach say the
first examples have come in places like Cambodia, where Japan has sponsored
peace talks and has sent troops to rebuild roads but not disarm factions. The
problem is that eventually this Japan has to decide whether to be a regular
superpower, with a larger military, or continue what Mr. Owada termed "an
extremely unnatural existence," that would have to be balanced by extraordinary
contributions to the world in non-military fields.

The Reformer This is the Japan that no longer waits for American pressure before
opening its markets, building better housing, taking more vacations and turning
into what Prime Minister Kiichi Miyazawa calls a "lifestyle superpower." All
this, of course, also increases imports. Few doubt the benefits of putting an
end to the cycle of American demands, Japanese refusals and then grudging change
that has embittered all sides. But the timing for reform is poor. The ruling
Liberal Democratic Party, scandal-ridden and divided, seems more terrified than
ever of taking the initiative. The business community, after drinking more than
its share during a terrific party in the 1980's, will take the better part of
the 90's just getting the poisons out of its system.

This is not to say that Japan will not change in response to the challenges of a
new team in Washington; after all, an American named Akebono just became the
first foreigner ever to be named a sumo grand champion. But it took 2,000 years.

LOAD-DATE: February 14, 1993

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Drawing

                   Copyright 1993 The New York Times Company

                              157 of 255 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                February 14, 1993, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

Sympathy for Killer Claiming Post-Vietnam Stress

BYLINE: AP

SECTION: Section 1; Page 37; Column 1; National Desk

LENGTH: 665 words

DATELINE: MIAMI, Feb. 13


A killer's bid to save his life by claiming that he is a victim of lingering
trauma from service in Vietnam has stirred the sympathy of fellow veterans and
focused attention on what is known as post-traumatic stress disorder.

Two weeks ago Gov. Lawton Chiles blocked the execution of the veteran, Larry Joe
Johnson, for the slaying of a gas station attendant 14 years ago. Mr. Chiles
said he wanted to review the case.

At a clemency hearing last year, mental-health experts testified that Mr.
Johnson could have acted without control while reliving a traumatic experience
in the war.

The stay of execution was the first that Mr. Chiles, a Democrat, has granted in
two years in office. Four executions have taken place in that period.

Reaction Is Divided

The Governor's office has reported a barrage of calls and mail about the Johnson
case. John Currie, director of the agency that handles public reaction, said the
calls were running 3 to 1 against clemency while letters were running 3 to 2 in
favor.

Among those rallying to Mr. Johnson's defense are many Vietnam veterans. "It's
sort of like his body survived Vietnam, but his mind didn't," said Scott Camil,
a veteran from Gainesville. "And now they are trying to put his body where his
mind is. Society has a right to be protected from him, but his honorable service
and condition that resulted from that service should count for something."

The prosecutor, Jerry Blair, himself a Vietnam veteran, is among those who
contend that Mr. Johnson is using his Vietnam service as an excuse. "It is
demeaning to suggest that because you served in Vietnam you are a walking time
bomb just waiting to explode and take someone's life," Mr. Blair said.

The prosecutor said post-traumatic stress disorder might be a valid defense in
some cases, but he pointed out that Mr. Johnson spent his Vietnam tour as a Navy
construction worker. He said Mr. Johnson had not produced evidence of any
traumatic combat experiences.

But psychologists who testified at Mr. Johnson's clemency hearing last year said
his exposure to the herbicide Agent Orange, which was used in Vietnam to
defoliate areas where guerrillas might be hiding, could have aggravated the
disorder. They also said Mr. Johnson's involvement in a National Guard accident
with a smoke grenade in 1974 could have been a factor in his mental condition.

Governor Chiles's aides say his indefinite stay of the execution does not mean
he is leaning toward clemency, which would mean life in prison. Should Mr.
Chiles decide that Mr. Johnson's arguments are valid, he would need the votes of
three others on the State Clemency Board, on which the Governor is one of seven
members, to grant clemency.

A jury in 1979 found Mr. Johnson guilty of killing James Hadden, 67, in a
robbery that year.

An Official Defense Later

Post-traumatic stress disorder was not included in the American Psychiatric
Association's diagnostic manual until 1980, so Mr. Johnson could not use it in
his defense. His lawyers cited it in his appeals, which have been exhausted.

Symptoms of the syndrome can include increased aggression, abnormally quick
responses of rage and episodes in which the sufferer acts without control while
reliving a traumatic experience.

William Weitz, a Vietnam-era veteran and a psychologist who counsels veterans
with the disorder, said: "I think there's a much wider awareness and sensitivity
now. Ultimately, when a case can legitimately be made, it's a strong mitigation
issue."

Combat trauma has been recognized for generations, but experts say several
factors increased the trauma for Vietnam veterans. For example, their average
age was 19, younger than in previous wars, and while combat in other wars was
often intense but relatively brief, in Vietnam the threat of attack or ambush
was nearly constant for many soldiers. In addition, the strong antiwar feeling
in the United States caused many veterans to become disillusioned about serving.

LOAD-DATE: February 14, 1993

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1993 The New York Times Company

                              158 of 255 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                February 14, 1993, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

A Political Whodunit;
Suspects Abound in the Downfall of Harold M. Ickes

BYLINE: By TODD S. PURDUM

SECTION: Section 1; Page 41; Column 4; Metropolitan Desk

LENGTH: 1821 words


Late on the night of Jan. 13, in the Governor's Mansion in Little Rock, Ark.,
Harold McEwen Ickes had a painful conversation with a friend he had known since
they protested the Vietnam War together. They should have been exultant, since
Mr. Ickes had just spent more than a year helping to make that friend President
of the United States.

For weeks, Bill Clinton's team had made no secret that Mr. Ickes, a liberal New
York labor lawyer who had lent his tactical canny to a string of losing
Presidential campaigns, was the leading choice to be deputy chief of staff.
After all, he had headed Mr. Clinton's primary campaign in New York, managed the
Democratic Convention and been deputy director of the transition.

Agreed That He Should Withdraw

But there, on the night before Mr. Clinton was to announce his senior staff
appointments, Clinton aides told Mr. Ickes for the first time that his law firm
was under investigation for its work for a union that Federal prosecutors say
was mob-controlled. The two old friends agreed that Mr. Ickes should withdraw.

How and why a man Mr. Clinton described after his nomination as "one person
without whom I might not be here" ended up not there himself has become a
favorite parlor game in the tight little world of New York politics, where
almost everyone knows Mr. Ickes but not everyone likes him. It is a political
whodunit rich with old feuds and putative intrigues that stretch from the son of
one New York City mayoral candidate -- David N. Dinkins -- to the father of
another -- Andrew J. Stein.

"Someone wanted to hurt a President, a Mayor and Harold, and not necessarily in
that order," said Victor A. Kovner, a former city corporation counsel and old
friend of Mr. Ickes.

Unflattering Reports

This much is clear: Mr. Ickes withdrew after a week of unflattering newspaper
and network television reports recalling his role as the lawyer for Mr.
Dinkins's 1989 mayoral campaign, when a stock transfer between the candidate and
his son David Jr. became a focus of controversy, and Mr. Ickes's longtime
representation of Local 100 of the Hotel and Restaurant Employees International
Union, which Federal prosecutors have charged was controlled by organized crime.

Gov. Mario M. Cuomo himself felt compelled to deny a gossip columnist's report
that he had tried to block the appointment. His supposed motive? Friends of both
men say the Governor has nursed a grudge against Mr. Ickes since the 1982
gubernatorial campaign, when Mr. Ickes was quoted as saying that he had heard
others say that Mr. Cuomo had an anti-Semitic streak. In fact, Mr. Cuomo now
says he hopes he can find a nonpaying post for Mr. Ickes on some state board as
a sign of his regard.

"Who those people are and what their motives are can be the subject of endless
speculation, which I'm not prepared to do," Mr. Ickes said in his first lengthy
interview since he left the White House, where he worked for 10 days after the
inauguration last month helping organize the staff. "But I did think there was a
concerted effort to get me."

The reports surfaced when Mr. Clinton was already under fire for Zoe Baird's
hiring of illegal immigrants and Commerce Secretary Ronald H. Brown's work as a
high-paid lobbyist, and was reluctant, his aides say, to court more controversy
with a top White House appointment.

For the 53-year-old Mr. Ickes, who still consults with the President by phone,
working in the White House would have carried on the legacy of his father,
Harold L. Ickes, Franklin D. Roosevelt's Secretary of the Interior, who died
when Mr. Ickes was 12.

'Where Do We Stand?'

For many Democratic politicians in New York government, and perhaps for the city
as a whole, his appointment would have meant more: a sympathetic ear in the
White House after 12 years of Republican cold shoulders. From Manhattan to
Mineola, L.I., where Mr. Ickes's law firm of Meyer, Suozzi, English & Klein is
based, many talked openly of joining him in Washington, and were aghast at the
outcome.

"People said if that could happen to Harold, where do we stand?" said one Long
Island official who is still hoping for a job in the Administration. "They were
really scared."

Friends of Mr. Ickes (pronounced ICK-eeze) said they were not surprised at the
fealty that led him to make no fuss when his hopes collapsed. But he is nothing
if not a scrapper. In 1965, he lost a kidney after a beating by three white men
in Louisiana where he was a civil rights worker, and during the 1973 mayoral
campaign of Herman Badillo an argument with a fellow aide became such a brawl
that Mr. Ickes bit into the leg of a third colleague who tried to break it up.

Such tenacity has won him many friends, but also enemies, chief among them
prosecutors in the Republican-led United States Attorney's office in Brooklyn,
who were unhappy with the limited cooperation he offered their 1990
investigation into the Mayor's stock deal with his son. When questions arose
during the 1989 campaign about the value and nature of the transaction, and
whether all necessary taxes had been paid, Mr. Dinkins produced a letter from
his son dated 1985, describing an installment sale.

No Charges Brought

But the prosecutors later said there was substantial evidence that the letter
had been written during the campaign and backdated, and that the Mayor might
have lied about it under oath during a grand jury investigation. Mr. Ickes
invoked the Mayor's lawyer-client privilege several times in declining to answer
questions. No charges were brought.

On Jan. 7, an article in The New York Post, quoting anonymous law-enforcement
officials, said that prosecutors had concluded in their confidential report on
the case that Mr. Ickes had not told the truth about the letter. Mr. Ickes
himself said he had been told that prosecutors were dissatisfied with his
testimony, though he says "they had no reason to be."

The United States Attorney at the time was Andrew J. Maloney, who is now in
private practice and has refused to comment. But because one Mr. Maloney's
oldest friends is Jerry Finkelstein, the father of Mr. Dinkins's rival, City
Council President Andrew J. Stein, the City Hall grapevine has buzzed with the
notion that Mr. Maloney and Mr. Finkelstein collaborated to embarrass the Mayor
and Mr. Ickes.

"Oh, God Almighty, what a world!" Mr. Maloney said, collapsing in laughter when
asked. "Absolutely not."

'Not a Chance'

For his part, Mr. Finkelstein said, "Not a chance. Whoever said that is probably
trying to hurt my son."

But as it happens, Mr. Finkelstein also has a tenuous link to the other
unflattering story about Mr. Ickes, his work as counsel to the restaurant
workers union from 1983 to 1991. The local was brought under Federal court
supervision last fall in the settlement of a civil racketeering complaint that
charged that the union had been infiltrated by organized crime.

The activities of the union and its employees are now under investigation by
Mary Shannon Little, a former prosecutor who is now at Kroll Associates, the
private investigations concern headed by another of Mr. Finkelstein's friends,
Jules Kroll, from whom he rents office space.

Ms. Little said Mr. Finkelstein "has nothing to do with our ongoing operations"
and noted that the settlement appointing her monitor was a public court
document, readily available.

Questions about Mr. Ickes's work for the union were featured in a tough story on
the "NBC Nightly News" on Jan. 8. The correspondent, Andrea Mitchell, noted that
during the trial of the Colombo mob family in the mid-1980's, prosecutors had
played a wiretap of Local 100 leaders discussing how to divide union territory
with Paul Castellano, at that time the boss of the Gambino family.

Aware of Allegations

"While Ickes was doing his job as a lawyer, this Administration has been
advertising itself as above reproach, and this does raise questions about the
judgment of one of its key players," Ms. Mitchell said in the report.

Mr. Ickes said he was aware of the allegations about the union officials, but
that in representing union members in arbitration proceedings with employers, he
had never been aware of any illegal activities by the union.  He said he had
alerted Mr. Clinton to the possible controversy before ever going to work for
his campaign, though "I'm not sure he absorbed it at the time."

In any case, the transition staff continued to support Mr. Ickes.

Then on Jan. 12, Mike McAlary, at the time a columnist for The New York Post,
wrote about the stock and union questions. "There are more than a couple of
prosecutors in this city who believe that the only thing separating Harold Ickes
and a jail cell is his ability to go strong and silent in the face of tough
questions."

'Difficult Discussions'

That was too much for some prominent New Yorkers, from former Mayor Edward I.
Koch, who complained that "a decent man and a highly regarded attorney" was
being smeared, to the Manhattan District Attorney, Robert M. Morgenthau, who
made public a letter saying Mr. Ickes had never been the subject of an
investigation by his office.

But it was also apparently too late. Already, the F.B.I. had raised questions
about the union investigation and what one senior White House aide described as
"a series of very difficult discussions" was under way which led to Mr. Ickes's
withdrawal the next day. Among other things, Clinton aides said, the
investigation of Local 100 would stretch into 1994, raising the possibility that
Mr. Ickes's name would crop up again.

Asked who had done Mr. Ickes in, Mr. McAlary, now a columnist for The Daily
News, said, "I like to think I did."

Mr. McAlary is a close friend of Governor Cuomo's son Andrew, who also worked on
the Clinton transition, and days later Richard Johnson, a gossip columnist for
The Daily News, ran an item saying it was the Governor who had administered "the
coup de grace," telling the White House Mr. Ickes was "bad news."

'I Came to Like Him'

The Governor said that was preposterous. "I don't owe Harold Ickes anything and
he doesn't owe me anything," Mr. Cuomo said, "but I respect him and I came to
like him in this campaign and he has been dealt with very badly by someone who
is after him or David Dinkins."

Some Clinton aides said there may yet be a job for Mr. Ickes someday, but he
said he doubts it.

"I have to earn a living," he said quietly. "I have no idea when this
investigation will be completed, and things take on their own dynamic in an
organization and once they get up and going, it's not easy to bring someone else
in."

Paradoxically, it was Mr. Ickes who helped keep prominent New Yorkers behind Mr.
Clinton last year when reports of marital infidelity exploded around the
candidate in the New Hampshire primary.

"I wouldn't want anyone to go into my background," he said then. "None of us is
perfect."

NAME: Harold M. Ickes

LOAD-DATE: February 14, 1993

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photos: Harold M. Ickes, who withdrew from consideration as deputy
chief of staff for President Clinton. (Ruby Washington/The New York Times) (pg.
41); Andrew J. Maloney; Jerry Finkelstein; Gov. Mario M. Cuomo; Mike McAlary;
President Clinton (pg. 46)

TYPE: Biography

                   Copyright 1993 The New York Times Company

                              159 of 255 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                February 14, 1993, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

To Meet Ashe Was to Remember Him

SECTION: Section 8; Page 9; Column 4; Sports Desk

LENGTH: 689 words


To the Sports Editor:

I met Arthur Ashe twice. The first time was 20 years ago, the second 10 years
ago. He made the same lasting impression on me that he made on many people and
for those who never met him, the story of our meeting is worth retelling.

In 1972, just out of college and caught in the political excitement of that
election year, I worked as the Bergen County headquarters manager for the
McGovern campaign. McGovern's staff had created a "national speakers' bureau"
for fund-raising events. We had been told that Ashe was scheduled to speak for
us at the end of September. Based on that promise, we set up two receptions --
one in the home of an affluent Ridgewood supporter and one in a black church in
Englewood.

Preparations went smoothly and as the date approached, the speakers' bureau
confirmed that everything was set -- that is, until the day before, when we were
suddenly told that actually, no one seemed to know where Ashe was.

On the day of the scheduled events, I finally reached Ashe's agent. It was he
who had promised Ashe as a speaker, but he had neglected to tell his client and
knew only that Ashe was on a vacation somewhere and that he should be returning
soon.

By 5 P.M. that afternoon, everyone had left our office. I was just about to lock
up when Ashe's agent phoned with news that Ashe might be coming into Kennedy
Airport from the Caribbean on a plane due to arrive at 6 P.M.

I arrived at the airport gate just as the plane was landing, but I could not go
beyond the customs line. A flight attendant agreed to carry a quickly scribbled
note on board for me. And then, 10 minutes later, Ashe walked off the plane.

At the time, Ashe was at the top of the tennis world, yet he was as unassuming
and friendly as anyone I had ever met. He had no idea that he had been promised
as a speaker, but there was no hint of irritation.

As soon as we were on the road, Ashe admitted to me that, although a staunch
Democrat, he did not know any specifics of McGovern policy. For the next hour, I
outlined various positions for him. There was much concern that McGovern's plans
would be too burdensome on the well-to-do.

Ashe was the only black at the Ridgewood reception and he certainly had little
time to prepare, but he moved easily and comfortably around the room. Then,
standing in the center of a circle of perhaps 60 people, he began to speak: "You
know, I probably make as much money as most of you . . ." A pause to let that
sink in. ". . . In fact, I probably make a lot more than most of you . . ."
Laughter. He went on for 20 minutes, speaking eloquently on all the issues we
had discussed -- Vietnam, military spending, and election and tax reform. When
he finished, he thoughtfully answered questions, and then we were off to the
church in Englewood.

I was expecting a large turnout from the black community, but on the way Ashe
said that he really was not very well known to many young blacks. He confided
that it was something that bothered him. He knew that if he was as successful in
basketball or baseball or football, he could be a much more influential force in
the black community.

True to his prediction, when we arrived at the church, only 12 people were
waiting. Ashe's disappointment never showed. He sat and spoke for an hour about
community involvement and educational opportunities. Afterward, I drove him back
to his New York apartment, where he thanked me for the opportunity to help.

Ten years later, I saw Ashe again at a reception at the Longwood Cricket Club in
Boston. It was a packed room, but I managed to get his attention for a moment
and asked if he remembered our earlier meeting. He did, and asked how I had
been, then paused and, with that characteristic ironic half-smile of his, said,
"We didn't do too well, did we?" and was gone into the crowd.

McGovern may not have done well, but Arthur Ashe did splendidly. Ashe had
nothing to gain personally, 20 years ago, when he spent a half-day with me. What
mattered to him was standing by commitments and being part of the world outside
of tennis.

PAUL A. MOSES
Newport Beach, Calif.

LOAD-DATE: February 14, 1993

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Letter

                   Copyright 1993 The New York Times Company

                              160 of 255 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                February 14, 1993, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

BACKTALK;
Arthur Ashe: A Man of Artistry and Letters

BYLINE: By NEIL AMDUR;  Neil Amdur, the sports editor of The Times, collaborated
with Arthur Ashe on Ashe's autobiography, "Off the Court," published in 1983.

SECTION: Section 8; Page 9; Column 2; Sports Desk

LENGTH: 1161 words


It has been one week since Arthur Ashe died. But for many of us, the shock still
lingers, and there is this impulse to somehow reach out and address him -- in a
vein he would understand, "Dear Arthur" -- because Arthur Ashe was forever
writing letters to the people who mattered to him.

I don't think Ashe realized how many people truly loved him. Maybe he wondered
but wasn't sure. After all, he was shy and had been away from the competitive
limelight for a decade before being forced back into the public arena last
April.

No matter. People cared because he made everyone a part of his life. Rich. Poor.
Young. Old. Black. White. Americans. Africans. South Africans. Europeans.
Australians. He was as comfortable in a boardroom as a press room, a tennis
court or a court of law, Wall Street and Main Street. Muhammad Ali, Pele, Magic
Johnson and Michael Jordan were the fiery comets in the sports galaxy, but
Arthur Ashe was the guiding light.

Exalted Role of Messenger

"There's no achievement more important than being a messenger," Ashe would tell
the television producer Charlie Grinker and others. Long chats with Ashe were
social and political adventures that often felt like clay-court rallies with
philosophical lobs and slices angled in semantics. He listened to and probed
weighty international issues like apartheid and Vietnam, and debated the
differences between honesty and integrity (there is a difference, he agreed),
heart and soul, intensity and killer instinct. Ashe had integrity, soul and
intensity.

"In tennis, the killer instinct is a waste of energy," he said. "How do you
control something like that? I would not want to be known as somebody with a
killer instinct." Yet he also acknowledged that killer instinct existed at the
highest levels of intensity.

People who saw Ashe from afar -- on the court as a player, as a television
analyst or as a Davis Cup captain trying to contain an agitated John McEnroe --
sometimes took his controlled analytical bent as aloofness. But most didn't
realize why he held back: as a child, he attended the funerals of several close
relatives, including his mother, and the sight of other close family members
emotionally distraught left a profound imprint on his psyche. And only close
friends knew enough to watch him chewing on his inner cheek when he really
churned inside.

'I'm Not a Rock Thrower'

But he was passionate in his beliefs, like the first time he began to feel a
sense of militancy. It was January 1968 at West Point, N.Y. He was Lieut. Arthur
Ashe (05714403), the country was besieged by racial turmoil, and black power and
militancy were hot topics.

"I'm not a rock thrower," he told me at the time. "I never will be. I think rock
throwing, riots, burnings and lootings are utterly ridiculous . . . but I'm in
favor of black power as it pertains to the exercise of power by black people in
a bloc, if they so desire. This power is not only good, it's just and it's
American. It's democracy in action. Certain groups have certain goals. In my
case, I'm talking about Negro America. We want certain things and we've got to
lobby for these things, to ask Congress for them. That's the only place we're
going to get it. In that respect, I'm all for black power."

Never a Wasted Moment

As much time as we spent together over 25 years, I never heard him complain --
not even about the serious medical problems he endured during the last 15 years.
"Not bad," was about his strongest reply to any inquiry of "how you feeling?"
And to peers and others struggling with past problems, he offered a simple
remedy: let go of the baggage.

Ashe could size up a situation as if he had antennae picking up signals. Then I
realized why: he was a journalist and social scholar ("No matter what happens,"
he once said, "if I go into a public facility looking for hidden meanings, I'll
search the face.")

I asked his wife, Jeanne, how he managed to cram so much meaningful actvity into
a single day, and she said, "Arthur never wasted time." If he wasn't carrying a
racquet to and from practice or matches, it was a pen or pencil. He was a
prolific writer, and it wasn't just books or articles for newspapers and
magazines. The daily journals he kept faithfully resurrected thoughts, and his
letters -- those wonderful letters -- touched everyone everywhere.

Jeanne says she treasures all those letters he wrote her -- each year on her
birthday, on Washington-New York shuttle flights, from hotels abroad, even notes
to discuss day-to-day events in their lives that he often left on a night table
("I cannot tell you the number of letters he wrote," she said the other day.)

The Socio-Sport Connection

Ingrid Bentzer, the former player from Sweden, who flew to New York from London
for the memorial service on Friday, showed me one letter Ashe had sent her in
the 1970's defending Billie Jean King's bid for equal prize money for women.
Many speakers at the service -- from the president of Time Warner sports, Seth
Abraham, to Senator Bill Bradley, another athlete-author -- also elaborated on
links with Ashe; Bradley talked of the socio-sport connection he shared with
Ashe and Giants quarterback Fran Tarkenton during their New York playing days.

Before he announced his retirement from tennis, Ashe wrote me a letter telling
me of his plans. No athlete enjoyed a closer relationship with the media.

As tough as Ashe was on himself, he found it almost impossible to turn down
social and charitable pleas. He once flew back from Washington to address
parents at the Little Red School House in Manhattan as a favor.

Best Friend to Many

Even from a hospital bed two days before Ashe died, Jim Keeler, a friend, said
Ashe was on the phone with him trying to complete plans for the "Hard Road to
Glory Gala" to honor all African-American Hall of Fame athletes Nov. 6 in
Richmond. Keeler said he even heard Ashe tell a nurse that he had numbness in
his shoulder and hands, before he got back on the phone to set up yet another
conference call.

It is not surprising that so many peers considered Ashe their "best friend." He
had a knack for putting himself in other people's shoes, without cramping that
person's style. When Ashe committed to a project, he was always on the correct
side because he had done the homework. Even when angered by the forced
disclosure that he had AIDS, Ashe never channeled the energy in a negative way.

Ashe's 16-year marriage was equally enriching. He and Jeanne were "one." She was
both moral support and emotional strength while giving Arthur the freedom to
fulfill his destiny.

Ion Tiriac once said that a true champion is that person who enriches a sport by
his presence and leaves the game better for having been in it. There was no
better world champion than Arthur Ashe because he not only enriched a sport with
his presence but also left a wondrous legacy -- true to all but, most important,
true to himself.

NAME: Arthur Ashe

LOAD-DATE: February 14, 1993

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photos: Arthur Ashe last August with his wife, Jeanne Moutoussamy-Ashe,
and their daughter, Camera. Ashe drew emotional strength from his family.
(Associated Press); Arthur Ashe, right, on tennis courts at West Point in 1968,
when he was a lieutenant in the Army. (The New York Times)

TYPE: Biography

                   Copyright 1993 The New York Times Company

                              161 of 255 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                February 14, 1993, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

FILM;
A Dutch Director Trafficks In a Bit of Deja Voodoo

BYLINE: By MIMI AVINS;  Mimi Avins is a contributing writer for Premiere.

SECTION: Section 2; Page 20; Column 4; Arts & Leisure Desk

LENGTH: 1421 words

DATELINE: LOS ANGELES


A vacationing couple stops at a gas station beside the highway. The young woman
goes inside to buy some cold drinks and is never seen again. That is the premise
of "The Vanishing," the psychological thriller starring Jeff Bridges, Kiefer
Sutherland and Nancy Travis that opened earlier this month. It is also the
premise of "The Vanishing," the Dutch movie that played in America two years
ago. Both films were directed by George Sluizer (pronounced SLY-zer).

Although Janet Maslin, writing in The New York Times, did not find the new
version the equal of the old, she had called the original "gripping" and written
that "Mr. Sluizer's direction has the spooky precision of nonfiction crime
writing."

Why remake an artistically successful film? For one, few American moviegoers
attend foreign language films -- or, as Larry Brezner, a producer of the latest
"Vanishing," puts it, "When I was growing up, more people lived in my building
in the Bronx than saw the original version of 'The Vanishing' in this country."
Indeed, producers are constantly searching for good material, and a well-plotted
thriller that has reached only a fraction of its potential audience has the
value of an untapped natural resource in Hollywood.

While many foreign films have been remade by Hollywood in the last decade, the
pattern has been to assign an American director to the American adaptation. But
in the case of "The Vanishing," Mr. Sluizer owned the rights to Tim Krabbe's
"Golden Egg," the novel on which the film was based, and he was willing to sell
them only if he could direct.

"Fortunately, I thought the European film was very well directed," Mr. Brezner
says. "My opening conversations with George were about what I thought could be
done differently in an American version. The ability to go back and reshoot
something is an artist's dream, because you always think you can make it better.
We didn't set out to take George's film and make it better. We set out to make a
different film."

Says Mr. Sluizer: "The No. 1 fascination for me was to be able to recreate
characters in a different culture, in a different movie with different actors,
but based on the same story."

With gray hair surrounding a balding pate, wearing one pair of glasses while
another hangs around his neck, Mr. Sluizer is hardly the image of the new kid in
town. At 60, he views the experience of making a major studio movie as part of
his continuing education in film making.

"I'm a little too old to feel that making a big Hollywood picture is going to
build my career," he says.

Because Mr. Sluizer has been involved with movies for more than 30 years, he is
precise in his analysis of various cinematic styles. The director's
understanding was shared by the American producers, Mr. Brezner and his partner,
Paul Schiff. They agreed that chilling understatement, while effective in a
European thriller, lacked the intense emotional pitch favored by American
audiences. The words they use to describe the difference between the European
and American treatments are cerebral (for the former) and visceral (for the
latter).

"It's the difference between being more intellectual or more gut level," Mr.
Sluizer says. "I know if you do a mainstream American movie, you have to
maintain a faster pace. If you sit in a movie theater in northern Europe, you
will never hear an audience make noises reacting to a picture. Here, they scream
and gasp. They applaud. The audience participates in a way that is more
childlike."

It has become a convention of the thriller genre that the climax must contain a
confrontation between the hero and his nemesis. The Dutch version of "The
Vanishing" was admired for its bleak, uncompromising ending. The new version,
which drew mixed reviews, was criticized for its more crowd-pleasing denouement.

Says Mr. Schiff: "We acknowledged and embraced the expectations that we know
exist in an American audience for this kind of movie, which are that the
characters whom we grow to identify with do triumph in some significant way,
that there's some positive, affirming result at the end of the journey. I'm not
convinced that our film has a 'happy' ending.  But under the circumstances, it's
better than some other options available to these characters." And clearly
better than the fate they met in the original version. The new ending was the
invention of the screenwriter Todd Graff, who also wrote "Used People," and it
was sanctioned by the director.

Mr. Krabbe had written the script for the 1991 "Vanishing," which Mr. Graff
rewrote while Mr. Sluizer was in Czechoslovakia making "Utz," a character study
about an obsessive porcelain collector. "Utz," filmed in English and starring
Armin Mueller-Stahl, Brenda Fricker and Paul Scofield, is also currently playing
in New York.

In "Utz" and "The Vanishing," Mr. Sluizer sees a similarity of themes. The
character played by Mr. Sutherland in "The Vanishing" makes discovering the
truth of his girlfriend's disappearance the focus of his life for years. "Both
of these stories deal with obsession," the director says.

Perhaps it was fortunate that Mr. Sluizer was familiar with obsession: to
protect his vision of "The Vanishing" in the midst of a Hollywood creative team
took nothing less than a zealot's dedication. He seems somewhat battered by his
Hollywood experience; it is as if intellectually he accepts the concept of film
as a collaborative enterprise, but viscerally he finds the process occasionally
difficult to endure.

"I think the director is like the captain of a ship," he says. "You don't mind
listening to the officers, but still, when you're the captain, you must be the
one in charge. When there are differences of opinion, I fight for what I believe
and try to convince others of my point of view."

Mr. Graff, who also is co-producer of the film, says, "It was very difficult for
him. He had never made an American film before, but he had made this film
before. He must have felt like Alice in Wonderland, because he knows what he's
doing, but none of the same rules apply."

Throughout his career, Mr. Sluizer has been accustomed to being very much in
charge. Before "Utz" and the remake of "The Vanishing," he had directed six
feature films, which he also produced and wrote or co-wrote. After attending the
Institute for Advanced Studies in Film in Paris, where Louis Malle was a
classmate, Mr. Sluizer began working his way up in Dutch cinema. He has created
25 documentaries and several experimental films and enjoys the variety of
alternating between large and small projects and fictional and nonfictional
subjects.

Mr. Sluizer considered his budget for the remake of "The Vanishing" -- about $20
million, compared to $1 million for the original -- a mixed blessing.

"There is a level of technical expertise in Hollywood you profit from, but the
thing you lose is flexibility," he says. "I can move a small production around
like it was a news team.  Working with a big crew is complicated. But if I need
fog on a car window, in a Dutch movie I blow on the window and hope the
condensation stays visible long enough for the shot. Here, you have people who
have the right chemicals to create the fog, and it lasts as long as you need
it."

Mr. Brezner, whose producing credits include "Good Morning, Vietnam" and "Throw
Momma From the Train," says: "There is a law, which says that the amount of
money needed to do the picture will always increase according to the budget
allowed. It's amazing. George had absolutely no problem spending the money. We
never had to say to him, 'George, we have more money.  Please spend it.' "

An admirer of American actors, Mr. Sluizer was careful not to let the demands of
a big production distract him from the details of performance and storytelling.
"Since George is not used to dealing with the kind of money that this film
cost," Mr. Sutherland says, "he approached the work the way you would if you
were making a film that's a struggle. With George, you concentrate a lot more,
as if you have to overcome obstacles that you can't buy your way out of.  We
spent a lot more time on our feet.  The American approach is lazier.

"When you're on your feet, you never get the chance to sit down and think about
anything else but the scene. The camera is always in your face, or George is
always in your face. No one would ever call George complacent about anything."

The director admits: "I am known as a detail freak. I like references. I like to
play with the puzzle."

LOAD-DATE: February 14, 1993

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photos: Mr. Sluizer, the director of "Utz" and the two versions of "The
Vanishing" -- Recreating characters in a different culture. (Film Forum); Brenda
Fricker and Armin Mueller-Stahl in Mr. Sluizer's "Utz" -- Another film about
obsession. (Film Forum)(pg. 21)

                   Copyright 1993 The New York Times Company

                              162 of 255 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                February 14, 1993, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

Lost in the Name Game

BYLINE: By BETSY ISRAEL

SECTION: Section 9; Page 1; Column 1; Styles of The Times

LENGTH: 3061 words


WHAT do you call someone who is 23? (Or for that matter, someone 31 or 18 or
possibly 12?)

Journalists, marketing executives -- many over-30's everywhere -- seem suddenly
desperate to know. Each week brings a new round of cute, all-inclusive names,
each guaranteed to be the generational logo. And with these pronouncements come
handbooks and guides to this mysterious New Youth and many talk-show dissections
of New Youth character, as well as polls, profiles, articles -- each offering up
the definitive traits of the postboom, pre-millennium set. It's as if half the
world had just noticed that many, many people were born during the 1960's and
70's.

Despite all the fuss, there's little agreement on who they are, except for this:
these people have had it rough. They were the children of Watergate, one reads
again and again, of newly employed mothers, absentee fathers and mass divorce.
They grew up amid precocious sex and drug use, legalized abortion and possible
nuclear annihilation, not to mention those "open" classrooms that may have
produced the lowest SAT scores in history. And they emerged from childhood in
time for AIDS, an unyielding recession and bad rock music. In their favor, it's
generally agreed, they can do five things at once: channel-surf, eat, talk on
the phone, listen to music and type resumes for nonexistent jobs. But they
can't, determined namers say, concentrate on any one activity for more than five
minutes.

The fill-in-the-blanks, we'll call them here. The only American generation
without a name. Despite countless "This is it!" claims, they still don't have
one.

Few, understandably, want to be known as baby busters (as in "from boom to
bust") or baby boomerangs (for boomeranging home to one's parents, or worse,
boomeranging back to rob or kill selfish, home-owning baby boomers). Time
magazine did not exactly wrap things up with the New Lost Generation. And how
excited is the average 30-year-old (minus 10) likely to get about
twenty-somethings? Others favor the slightly mysterious Generation X, the title
of a sardonic, "Here we are!" novel by Douglas Coupland. Or else slackers, from
the Richard Linklater film about severely anomic (yet very witty) young Texans.
There's been talk of Bradys, after the venerated television sit-com, and even
13ers, for the 13th generation to come of age since Benjamin Franklin's
(advocates concede, however, that being named for a floor that elevators don't
stop at might be discouraging -- worse even than being named for an antique
television show.)

Gabe Doppelt, the editor in chief of the reconstituted, more youthful
Mademoiselle, suggested "Cable Generation, perhaps -- because MTV is just one
channel among many." The author Joan Kron wrote in a letter to Allure magazine
that "Metamorphs" -- a term she devised with Dr. Grant McCracken -- "really best
describes the 90's person who believes that he or she can and must change
themselves in order to survive."

So the list drones on: latchkeys; technobabies; videos; boomers-nots; cyborgs;
posties; protos (for proto-adults); borders; downbeats; mall rats; nowheres;
burnouts; remotes; steroids; junks; "sparse," according to the National Journal,
or to quote the columnist Russell Baker, "simply numb."

And there would seem to be as many definitions of whom these chilly labels
purport to fit. Neil Howe, who wrote "13th Gen" with Bill Strauss, said, "We are
talking here about the 80 million people born from 1961 to 1981 -- that's two
related waves: the 60's Atari wave and the later 70's group, which we call the
Nintendos."

Bret Easton Ellis, 28 and an occasional "Atari wave" spokesman, claims as peers
those born between 1961 and 1971. Donna Gaines, the author of "Teenage
Wasteland" -- a study of miserable, forgotten suburban "burnouts" -- defines the
"bust" as the 37 million people born between 1965 and 1975.  And Business Week
has staked out the 46 million born between 1964 and 1975, a group of expert
shoppers likely to spend some $125 billion this year.

In fairness to the blanks, a truly accurate group portrait will take years to
complete. (By some estimates, the youngest members are now 12.) In the meantime,
we can admire this rush to define as a marketing ploy on the scale of D-day. Or
we can view it as a weird sort of national sport, a professional name game. Or
as something deeper, perhaps what Michael Schudson, a professor of
communications and sociology at the University of California at San Diego,
called "a means of creating community between people who have lost other forms
of identification."

"Definition by birth year," he continued, "is really a phenomenon of the past
half century, a time in which people have moved around so rapidly that
traditional community, familial or spiritual ties do not hold."

One 19-year-old student, who is (or isn't) blank, put it this way: "People
without a name tag on are threatening, and so there's got to be a big push to
get that tag. You say, 'Hi! I'm from the dog-bowl era!" They say, 'Fine. Here's
your discount dog bone.' Is there some reason we can't just live?"

There is. Isolating and naming population segments help marketing executives and
advertisers. Create the idea of a subculture defined by tokens of membership,
and you sell more toys, movies and books. "No marketer on earth could have
ignored those 75 million or whatever baby boomers," said Barbara Feigen,
executive vice president at Grey Advertising. "Obviously that was one of the
hugest marketing opportunities of the century. It was imperative to comprehend
not only the shared chronological age but the mind-set, the common attitudes,
sociology and psychology -- what values that unique group brought to the
marketplace."

And the true legacy of the 1960's is the idea that the group is the young group,
whether it's a New Generation or a Youth Quake or an Explosion or a New Voice.

Studies of spending patterns have shown that when a large number of people turn
25 simultaneously, sales of big-ticket items -- cars and houses, namely -- start
to rise. A large number of American citizens will turn 25 during the next few
years. And by "reaching out" to them, advertisers will suck up those at either
end of the age spectrum, the too young or just too old. (Remember that the only
ones who really said "groovy" in 1967 were either 12 or pushing 40.)

This business imperative intersects an odd cultural one: the need to have (or to
prove) generational standing.

During the 1960's, the "core" baby boomers (born between 1946 and 1951), became
that young generation largely by reviling the one just before them. And as they
aged during the 1970's, and actually turned 30, they extended this generational
apartheid in all directions. Consider for a moment the lives of the '58-to-'59
group (late boomers? boomettes? yuppies?), who faced countless loyalty tests:
Did they really see the Beatles on "The Ed Sullivan Show," or did they just
think they did? Where were they during the invasion of Cambodia? ("Seventh
grade" was not, needless to say, an acceptable response.) Since that time,
testifying to one's pop-cultural legacy -- a defensive litany of childhood
television shows, historic rock concerts or political acts -- has become a
competitive fact of life. Americans now carry with them an instant age resume,
with the generational label as a sort of cover letter.

So why is it so hard to write one for the blanks? For one thing, because the
generational markers, all the identifying cartoons and clothes and shoes, now
seem to come and go with greater speed. In fact, as the daily tempo of life has
accelerated -- and as advertisers have been forced to seek more finely segmented
audiences -- the average ID-card "generation" seems to last as long as most
sit-com runs. This high turnover rate has created a huge instant-nostalgia
market (Great Love Ballads of the late 70's! Television show themes from the
Summer of Love!). It has also made it hard for the blanks to set membership
ground rules. There are factions within factions, internal tribes with their own
identifying T-shirts. Being asked to wear the wrong one is cause for war.

This age egocentrism was summarized recently by two 30ish men on the Op-Ed page
of The New York Times. In a tone of muted outrage, they denounced being dumped
with the "twenty-somethings," the grungy miscreants they called the cuspers.
Instead they claimed to represent a mini-cohort, born between 1960 and 1964, a
"boomlet," inhabited now by boomer manques. Unlikely, as adults, to experience
much in the way of "boom" -- the great houses and cars and casual sex -- they
would settle, thank you, for a better-looking, slimmer demographic.

Which brings up a second labeling dilemma: who'd want to be part of an age group
like Generation X or Baby Bust?

"We haven't done any naming of this group ourselves," said Ms. Feigen at Grey
Advertising. "But if we do, it will be from a constructive marketing
perspective. These names reflect what these people are not, or else they're a
reference to some other group. It's insulting. It's shallow. The names don't
show any thought given to who these people are, how they feel about themselves."

Under the circumstances, inclusion in this age cohort might reasonably be viewed
less as an invitation, a call to comradeship, than as a punishment. (Labeling is
always to some extent a hostile act. Yuppie, originally a socioeconomic
designation, quickly became a moral slur, a weapon core boomers used to bash the
late arrivals.) Just as no one was ever voluntarily "a yuppie" -- and no
self-respecting over-50-year-old would admit to being from the Silent Generation
-- few want to sign up to be blank.

"The 13er," said Mr. Howe, the author, "shares with his or her peers the
collective sense that everything gets tired by the time it gets to them. There's
the very real sense that the boomers -- who were the original 'found' generation
-- sucked up too much of the oxygen and now there's not enough left." He
continued, "Like the first World War I-era 'lost' generation, the 13ers are a
sacrificial generation, a clean-up crew who will have to quietly, on their own,
take on the messes previous generations couldn't handle." He added, "And they
feel as if they will never get credit for it, that all the attention is going,
out of guilt, to the generation after them -- the 'baby on board!' kids born
post-'82."

IGNORED until last month or so, blanks seem to have a skeptical so-show-me
approach to just about everything. And it's this reticence -- known also as a
bad attitude -- that ultimately makes the search for an acceptable name so
difficult. To the blank, the entire labeling process is transparent and
insulting (imagine being the target audience for "Melrose Place.") In short, the
20- and 25- and 30-year-olds just won't buy it.

They make fun of it.

Playing anthropologists, reporters often cite "Generation X," a novel by the
very funny, very blank Mr. Coupland, who is 32. What most quote, however, is not
the prose itself but the marginalia -- a glossary of terms like "bleeding
ponytail" and "legislated nostalgia" -- included to explain key "X" concepts.
(His latest novel, "Shampoo Planet," includes an updated Table of the Elements
-- PZ=prozac; OP=opinion poll, etc.)

Even the more serious statements of generational discontent sound like an angry
parody of 60's rhetoric. "We are twenty-nothing," declared an unsigned piece in
The Baffler, a literary journal published by graduates of the University of
Chicago, "forever lost to your suburban platitudes; lost to the simple blather
of your TV; deaf to your nonpolitics; hopelessly estranged from your cult of
'professionalism,' the brain-deadening architecture of your office complexes."
It added, "Your best and your brightest want nothing to do with you."

This refusal to hold still and be tagged -- coupled with the inability to say
exactly who is to be tagged -- has led some to conclude that there simply isn't
a new generation out there. Perhaps, as Alexander Star wrote recently in The New
Republic, the claim to blank generational status is "a myth -- an imaginary
resolution of real contradictions." As Professor Schudson explained, "Most
generations have a focal point, a traumatic national or political event or a
war. Here, you might argue that the one defining cultural experience of people
in their 20's is a splintering effect, a true multiculturalism that's
nonbinding."

"What you have is commercials," said one 24-year-old woman.
"Rollerblading-across-the-Grand-Canyon wish fulfillments. I don't see any
organized role models or beliefs. I mean, 'Wayne's World'? Anyway, I think the
idea of generations, as isolated organized groups, is obsolete."

What may be obsolete is the idea that one encompassing label can be applied.
"Silent" and "G.I.," attached to generations, cover a lot of identifiable
ground. "Hippie," "punk" and "yuppie" refer to increasingly smaller patches.

"The world has changed so much in 20 years," Ms. Doppelt at Mademoiselle said.
"The state of flux that kids heard so much about in the late 60's is now pretty
much permanent. And younger people have -- as we all have -- this information,
all sorts of things, flung out at them, 24 hours a day. The mind has to work in
a different way." She continued: "That doesn't make them completely different.
At least two generations grew up with TV, so some similarities exist, but you
have to be much quicker and direct. There's a different sensibility, both more
sophisticated and more straightforward."

Richard Linklater, the director of "Slacker," has tried to describe that
sensibility, to say what it is that unites and brands his co-blanks. It's not a
political stance or a language or even a coherent fashion statement. As he
writes in his book on the making of the film, it's experiencing an "incredible
kind of -- what? Dissatisfaction, or total nonbelief in everything, but with an
interesting sense of humor and irony about it all."

As generational tag lines go, "the Age of Aquarius" was a lot easier to work
with.



A GENERATION DEFINES ITSELF

"I honestly think that the principal experience of people in their 20's is of
being caught behind a defining generation and having to settle for junk culture
as a unifying symbol. We couldn't rebel against Vietnam, so we rebelled against
disco. We missed the 80's boom and all the good jobs were taken, so we invented
this slacker psyche, or in my case went to law school. We should call ourselves
the late generation. That's really it. You had the generation of our parents
that lived by things with which youth is inexorably associated: hippies and
political agitation. History didn't leave us that symbolic youth, so all we got
left with was 'The Brady Bunch.' "
Charles von Simson, 28, law student, Brooklyn.

"I feel, and most people I know feel, something big is about to happen, and
we're excited. Especially coming from an African-American point of view, things
are so bad that there is a change that has to take place. It can only go so low
and people will take things into their own hands to make things happen. In the
riots in Los Angeles, it was basically the young people who were outraged, who
were fighting back. You didn't see many older people shouting and outraged. It
was the older people who were talking about calm. It is exciting to be young
right now because things are so critical. I was talking to a friend of mine who
was saying that there is a whole new wave that is going to happen. It's a social
wave. It's a new feeling of change, that young people who have seen what has
happened to past generations are taking control over what they feel is wrong."
Stacy Highsmith, 21, student, North Carolina School of the Arts, Winston-Salem,
N.C.

"AT least among my friends, we want to do something that is meaningful and
fulfilling and something that we hope is going to make a difference. But at the
same time, I think all of us have a desire for material comforts, and those two
often don't go hand in hand. And I'm not sure that characteristic is confined to
our generation. It may be a predominant characteristic of people in their 20's,
in whatever era. I don't think there is a definite characteristic of people in
their 20's except that they are trying to decide what to do with their lives,
and that is going to cause a certain amount of confusion and angst no matter who
you are and what you are doing. To say that my group, as people in their 20's
living in the 90's, is somehow different strikes me as a massive
overgeneralization."
Ed Yim, 25, assistant to the general manager of the Philadelphia Orchestra,
Philadelphia.

"DOES slacker mean a good thing or a bad thing? For us, I don't think anyone
would think that it is bad. Whereas for other people, the problem is to define
us, and slacker just barely gets at what our generation is experiencing. I feel
like we have seen people or know people who are disillusioned with the American
dream and yet at the same time don't feel ready to give up on it. But they are
not going to embrace it in its current state. That leaves us with the problem of
change, but it seems like an enormous task to change the way our country works.
I feel like we are not sure of what the answers are. And if you don't know the
answer, how can you work toward a change? So we are sort of caught in a big
muddle of trying to see every side of everything and not being able to move
forward."
Rachael McNally, 24, high school teacher and drummer for a band
calledSleepyhead, Manhattan.

"BARTENDING and substitute teaching are both things that you do when you are on
your way to doing something else or you haven't decided what to do. By the time
my dad was 27, he had started a family. That's a big step. I have mixed feelings
about children, not because I don't like them, but I just feel like there are
probably more than enough people on the planet and I don't know if they need one
more. On the other hand, there are so many people who are screwed up, maybe you
could make someone who could do something good. So there is always the
contradiction about feeling good about things and feeling bad about things."
Geoffrey Hill, 27, bartender and substitute teacher, Austin, Tex.

LOAD-DATE: February 14, 1993

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1993 The New York Times Company

                              163 of 255 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                February 14, 1993, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

FILM;
Drinking In Diluted Stanislavsky, Street People Make a Film

BYLINE: By ANDREW MEIER;  Andrew Meier writes for Premiere.

SECTION: Section 2; Page 13; Column 1; Arts & Leisure Desk

LENGTH: 1493 words

DATELINE: SAN FRANCISCO


Last year, 138 people without homes died on San Francisco's streets. One of them
was a nomadic Vietnam vet who spoke fluent Sioux and called himself Buck. Though
he never got the shrapnel out of his skull or the alcohol out of his blood, he
did try to find direction in one of the city's more unorthodox recovery
programs.

The program, known as the Tenderloin Action Group, was founded in August 1991 by
Rob Nilsson, a local film maker, and it invited anyone to act his way off the
streets. Within a year, it had grown into a grass-roots workshop that today is
finishing a feature film, "Chalk," a smoky pool-hall drama about a small-time
hustler set up for a game he cannot win. Mr. Nilsson hopes that the film, which
will cost just under $100,000 to make, will be ready for release late this year.

With its unlikely ensemble of novices, "Chalk" is not merely a low-budget
melange of "The Hustler," "The Color of Money" and "Mean Streets." Rather, it is
a film wrought with detail from the biographies of its cast and dialogue in
their own idiom. Mr. Nilsson and his co-writer, Don Bajema, created each
character with a workshop member in mind, grafting material from their
improvised scenes and their own lives.

The cast might seem a sampling from a census of America's dispossessed,
including some people who once led stable, middle-class lives. But to Mr.
Nilsson, 52, they are "drifters and dreamers who shared the same conundrums of
heart and head that confront us all." Having veered away from home and family to
face battles with drugs, alcohol and the streets, these actors discovered a
sanctuary in the Tenderloin Group. True, few among them were ever mere bundles
on the sidewalk, but fewer still required any make overs, costume changes or De
Niroesque stints on skid row to assume their roles.

Mr. Nilsson, a graduate of Harvard and the Peace Corps, traveled his own odyssey
to make "Chalk." Nearing 50 as the 1980's closed, he was no longer up and
coming. His independent films had garnered praise from Francis Ford Coppola and
John Cassavetes and awards in Cannes (for "Northern Lights" in 1979) and Park
City, Utah (for "Heat and Sunlight" in 1988). Despite his early acclaim, the
director was shunned by Hollywood and forced to distribute five of his six films
on his own. (The exception was the 1985 drama "On the Edge," which starred Bruce
Dern.) The decade had made him thinner and grayer, a sinewy cross between Chet
Baker and Clint Eastwood.

Mr. Nilsson spent the 80's practicing his own guerrilla film making, which he
calls direct action cinema. It is modeled, he confesses with obvious adulation,
on the cinema verite of Cassavetes. Emphasizing improvisation and character over
strict plot lines and big-budget effects, he had lionized the struggles of
Norwegian farmers, San Francisco cabbies, a disgraced runner and lovers in the
final hours of an affair. But he had yet to touch a subject that haunted him
daily.

That subject was his younger brother, Greg. For 10 years he had searched for
Greg, who had left the family's home in Marin County and begun wandering around
the country.  By the spring of 1989, the breadlines in the city's Tenderloin
district, seething with the down and out, had filled its seamy sidewalks. Every
morning, on his way to edit "Heat and Sunlight," Mr. Nilsson would scan the
hungry faces in search of Greg's. "About twice a year," he recalls, "my dad
would get a call from some hospital in South Carolina or somewhere: 'We've got
your son here. What should we do?' " Mr. Nilsson, too, wondered what he could
do.

On the set of "Chalk," it is obvious he has found his answer. "This film's not
about homelessness," he makes clear, "but it evolved out of my desire to address
the issue." In the summer of 1991 Mr. Nilsson moved across the bay from
Berkeley, where he lives, into a transient hotel in the Tenderloin, where he
spent months writing a script called "Hope for the Fourth Ace."

"It's about a Vietnam vet and his lottery card that has four scratch-off
numbers. A game of reverse Russian roulette." Mr. Nilsson shopped it around
furiously, even paying his own way to Cannes, only to be "killed with kindness,
not offers." Realizing that the homeless were not likely to attract audiences in
the recession, he recruited Danny Glover and Whoopi Goldberg to work for scale.
"Then James Olmos, Sally Kirkland and Peter Coyote volunteered," he says. While
still hunting for the $4 million needed for financing, Mr. Nilsson and his
co-producers, Rand Crook and Ethan Sing, searched for an "auxiliary cast,"
advertising a free acting workshop for anyone in San Francisco shelters. Each
workshop was videotaped.

"That raw footage was bottled lightning," Mr. Nilsson says. "It was a collective
human cry. You know why you see guys screaming on the street? Because they're
wound so tight. Give them a chemical twist, and a spigot opens." Offering
nothing stronger than diluted Stanislavsky, Mr. Nilsson pulled together the
makings of a film.

"It struck me one day," he recalls; " 'Don't wait for the money. Use video. Turn
the warehouse into a pool hall and use these wonderful actors.' " And so, with
four donated pool tables, a bar built by the cast, nearly $25,000 from benefits
whose attractions were names like Tom Waits, Gregg Allman and Gena Rowlands, and
a $6,500 check from a "local angel," shooting began last June.

Ten months earlier, the Tenderloin Action Group had met for the first time.
"That night we were just a brave few, fresh from the streets," remembers Edwin
Johnson, who plays Watson, the proprietor of the hustler's local pool hall.
Strangers on the streets, they discovered in the workshop that they shared
painful histories.

"We're all just folks who ran across hard times," says Sharon Jamieson, a
thirtysomething graduate of the University of the District of Columbia who spent
six months in shelters before joining the Tenderloin Group. Motivated mostly by
curiosity, the homeless trickled down to the organization's headquarters, a
leaky warehouse in the city's industrial area.

Once a week, nearly two dozen would-be thespians came together. Ms. Jamieson
recalls her elation after the first workshop: "It nourished my soul. I'm not
saying I'm gonna be another Whoopi in six months, but it gave incentive to wean
myself of the streets."

Few of the participants had acted before. Destiny Costa, a 21-year-old with a
history of both alcohol and drug abuse, had been a "witch slash tour guide" in a
Salem, Mass., museum. Ms. Jamieson had been an extra in "White Men Can't Jump"
and "The Mambo Kings."

Mr. Nilsson, it turned out, was spared searching the Tenderloin for his brother.
Greg resurfaced and has a small role in "Chalk" as the pool hall's custodian.

Like Greg, many in the cast have found not only an audience but a family. "On
the streets," explains Edwin Johnson, "you know a lot of people. But not one can
you call a friend." Although their part-time work on "Chalk" is unpaid pending a
distribution deal, many members of the Tenderloin Group have found their lives
changed. Disdaining alcohol and drug abuse, and becoming accustomed to keeping a
schedule, they have now managed to find jobs and, at the least, rooms of their
own.

"Chalk" has also proved to be an esthetic adventure. "I wanted to let them mine
their own experiences and emotions," Mr. Nilsson says. "There was a lot of
kindergarten rote reading at first, so we just found another skein to travel
along." The director was careful to guide his actors away from self-indulgence,
toward self-exploration. "Rob's different with each of us," Ms. Costa says. "He
may be teacher, mentor, brother or father. But he gets us all to open up."

Mr. Nilsson's evolving role falls uneasily on his shoulders. "I'm not an acting
teacher," he says. "I trust feeling over acting. My job is just a bit of
midwifery."

Yet with an anthropologist's allegiance to authenticity, he kept his writerly
impulses out of the script. "People on the street talk like no one could ever
write," Mr. Nilsson says with a laugh, quoting one of the Buck's mantras: "Ain't
no woman gonna bleed my best thoughts."

The director concedes that in the move from the workshop to the film, "a few got
away." One was Neil, by all accounts a natural leading man, but a heroin addict
unable to shake the habit.

Though Neil remains in the film in a smaller role, his departure forced Mr.
Nilsson and Mr. Bajema into a major rewrite. "I cast one of 'Chalk's' two
professionals, Kelvin Han Yee; and our African-American lead suddenly became
Asian," Mr. Nilsson says. And filming began on schedule.

Mr. Nilsson is determined to screen "Chalk" nationwide as a testament to his
cast. (A New York distributor, Arrow Entertainment, has expressed interest in
the rights.) For Mr. Nilsson, the workshop is not enough. "This is not about
process," he insists. "I'm an artist. I believe in leaving an artifact behind."

LOAD-DATE: February 14, 1993

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photos: The co-writer Don Bajema in "Chalk," a film about a small-time
pool-hall hustler. (Ethan Sing)(pg. 13); Mr. Nilsson, right, with the three
leads of "Chalk," Denise Cavaliere, Johnny Reese and Kelvin Han Yee -- On an
esthetic adventure. (Janet Silva)(pg. 19)

                   Copyright 1993 The New York Times Company

                              164 of 255 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                February 15, 1993, Monday, Late Edition - Final

Iraqi Leader Appeals to Clinton for New Relations

BYLINE: Special to The New York Times

SECTION: Section A; Page 1; Column 3; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 839 words

DATELINE: BAGHDAD, Iraq, Feb. 14


In his first personal appeal to the President Clinton, President Saddam Hussein
has urged him to open a new chapter in American relations with Iraq.

"I believe that the President of the biggest country in the world, with the most
destructive potential, needs to try wisdom and not weapons," the official Iraqi
news agency quoted the Iraqi leader as saying, in a reference to Iraq's crushing
defeat in the Persian Gulf war. In a good-will gesture on Jan. 19, Mr. Hussein
said his forces would respect the ban on flights over northern and southern Iraq
that the United States and its allies have imposed to enforce the cease-fire
terms that followed the gulf war.

"I simply believe that we can pave the way for building new relations," Mr.
Hussein added, "based on mutual respect and the exchange of legitimate interests
regardless to what has happened."

Talk With Ramsey Clark

The remarks were made Saturday during a "political dialogue" with Ramsey Clark,
a former United States Attorney General who was an outspoken critic of the gulf
war. Mr. Clark, now a lawyer in New York, told reporters that he had come here
as a private citizen to meet Iraqi officials and evaluate the effects of United
Nations sanctions.

Mr. Hussein's comments received wide coverage in the Government-controlled
media. A transcript of the discussion was read by an anchorman on state
television news for 70 minutes. Official newspapers displayed the report and
accompanying photographs of Mr. Hussein and Mr. Clark across their front pages.

It was the first time Mr. Hussein had personally called on Mr. Clinton to open a
dialogue; previous overtures were made by high-ranking Iraqi officials and the
Government media.

Mr. Hussein also praised Mr. Clinton for his opposition to the Vietnam war.
"There are some trying to make the anti-war past of Clinton a matter of personal
weakness." he said. "We and the entire humanity consider this aspect of
Clinton's personality a mark of strength."

Relieved by the arrival of a new man in the White House, Iraq has apparently
embarked on a fresh strategy of avoiding confrontation or radical oratory and
making peace gestures aimed at a rapprochement.

'Wants to Break the Ice'

"He doesn't want to give too much," an Arab ambassador in Baghdad said, "but he
wants to break the ice and the hostility."

The Iraqi leader, who provoked President Bush in his final days in the White
House, has not blatantly challenged the allies since the Revolutionary Command
Council announced a cease-fire over the flight-exclusion zones on the eve of Mr.
Clinton's inauguration.

There were two allied raids after the inauguration, intended to knock out Iraqi
ground installations, but the Pentagon said at the time that it was unclear
whether the activity around the installations should be considered a challenge
from Mr. Hussein.

Diplomats say Iraq switched off the targeting radar on its anti-aircraft missile
batteries immediately after Mr. Clinton took office. Most United States and
allied air strikes before and after the inauguration were touched off by fears
that activating the targeting radar presaged Iraqi attacks.

While the official Iraqi press still lashes out at the Bush Administration for
its past "aggression" against Iraq, it is calling on Mr. Clinton to seek a new
relationship.

"Peace, Mr. Clinton, is the language of Islam and Christianity together," a
writer said recently in Al Qadissiya, the Defense Ministry's newspaper. "It is
the language of justice, humanity and constructive dialogue. I repeat it once
again: Peace, peace, Mr. Clinton."

Positive Signs Seen

In a recent interview with state television, Iraq's representative to the United
Nations, Nizar Hamdoun, said he had detected "to some extent positive
indications" from the Clinton Administration. He cautioned, however, against
overoptimism and said that "one has got to wait" for an initial move from
Washington.

Mr. Clinton has suggested that there is no way that relations with Iraq can be
normal as long as Mr. Hussein remains in power, and Iraq does not seem to expect
a swift reversal of American policy. But the Iraqi President seems ready to
overlook the negative signals from Washington apparently in the belief that the
threat of Iranian expansionism will eventually encourage the United States and
the West to lean toward Baghdad.

"Saddam Hussein has shown his ability to manipulate tension," said a senior
European diplomat who spoke on condition of anonymity. "He wants to show he's
still in the game."

United Nations inspectors who are in Baghdad to seek out and destroy heavy
weapons, especially chemical and nuclear arms, say the Government has been
cooperative, and Baghdad has reiterated that it has complied with most United
Nations demands. But Iraq has so far refused to hand over a complete list of
foreign suppliers to its nuclear weapons program and has yet to accept long-term
monitoring of programs to insure that it never develops weapons of mass
destruction.

LOAD-DATE: February 15, 1993

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo: During a "political dialogue" Saturday in Baghdad with Ramsey
Clark, left, a former United States Attorney General, President Saddam Hussein
made his first personal appeal to President Clinton, urging him to open a new
chapter in American relations with Iraq. (Agence France-Presse)

                   Copyright 1993 The New York Times Company

                              165 of 255 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                February 15, 1993, Monday, Late Edition - Final

WEDDINGS;
Amy Gadol, Robert Deak

SECTION: Section B; Page 5; Column 6; Style Desk

LENGTH: 149 words


Amy Gadol, a vice president of the Bankers Trust Company, and Robert Frank Deak,
an independent investment adviser, both in New York, were married yesterday.
Charles D. Brown, the village justice of Asharoken, L.I., officiated at the
Princeton Club in New York.

Mrs. Deak graduated from Georgetown University, where she was elected to Phi
Beta Kappa, and received an M.B.A. from Columbia University. She is a daughter
of Ellis Gadol of Silver Spring, Md., and the late Selma Gadol. Her father is a
pharmacist in Silver Spring. Her previous marriage ended in divorce.

The bridegroom graduated cum laude from Princeton University. A former captain
in the United States Air Force, he was a pilot in Vietnam, directing air
strikes, and later flew KC-135 tanker planes. He is the son of Frank Deak of
Hollywood, Fla., and the late Agnes Deak. His previous marriage ended in
divorce.


LOAD-DATE: February 15, 1993

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1993 The New York Times Company

                              166 of 255 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                February 15, 1993, Monday, Late Edition - Final

Patents;
Dried Blood For Emergency Uses

BYLINE: By Sabra Chartrand

SECTION: Section D; Page 2; Column 5; Financial Desk

LENGTH: 335 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON


A California company has patented freeze-dried red blood cells that emergency
medical personnel can carry around at room temperature for weeks or months at a
time.

Present methods of storage require red blood cells to be refrigerated. If a
transfusion patient is too far from the blood source to receive unrefrigerated
blood (which lasts only a few hours), the delay while transporting the patient
to the blood source can be fatal. The problem is particularly acute for soldiers
wounded in battle. In Vietnam, the military relied on helicopter evacuation, but
many soldiers died who might have been saved if fresh blood had been at hand.

Cryopharm, a Pasadena company that specializes in cryo-preservation of natural
cells, received a patent for freeze-dried red blood cells that can be packaged
in plastic and stored at room temperature for up to six months before being
rehydrated. The present shelf life of refrigerated red blood cells, the vital
cells that carry oxygen from the lungs to body tissue, is about six weeks.

Protecting the Membrane

Freeze-drying is commonly used for food or pharmaceutical products. The
challenge in freeze-drying blood was to develop a method for removing liquid
without destroying the fragile cell membrane.

"It's very easy to break the membrane, and then the cell is dead and all the
internal proteins leak out," said Roger Hackett, Cryopharm's vice president. The
company's invention "puts the cells through the stress of removing the water by
replacing it with carbohydrates and polymers to protect the membrane."

The Navy Medical Command financed Cryopharm's research with a $1.3 million
grant. While the invention needs Food and Drug Administration approval before it
can be used on patients, it may someday help eliminate the problem of spoilage
in blood banks. The New England Journal of Medicine reported in 1990 that
hundreds of thousand of units of blood are thrown away each year because of
spoilage.

Cryopharm received patent 5,171,611

LOAD-DATE: February 15, 1993

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1993 The New York Times Company

                              167 of 255 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                February 15, 1993, Monday, Late Edition - Final

Pop and Jazz in Review

BYLINE: By STEPHEN HOLDEN

SECTION: Section C; Page 16; Column 3; Cultural Desk; Word and Image Page

LENGTH: 317 words



Eartha Kitt
Cafe Carlyle
Madison Avenue and 76th Street
 Through March 27

Among the dozens of seasoned Broadway and cabaret entertainers who have
declaimed Stephen Sondheim's show-business survival anthem "I'm Still Here,"
none give it quite as savage a spin as Eartha Kitt. In her interpretation, which
is the opening number of her new act, Miss Kitt practically spits out the
roller-coaster career reminiscence of an aging trouper in a tone that veers
between compressed bitterness and vindictive triumph.

The singer has also added her own personal touch to one line. "When you've been
through Johnson and Richard M. Nixon, anything else is a lark," she sings,
alluding to her precipitate career slump after her public criticism of the
Vietnam War to Lady Bird Johnson at a White House reception.

Looking remarkably fit at 65, Miss Kitt still embodies the self-mocking femme
fatale in voracious pursuit of diamonds, furs and "an old-fashioned
millionaire," just as she did 40 years ago. Her clenched, guttural delivery has
always suggested an artfully stylized parody of Marlene Dietrich applied to an
invented character that in old-fashioned parlance would have been labeled a
"hellcat," a "spitfire" or a "gold digger."

If today that archetype seems anachronistic, at Wednesday's early show of an
engagement that extends through March 27 she played the role with a sinuous
intensity, baring her legs and making provocative eye contact with the men
sitting at ringside tables. Only occasionally did she break the tension with a
broad smile or a laugh that turned it all into a joke.

For all its artifice, the show, in which the singer was backed by an able jazz
trio, had strong emotional undercurrents. A medley of "Guess Who I Saw Today?"
and "Could I Leave You?" conveyed a charge of genuine fury, while "Here's to
Life," ended the show on a note of grim celebration.

LOAD-DATE: February 15, 1993

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Review

                   Copyright 1993 The New York Times Company

                              168 of 255 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               February 17, 1993, Wednesday, Late Edition - Final

President's New Pitch: Redefining Patriotism as a Banner for Peace, Not War

BYLINE: By THOMAS L. FRIEDMAN,  Special to The New York Times

SECTION: Section A; Page 14; Column 1; National Desk

LENGTH: 951 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, Feb. 16


In telling Americans that it is their patriotic duty to support his economic
program, President Clinton is trying to redefine "patriotism" from pulling
together to face a mortal threat abroad to paying higher taxes to face an
economic threat at home.

This is both a high-risk political strategy and an experiment in the politics of
mobilizing mass opinion in the wake of the cold war. The biggest risk is that
Mr. Clinton will discover what Jimmy Carter did when he declared that his energy
conservation plan was "the moral equivalent of war" -- that most Americans found
the notion so overstated that they scoffed at it, undermining his whole
initiative.

While many Americans can understand an appeal to bipartisan support for an
economic plan, they may balk at the notion that it is their patriotic duty to
pay higher taxes.

"Patriotism and economics form strange bedfellows," said Representative Jim
Leach, Republican of Iowa, "One can make a national interest case for sacrifice,
one can make a common sense case for sacrifice, but patriotism is when you risk
your life, not when you risk your wallet."

New Political Vocabulary

Nevertheless, Mr. Clinton's use of patriotism in his Monday night address to the
nation is an experiment. It is based on the assumption that with the end of the
cold war, and with the absence of any overriding external threat, the nation's
patriotic fervor can be stoked up to confront an enemy that is depicted by bar
charts and line graphs, not as the Red menace or Nazi youth. The deficit,
health-care reform or low-wage jobs are concerns of every American, but how many
people would kill for them?

In a way, Mr. Clinton is introducing a whole new post-cold-war political
vocabulary, Mr. Leach said. The President is saying that the Government gets
involved abroad, in places like Somalia or the Balkans, out of "compassion" and
raises taxes at home out of "patriotism."

Another danger in appealing to patriotism in support of his budget is that Mr.
Clinton could be courting more division than solidarity. Those who will not
support his program on economic or philosophical grounds will not take kindly to
being labeled as being against God, country and apple pie.

"I, like others, was uncomfortable with the use of the word patriotism," said
Thomas Mann, a Congressional expert at the Brookings Institution, a research
organization. "Patriotism is a word that can be used and misused too easily. It
carries more baggage than Clinton would like. If you disagree with him, are you
unpatriotic? I don't think he wants to be in a position where those who oppose
his program might be accused of being unpatriotic, but that is a risk he is
running."

A Vietnam Comparison

If the debate really sharpens, it might be particularly ticklish for Mr.
Clinton, who in the Presidential campaign defended his opposition to the Vietnam
War as the product of his own interpretation of patriotism.

When Mr. Carter used the language of war to get Americans to accept a program of
stringent conservation, higher energy prices and penalties for waste, his plan
died three steps out of the starting gate.

"The big difference between now and 1977," said Jody Powell, who was President
Carter's spokesman, "is that when we used the moral equivalent of war only about
three people in the country believed that energy was such a big problem. A lot
of smart-mouthed Washington pundits dismissed it, until oil prices started
quadrupling.

"Hopefully, Clinton won't have to wait so long for vindication. I think what he
has going for him is that most Americans believe that we have a big problem with
the economy, that we need to pull together."

As Mr. Clinton put it in his address on Monday: "If you will join with me, we
can create an economy in which all Americans work hard and prosper. This is
nothing less than a call to arms to restore the vitality of the American dream.
When I was a boy, we had a name for the belief that we should all pull together
to build a better, stronger nation. We called it patriotism. And we still do."

Even though Mr. Clinton did not run a campaign based on the notion of sacrifice
by the middle class, Mr. Powell argued, his message of sacrifice is "not a big
surprise to people."

That is certainly the bet that Mr. Clinton is making, his aides say. He is
betting that Americans are worried enough about their children being worse off
than they are and Social Security not being there when they need it that they
will be ready to contribute the same sweat and tears, if not blood, they would
for a military crusade.

Mr. Clinton's personal poll taker, Stan Greenberg, said that also underlying Mr.
Clinton's use of patriotism is the President's conviction that most Americans
look back on the 1980's as a period of frustration over the lack of priority
given to American domestic affairs and interests.

"The notion that we are all in this together was lost as people sought their
separate fortunes," Mr. Greenberg said.

"What the President was trying to do last night was an attempt to recreate an
ethic where people begin to feel responsible again for their own country," he
added. "I think the public thinks the country is in crisis and that people have
failed to pitch in and they are waiting to be called to duty."

But this is a very different conscription notice from the one to which people
are most accustomed, or even from the one that Mr. Clinton prepared them for in
the campaign. It is asking an indulgent consumer society to do what is the
hardest thing possible: sacrifice now for deferred gratification. The question
is how many will answer Mr. Clinton's patriotic call, and how many will dodge
his draft?


LOAD-DATE: February 17, 1993

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: News Analysis

                   Copyright 1993 The New York Times Company

                              169 of 255 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               February 17, 1993, Wednesday, Late Edition - Final

Phnom Penh Journal;
For the Cambodian Vote, a Fourth of July Flavor

BYLINE: By PHILIP SHENON,  Special to The New York Times

SECTION: Section A; Page 4; Column 3; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 943 words

DATELINE: PHNOM PENH, Cambodia, Feb. 14


Kim Kethavy speaks with the confidence of a self-made man, and the 51-year-old
businessman is certain that the lessons he learned while making his fortune as a
gasoline-station owner in Long Beach, Calif., will serve him well if he somehow
manages to become the first freely elected President of Cambodia.

When Mr. Kethavy returned to his war-ravaged homeland last year, he opened his
campaign headquarters above a storefront on one of the busiest street corners in
Phnom Penh, across from the central market.

He knew from experience that his campaign message, like most advertising, should
be short and punchy.  That explains why the red-and-white banner that hangs from
the office balcony says simply, "Communism Is Evil!"

"One million eyes see my banner every day, easy," Mr. Kethavy said, motioning
out the window to the frenzied street scene below. "People see my sign and they
volunteer to help me. I believe all Cambodians hate Communism. They have
enthusiasm for democracy. They want to vote."

A Long Shot Against Sihanouk

Mr. Kethavy, who left Cambodia in the spring of 1975, only days before the
Maoist-inspired Khmer Rouge overran the country, is considered a long shot in
Cambodia's presidential election. The job will almost certainly go to Prince
Norodom Sihanouk, the nation's revered former monarch.

But in his enthusiasm for the democratic political process, Mr. Kethavy should
have his share of well-wishers among Cambodians, who have never before
experienced anything like a free and fair election, and who seem to like the
idea.

After a year in which the peace plan sponsored by the United Nations has often
seemed close to collapse, the 22,000-member peacekeeping force here can at least
boast of its success in signing up Cambodians to vote. Nearly 4.7 million people
have already registered, or about 9 out of every 10 eligible adults.

United Nations officials tell of Cambodians who crossed minefields or who
traveled through malarial jungles by oxcart or on foot to reach registration
stations.

Cambodia is a country that until last year fit every definition of a
totalitarian state. Now it has more than 20 political parties, several led by
former exiles like Mr. Kethavy.

"Many of us are coming home for this election," said Chea Savoeun, a 55-year-old
pharmacy owner from San Bernadino, Calif., who is now a candidate for Cambodia's
constituent assembly from the western province of Battambang.

Hundreds of other Cambodians have registered as candidates for the assembly to
be formed after the elections, which are scheduled for May 23 to 25.
Presidential elections are expected in June or July.

Reginald Austin, a Zimbabwean lawyer who is organizing the Cambodian elections
for the United Nations, said, "People are sick and tired of the war, and I think
the gut feeling out there is that this election will be a way of achieving
peace."

U.N. Firm on Election

The United Nations vows that the Cambodian election will go forward with or
without the participation of the Khmer Rouge, the nation's most feared and
powerful rebel group.

Khmer Rouge leaders signed a 1991 peace treaty intended to end the civil war,
but they are now boycotting the election to protest what they say is the
presence of Vietnamese troops in Cambodia. Diplomats here fear that the Khmer
Rouge may try to disrupt the election with violence.

The Vietnamese-installed Government has been blamed for a recent wave of
political violence, most of it directed against a political party long aligned
with Prince Sihanouk.

Mr. Kethavy has no affection for the Government -- "old Communists, completely
corrupt" -- and certainly none for the Khmer Rouge, who controlled the central
Government from 1975 until it was toppled in 1979 by the invading Vietnamese
Army.

He blames the Khmer Rouge and its leader, Pol Pot, for the deaths of every
member of his family: 32 people by his count, including his parents and four
brothers.

An engineer by training, Mr. Kethavy was working for the Phnom Penh water
department in March 1975 when his supervisor sent him to Saigon, then the
capital of South Vietnam, to buy a new water pump.

Days after he arrived in Vietnam, the Khmer Rouge marched into Phnom Penh,
evacuated the city and sealed Cambodia's borders.

Every Day a Fourth of July

Like many Cambodian refugees at the time, Mr. Kethavy eventually made his way to
the United States. He became successful as the owner of two Long Beach gasoline
stations, which he recently sold for $500,000. He says he has used more than
$100,000 of it to underwrite his presidential campaign and his new political
party, the Republic Democracy Khmer Party.

Mr. Kethavy first returned to Cambodia in 1990 to discover that "even though the
Khmer Rouge were gone, everything in the country was still in chaos." He left,
he said, with the inspiration to return to Cambodia again, perhaps permanently,
and this time to apply the lessons learned after so many years in the United
States.

"I decided to dedicate myself to teaching the Cambodian people about democracy
and freedom," he said.

For Mr. Kethavy, who carries an American passport, every day might just as well
be the Fourth of July. The offices of his campaign headquarters bloom with
American flags. (Under American immigration law, Mr. Kethavy would probably be
forced to give up his United States citizenship in the unlikely event that he
won.)

"If I'm elected, I'm going to beg America for help," Mr. Kethavy said. "Beg.
After so many years of war, Cambodia is absolutely zero now. I know that the
United States would help us. America would not let us bleed to death."


LOAD-DATE: February 17, 1993

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo: "People see my sign and they volunteer to help me," said Kim
Kethavy, a former gasoline-station owner in Long Beach, Calif., who returned to
Cambodia to run for President. "I believe all Cambodians hate Communism." He
stood in Phnom Penh by a banner that read "Communism Is Evil!" (Philip
Shenon/The New York Times)

                   Copyright 1993 The New York Times Company

                              170 of 255 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               February 17, 1993, Wednesday, Late Edition - Final

ABOUT NEW YORK;
Going to Court, Cabbies Hail This Man

BYLINE: By Alison Mitchell

SECTION: Section B; Page 1; Column 2; Metropolitan Desk

LENGTH: 851 words


THERE is a seedy Times Square waiting room that is taxi driver hell, a place
where all those cab-driving tormentors of New Yorkers huddle in their black and
brown leather jackets, their moods sullen as they wait to be called to account
before the Taxi and Limousine Commission's taxi court.

But the gloom changes subtly with the entrance of Tony Falese, the cabdriver's
friend, a guy with the stocky build of a cop, a silver bracelet, a beeper on his
belt, and eyes that don't flinch when he talks of the cabby who hit a passenger
in the face with a tow-chain.

Mr. Falese has the air of a lawyer, the Court Street kind, but he's only the
cabdriver's representative, without benefit of law degree, as the signs posted
all over the waiting room point out: "Please be advised that representatives are
not attorneys."

But within minutes a line of supplicants has formed at Mr. Falese's side. "Tony.
Ya remember me?" whispers a fellow in a black leather jacket, his stomach
protruding well beyond the zipper.

"Yeah. I saw your picture in my post office," says Mr. Falese. "What's the
matter?"

A quiet man, who is unusually dapper in a dark suit and who wants to appeal a
fine, is next. Mr. Falese tells him to get a tape of his hearing. He scans the
papers the driver has handed him. "Touching complainant's breast," he reads
slowly, out loud. "Uh, oh. "

"Did they convict you on all three charges, $350?" he asks, paying more
attention to this impassive client. "The guy did you a favor. He could have
killed you." This case could be a loser. This will take work. This will cost $50
-- up from the standard fee of $35. "You get the $50 into my office," Mr. Falese
admonishes.

There is that special breed of New Yorker who sees opportunity where others see
only bureaucracy. Such individuals end up with professions not easily
transferable to other places -- movers of cars to comply with alternate side of
the street rules or line-waiters at government offices.

Mr. Falese is one of that special breed. And each weekday he is at taxi court,
handling summonses delivered to any of the owners or drivers of the 2,602
medallion cabs he counts as clients, taking advantage of the rule that says a
cabby can have a representative who need not be a lawyer. He may not always save
them from the wrath of the court -- anything from a $15 fine to the revocation a
driver's license -- but at least he spares them time lost in the waiting room.

In the mornings, he conducts triage, deciding which of his 50 or so daily cases
are losers and whittling down to the 10 he will fight. The toughest are the
civilian complaints like this one: "Taxi driver got lost, drove me around in
circles for 40 minutes; driver drove like a maniac practically running people
down in the crosswalk, nearly causing accidents with other vehicles the whole
drive."

"I think we're dealing with a case of exaggeration," sniffs Mr. Falese.

Mr. Falese, after all, was once a taxi driver himself. After serving in Vietnam,
he drove a cab to put himself through City College and St. John's University.
That's when he became one of the very few New Yorkers who believe that every
taxi driver needs a break.

"All the time I was in Vietnam I was in less danger than when I was in the front
seat of the taxicab," he says. "When you're in a war zone you've got a fighting
chance to defend yourself."

After getting a master's degree in Chinese, Mr. Falese became a taxi fleet
manager. The company lasted three years, just long enough for Mr. Falese to get
good at dealing with summonses. So when the fleet went under, Mr. Falese kept
fighting tickets -- for a fee.

Eleven years later, at the age of 48, he has prospered. He has a company called
Cabfair on West 51st Street just off 10th Avenue. In the office, he's got memo
pads shaped like yellow cabs, yellow cab drawings, and even a taxi cookie jar.
And when he marches to court, taxi horns blare out greetings -- even from the
black livery cabs.

Of course, there are those officials at the Taxi and Limousine Commission who
would dearly love to get rid of the taxi representatives. Leeches. Abusive.
Obnoxious. These are just some of the words they use to describe them, thinking
especially of Mr. Falese.

Yesterday, the commission went one better and charged him with judge shopping,
an offense that can carry a 10-day suspension. Mr. Falese, who says he will have
to appear before a "real judge" at the Office of Adjudication and Truth in
Hearings, thinks he will probably defend himself.

Still, there was a moment when one judge couldn't resist a word of praise for
Mr. Falese when he rescued a taxi inspector who was being pummeled by a driver
in the court room. "Without regard for his own personal safety and having no
need to, Mr. Falese immediately and courageously came to the aid of the
inspector," wrote Anthony A. LaBella Jr., whose 1986 letter is now framed on Mr.
Falese's office wall.

"I wrestled the driver down and cuffed him," says Mr. Falese, who pulled the
handcuffs from the inspector's pocket. Some taxi drivers, he concedes, are
"lowlifes."

NAME: Tony Falese

LOAD-DATE: February 17, 1993

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Drawing

TYPE: Biography

                   Copyright 1993 The New York Times Company

                              171 of 255 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               February 17, 1993, Wednesday, Late Edition - Final

Richard Salant, 78, Who Headed CBS News in Expansion, Is Dead

BYLINE: By BRUCE LAMBERT

SECTION: Section B; Page 8; Column 1; Metropolitan Desk

LENGTH: 729 words


Richard S. Salant, who led CBS News for most of the 1960's and 70's during the
tumultuous Vietnam and Watergate eras, died yesterday while speaking to a group
in Southport, Conn. He was 78 and lived in New Canaan, Conn.

CBS said he suffered heart failure while giving a talk on news coverage to an
organization of elderly people at the Country Club of Fairfield in Southport.

He was credited with raising professional standards and expanding news
programming at CBS. He served as the president of CBS News from 1961 to 1964 and
from 1966 to 1979. After reaching the mandatory retirement age of 65 there, he
went to the rival NBC News as its vice chairman for two years.

During his tenure, CBS was the first network to expand its week-night news
report to 30 minutes. Under his leadership, CBS also introduced "60 Minutes" and
the "CBS Morning News" and "Sunday Morning" programs.

An Industry Leader

CBS became an industry leader under Mr. Salant, said Don Hewitt, the executive
producer of "60 Minutes." He said the competition in those years "was not so
much ratings but how many DuPont and Peabody Awards you could garner, and CBS
was on top."

The role of news organizations became an issue during the Vietnam War and the
Watergate scandal. Mr. Salant was known as both a defender of the news media's
First Amendment rights and a critic of what he considered the media's excesses
and failings.

When CBS's broadcast of the five-hour "Atlanta Child Murders" in 1985 prompted
debate on fictionalized versions of historical events, he said, "The problem
with 'docudramas' is people don't know where the docu ends and drama begins."

Fending off critics in the defense establishment, Mr. Salant broadcast the
documentary "The Selling of the Pentagon," which examined the military's
manipulation of public opinion and the news media, including CBS.

Dan Rather, the network's evening news anchor, said Mr. Salant "wrote the book
on integrity, ethics and excellence." Howard Stringer, the president of the CBS
Broadcast Group, called Mr. Salant "one of the founding fathers of CBS News."

Mr. Salant's promotion to head CBS News had raised eyebrows because he was the
first in that post without a journalism background, except for being editor of
his preparatory-school paper and on The Harvard Law Review. His career had been
as a government lawyer and corporate executive.

His actions soon dispelled the skepticism. Among his first decisions was to
segregate CBS News from sports and entertainment programming.

Fred W. Friendly, who served as CBS News president between Mr. Salant's two
stints as president, said, "He was the only non-news person as head of CBS News,
but I think he was probably the best we ever had."

Some Mistakes

Mr. Salant admitted some mistakes. He said that although he found Diane Sawyer
"probably the most intelligent and best-read reporter I was associated with," he
harbored "great reservations about hiring her -- she was too beautiful, and
there was that matter of her working for Nixon for three years."

Mr. Salant, a native of Manhattan, graduated from Harvard in 1935 and its law
school in 1938. He then became a lawyer for the National Labor Relations Board
in Washington. In 1940 and 1941 he was acting director of the Attorney General's
committee on administrative procedure, and from 1941 to 1943 worked for the
Solicitor General.

In World War II he was in the Navy as a lieutenant commander. After the war he
joined the Manhattan law firm of Rosenman, Goldmark, Colin & Kaye, which had the
Columbia Broadcasting System as a client. His relationship with CBS expanded
until he joined its staff in 1952 as a vice president.

Mr. Salant represented CBS in hearings before the Federal Communications
Commission and Congressional committees and headed the CBS legal team in
litigation with RCA-NBC over which would develop color television. Although CBS
lost, he impressed the network's president, Frank Stanton, who later appointed
him to CBS News.

Mr. Salant's marriage to Rosalind Robb ended in divorce. He is survived by his
wife of 37 years, the former Frances Trainer; four daughters, Linda Breck of
Tucson, Ariz., Susan Burdick of Singapore, Priscilla Salant of Moscow, Idaho,
and Sarah Gleason of Darien, Conn.; a son, Robb of Tucson; a sister, Helen
Isaacs of White Plains, and nine grandchildren.

NAME: Richard S. Salant

LOAD-DATE: February 17, 1993

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo: Richard S. Salant (1977)

TYPE: Biography; Obituary (Obit)

                   Copyright 1993 The New York Times Company

                              172 of 255 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               February 18, 1993, Thursday, Late Edition - Final

Vincent Jones, 86, A Former Executive For Gannett Papers

BYLINE: By BRUCE LAMBERT

SECTION: Section B; Page 11; Column 3; Metropolitan Desk

LENGTH: 298 words


Vincent S. Jones, a retired newspaper executive and leader in news
organizations, died on Monday at Genesee Hospital in Rochester, where he lived.
He was 86.

The cause of death was cancer, his family said.

Mr. Jones was the former vice president and executive editor of the Gannett
newspaper and broadcasting company and former vice president of the Gannett
Foundation, now called Freedom Forum.

He also served as president of the American Society of Newspaper Editors, New
York State Associated Press Association and New York State Society of Newspaper
Editors.

Mr. Jones directed, helped to write and edited "The Road to Integration," a
Gannett series that won a Pulitzer Prize in 1964, the first Pulitzer awarded to
a newspaper group. He also wrote a series on the Vietnam War and another on the
Soviet Union in 1969.

A Pulitzer Juror

An advocate of photographic journalism, he frequently lectured on that topic and
served eight years as a Pulitzer juror on photography. He was also a trustee of
the International Museum of Photography at the George Eastman House in
Rochester.

Born in Utica, N.Y., Mr. Jones was the son of William Jones, the president of
Gannett's Utica Daily Press. After graduating from Hamilton College Vincent
Jones started as a reporter at The Daily Press.

He was eventually promoted to managing editor and executive editor of The Daily
Press and its sister publication, The Utica Observer-Dispatch. In 1950 he went
to Gannett headquarters in Rochester as director of news and editorials. His
last job was at the foundation, where he worked from 1970 to 1975.

Surviving are his wife of nearly 53 years, the former Nancy Parsons; two
daughters, Suzanne Chansler of Atlanta, and Margot Mabie of Riverside, Conn.,
and four grandchildren.

NAME: Vincent S. Jones

LOAD-DATE: February 18, 1993

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo: Vincent S. Jones (United Press International, 1961)

TYPE: Biography; Obituary (Obit)

                   Copyright 1993 The New York Times Company

                              173 of 255 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                February 19, 1993, Friday, Late Edition - Final

Review/Television;
The Ordeals of the Beirut Hostages And Those Who Tried to Free Them

BYLINE: By JOHN J. O'CONNOR

SECTION: Section B; Page 16; Column 4; Weekend Desk; Word and Image Page

LENGTH: 885 words


Using the combination of journalistic investigation and dramatization that
worked so effectively in recent projects like "Dead Ahead: The Exxon Valdez
Disaster," HBO Showcase and Granada Television of Britain are now offering
"Hostages," the harrowing story of several civilians taken hostage in Lebanon
between 1985 and 1987 and held for four years or more. The docudrama has its
American premiere on HBO at 8 P.M. tomorrow.

Much of the film focuses on the plights of John McCarthy (Colin Firth), a
British television correspondent, and Brian Keenan (Ciaran Hinds), an Irish
teacher of English. Early on, they find themselves together in a dingy cell,
watched closely by their volatile captors and struggling to devise survival
techniques. A sense of humor proves crucial. (Part of their experience is
fictionalized in the powerful play "Someone Who'll Watch Over Me," currently on
Broadway.)

Eventually, Mr. McCarthy and Mr. Keenan, wrapped mummylike in tape, are
transported to another location where they are imprisoned with three Americans:
Terry Anderson (Jay O. Sanders), the Associated Press reporter; Tom Sutherland
(Josef Sommer), a professor at the American University in Beirut, and Frank Reed
(Harry Dean Stanton), the principal of a Beirut private school. A radio provides
some contact with what is happening in the outside world. Later, Terry Waite
(Conrad Asquith), a special envoy of the Archbishop of Canterbury, will be added
to the cell.

Bernard MacLaverty's script carefully, and pointedly, keeps placing the
struggles of the hostages in the larger context of Mideast and world politics.
The captors, members of Hezbollah, the terrorist, fundamentalist Party of God,
are not demonized, and Western leaders, most notably former Presidents Ronald
Reagan and George Bush, and former Prime Minister Margaret Thatcher, are hardly
sanctified. Campaigns to free the hostages are kept alive primarily by a handful
of courageous women, including Jill Morrell, Mr. McCarthy's fiancee, and Peggy
Say, Mr. Anderson's sister, played by Natasha Richardson and Kathy Bates
respectively. It's them against the wary politicians and bureaucrats, and
"Hostages" leaves no doubt about whose side it is on.

Work on the film began in 1990, following the release of Mr. Keenan. He and the
other hostages' families cooperated but did not want the film released until all
the captives in the story had come home. The last were released in late 1991.
Then, however, some of the men signed book and possible film contracts of their
own (Mr. Anderson has a deal with NBC). When this docudrama was recently
broadcast in England, several of the former hostages signed a letter of protest
concerning rights to the material. But an HBO spokesman now says that at least
two of the Americans later conceded that the film isextremely accurate.

The grim depiction of meaningless captivity, of faint hope and profound despair,
reduces human existence to its bare-bones essentials. As Mr. Keenan says in the
docudrama after his release, "In captivity, you learn to live with what is, not
what you want it to be." David Wheatley's direction, and riveting performances,
especially from Mr. Firth and Mr. Hinds, drive the point home powerfully.

'Miles Davis'
 'A Tribute'
PBS, tonight at 9
(Channel 13 in New York)

The jazz master, who died in September 1991 at the age of 65, is remembered for
two special hours, with Quincy Jones as host, on "Great Performances." The first
part is a 1986 documentary, "Miles Ahead," its wealth of biographical material
enhanced with a rare Davis interview. The second is "Miles at Montreux," a
concert taped just months before his death. With Mr. Jones conducting, Davis
breaks a long-standing rule and returns to his musical past, performing cuts
from classic albums like "Sketches of Spain" and "Porgy and Bess." His tightly
wound passion and genius are never less than thrilling.

'Frankie's House'
A & E, Sunday at 8 P.M.

Based on the true exploits of the photographer Tim Page, this tough Australian
production looks at the Vietnam War from a different, and unusually candid,
angle. In 1965, Page (Iain Glenn), an English hippie, moves into a Saigon
brothel and makes friends with a motley crew of journalists who can already
sense the disaster in store for the United States. Fortified with liquor,
marijuana and rock, the hearties set off for battles wherever they can find
them. Kevin Dillon plays Sean Flynn, Errol's son, who disappears forever in
Cambodia. Jeff Beck and Jed Leiber composed the music track. The two-parter will
conclude Tuesday at 9 P.M.

Hostages
HBO, tomorrow at 8 P.M.

Directed by David Wheatley; written by Bernard MacLaverty; director of
photography, John Hooper; editor, Anthony Ham; music by Richard Harvey;
production designer, Stephen Fineren; produced by Sita Williams for HBO/Granada
Productions; Colin Callender and Ray Fitzwalter, executive producers.

Frank Reed . . . Harry Dean Stanton
Peggy Say . . . Kathy Bates
Terry Anderson . . . Jay O. Sanders
Jill Morrell . . . Natasha Richardson
John McCarthy . . . Colin Firth
Tom Sutherland . . . Josef Sommer
Terry Waite . . . Conrad Asquith
Brian Keenan . . . Ciaran Hinds
Elaine Spence . . . Ruth McCabe
Brenda Gilham . . . Rosaleen Linehan

LOAD-DATE: February 19, 1993

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo: Colin Firth, right, in the role of a kidnapped reporter, in
"Hostages." (Yoni Hamenacem/HBO)

TYPE: Review

                   Copyright 1993 The New York Times Company

                              174 of 255 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               February 20, 1993, Saturday, Late Edition - Final

ABOUT NEW YORK;
A World of Hope Away, A Daughter Floats Free

BYLINE: By Deborah Sontag

SECTION: Section 1; Page 23; Column 1; Metropolitan Desk

LENGTH: 858 words


TWIRLING a strand of her long, fine hair, Tram Thuy Ngoc Tran, 17, giggled about
her latest anxiety: dissatisfaction with a 95 average. "My teacher tell me to
stop coming for extra help after school," she said. "I tell her I stop when I
get 100."

Before she arrived in New York, Tram's worries were of a different order, beyond
the scope of her classmates' imaginations. They see Tram's quiet intensity, her
disregard of pop culture and her annoying success at math. What brought her into
their midst is a mystery she encourages the few curious souls to ignore.

Six years ago, Tram left Vietnam in the steamy dead of night, 11 years old and
alone on a sailboat crowded with strangers. It was her second escape attempt in
as many years. A child refugee, Tram was too young to understand what she was
fleeing, but old enough to know that her father was sending her away out of
love.

"Don't come back, don't ever come back to Vietnam," her father whispered when he
left her at the boat owner's house. A former South Vietnam Army official, he
worried that Tram, his oldest child, would be marked for life as the daughter of
a pariah who endured years in the Communists' re-education camps.

So he sent Tram into the world like a message of hope in a bottle, bobbing on
the dark seas with nothing but naivete to keep her from being afraid. Tram would
be the family's emissary, their communal chance at a future -- if she survived.

"When you sail away, you see only the sky, no trees," she said. "You don't know
where you can land. You think, maybe 99 percent die, 1 percent live. Maybe you
be lucky."

It is one struggle to be an immigrant looking for a better life, another still
to be a political refugee fleeing persecution. But to be a refugee as a child,
unaccompanied by any adult, is a displacement so great as to be almost
inconceivable.

"Wow!" said Tram, using one of her favorite English words. "It was really an
adjustment for me, coming from refugee camp in Thailand to New Rochelle."

Some child refugees are hustled out of their countries after their parents are
killed, some sent away to escape persecution, discrimination or a dead-end
future. Since 1980, New York City's government agencies have resettled 1,233
unaccompanied child refugees, placing them with foster families in the region
and overseeing their care until they turn 21.

Like Tram, most are model wards: 90 percent complete high school and 40 percent
go on to college. It is as if adversity has steeled them to disassociate their
nightmares and, with the resilience of children, start anew.

"They're children who've had incredible experiences, but yet they don't seem to
allow themselves to look back," said Tara Geertgens, a clinical social worker
and Tram's foster mother. "They feel a real sense of loss, and it's very
painful, because family is very important to them. But they don't want to be
ungrateful for the opportunity being given them."

The first escape attempt landed 10-year-old Tram in a provincial jail.

A year later, on the first day of her second attempt, the boat's motor died, and
70 refugees prayed that the wind would blow them to Thailand. In Thailand, Tram
spent three years confined to refugee camps, scrounging for food and water and
pinning her hopes on being accepted by the United States.

"When they accept me -- Wow! -- I so, so, so happy," said Tram, who is 5 feet
tall, slender and as giggly as a little girl.

When Ms. Geertgens went to the airport to meet Tram in September 1990, she found
a small, shy girl shivering with fear. Tram clutched the woman she now calls Mom
for 24 hours. Her thick accent made her few words of English incomprehensible.

But scared as she was, Tram was astounded by her new suburban home, where she
now has a room filled with stuffed animals and tiny porcelain figurines.

"I left Vietnam when I was 11, so I could not remember what a house look like,"
she said. "In camp, you sleep in grass houses with a whole bunch of kids. Here
you have a bed by yourself. America!"

In her first year at New Rochelle High School, Tram kept within the small circle
of her three Vietnamese classmates and several other foreign-born students. "I
stay separate from the Americans," she said. "I say, 'Oh, my God, they so big."

Now in her third academic year, Tram has yet to go to a movie or out on a date.
But she does have American friends now, other serious students from chemistry
and Latin classes. She even sits with them in the cafeteria, though after some
chatting, she always says: "O.K. Time out. I got to study."

The American students pester her with questions about her background that she
generally evades. "American kids, first question -- 'Why you leave?' " she said.
"Second question -- 'You don't have any parent? Any relative?' "

For six years, Tram has communicated with her parents only by letter. She misses
them, but honoring their decision to send her into exile means refusing to dwell
on any sadness. Still, sometimes, she cannot help but feel twinges.

"When I see American kids, they have parents, I feel really bad," she said.
"They say, 'Dad, Mom.' I feel terrible."

LOAD-DATE: February 20, 1993

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Drawing

                   Copyright 1993 The New York Times Company

                              175 of 255 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                February 21, 1993, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

Mississippi Learning

BYLINE: By Alexis Jetter;  Alexis Jetter writes frequently on culture and
politics.

SECTION: Section 6; Page 28; Column 3; Magazine Desk

LENGTH: 5423 words


Keep inside the Mississippi Delta, where he once dodged Klan bullets and
sharecropper adulation, Bob Moses has quietly returned to finish the task he
started 30 years ago.

It's midnight in Mississippi, and memories stir as Moses walks through the
deserted Jackson airport. Black men once feared traversing this state after
dark. Tonight, despite the hour, he dials Doc Anderson, a local physician who in
the 1960's had a busy sideline stitching up civil rights workers. "Guess what?"
Moses says, laughing softly at his own audacity. "I'm here. Can you come get
me?"

A call in the night from a man gone almost 30 years doesn't seem to faze people
whose bonds were forged in the flames of civil rights era Mississippi. Few here
have forgotten the shy, bespectacled math teacher who in 1964 guided Freedom
Summer, busing hundreds of college students into backwoods Mississippi to
educate and register black voters. "The purpose," Moses says, "was to break open
Mississippi as a closed society."

Today he's seeking to open another closed society: the world of educational
opportunity denied to poor children, black and white alike. His trademark
overalls and baby face are gone, but the curiously unblinking gaze and hushed
voice haven't changed at all. And now, in the same Delta towns where he was
beaten and jailed three decades ago, Moses has reappeared -- retooled for the
90's as director of the Algebra Project, a crusade that experts say could
revolutionize math education.

"It's our version of Civil Rights 1992," Moses says. "But this time, we're
organizing around literacy -- not just reading and writing, but mathematical
literacy." The parallels to the past, he says, are clear. "The question we asked
then was: What are the skills people have to master to open the doors to
citizenship? Now math literacy holds the key."

Labor and education experts agree. According to the Department of Labor, more
than half of today's high-school graduates lack the analytic skills required for
jobs. And minority groups, which by the year 2000 will constitute a third of all
students, are lagging far behind.

Determined to reverse that trend, Moses established the first Algebra Project in
Cambridge, Mass., in 1982. The idea was simple: Without algebra, the door to
college and most skilled professions is locked. But many black and Hispanic
students, if they take algebra at all, learn it too late to get on the
college-prep mathematics track. So why not expose every child to algebra in
middle school?

The techniques are vintage 1964. Just as Freedom School volunteers used examples
from sharecroppers' own experiences to teach history and writing, Algebra
Project students learn to think and "speak" mathematically by tackling problems
that arise in their daily lives. The philosophical link is universal access: "It
wasn't the right to vote for a few people," Moses says. "It was the right to
vote for everybody."

The idea struck a deep chord in parents, teachers and school reformers. By its
10th year, the program stretched from Boston to San Francisco, winning accolades
from the National Science Foundation and reaching 9,000 inner-city youths. But
for Moses, something was missing; call it a matter of the heart. Last year,
joined by Dave Dennis, who co-directed Freedom Summer, Moses found his answer:
the Delta Algebra Project of Mississippi.

Together, Bob Moses and Dave Dennis have returned to the bloodiest battleground
of the civil rights movement. This time they're talking more about education
than liberation. But the stakes are just as high, for they hope to revive a
dream deferred.

Moses fears that, without critical thinking skills, the Delta's children will be
"tossed by the wayside," like their parents and grandparents, the black
sharecroppers of the 1960's. "They didn't have the citizenship requirements of
their age," he says. "And so they were serfs, absolutely without power. What is
happening now is that we are watching the new serfs emerge."

THE SLEEK BLUE VAN HURTLES PAST misty bayous and scrubby pine forests as Moses
and Dennis head toward the Mississippi Delta. Dennis, his eyes red from fatigue,
sips iced tea in a fruitless effort to stay alert. Moses grips the wheel and
stares straight ahead. After a grueling weeklong Algebra Project workshop in New
Orleans, they're on their way to another teacher training session in Itta Bena,
Miss.

They make an odd pair: Moses' penetrating eyes and soft voice are virtually
hypnotic; Dennis, with his easy laugh and fast talk, is an openly emotional man
impatient with the pace of change. But they both came of age in Mississippi, and
that experience shaped an intimacy that requires few words.

In the back seat, nibbling soybeans, is a long-haired young drummer, Ben
Moynihan, lost in thought. He uses the contrasting rhythms of African drumming
to explain math ratios to children, and he has come from Boston to demonstrate
his techniques to Delta teachers. But this trip is largely a journey of
discovery. For Ben is the child of two Freedom Summer volunteers -- one black,
one white -- whom he has never met. And now, for the first time, he hopes to
find some clue to their identities.

Inside the Delta, the road narrows, bisecting ramshackle towns where Coca-Cola
still comes in green bottles and cotton is still king. Bits of fluff blow off
the bale-laden trucks, forming a white spine down the highway, and cotton gins
rumble beside the railroad tracks. Time and the catfish industry have subtly
altered the Delta landscape. Many cotton fields are now flooded, gridded catfish
paddies, with Canada geese paddling lazily on top. And there are no "Whites
Only" signs at roadside rest stops. But for all that, the clock seems to have
stopped here, and every mile is steeped in memory.

Moses once described Mississippi as "the middle of the iceberg." No other state
so defiantly hoisted segregation as its banner; no other state so openly used
the sheriff's badge, the lynch mob and the burning cross to enforce it.
"Mississippi set itself up to be our destiny," Moses says. "And so it attracted
what it eventually got: us."

Moses arrived alone in 1960. Dennis rolled in a year later on the first busload
of Freedom Riders to go into Mississippi, a daring crusade to break the South's
color bar. In 1964, together with a band of young activists from the Student
Nonviolent Coordinating Committee (SNCC) and the Congress of Racial Equality
(CORE), Moses and Dennis embarked on a historic drive to teach Mississippi
blacks about their constitutional rights and register them to vote.

Only a case of bronchitis prevented Dennis from meeting Mickey Schwerner, James
Chaney and Andrew Goodman, civil rights workers, at a bombed-out church in
Neshoba County on June 21, 1964. He has never quite shaken a sense of
responsibility for their deaths, or forgotten the horror uncovered in the search
for their bodies: other corpses, of black men mutilated beyond recognition,
caught on snags in Mississippi rivers.

But Mississippi holds more than nightmares for Dennis, who went on to become a
successful lawyer in New Orleans. He recalls the deep affection the activists
had for each other, the revolution of hope they inspired and the work they left
undone. "When I left Mississippi," Dennis says, "I felt that there was a part of
me missing. I didn't finish something."

MOSES SAYS HE, TOO, LEFT PART OF his soul in Mississippi. Raised in the Harlem
River Houses in New York, he had been a Harvard Ph.D. candidate in philosophy
and was a middle-school math teacher when news of the lunch-counter sit-in
movement drew him south in 1960. In Atlanta he met EllaBaker, director of the
Southern Christian Leadership Conference, godmother of SNCC and a fierce
believer in the power of common people to move mountains.

With Baker's backing, Moses set out on a solitary tour of rural Mississippi,
written off by most civil rights leaders as too dangerous to organize. By 1961,
he was registering blacks to vote in towns where few had dared to claim even
their most basic rights. Exhibiting almost mystical calm in the face of terrible
violence, the soft-spoken young man quickly became a legend.

When a sheriff's cousin gashed his head open with a knife handle, a badly
bleeding Moses still managed to stagger up the courthouse steps to register two
black farmers. Seemingly oblivious to danger, he fell asleep in a SNCC office
where only hours before workers had leaped out a window to escape an armed mob
of local whites. And in Greenwood, when three Klansmen opened fire on his car,
Moses grabbed the steering wheel with one hand, cradled the bleeding driver with
the other and somehow managed to bring the careening car to a halt.

Arrested and jailed countless times, he resisted his growing "Moses" reputation
-- going so far as to change his name to Parris, his mother's maiden name. But
his exploits fed the legend. "In Mississippi, Bob Moses was the equivalent of
Martin Luther King," says Taylor Branch, author of "Parting the Waters," a
Pulitzer Prize-winning account of the early civil rights movement.

Moses' insistence on Socratic reasoning and bottom-up organizing, which often
dragged SNCC meetings late into the night, alternately inspired and maddened his
colleagues. "Bob combines Calvinist, absolute certainty with a deep commitment
to democracy and poor folks," says a longtime friend, the Rev. James Breeden.
"He can be the most charming, open guy you'll ever want to meet or a totally
inside-himself, enigmatic mystic. But one rarely runs into such an implacable
being."

After Freedom Summer, however, something snapped. He watched in pain as SNCC's
interracial "Beloved Community" fractured in a season of violence that left 4
people dead and 80 beaten, and 67 churches, homes and businesses destroyed.
"That summer," Moses says, "people who were talking to each other stopped.
People who had been working together left. The whole spectrum of race relations
compressed, broke down and washed us away."

Moses' personal life, too, lost its moorings. His marriage to Dona Richard, a
SNCC worker, ended in divorce. And as he grew more actively opposed to the
Vietnam War, Federal authorities -- who hadn't accepted his claim of
conscientious objection -- drafted him. In 1966, Moses fled to Canada. For two
years he lived under an assumed name and scraped by with a medley of jobs.
Finally, Moses and his second wife, Janet Jemmott, a former SNCC activist, moved
to a dusty village in Tanzania, where they lived for eight years.

It was a good time to be away. Assassinations, the war, racial polarization: "I
was glad to miss it all," Moses says. "It was a good time to duck. The notion
that you can fight everything is crazy." Instead, he taught high-school math,
raised four children and gradually recovered from the "deep sea pressure" of
Mississippi. "You just felt like you were underwater all the time."

IN 1976, AFTER 10 YEARS in exile, Moses returned. Janet entered medical school,
and he resumed his doctoral studies at Harvard. But he was soon distracted.
Unhappy with the math instruction his eldest daughter, Maisha, was receiving at
Martin Luther King Jr. School in Cambridge, Moses insisted on tutoring her at
home.

"Doing math with my dad was part of our responsibility in the family," Maisha
recalls, "like taking out the garbage or doing laundry." By 1982, however,
Maisha was in open revolt about learning math at home, instead of with her
schoolmates. So when her eighth-grade teacher invited Moses to come in and teach
algebra, he followed his daughter to school.

It was the end of his doctoral studies and the beginning of the Algebra Project.
Freed from financial burdens by a MacArthur Foundation "genius" grant, Moses
turned his full attention to teaching -- and watching. Some found his
beetle-browed gaze unsettling. Mary Lou Mehrling, Maisha's teacher, recalls one
frightened little girl running out of the classroom in tears. "His steady,
constant demands, that intensity, just unnerved her," Mehrling says, laughing.
"And it unnerved us!"

But all that watching paid off. Moses noted that children had difficulty moving
from an arithmetic understanding of numbers -- usually associated with the
question "How much?" -- to the more flexible algebraic concept, which requires
an additional question: "Which way?"

Getting the right answer wasn't the point, Moses realized. Students needed to
puzzle their way to the right questions, then chart out a variety of solutions.
Watching children distill lessons from concrete experiences, he created a
five-step model that reproduced their natural learning process. In an Algebra
Project exercise, a child experiences an event, draws or models it, writes and
talks about it, translates it into mathematical language and then develops
symbols to represent it.

Moses came to believe that even tricky mathematical concepts like negative
numbers, which make little sense to children but are critical in algebra, could
be more readily explained if linked to everyday applications. He scouted around
Cambridge for a simple, vivid example and found one staring him in the face: the
Red Line in nearby Central Square.

Herding his students into a subway car, Moses took them inbound to Boston, then
back past Central Square to the end of the line in Cambridge. Back in class,
armed with magic markers, students assigned a value of zero to the Central
Square station. Soon they had transformed the train route into a number line
with positive values for inbound stops, negative for outbound.

Students got the point, a fun ride and a chance to make art out of numbers. One
boy who used to hide behind a piano during math class emerged. Groans
diminished. Resistance ebbed. Soon Moses was experimenting with other ways to
teach algebraic concepts: zodiac games to teach multiplication and division and
lemonade concentrate to teach ratios.

Moses next began a series of weekend tutorials for parents and breakfast
workshops for children who needed it. Not everyone was thrilled. "It was like
torture," says Claude Sneed, now 19, whose mother roused him from sleep for
those 7:30 A.M. sessions. "I know for myself, whenever math time came around I
got a sick feeling in my stomach. They worked us hard."

But Sneed sailed through the ninth-grade qualifying test for honors math and
moved directly into the sequence of geometry, trigonometry and precalculus. Even
those who didn't pass advanced to honors algebra, which is still on the
college-prep track. Today Sneed is an electrical-engineering student at
Northeastern University. Maisha Moses is a Harvard graduate and Algebra Project
developer in Oakland. And the King school is using project techniques in every
grade from kindergarten to eighth.

Moses has just begun to assess his project's long-term impact; as yet, there is
insufficient data to judge its success. But anecdotal information and
standardized tests from several schools appear to confirm what Algebra Project
teachers have long suspected: "When these kids get the privilege of creating
their own mathematics, they become independent learners," says Dorothy Strong,
director of mathematics for the Chicago public schools. "And that works on the
whole child."

The best example is the King School, where the program has been in place for 10
years. Before the Algebra Project, few students took the optional
advanced-placement qualifying test in ninth grade, and virtually none passed. By
1991, the school's graduates ranked second in Cambridge on the test.

In Chicago, parents emboldened by a citywide school reform movement imported
math Moses-style into 19 elementary schools, beginning in 1990. Several
skeptical teachers resisted, but last year many students showed marked
improvement in reading and writing as well as in math. And in Louisville, Ky.,
one principal credits the project with nearly doubling the number of students
who scored at or above the 50th percentile on a national math achievement test.

News of the project's success spread quickly. Soon schools in Boston, Los
Angeles, Milwaukee, Oakland and San Francisco jumped on board. Reports trickled
south, but Moses -- already leapfrogging across the north to personally train
every Algebra Project teacher -- gave little thought to expanding there.

Then "Mississippi Burning," Alan Parker's 1988 film about the murder of the
three civil rights workers, stirred long-repressed anger. Outraged at what they
considered the film's distortions, and particularly galled by its heroic
depiction of the Federal Bureau of Investigation, former activists held a
symposium in Jackson. Their informal title: "Why Was Mississippi Burning and Who
Put Out the Fire?"

It was a wrenching reunion; Dennis had not seen Moses for 24 years. "For us to
come together again after a white man makes a crazy movie is insanity," Dennis
said that day, his voice choked with emotion. "We have to get back in here.
We've got a lot of stuff that's unfinished."

Dennis spoke about the tongue-lashing he'd got from the aging Mississippi
firebrand Annie Devine. "Mrs. Devine compared Bob and me to runaway fathers. She
said: 'You gave birth and you left, and you haven't done anything to support
your children.' " Dennis paused, laughed through his tears and said, "Maybe
that's what's been nagging me for so many years."

Rising at dawn, the men spoke for hours by the edge of a Jackson motel pool, and
when they parted they still had 10 years to fill in. Both had remarried, both
had children to brag about. But Moses kept coming back to the same thing: the
Algebra Project. It's the future, he said. And it's the legacy of our past.

Moses pointed to the example of their late friend Fannie Lou Hamer of Sunflower
County in Mississippi. Hamer was 44 when she learned she had the right to vote.
But encouraged by SNCC, the plantation worker rose to become one of the
movement's most eloquent and savvy leaders. And when, in televised testimony at
the 1964 Democratic National Convention, she passionately demanded an end to
all-white delegations, she shook the conscience of the nation.

"Immersing everyone in the process, insisting that everyone get in there and do
it, accelerated the development of leadership," Moses told Dennis. "Here, you
immerse the child in a physical event he understands, and show that child how to
take from that event the mathematics he needs. It's the same process that raised
someone like Fannie Lou Hamer until she could speak to the whole country."

Last year, Dennis left his law practice and moved to Jackson with his wife,
Carolyn, and two youngest children to coordinate the Algebra Project's Southern
Initiative. He now administers programs in Louisiana, Kentucky, Arkansas and
Mississippi, where he hopes to put some old demons to rest.

"Coming back to Mississippi, you see what you left," Dennis says over a hasty
cup of tea in Greenwood. "Yes, there's been progress. But then you wonder what
direction that is going in. There still is no format for saving the children."

BUT IN Greenwood itself, and in Sunflower and Washington Counties to the west,
seeds planted by the Algebra Project are beginning to bear fruit for more than
2,000 Delta schoolchildren in 10 area schools. Inside Thelma McGee's classroom
in Indianola, children are sprawled on the floor, under their desks, drawing on
butcher paper, debating in groups, writing stories -- doing everything, in
short, you wouldn't expect them to do in a sixth-grade math class.

McGee, a sweet-tempered woman who keeps a Bible on her desk for personal
reference, answers an inquiry here and there but lets her young charges answer
most of their own questions. "It's embarrassing to ask your teacher," explains
Robert Kent, a lean, serious boy with metal-rimmed glasses and a gray sweatsuit.
"But you can ask your friends. They're trustworthy."

On the walls are drawings of their recent bus tour through town: the courthouse,
National Guard armory, fire station, airport and graveyard. One boy's cemetery
has a gravestone with "JoJo" written across it. "He's an imaginary friend,"
explains a squirming Davis Willis. Next are slightly more abstract renderings of
the trip, with directional symbols of the students' own design. The idea, says
McGee, is to acquaint children with numerical equivalents for distance,
direction, time and space in their own living, breathing environment.

Moses' "transitional curriculum" for sixth graders is designed to introduce
students gently to concepts they will need later in algebra. Children draw,
write and discuss their ideas in small, cooperative teams and concoct stories
from their own experience that illustrate mathematical concepts. "Mostly you
have to talk about it before you're ready to solve the problem," Robert Kent
says, drawing vigorous nods of agreement from his teammates.

Getting children to talk to each other about math is exactly what Moses intends.
There's no need, he says, to teach children better ways to compute. "Today,
drill and practice doesn't take you front and center," he says. "Computers can
crunch more numbers than anyone's going to dream of crunching. There are no jobs
out there for people who know how to divide."

Educators say his approach flips traditional math instruction, often used to
filter out weaker students, on its head. "Seeing mathematics as a language leads
naturally to the assumption that everyone can learn to be math literate," says
Claudia Henrion, a Middlebury College math professor working to reform
high-school and college teaching. "We would never say to a student: 'Sorry,
you're not bright enough to learn English.' "

And an observer doesn't have to look far to find the echo of Fannie Lou Hamer in
McGee's classroom. "I think that I am good at math since we started the Algebra
Project," says Shemetric Falconer, a slender girl in a pink T-shirt and jeans.
"I can grow up and get a job and be good at this stuff."

Shemetric, who last year wanted no part of school at all -- and was considered
at risk for dropping out -- now says she wants to teach algebra. "She's
gradually coming out of her shell," McGee says. "They sit there and explain
things to each other, so she's beginning to feel more comfortable."

Moses wants students to discover their own mathematical thinking. So rather than
taking an abstract approach to concepts like equivalency -- the idea that
one-half is equivalent to five-tenths, even though it doesn't look a thing like
it -- the Algebra Project asks students to write "make-do" parables that
demonstrate equivalencies in real life. In Thelma McGee's classroom, children
write about substituting baking soda for toothpaste, flour for pancake mix and
liver for fishing bait.

Equivalence, any theoretician will attest, is a fundamental concept of modern
mathematics and a stepping stone to higher math. Moses makes it child's play.
Using snap-together cubes, Play-Doh, jump ropes and Chinese zodiac restaurant
menus, Moses has found ways to introduce even such difficult notions as
displacement, integers and vectors. "It gets harder as you go along," confides
another student. "But it seems like they cover it up by making it fun."

Rural reality does pose problems for the Algebra Project's urban-based
curriculum. Since there are no subways, teachers use a bus route for the
number-line exercise, and students pick their own landmarks.

Often Algebra Project bus tours teach more than just math. During a recent
training, one white teacher on a bus full of educators pointed out the former
site of Greenwood's swimming pool. Her grandfather built the pool, she said. And
in the 1960's, when the town was ordered to let black people swim there, her
father was one of the men who poured it full of concrete.

OF COURSE, MISSISSIPPI has changed since Bob Moses and Dave Dennis left. Blacks,
who constitute 36 percent of the population -- the highest concentration in any
Southern state -- now occupy nearly a quarter of the seats in the State
Legislature. And in the former heartland of the Ku Klux Klan and White Citizens
Councils, overt racism is no longer in vogue. Moses, who once slept on the
floors of those bold enough to give him shelter, is greeted politely by white
clerks at Greenwood's Best Western motel when he comes to town.

But Greenwood's blacks still live apart from whites, separated by the
traditional dividing line: railroad tracks. The Magnolia State leads the nation
in poverty, infant mortality and illiteracy. And its schools are still
segregated.

In 1970, as court-ordered desegregation plans went into effect, Mississippi's
dual public school system simply changed form. It became, for the most part, a
black-public, white-private system, as predominantly white institutions like
Pillow Academy in Greenwood sprang up overnight. The educational legacy of Jim
Crow still cripples the Delta's black populace. Into the mid-60's, the black
school year was substantially shortened by white administrators more concerned
with the cotton crop than with educating black children. That shortchange,
coupled with agricultural mechanization and a virtually nonexistent industrial
base, has mired Delta blacks in illiteracy and unemployment.

For too long, says Howard Sanders, superintendent of schools in Hollandale,
black parents have told their children to leave Mississippi and "never look
back." The Delta's calcified, semifeudal economy left aspiring young blacks
little choice. Now he and local business leaders are looking to the Algebra
Project to lay the groundwork for economic revival.

Visions of economic renewal have attracted whites as well as blacks. Rebecca
Baird, a plucky teacher from Williamsburg, Ky., hopes to lure corporations to
her depressed coal town with the promise of a math-literate work force. "We're
trying to train our kids so we can compete with bigger cities," says Baird, who
attended a recent Algebra Project training in New Orleans. Her school district
is offering free videos, fast food or T-shirts to kids who sign up. Baird calls
it stealth learning: "They'll learn without realizing they're learning."

Other Southern whites have embraced the Algebra Project for reasons that have
little to do with civil rights or economic development. Debbie Murphy is a
blond, blue-eyed daughter of the Confederacy. She grew up in the small Delta
town of Ruleville, attended an all-white private academy and didn't realize
until her first day of college at Ole Miss "that this was not a segregated
world." Murphy never heard of Hamer, who lived on the black side of Ruleville,
until the day she died.

But Murphy went on to become a public-school math teacher. She's committed to
teaching at Lockard, an integrated school in Indianola. And what draws her to
the Algebra Project is that it works. At first, she admits, she was far from
convinced. "I was very, very skeptical," she says. "But I just fell into it. It
was so easy. They learn from each other."

"Mrs. Murphy, can we break into our groups, please?" asks one insistent girl.
Murphy nods, and the classroom explodes with activity. Teams of students measure
the floor, Murphy's desk and the windows, using rolls of tape, books, pieces of
chalk or just their own feet. "One-two-three-four" mutters one youngster atop a
table. "Before, they could just sit there and ignore the teacher," Murphy says.
"But they can't ignore this." The one drawback? As the math class files out, a
girl from Murphy's incoming class surveys the scene. "It's messy," she sniffs.

BOB MOSES HAS WATCHED WITH satisfaction as the Delta Project has grown and
flourished. But he never forgets the way things were. "It's interesting to work
with teachers who 30 years ago you couldn't talk to," he muses one afternoon in
Dennis's backyard. "There was no way even to approach them."

Mississippi has extended a bittersweet homecoming to the veterans and offspring
of Freedom Summer. Nightmares still stalk Dave Dennis's nights, but his days are
filled with ever-expanding plans to reform Southern education. Ben Moynihan
found no trace of his parents, but discovered blood ties to a fiercely loving
family. "I know whose boy you are," MacArthur Cotton, a former SNCC activist,
said to him one night in Dennis's Jackson home. "You belong to us."

Next year, Cotton hopes to hold a Mississippi reunion to mark the 30th
anniversary of Freedom Summer. Many would make the pilgrimage, for that distant
summer was the defining moment of their lives. But others never recovered from
the terrible violence unleashed against them, and for them there can be no
homecoming. Some are alcoholics on the streets where they all once marched, some
are in jail and at least one woman has been in a mental institution. "Some of us
didn't survive psychologically through this," Dennis says. "When the movement
moved on these people were left behind, like the M.I.A.'s from the Vietnam War."

Moses, off to yet another training session, grabs his backpack, extends a warm
hand in farewell and climbs back into Dennis's blue van. "It's taken a quarter
of a century to move through this," he says with a small smile. "But it may be
that the times are ready."



THE COLLEGE-BOARD METHOD: MATH AS THE GATEKEEPER

THE CREATORS OF THE scholastic Aptitude Test -- the much-feared college entrance
exam -- have decided to assist students who might otherwise fall off the
college-prep track. "I believe in elite education for the non-elite," says
Donald M. Stewart, president of the College Board, in New York City. "Having
spent a lot of time defining and raising standards, we have decided to help
students meet those standards."

The board's response: Equity 2000, an attempt to close the college-bound gap
between white and minority students by the end of the century. The two-year-old
program, now involving more than 450,000 students in 200 schools across the
nation, eliminates middle-school tracking, insures that every ninth grader
learns algebra and trains teachers in the most effective techniques for math
instruction.

Why focus on math? "Math is the gatekeeper to the academic track," says Stewart.
In a recent study, the board found that minority students who mastered algebra
and geometry in high school succeeded in college at almost the same rate as
white students. But many black and Hispanic students are still tracked into
dead-end math classes.

"Once a child becomes remedial, they never get 'fixed,' " says Anthony Terceira,
math administrator for the Providence, R.I., school system, one of six Equity
2000 sites. "And it does a lot of harm to children's attitudes."

Call it consumer math, business math or vocational math, it all comes down to "a
cruel hoax," says Equity 2000's national director, Vinetta Jones. "But you can't
just by edict say: 'Thou Shalt Not Track,' " she adds. "You've got to provide
training."

Equity 2000's summer workshops show teachers and guidance counselors how to
reach all students with new materials and teaching styles. In Providence, school
administrators have eliminated math tracking in every grade, from first on up.
And next September, they plan to enroll every eighth grader in pre-algebra,
every ninth grader in algebra and every 10th grader in geometry. Schools at the
other sites -- Fort Worth, Milwaukee, Nashville, San Jose, Calif., and Prince
George's County, Md. -- are setting similar goals.

Still, many teachers and parents wonder how they can de-track their schools
without boring the bright kids and overwhelming the slower learners. The answer,
say experts, is to raise the floor without capping the ceiling. In Providence,
quicker learners advance through math at their own rate; those who need more
help to reach Equity 2000 thresholds receive after-school help.

Most important, says Terceira, emphasis has switched from workbooks to creative
thinking. Two years ago, seventh-grade students sat in six rows of five desks,
alternately staring at their teachers, the clock and their work sheets. Today,
they're huddled in small groups, gripping rubber dolls and animatedly debating
the height ratio of Beauty to the Beast. And in the upper grades, lessons start
with real-life problems rather than abstract concepts.

"The old thing we always heard was: 'I'm never going to use this stuff,' " says
Terceira. "That's true. You are never going to get a job where you are paid to
open to page 256 and do those 15 factoring problems. Nobody's making money doing
that except teachers."

NAME: Bob Moses

LOAD-DATE: February 21, 1993

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photos: Bob Moses has returned to Mississippi with new equations for
empowerment. Algebra Project students in Indianola, Miss., learn about
substitution by taking a measurement first with their feet, then with a
yardstick, and comparing results. (Photographs by Chester Higgins Jr./The New
York Times)(pg. 28); Belle measures up: Equity 2000 students check the height of
a "Beauty and the Beast" doll. (Seth Resnick for The New York Times); Moses,
center, at a SNCC office in March 1963. In those days Moses' curriculum --
black-voter registration -- got him beaten and jailed. (Danny Lyon/Magnum)(pg.
30); Moses at a teacher training session at Xavier University in New Orleans.
His method emphasizes math as a language, not as number-crunching. Algebra
Project students demonstrate their skills at Mississippi State University. (pg.
31); Ben Moynihan, an Algebra Project trainer, looked for his family in
Mississippi but instead found his roots. The rhythms of math: Algebra Project
instructors use African drumming to teach students about ratios. (pg. 32); Bob
Moses with a teacher and a student in Cambridge, Mass. The Algebra Project was
born there in 1982 after Moses insisted on tutoring his daughter in math. (pg.
51)(Photographs by Chester Higgins Jr./The New York Times)

TYPE: Biography

                   Copyright 1993 The New York Times Company

                              176 of 255 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                February 21, 1993, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

Vance-Owen Plan Offers a Fair Bosnia Solution

SECTION: Section 4; Page 16; Column 4; Editorial Desk

LENGTH: 270 words


To the Editor:

In "Lord Owen's Googly" (editorial, Feb. 4), you criticize the Vance-Owen United
Nations peace proposals for the former Yugoslavia and attack Lord Owen as "not
infallible in his political judgment" because of the defeat of his Alliance
parties in the 1987 British election.

We find it interesting that you did not mention Cyrus Vance's long record of
achievements, which helped to contribute to peace in many troubled areas of the
world, including, as a Jan. 19 article put it, "negotiations that averted a war
over Cyprus in 1967, ended America's involvement in Vietnam in 1973, ended white
minority rule of Rhodesia in 1978 and led to the Camp David Mideast peace
accords in 1979."

Mr. Vance and Lord Owen have worked tirelessly to find a workable United Nations
peace plan for Bosnia. Contrary to what many United States critics say, the
Vance-Owen plan does not reward Serb aggression in Bosnia. Before war broke out,
the Serbs were the majority group in Bosnia, living on 60 percent of the land.
Under the Vance-Owen proposal they will only control 43 percent of the new
Bosnia. Not only will they not be allowed to live on land gained by war, but
they are also being asked to settle for almost 20 percent less land than they
had before the war.

There is plenty of blame to share in this terrible war, but as many historians
have noted, the Western powers should take a large share for so rapidly
recognizing a minority Muslim-run Government in Bosnia, when the majority of
people living there were Serbs.

SALLY HOWE LINEWEAVER
JOHN R. LINEWEAVER
Northport, L.I., Feb. 8, 1993

LOAD-DATE: February 21, 1993

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Letter

                   Copyright 1993 The New York Times Company

                              177 of 255 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                February 21, 1993, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

THE WORLD;
China, the Conglomerate, Seeks a New Unifying Principle

BYLINE: By NICHOLAS D. KRISTOF

SECTION: Section 4; Page 6; Column 1; Week in Review Desk

LENGTH: 1031 words

DATELINE: BEIJING


AFTER holding China together for four decades, Communism is like a yellowing,
cracking layer of glue, slowly losing its grip. The ideology and -- when that
wasn't enough -- the fear that Mao used to keep distant provinces in the orbit
of Beijing are no longer sufficient, and Chinese leaders are searching for a new
unifying force, a new adhesive, to keep the empire together.

"In Russia, there's no state, but there is a society," said a prominent Chinese
journalist. "Here it's more like the reverse. In Russia, people still line up
even if there's no bread on the shelves, while here it'd be chaos in that kind
of situation. There's nothing to hold us together. It's only a question of time
before everything falls apart."

Not everyone is that pessimistic, but even the authorities are aware of the
risks. They have in mind two possible replacements for ideology as a national
glue. One is a sustained economic boom to raise living standards and thus give
the Government a new legitimacy and the people a sense of common purpose. The
second is nationalism.

There are problems with both. China's economic boom has tended to worsen
regional disparities and tensions rather than alleviate them. Tibetans feel left
out, while prosperous Guangdong Province is growing so fast it feels dragged
down by the rest of the country.

And Chinese nationalism could threaten Asian stability. China has boundary
disputes with at least seven of its neighbors, including Japan, Vietnam, Russia
and India. The neighbors are naturally anxious that rising nationalism could
encourage China to become more aggressive, particularly as it is engaged in a
far-reaching military buildup. China insists that its intentions are wholly
friendly, but it seems to be doing what it can to encourage more nationalism.

"The new unifying force in China is patriotism," said He Xin, a social
commentator with close ties to the hard-liners, using a more benign term for
nationalism. "It's already emerged."

Empires have had a way of falling apart in this century, as the British, the
French and lately the Russians have discovered. Today the Chinese empire --
stretching from Buddhist Tibet to Korean enclaves in Manchuria, from Muslim
Xinjiang near Pakistan to Cantonese-speaking Guangdong next to Hong Kong -- is
arguably the last great multi-ethnic trans-continental empire left in the world.
And while its grasp is enormous, its reach is even greater: Chinese claims
stretch across seas to encompass Taiwan and the Spratly Islands near the
Philippines and Malaysia.

For decades and sometimes centuries at a time, China has been more like Europe
-- sometimes Europe at war -- than like a country. As recently as the first half
of this century, China was a hodgepodge of fiefs run by competing warlords. As
Lucian W. Pye, an American specialist on Asia, writes in the most recent issue
of the Australian Journal of Chinese Affairs: "Put bluntly, the fundamental
problem in China's modernization is that China is really a civilization
pretending to be a nation-state."

Today many Chinese are particularly fearful about what will happen after the
death of Deng Xiaoping, the country's 88-year-old senior leader. Few questions
may be so important to Asia in coming decades as whether China develops some new
cohesive force to keep it together.

At the Edges

Already, decentralization is gaining momentum, and local leaders are
increasingly bold about defying national policies. Separatist movements appear
to be gaining in Tibet, Xinjiang and Inner Mongolia; Taiwan, as well, is
debating whether to declare its formal independence from Chinese sovereignty.

It seems less likely that China's other provinces would want to leave, but in
places like Guangdong the possibility of eventual secession cannot be ruled out.
Indeed, in China, almost nothing should be ruled out.

Leaders from Mr. Deng on down have warned that the West should not look forward
with glee to the prospect of Communism collapsing in China. Given past
experience, including the flight of millions of Chinese abroad when past
dynasties crumbled, the authorities may have a point.

"Should there be a disintegration of China or a continued chaos with the 1.16
billion people divided and fighting and starving, the disastrous consequences
would spill over the border and endanger the stability of our neighbors, and
Hong Kong may witness a flow of millions of people across the border," Ma
Yuzhen, the Chinese Ambassador to Britain, warned in a recent speech.

While China's neighbors are worried not just about the possibility of China
collapsing but also about the emergence of nationalism as a new unifier, there
is little sign now that militant nationalism could be a threat. Nationalism is
clearly on the rise only among ethnic minorities, and in their case is directed
against China.

The only nationalist issue that seems to fire up the general public is the
conduct of Japan. Many Chinese blame Japan for failing to provide more
compensation for wartime injuries, for laying claim to islands that China
regards as its own, and for supposedly waging economic imperialism by flooding
China with Japanese products.

Paradoxically, this manifestation of nationalism seems to do more harm than good
to the central Government's legitimacy.

Many ordinary Chinese protest that the Communist authorities are being too
friendly to Japan, and are trying to prevent anti-Japan organizations in China
from speaking out. The party rose to power partly because it gained
nationalistic credentials by fighting Japan; today it is losing some of its
dwindling legitimacy because it is widely seen as too chummy with those still
known in Chinese as the wokou, the "Japanese bandits" -- a term often pronounced
with a real hatred.

While wary of the way nationalism could turn against them, the authorities seem
to believe that they have little alternative but to press ahead and cultivate
national pride.

"The amount of patriotism will depend in part on how we play our propaganda,"
said a mid-level Government official. "So we're trying to step up our propaganda
now in schools and in the news media to encourage more patriotism."

LOAD-DATE: February 21, 1993

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo: Two boys in Xinjiang, one of the ethnic Muslim provinces of
China near Pakistan. (Aral/Sipa)

                   Copyright 1993 The New York Times Company

                              178 of 255 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                February 21, 1993, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

Two Voices That Helped Shape the Law

SECTION: Section 1; Page 38; Column 4; National Desk

LENGTH: 440 words


Following are excerpts from the rulings and public statements of David L.
Bazelon and Gerhard A. Gesell, two influential Federal judges who died on
Friday:

JUDGE DAVID L. BAZELON

"The right-wrong test, which considers knowledge or reason alone, is an
inadequate guide to mental responsibility for criminal behavior. An accused is
not criminally responsible if his unlawful act was the product of mental disease
or mental defect."

-- Decision in Durham v. United States (1954), a principle that became known as
the Durham Rule

"It would be a serious mistake for us as a nation to think that it is more
important to repair our judicial machinery than to repair the institutions that
provide uninhabitable housing, insufficient food, medieval medical care, and
inadequate educations to the people who commit the crimes that concern us."

-- Madison lecture at New York University Law School, 1971

"For nearly 200 years of this nation's history, few blacks, Hispanics or
Asian-Americans, to name only a few of the victims of oppression, would have
thought of taking their claims to court. They knew they would receive no hearing
there. If the so-called 'litigation crisis' is due in any significant part to
the increase in social expectations of the disadvantaged and to society's
growing sensitivity to these issues, and I believe it is, then in my opinion the
increase in litigation is a healthy one."

-- Commencement speech at University
 of Washington Law School, 1983

JUDGE GERHARD A. GESELL

"Censorship at this stage raises doubts and rumors that feed the fires of
distrust. Our democracy depends for its future on the informed will of the
majority, and it is the purpose and effect of the First Amendment to expose to
the public the maximum amount of information on which sound judgment can be made
by the electorate."

-- Ruling allowing The Washington Post to publish secret papers about the
Vietnam War, 1971

"The Fourth Amendment protects the privacy of citizens against unreasonable and
unrestrained intrusion by Government officials and their agents. It is not
theoretical. It lies at the heart of our free society."

-- Ruling that President Richard M. Nixon had no constitutional right to
authorize break-ins without a warrant, 1974
 "And along the way you came to accept, it seems to me, the mistaken view that
Congress couldn't be trusted and that the fate of the country was better left to
a small inside group, not elected by the people, who were free to act as they
chose while publicly professing to act differently."

-- Sentencing Oliver L. North to probation,
 community service and a fine, 1989

LOAD-DATE: February 21, 1993

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Text

                   Copyright 1993 The New York Times Company

                              179 of 255 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                February 21, 1993, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

Judge Gerhard Gesell Dies at 82; Oversaw Big Cases

BYLINE: By BRUCE LAMBERT

SECTION: Section 1; Page 39; Column 1; National Desk

LENGTH: 1377 words


Gerhard A. Gesell, a Federal judge who presided over momentous cases in the
Watergate scandals, the release of the secret Pentagon Papers, the Iran-contra
affair and the legalization of abortion, died on Friday at his home in
Washington. He was 82.

The cause of death was liver cancer, his family said.

Judge Gesell (pronounced guh-ZEL) was appointed to the Federal District Court in
Washington by President Lyndon B. Johnson in 1967. On Jan. 22, he had placed
himself on senior status, continuing to work but in a limited capacity.

In crucial Watergate and Iran-contra cases, Judge Gesell stood resolute against
what he considered abuses of power by the nation's highest officials.

During the 1989 criminal trial of Lieut. Col. Oliver L. North for his role in
the Iran-contra affair, the judge instructed the jury, "Neither the President
nor any of the defendant's superiors had the legal authority to order anyone to
violate the law."

Doctors' Office Burglarized


 When sentencing two Watergate defendants, Bernard L. Barker and Eugenio
Martinez, the judge said, "As you both know well, it is impossible to preserve
freedom anywhere when the zealots take over and the rule of law is ignored."

The judge also ruled that national security was not a valid excuse in 1971 when
agents broke into the office of the psychiatrist of Dr. Daniel Ellsberg, who
helped write the secret Pentagon Papers study of the Vietnam War, which was
later divulged to the news organizations.

Judge Gesell, a Democrat, was known as a staunch liberal, a strong civil rights
jurist and a judge who exerted an imposing command over his courtroom.

In Mr. North's trial, the judge admonished Fawn Hall, Mr. North's secretary, to
"keep your mouth shut while I'm talking." Alarmed by pretrial publicity on
Watergate, he warned Special Prosecutor Leon Jaworski that "your good sense
should keep you off talk shows" on television.

Henry Huge, a lawyer, once said: "He's like God up there, with his white hair.
Sometimes you think he might throw thunderbolts from up there.

Judge Gesell's promptness and efficiency were legendary, and he helped modernize
court procedures and train new judges. Chief Justice Warren E. Burger in 1977
placed him in charge of the thousands of suits filed claiming illnesses from
defective swine flu vaccinations.

Decisive and incisive, Judge Gesell was quick to cut to core issues. A former
clerk said, 'When he was a trial lawyer, he thought the best way to try a case
was to go for the jugular and leave the capillaries alone."

In his 25 years on the bench, the docket of trials Judge Gesell presided over
and rulings he issued was full of celebrated cases.

Eager to tackle highly charged issues, he struck down the District of Columbia's
abortion ban in 1969, in his first year as a judge. The Supreme Court overruled
him, but later reversed itself and legalized abortion.

In 1978 he joined a three-judge panel that threw out regulations forcing the
mandatory retirement of foreign service officers at the age of 60, a ruling that
was an important step in the abolition of mandatory retirement.

During the Watergate investigations and litigation, Judge Gesell ruled that the
dismissal of Archibald Cox as special prosecutor in the "Saturday night
massacre" in October 1973 had been illegal.

North Found Guilty

In 1989, a jury found Colonel North guilty of three of the 12 crimes he was
charged with: obstructing Congress, destroying documents and receiving an
illegal gratuity. The verdicts carried a maximum penalty of 10 years in prison
and fines of $750,000.

Judge Gesell surprised many people when he decided not to send the former Marine
Corps officer to prison. Instead he fined Mr. North $150,000, placed him on
probation for two years and ordered him to serve 1,200 hours of community
service. But he told Mr. North: "I believe you still lack full understanding,
however, of how the public service has been tarnished."

"I do not think in this area you were a leader at all, but really a low-ranking
subordinate working to carry out the initiatives of a few cynical superiors,"
Judge Gesell said.

On appeal, Mr. North won a reversal of part of his conviction and was granted a
new hearing on whether his remaining conviction should be voided because of his
being granted immunity testifying to Congressional committees. Prosecutors then
dropped their case, and he was free of any penalty.

Presiding over the 1974 trial of John D. Ehrlichman, former President Richard M.
Nixon's chief adviser on domestic affairs, Judge Gesell sentenced himto 20
months to five years in prison for his role in the break-in into a doctor's
office to find out about Dr. Ellsberg, who had helped prepare a secret study on
the Vietnam War, which came to be known as the Pentagon papers.

Judge Gesell called the break-in "a shameful episode in the history of the
country."

In the complex Pentagon Papers litigation, which was heard by 29 Federal judges,
Judge Gesell was the only one who did not issue a temporary order restraining
publication.

On June 21, 1971, Judge Gesell ruled that The Washington Post could continue to
publish a series of articles about the Vietnam War based on the secret study
after the Government tried to halt publication.

"It should be obvious that the interests of the Government are inseparable from
the interests of the public," Judge Gesell read from his handwritten opinion.
"These are one and the same, and the public interest makes an instant plea for
publication."

The New York Times had begun publishing the Pentagon Papers on June 13, 1971. On
June 30, the Supreme Court upheld the right of The Times and The Post to
continue publication.

In November 1969, Judge Gesell declared that the District of Columbia's abortion
statute was unconstitutional. The statute, which permitted only those abortions
meant to preserve a woman's life or health, was unconstitutionally vague, he
ruled.

Graduated From Yale

Born in Los Angeles, Judge Gesell grew up in New Haven. His father, Arnold, was
a renowned pediatrician and child-development specialist who taught at Yale.
Gerhard Gesell graduated from Yale in 1932 and its law school in 1935.

His first job was as a staff lawyer and adviser to Chairman William O. Douglas
at the new Securities and Exchange Commission from 1935 to 1941. Despite his
youth, he was put in charge of a major investigation of the New York Stock
Exchange that called as witnesses major Wall Street figures like J. P. Morgan.

While still in his 20's, he also conducted hearings into the insurance industry
for a Congressional committee. An editorial cartoon portrayed him as David
against Goliath.

Then in 1941 he joined the prominent law firm of Covington & Burling in
Washington, where he specialized in antitrust and other corporate cases, arguing
some of them before the Supreme Court.

While in private practice, he also took on special government assignments. He
served as a lawyer to the Joint Congressional Committee investigating the attack
on Pearl Harbor and questions about advance warnings and preparations. He also
served as chairman of President John F. Kennedy's Commission on Equal
Opportunity in the Armed Forces from 1962 to 1964.

In 1989 Judge Gesell won the the Edward J. Devitt Distinguished Service to
Justice Award, given annually to an outstanding Federal jurist.

Judge Gesell expressed his credo in a 1986 ceremony granting citizenship to 98
immigrants. "You are now part of a great experiment in government," he said.
"Don't be willing to leave government to others. Participate." He added: "Demand
competence in your leaders. Seek out the good, shun the bad. Vote. Work. Help
others. Be useful. Obey the law. Speak out against intolerance. Get involved.
Use your minds, not your fists. Your voice will be heard."

His major pastimes were spending weekends at his 358-acre cattle, sheep and
honeybee farm near Leesburg, Va., and sailing and gardening during summers on
Penobscot Bay, Me.

Surviving are his wife of 56 years, the former Marion Pike, known as Peggy; a
son, Peter of Cambridge, Mass.; a daughter, Patsy Gesell of Manhattan; a sister,
Catherine Walden, known as Tassy, of Guilford, Conn., and three grandchildren.

NAME: Gerhard A. Gesell

LOAD-DATE: February 21, 1993

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo: Judge Gerhard A. Gesell (The New York Times, 1986)

TYPE: Biography; Obituary (Obit)

                   Copyright 1993 The New York Times Company

                              180 of 255 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                February 23, 1993, Tuesday, Late Edition - Final

Editorial Notebook;
Two Strong Judges

BYLINE: By JOHN P MACKENZIE

SECTION: Section A; Page 20; Column 1; Editorial Desk

LENGTH: 366 words


The deaths of two judicial giants, David Bazelon, 83, and Gerhard Gesell, 82,
are stark reminders that the Supreme Court isn't the only seat of legal power.
Former Chief Judge Bazelon was profoundly influential in four decades on the
U.S. Court of Appeals in Washington. Judge Gesell, on the District Court in the
same courthouse, often had the last word in the cases he tried.

Judge Bazelon pushed at every frontier he encountered. His dissent in a local
rape case became law in 1957 when the Supreme Court, anticipating its own
Miranda ruling of 1966, unanimously threw out a confession obtained during an
unlawful arrest. He was even more influential in the realm of insanity and
criminal responsibility.

Before the judge's 1954 decision in the case of a Georgetown housebreaker named
Monte Durham, the question of sanity in many criminal cases came down to whether
the accused knew right from wrong. By asking whether the crime was the product
of a mental disease or defect, the Durham rule gave more room for psychiatrists
and others to tell the jury much more about the defendant. Later the definition
was narrowed again, but courts continued to entertain more evidence, making
clear that the entire person, not just a particular brain function, must be
evaluated before guilt is assigned.

Judge Gesell is well remembered for trying one of the Pentagon Papers cases --
thundering that the Government had no right to enjoin publication of the Vietnam
War history -- and for Watergate and Iran-contra trials. I had special and early
reason to know his merits as a trial judge because his first trial, in 1967,
involved a zoning dispute in my own neighborhood.

The new judge was in total control from the start, ruling crisply and promptly
on points of law and reining in the lawyers. He was evenhanded, attentive and
appreciative of the issues in the case.

I had time to ask myself how I felt personally about this judge: if he ruled
against us, would I be satisfied that justice had been done? The question turned
out to be academic, for he ruled in our favor. But I remember thinking honestly
that I would have felt justly treated if Judge Gesell had ruled the other way.

LOAD-DATE: February 23, 1993

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Editorial

                   Copyright 1993 The New York Times Company

                              181 of 255 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               February 24, 1993, Wednesday, Late Edition - Final

Books of The Times;
The Klan's War Against Jews in the Deep South

BYLINE: By HERBERT MITGANG

SECTION: Section C; Page 19; Column 1; Cultural Desk; Word and Image Page

LENGTH: 908 words



Terror in the Night
The Klan's Campaign Against the Jews
By Jack Nelson
Simon & Schuster. 287 pages. Publisher.
$22.

Jack Nelson was the Atlanta bureau chief of The Los Angeles Times in the summer
of 1968 when he got a call in the middle of the night from Roy Gunn, the police
chief of Meridian, Miss. " 'O.K., Jack, get your pencil out,' the booming voice
commanded. 'There's gonna be some wailing and gnashing of teeth.' "

So begins "Terror in the Night," a melodramatic, personalized account by a
greatly respected reporter of the civil rights battle in the streets and for the
minds of Southerners a quarter of a century ago. If one thinks back to that
violent decade, thoughts quickly turn to anti-Vietnam War marches on Washington,
the assassinations of the Kennedy brothers, the murders of black and white
volunteers for justice by rabid segregationists with ropes and guns, the slaying
of the Rev. Dr. Martin Luther King Jr.

But after all these events and the passage of years, something else kept gnawing
at Mr. Nelson: the much lesser-known scapegoating campaign against the Jews in
the Deep South by fanatical members of the White Knights of the Ku Klux Klan and
the hidden story behind the counterattack by local police chiefs, Federal Bureau
of Investigation agents and Jewish leaders. With the help of the Freedom of
Information Act, Mr. Nelson gained access to F.B.I. files and, using his strong
contacts, uncovered Mississippi police records. To bring his story up to date,
he returned to the scene of the crimes and conducted interviews with F.B.I.
agents, Jewish leaders and former Klansmen who, more or less, had found
religion.

This results in a startling reconstruction of the way the F.B.I. and the
Mississippi police decided to fight fire with fire even if, as Mr. Nelson
strongly states, it meant bending the law. Under pressure from arrests in civil
rights cases involving blacks, the Klan decided to change tactics and to focus
its violence against Jews.  The shift in strategy led to the bombing of a new
synagogue in Jackson, the dynamiting of a rabbi's house and the marking of
certain Jewish leaders for death. On a tape recording obtained by the F.B.I.,
one Klansman argued in favor of bombing a synagogue while many worshipers would
be there, including children. The Klansman is heard to say, "Kill 'em while
they're young."

Mr. Nelson, originally from Mississippi and now his newspaper's bureau chief in
Washington, is especially perceptive about how an indifferent Christian clergy
and the assimilationist Jewish community in Mississippi -- some of whose
ancestors fought for the Confederacy during what was still called the War
Between the States rather than the Civil War -- were ambivalent about openly
pressing for civil rights. Only after the violence erupted did the Jewish
leaders realize that the hate literature (like The White Patriot, distributed by
Americans for the Preservation of the White Race, a front organization for the
White Knights of the Ku Klux Klan) tolled for them, too.

By the middle of the 1960's, the F.B.I. estimated that the White Knights had
grown to a membership of 5,000 to 6,000 members. They had infiltrated some local
police departments in Mississippi; not every policeman could be trusted with
anti-Klan plans. Then the F.B.I. moved in.  Its special agents in Mississippi
decided it was necessary to find a private bankroll to buy information and trap
the Klan killers. Secretly, the Federal agents obtained tens of thousands of
dollars from Mississippi's Jewish community, bought Klan informers and used them
to set up an ambush to capture or, more likely, kill the Klan's most dangerous
hit men.

The two hit men turned out to be a man and a woman, the Bonnie and Clyde of
"Terror in the Night." Thomas Albert Tarrants 3d was a 21-year-old terrorist and
dynamiter, an anti-Semite with an arrest record; Kathryn Ainsworth was a
26-year-old schoolteacher by day, a Klan bomber at night. They were the trusted
confederates of Samuel Holloway Bowers Jr., Imperial Wizard of the White Knights
of the Mississippi Klan. On the evening of June 29, 1968, their mission was to
pull off what the Klan called a "No. 4" -- a murder -- against a prominent
Jewish businessman in Meridian.

In the most gripping chapter of the book, an elaborate ambush is devised by the
F.B.I. and local police. The two Klan terrorists, armed with machine guns and
sticks of dynamite, drive up a darkened street toward their target. A car chase
follows; Tarrants is pursued, wounded and captured.  Ainsworth is killed and
becomes a martyr, worshiped by Klansmen.  Long afterward, Mr. Nelson interviews
Tarrants and finds that he is now a Christian convert, "involved in religious
teaching and Bible training."

"Terror in the Night" is an exciting work of personal storytelling that,
regrettably, lacks a parallel context to give it special meaning now. Mr. Nelson
is so intent on being the digging reporter that he fails to deal with matters
that demand interpretation. A book isn't a newspaper; it permits passion as well
as objectivity. After all, he is writing about the evil nature of the most
dangerous bigots in American life and their political successors, without hoods,
who talk of religious war in the United States today. Had he included an
afterword or epilogue about such matters, Mr. Nelson could have created an even
more valuable book of current history.

LOAD-DATE: February 24, 1993

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo: Jack Nelson (Bernie Boston/Simon & Schuster)

TYPE: Review

                   Copyright 1993 The New York Times Company

                              182 of 255 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               February 25, 1993, Thursday, Late Edition - Final

Woman Is Slain at a Courthouse; Death Linked to 6 Bronx Killings

BYLINE: By DAVID GONZALEZ

SECTION: Section A; Page 1; Column 5; Metropolitan Desk

LENGTH: 1375 words


A woman accompanying her husband to the Bronx County Building for his court
appearance yesterday was shot and killed by a man in a camouflage jacket and a
bulletproof vest, the police said.

Ninety minutes earlier at the courthouse, the police had arrested a suspect in
the execution-style killings of six people in the Bronx on Feb. 14. Police
Commissioner Raymond W. Kelly said the department was investigating whether the
shooting was linked to those slayings.

Other police officials said there was no doubt of the connection, and one police
officer said the husband of the woman killed yesterday was associated with the
gunmen in the earlier killings.

That officer, who spoke on the condition of anonymity, said the police were
investigating whether the husband, who was to appear in court in a drug case,
was the intended target of the shooting. The officer said they were pursuing an
avenue of investigation that assumed he was a member of a rival drug gang
involved in the killings on Valentine's Day and was selected as a target in
retaliation.

But the police had not reached any conclusions, and other possibilities,
including that the woman was killed to silence her husband, remained.

The police identified the dead woman as Lourdes Casellas, 22 years old, of 1140
Burke Avenue in Williamsbridge, the Bronx. Because her husband was was a witness
to the slaying, the police did not identify him.

A suspect in her killing, Gilbert Ortiz, 23, of 960 Avenue St. John, was
arrested as he tried to flee. His home is about two blocks from the scene of the
Feb. 14 shootings, which occurred in a building at East 152d Street and Prospect
Avenue in Mott Haven.

The proximity of the two addresses is one of several links between the killing
of Ms. Casellas and the six slayings. Another is that within one and a half
hours, the courthouse was the scene of her fatal shooting and the arrest of
Elliot Lopez, 18, in the six slayings. And, like Ms. Casellas's husband, Mr.
Lopez was at the courthouse for an appearance in a previous drug case.

An investigator, who spoke on the condition of anonymity, echoed the theory of
some borough officials that a car accident may have been staged outside the
courthouse on the Grand Concourse shortly before the shooting to divert
attention.

The police and witnesses said Ms. Casellas and her husband, accompanied by a
17-year-old friend, Luis Ramos, arrived at the courthouse about noon yesterday.
Ms. Casellas,pushing her 10-month-old child in a stroller, was shot after she
stepped into the narrow entryway. A witness said she was hit in the neck.

The gunman fired a total of four times before fleeing, also hitting Mr. Ramos.

An anti-crime officer at the scene heard the shots and chased the suspect while
alerting other officers, an investigator said.

The investigator said the police were looking at the possibility that several
other suspects had been at the scene and had eluded the officers.

A Call for Assistance

James Hecker, a civil court officer, was downstairs in the housing court section
when his radio crackled with a call for assistance. He ran upstairs, joined by
Frank Grillo, a fellow court officer.

Officer Grillo arrived at the entryway, where Ms. Casellas lay bleeding.
Witnesses said her husband was hugging her as she lay motionless on the ground
near the overturned stroller, where her child lay uninjured.

"When I saw her I knew she was dead," said Richard Ervin, a custodian at the
courthouse who ran to the vestibule after hearing the shots. "Her eyes were not
moving, there was blood on the left side of her neck and her head was limp."

Mr. Ramos slumped against a nearby wall clutching his thigh, which bled from a
bullet wound.

"Who shot you?" Officer Grillo asked him.

"A guy in a field jacket," he said the youth replied.

A Man in a Jacket

The two officers ran outside onto the Grand Concourse just in time to see a man
in a camouflage jacket turning the corner onto East 161st Street and heading
toward the normally bustling commercial strip.

"There were people all over the damn place," said Officer Hecker, a Marine
veteran who served in Vietnam and has worked at the courthouse since 1989.

"We told people to get the hell out of the way because we didn't know if he'd
keep on shooting," said Officer Grillo.

With city police and court officers in pursuit, the gunman turned south onto the
broad sidewalk of Walton Avenue. There, with his gun drawn, he confronted Sgt.
Willie Faulk, an officer assigned to Bronx Family Court. Sergeant Faulk, who had
been on the force for 10 years, fired once and hit the gunman in the upper arm.
The police said the suspect was armed with a .380-caliber semiautomatic handgun.

"He was blurting out that he was hurt," said Officer Grillo.

"He was saying, 'Don't hurt me,' " said Officer Hecker.

In Stable Condition

Mr. Ortiz was taken to Harlem Hospital last night, where he was treated and
released to the custody of the police. He was held on murder charges.

Mr. Ramos was at Harlem Hospital in stable condition last night.

At Ms. Casellas's home in Williamsbridge last night, neighbors were stunned by
her death.

"I can't believe this has happened to her," said Marisol Ramos, who is not
related to Luis Ramos but is a former classmate of Ms. Casellas at St. Anselm's,
a Roman Catholic school in the South Bronx. "She was a straight-A student when
we were in school. Very smart. Very nice."

No one answered the door at the Casellas home last night.

Yesterday's shooting renewed calls from both the District Attorney and the Bronx
Borough President for tightened security and the installation of metal detectors
in the four lobby entrances to the massive courthouse, which is home to the
State Supreme Court. The Office of Court Administration denied past requests
because of budget constraints, said Steven Reed, a spokesman for Robert T.
Johnson, the District Attorney.

"It's been a topic that has come up," said Mr. Reed. "I imagine it will be
brought to the attention of the people at O.C.A."

Not the First Time

Several court officers and other employees inside the courthouse said the
building was too open, with four entrances, none with metal detectors. They
added that it was not the first time violence occurred at the courthouse, which
in January 1991 was the scene of the shooting of a murder suspect by the
victim's father.

"We've had weapons incidents in this building for years and the Office of Court
Administration has not acted," said Borough President Fernando Ferrer. "Their
refusal to go along with the installation of metal detectors in this building is
disgraceful."

Several courthouses in Brooklyn, Queens and Manhattan have metal detectors in
their lobbies.

Justice Burton B. Roberts, the Bronx's administrative judge, said budget cuts
had prevented the installation of metal detectors in the lobby. They are set up
outside selected courtrooms during trials and are in the process of being
installed on five floors that house courtrooms.

Opposed to Detectors

He said he was opposed to placing the detectors in the lobby because they cause
long lines and create more problems than they solve.

When asked if detectors would have prevented the shooting, he pointed to the
entrance doors, noting that detectors, or magnetometers as they are also known,
would have been some 40 feet inside the building.

"Whether you install magnetometers or not, they could not have prevented the
shooting," he said. "What are we going to do, put magnetometers on the street?"

But Mr. Ferrer was not swayed by those arguments, saying that the possibility of
saving a life surpassed any amount of inconvenience to the thousands of people
who stream through its portals every week. "It's just going to take them a
little more time," he said.

Deborah Pollock, the senior advocacy coordinator for the civil division of the
Legal Aid Society, said the presence of metal detectors and the court officers
who monitor them could have prevented the violence.

"Maybe they could have gotten to it faster," she said. "You want to have a haven
in court. No matter what dispute you come in to settle, it's emotional. You
expect to be safe in a courthouse."


LOAD-DATE: February 25, 1993

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo: Police officers standing yesterday in the lobby of the Bronx
County Building, where a woman was shot and killed. (John Sotomayor/The New York
Times)

                   Copyright 1993 The New York Times Company

                              183 of 255 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               February 25, 1993, Thursday, Late Edition - Final

NEW BRUNSWICK JOURNAL;
A Defender of Redcoats Sets Out to Polish Their Image

BYLINE: By IVER PETERSON

SECTION: Section B; Page 6; Column 3; Metropolitan Desk

LENGTH: 765 words

DATELINE: NEW BRUNSWICK, N.J.


IAIN HAIGHT-ASHTON loyally puts on a red-coated uniform of the British Colonial
army when he participates in re-enactments of Revolutionary War battles, and he
always knows what to expect from the spectators.

"You're one of the bad guys, huh?" comes the inevitable comment.

"Here it is, 200 years after the fact," Mr. Haight-Ashton exclaimed in his
faintly mid-Atlantic accent, "and the Redcoats are still the bad guys. That is
not fair play."

Mr. Haight-Ashton is a 36-year-old British emigre computer programmer by day and
a dealer in antique glassware on weekends. Lately he has taken on a third
calling: to restore the reputation of the homesick but upright British
Revolutionary War soldier whose trademark red coat made such a handy target for
wily Colonial marksmen skulking in the woods.

Unappreciated at home, put-upon abroad, driven into service by joblessness to
die in a distant land, the Redcoat was not the wicked invader he is made out to
be in American textbook "propaganda," Mr. Haight-Ashton insists. He was a victim
of his time and, perhaps, a historical archetype for Americans to ponder.

With items from an everyday soldier's life in that period, Mr. Haight-Ashton has
scheduled a series of lectures at the Colonial-era Buccleuch Mansion museum here
to bring the short lives and hard times of the British soldier back to life. A
comb, some buttons, a razor from a British soldier's kit speak of their common
humanity, but the amateur historian has reached for a deeper metaphor to make
his point before skeptical Yankees: the Vietnam War.

After all, he said, both the British Colonial Army here and the American forces
in Vietnam were made up heavily of men from poor backgrounds, both thought they
were fighting to do good and both suffered from indifference and hostility back
home, a hostility that made both superpowers lose, in the end, to guerrilla
fighters from a stripling nation.

"England won most of the battles," Mr. Haight-Ashton said, "although you would
never know it from the history books." Even the recent Hollywood production,
"Last of the Mohicans," set during the French and Indian Wars, perpetuated a
surly view of the British as losers who go back on their word.

"In that movie, would you have thought that the British actually won the French
and Indian Wars?" Mr. Haight-Ashton inquired. "You wouldn't, but we did. We got
rid of the menace, we made the colonies safe, we supported the colonies, and
when we asked for some money to help pay for it all, you said 'No taxation
without representation.' '

Last week, Mr. Haight-Ashton took this argument to the very heart of
Revolutionary piety, in a speech at Buccleuch Mansion before the Jersey Blue
chapter of the Daughters of the American Revolution and the Raritan Valley
chapter of the Sons of the American Revolution, descendants all of the patriots
who ultimately drove the British from America.

"It was a little bit of a surprise, but we thought it was a very interesting
speech," said Harry Kels Swan, a historian at Washington Crossing State Park
outside Trenton and a member of the Raritan Valley S.A.R. "I think his point is
kind of neat, and it's one we should pay more attention to. We've been kind of
myopic."

This kind reception helped Mr. Haight-Ashton overcome some initial trepidation.
"I thought if I said the wrong thing to them, it would be outside and up I go,"
he said.

The British troops received no military honor for their fighting in the
colonies, because King George regarded the colonialists his countrymen, and
could not award honors in civil disputes, Mr. Haight-Ashton said. With supplies
distant and scarce, the Redcoat was forced to forage for himself while under the
constant threat of sniping. And while the British fought standing up, shoulder
to shoulder in the honorable fashion of the day, the colonials hid behind trees,
only to melt back into the populace when outnumbered, he said.

"It was the first Vietnam," Mr. Haigh-Ashton said of the war. "Our Vietnam."

He is a member of the 64th Regiment of Foot, an amateur British army of mostly
American membership centered in Rochester, that often plays the part of the
British in Revolutionary War enactments.

As he pulls on the coarse red wool of his coat, he imagines the lives of his
countrymen over two centuries ago.

"I'm not trying to damn the American cause," he said. "I'm not trying to go
nyaah-nyaah-nyaah, we could have won. But there are hundreds of British soldiers
buried here in shallow graves, far from home, and I'm just trying to say, 'Hey,
you guys were all right.' "

LOAD-DATE: February 25, 1993

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo: "Here it is, 200 years after the fact," said Iain Haight-Ashton,
a British emigre and a defender of British Revolutionary War soldiers, "and the
Redcoats are still the bad guys. That is not fair play." (Laura Pedrick for The
New York Times)

                   Copyright 1993 The New York Times Company

                              184 of 255 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                February 26, 1993, Friday, Late Edition - Final

Toy Caldwell Jr., 45, a Founder of the Marshall Tucker Band

BYLINE: New York Times Regional Newspapers

SECTION: Section A; Page 17; Column 1; Cultural Desk

LENGTH: 289 words

DATELINE: SPARTANBURG, S.C., Feb. 25


Toy Talmadge Caldwell Jr., a founding member of the Marshall Tucker Band, died
in his sleep on Wednesday at his home in Moore, S.C. He was 45.

The Marshall Tucker Band, named after the piano tuner who owned the band's
rehearsal hall, made 14 albums of easygoing Southern rock from 1973 to 1984; two
sold more than a million copies each, and seven sold more than 500,000. Mr.
Caldwell was the group's guitarist and main songwriter. Among the group's
best-known songs were "Heard It in a Love Song," "Can't You See," "Take the
Highway" and "This Ol' Cowboy."

The members of the Marshall Tucker Band first came together in 1964, when Mr.
Caldwell and two friends, Franklin Wilkie and George McCorkle, played in a band
called the Rants. Mr. Caldwell served in Vietnam with the Marine Corps and was
wounded in 1967. When he returned to Spartanburg, he formed the Toy Factory band
with Mr. Wilkie, Doug Gray and Jerry Eubanks. Tommy Caldwell, his brother,
joined in 1973 when Mr. Wilkie left and the band became the Marshall Tucker
Band.

After Two Deaths

The band played at the inauguration of President Jimmy Carter in 1977. Its
success waned after Tommy Caldwell died in an automobile accident in 1980, a
month after another brother, Tim, died in an automobile accident.

Mr. Caldwell left the band in 1984 after 15 years and resumed a solo career in
1989. Other band members continued to perform together under the Marshall Tucker
name and in 1990 put out an album called "Southern Spirit." Mr. Caldwell put out
an album, "Toy Caldwell," last year and performed around Spartanburg.

He is survived by his wife, Abbie; two daughters, Cassady and Toy Geneal, and
his father, Toy T. Caldwell Sr., all of Spartanburg.


NAME: Toy Talmadge Caldwell Jr.

LOAD-DATE: February 27, 1993

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Biography; Obituary (Obit)

                   Copyright 1993 The New York Times Company

                              185 of 255 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                February 28, 1993, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

FILM;
After 40 Years in Films, Piper Laurie Is Still Here

BYLINE: By BERNARD WEINRAUB

SECTION: Section 2; Page 18; Column 4; Arts & Leisure Desk

LENGTH: 1459 words

DATELINE: LOS ANGELES


It has been more than 40 years since Piper Laurie made her movie debut, playing
Ronald Reagan's daughter in a forgettable film called "Louisa." What followed
was a series of equally forgettable films, opposite actors like Tony Curtis,
Tyrone Power and Rory Calhoun, that turned her into a star as well as a
desperately unhappy woman who fled Hollywood at the age of 23. Even today, she
rankles at the memories of her years as a contract player under the old studio
system.

But now, at the age of 60 and with two new movies set for release, Ms. Laurie
believes that her Hollywood career is finally in place.

"I've been so fortunate these last few years," she says. "My judgment is better.
I know where to put my energy. I find the work more creative. And I'm getting
offers to play women I actually like."

One woman Ms. Laurie actually likes is Vera Delmage, a strong-willed and utterly
charming hairdresser in the comedy-drama "Rich in Love," which opens on Friday.
The movie, based on a Josephine Humphreys novel, is about a South Carolina
family thrown into crisis when the wife (Jill Clayburgh) leaves home to start a
second life. Albert Finney plays the husband, the man Vera Delmage has her eye
on.

Ms. Laurie seemed surprised she got the role. "The character's up front, no
neuroses or complications -- she's somebody you'd like to spend time with," she
said. "I don't think I've ever played anybody like that."

The movie was made by many of the same people who shaped the Academy
Award-winning film "Driving Miss Daisy." The team includes Alfred Uhry (who won
an Oscar for the screenplay and a Pulitzer Prize for the play), Bruce Beresford,
the director, and the producers Richard D. Zanuck and Lili Fini Zanuck.

"Rich in Love" was scheduled to be released in October, but the Zanucks and
M-G-M postponed it. "Frankly, we weren't ready," Mr. Zanuck said. "Without a lot
of stars or a lot of action, you have to be careful."

According to Mr. Zanuck, casting the role of Vera Delmage was especially
delicate. "We had a lot of candidates, but Piper was the only one we went to,"
he said. "She's put together such a nice body of work through the years. It's a
name that's recognizable. And we knew we needed an actress who could bring a
certain joy to the part. We needed an upbeat, pleasant, happy person."

David Lynch, who cast Ms. Laurie as the weird, mysterious Catherine Martell in
"Twin Peaks," saw quite different qualities in the actress.  "She has kind of a
wild streak that's interesting," he once said of her, "because it could become
dangerous."

Whatever that wild streak might be, it was dangerous only to her own career. She
never found the competitive streak that might have helped her win the meaty film
roles she desired.

Ms. Laurie's memories of her early years as a starlet in the studio system are
raw, as if they happened yesterday. "It was pathetic what we put ourselves
through," she recalled. "As a youngster, I would never leave my home without
makeup, for fear that I didn't look like a movie star."

She still retains her red-haired beauty. In 1981, reviewing her performance in
the Australian film "Tim" for The Times, Vincent Canby called her "gravely
beautiful." But perhaps most striking is her voice, still compelling and a bit
mysterious.

Seated in a friend's home in the Brentwood section of Los Angeles, Ms. Laurie
seemed alternately private and startlingly candid. Referring to her early life,
she said: "I went to pieces when I was still young enough to get over it.
Drinking too much, and pills, stuff like that. I was very fortunate. It was
behind me by the time the real drug culture began."

Her early career sounds like vintage Hollywood. She was born in Detroit, the
daughter of an immigrant Polish furniture dealer. Ms. Laurie's real name is
Rosetta Jacobs, and her friends and family still call her Rosetta or Rosie.

The family moved to Los Angeles (in those relatively smog-free times) because of
her sister's asthma. To overcome shyness, Ms. Laurie began acting lessons at the
age of 11. In 1949, at the age of 17, she auditioned at Universal Studios with a
one-act Tennessee Williams play. The audition was supposed to last three
minutes, but she wound up doing the entire 25-minute play. The studio signed
her, changed her name to Piper Laurie -- and forgot that she could act.

"I don't know where the name Piper Laurie came from," she said. "They just made
up names. It had to be like Lana or Ava. They just handed me my new name."

They also handed her parts in films like "The Son of Ali Baba," "The Prince Who
Was a Thief" and "Mississippi Gambler." A number of her films co-starred Tony
Curtis, whose background was similar to her own. The two have not spoken in many
years for reasons that Ms. Laurie leaves vague.

Mr. Curtis, who remembers her fondly, said: "I think our times together were
made difficult by the pressure and stress. She means a lot to me."

Said Ms. Laurie: "We did our last movie, 'No Room for the Groom,' without
speaking to each other. It makes for great love scenes, doesn't it? I don't
understand what happened. There was just a lot of gossip. Misunderstanding.
People would tell him things about me. They would tell me things about him. It
was childish, adolescent." Her voice trailed off.

Largely by her own choice, Ms. Laurie's acting career waned. At 23, she left
Universal.

"I was making as much money as any young woman in Hollywood, but I couldn't
stand it anymore," she said. The studio asked her to play what she calls
caricatures of teen-agers. "The work was humiliating. I knew I was better than
that. I felt I had so little control over my life or my work. I said, 'I'm not
going to work. Sue me. Jail me. But I'm not going to take these parts.' "

Though she was let out of her exclusive contract, the studio insisted she make a
picture a year for them. Ms. Laurie moved to New York and began appearing Off
Broadway and on television, where she appeared in the original production of
"The Days of Wine and Roses." She returned to Hollywood to star with Paul Newman
in "Until They Sail" and, in 1961, appeared with him again as his fragile
girlfriend in "The Hustler," for which she got an Oscar nomination. But her
career never took off.

"I got offers to play more girls like I played in 'The Hustler,' crippled and
emotionally crippled girls," she said. "I started to turn things down, and after
a while I realized nobody was offering me anything."

In the meantime, Ms. Laurie married Joseph Morgenstern, a journalist, and they
had a daughter, Annie. (The two were divorced in 1981.)

"Somehow I was so disillusioned with my career, with so much, that I wanted to
stop," she said. The family moved to Woodstock, N.Y. "I became a mother. I
sculpted. I baked a lot of bread. The Vietnam War started, and I just lost my
interest in acting. I didn't have my heart in it. It seemed so irrelevant. So I
didn't make a movie for 15 years."

In the mid-1970's she began considering a return to films. Several friends
suggested her to Brian De Palma, who was then casting the horror movie "Carrie."
Ms. Laurie read the script.

"I thought it was silly," she recalled. "I didn't want to do it. I told my
husband I could imagine this as a comedy or a satire. And he said that De Palma
has a comedic approach. So I thought that's what it was."

Ms. Laurie got the part. But when she began playing it as a comedy, Mr. De Palma
was horrified. "He said, 'You can't do that. People will laugh.' I was too
embarrassed to say anything." The role of the main character's fanatical
over-the-top mother earned Ms. Laurie her second Academy Award nomination, in
1977. Her third, in 1987, was for playing Marlee Matlin's estranged mother in
"Children of a Lesser God." That same year, she won an Emmy Award for her
performance in Hallmark Hall of Fame's "Promise."

Ms. Laurie, who recently purchased a home in the Hollywood Hills and became a
grandmother, is finding success at an age when most movie actresses over 40 are
scrambling for parts. Last fall, she portrayed the mother in Larry Kramer's
autobiographical play, "The Destiny of Me." Asked what appealed to her about
this particular mother, Ms. Laurie responded tersely: "Medea. A cliched Jewish
mother. A flirt. Wonderfully warm."

She has also completed work on the movie "Wrestling Ernest Hemingway," directed
by Randa Haines and starring Robert Duvall, Richard Harris and Shirley MacLaine.
The comedy, due for release at the end of the year, deals with two men and their
relationships with women.

When asked if she misses anything about the old studio days, Ms. Laurie paused
for a long time. "There was a great salad in the commissary," she said. "That's
the only thing I miss."

NAME: Piper Laurie

LOAD-DATE: February 28, 1993

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photos: Albert Finney and Piper Laurie in "Rich in Love," opening on
Friday -- A surprising role. (M-G-M); Ms. Laurie in the 1961 film "The Hustler,"
in which she played Paul Newman's fragile girlfriend -- An Oscar nomimation for
the actress. (20th Century Fox); After a 15-year absence from films, Ms. Laurie
appeared in Brian De Palma's "Carrie" in 1976 -- A second Oscar nomination.
(Associated Press)

TYPE: Biography

                   Copyright 1993 The New York Times Company

                              186 of 255 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                February 28, 1993, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

Civil Rights Roster

SECTION: Section 5; Page 12; Column 3; Travel Desk

LENGTH: 192 words


To the Editor: Thank you for the article on the new Civil Rights Institute in
Birmingham (Travel Advisory, Jan. 17).

One of the more moving exhibits in the museum, not mentioned by your story, is
the registry that greets people when they enter. Visitors who participated in
the civil rights movement from 1957-65 are invited to sign the registry and
indicate how they participated. Several categories are indicated: marched,
security guard, arrested, jailed, voter registration, etc. Although not a
participant myself, I was inspired to see the names of hundreds of people
inscribed in the book, mostly Birmingham residents. Even the names of those who
have since died have been added by friends and family. While the institute
showcases famous civil rights heroes and leaders, this registry, perhaps more
than anything else in the institute, is a reminder that it was ordinary people
who committed, risked and sacrificed their lives in building the most
significant movement of 20th-century America.

Like the Vietnam Memorial in Washington, the Civil Rights Institute should be
visited by every American.

SUSAN ROSENBLUM
Washington

LOAD-DATE: February 28, 1993

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo: Register at the Birmingham Civil Rights Institute. (Bill Ricker
for The New York Times)

TYPE: Letter

                   Copyright 1993 The New York Times Company

                              187 of 255 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                February 28, 1993, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

Spies & Thrillers

BYLINE: By Newgate Callendar

SECTION: Section 7; Page 24; Column 2; Book Review Desk

LENGTH: 818 words


In POINT OF IMPACT, by Stephen Hunter (Bantam, $21.95), the protagonist is a
former Marine sniper who served in Vietnam and had more than 80 verified kills
-- the best of his kind, a world-class shot. Now living in seclusion in
Arkansas, Bob Lee Swagger spends his time hunting and taking care of his
firearms collection.

Hired by a mysterious organization as a consultant, he discovers too late that
he has been set up. He becomes the most hated man in America. He is on the run,
wanted by every police department in the country, targeted by the F.B.I. and
also on the hit list of the powerful, shadowy group that originally approached
him. Yes, Bob Lee Swagger is in a lot of trouble.

The climax is a courtroom scene. Swagger is in the hands of the Federal
Government, which has prepared a damning indictment. The case against him seems
proved every which way. He is trussed, basted and ready for the oven. But this
is Bob Lee Swagger, the archetype of the strong, silent man, the hero of
infinite resources. Surely he must have something that will demolish the
opposition. The reader will find himself cheering him on. C'mon, Bob. You can do
it.

And he does.

More than a mere action novel, "Point of Impact" is superbly written. Mr. Hunter
has made a fine effort to get into the mind of his protagonist. What makes a
Marine killer? What goes into the special skills demanded by the job? What types
of extraordinary reflexes are required? And what about the equipment he must
use?

We learn a great deal about the niceties of firing at a target that is more than
a half-mile away. Of course, the sniper needs a clean "theater of fire," with
the sun behind him. The temperature is an important consideration. Heavy
humidity can affect the trajectory of a bullet. As for noise, a silencer is out
of the question. At that range the sniper needs "velocities of over 2,000 feet
per second with a weight of at least 150 grains and more likely 200 to have a
chance of making a 1,200-yard head or torso kill." And so on.

Maybe Bob Lee Swagger is bigger than life. Maybe he pulls off things that no
human could ever do. But Mr. Hunter involves us completely in the psyche of the
man, and "Point of Impact" is one of those rare things: a true, exciting page
turner. It will also be on the mandatory-reading list of the National Rifle
Association.

CALL TO DUTY, by Richard Herman Jr. (Morrow, $20), tells two stories. One is
about an American yacht taken over by pirates in the China Sea. Among the
captives is the daughter of an American senator, a sleazy man with White House
ambitions. He is not above using his captured daughter as a club against the
President, Matthew Zachary Pontowski.

President Pontowski was a Yank in the R.A.F., a World War II hero for the Royal
Air Force. A good half of "Call to Duty" consists of flashbacks to his
experiences as an ace flier and as a downed pilot in the European Theater of
Operations, trying to get back to England. Mr. Herman, a retired Air Force
major, knows his flying.

He also seems to have had experience with Special Forces, and the thrust of the
book concerns the heroics of a team of men gathered to get the hostages out of
China, where they are being held by a drug lord. These men differ somewhat from
Bob Lee Swagger. They are stereotypes. But anybody who responds to skillful
action writing will appreciate the "Mission: Impossible" deeds accomplished by
this small band.

In THE NOBLE PATH, by Peter May (St. Martin's, $19.95), we have a British
soldier of fortune hired by a wealthy Asian man to get his family out of
Cambodia. Here again there is a dispassionate killer to whom death is a
business. And here again the killer and the people he recruits do the
impossible.

As in "Point of Impact," the author tries hard to explain the mental processes
of a hired killer. But of more interest is the apparently authentic look at the
horrors committed by the Khmer Rouge regime. In these passages Mr. May is at his
most powerful, especially in his portrait of the family that is being saved. The
mother is objectively, rather than sentimentally or idealistically, described;
she is a truly admirable human being.

BURNING THE APOSTLE, by Bill Granger (Warner, $19.95), is the latest in the
November Man series about the American agent Devereaux. Here he has to stop an
arsonist engaged to burn down a Midwestern nuclear plant. The story is told in
prose of singular ineptitude. The characters constantly stare at one another
(there are four stares on pages 298 and 299 alone). They have "lopsided" or
"crazy" grins. Tough guys, we are told ad nauseam, have "flat" eyes and "flat"
voices. How Mr. Granger loves the word "flat"! This f(l)atuous writing achieves
a certain kind of splendor in one sentence: "The words were in the room above
them and they both saw the power in the flat words that hung like clouds."

Whatever that may mean.

LOAD-DATE: March 8, 1993

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Review

                   Copyright 1993 The New York Times Company

                              188 of 255 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                  March 1, 1993, Monday, Late Edition - Final

NEWS SUMMARY

SECTION: Section A; Page 2; Column 5; Metropolitan Desk

LENGTH: 1056 words



International A3-9

U.S. BEGINS AIRDROP OVER BOSNIA
With successful flights by three U.S. military cargo planes from Germany, the
United States began airdropping food, medicine and other supplies to besieged
towns in eastern Bosnia and Herzegovina.  A1

Two Bosnian factions signaled opposition to the U.N.'s proposal.  A6


Warren Christopher said Serbs were entrenched in Bosnia.  A6

YELTSIN SUGGESTS A REGIONAL ROLE
President Yeltsin said Russia should be granted special powers to stop ethnic
conflicts in the former Soviet Union. The U.S., however, said it was important
to see the full text of Mr. Yeltsin's remarks before jumping to any conclusions.
A7

The last generation of cold warriors met and compared notes.  A7

IN HAITI, A GROWING ANGER
With the door to the U.S. shut by a Coast Guard cordon off Haiti, the hope that
the international community can help bring change to the country is coupled with
the outspokenness that accompanies a spreading anger among its people.  A3

IN SOMALIA, PERIL FOR AID GROUPS
Because of stepped-up efforts to disarm Somalis and edge the country toward
political negotiations, foreign relief agencies are facing increased looting and
violence as weapons are being confiscated from their security guards.  A6

FATAL MISFIRE FOR SWEDEN ROCKET
A space rocket suddenly ignited while on its flatbed and shot through two
buildings at the European Space Range of Sweden, killing a technician and
injuring three others.  A9

KHMER ROUGE LEADERS ASSAIL U.N.
The Khmer Rouge leadership accused United Nations officials and Western powers
on the Security Council of aligning themselves with Vietnam in an effort to
eliminate the Khmer Rouge.  A8

IN SPAIN, REVIVAL OF ISLAMIC ROOTS
Almost eight centuries after King Ferdinand 3d of Castille ended Arab rule of
Cordoba, a few dozen Andalusian Muslims meet there regularly to read the Koran,
to study history and to learn Arabic, convinced that Islam remains central to
the identity of the Spanish region.  A4

National A10-13, B8-9

DEADLY GUNFIGHT IN TEXAS
More than 100 law officers engaged in a fierce gun battle as they tried to
arrest the leader of a heavily armed religious cult in Waco, Tex. At least four
Federal agents were killed and 16 others injured.  A1

BUSINESS BACKS CLINTON
Since President Clinton presented his economic plan to the nation, he has
traveled to meet with business leaders and seek their support. And so far, he
seems to be getting it.  A1

TOURISM GROWS IN SOUTH
Growing numbers of tourists are visiting the South, coming not just to enjoy
Florida beaches and theme parks, but also to find Dixie and Dogpatch.  A10

LITTLE PROGRESS ON URBAN UNREST
A new report, released on the 25th anniversary of a widely publicized report by
the Kerner Commission, said that the United States has not learned how to
improve inner cities and stop the cycle of upheaval.  A10

BUSING UNDER FIRE IN PHILADELPHIA
A 24-year-old lawsuit over Philadelphia's segregated schools has produced a
widely criticized busing plan, and many parents, black and white, contend that
integration is less important than improving education in the district.  A12

GENE MUTATIONS TIED TO DIABETES
Researchers have found that there are at least 23 types of mutations of a single
gene that can lead to development of a form of diabetes.  A13

SETBACK FOR CLINTON HEALTH PLAN
Federal officials have discovered that the Government no longer collects the
data needed to set a health budget for each state, dealing a blow to the
President's effort to control health costs.  B8

JOINING HEALTH AND ECONOMICS
The Senate majority leader said he would like to combine health-care legislation
with President Clinton's economic package to assure that both proposals get
passed.  B8

PRESS WAR IN SOMALIA
Executive Brief: Some troops in Somalia are not happy about a commander's
decision that USA Today, but not Stars and Stripes, may be distributed the
troops.  B8

An apartment fire in Michigan killed eight children and an adult.  A10

Metro Digest B1

TRADE CENTER CLOSED FOR WEEK
Officials announced yesterday that the twin towers of the World Trade Center
would be closed for at least seven days, and Gov. Mario M. Cuomo asked the
Federal Government to make low-interest loans available to small businesses
affected by the bombing.  A1

DYNAMITE WAS APPARENTLY USED
Law-enforcement officials said last night that the bomb that devastated the
garage under the World Trade Center in Lower Manhattan on Friday was apparently
made of conventional dynamite, available at many construction sites, and not a
tightly controlled military explosive like the plastic favored by terrorists.
A1

Business Digest D1

Obituaries B10-11

LILLIAN GISH DIES AT 99
Lillian Gish, the last of the great silent movie stars, died at home in
Manhattan. Her career in films, on the stage and in television, spanned more
than 85 years.  A1

Ruby Keeler, actress.  B11

Arts/Entertainment C9-14

Cracow orchestra's transition.  C9
Theater: Conjuring up Joplin.  C9
Music: "Castor et Pollux." C9
Poulenc translated.  C11
Ice Cube concert.  C12
Dance: Hawkins company.  C10
Word and Image:
"Goin' Back to T-Town." C9
"Computer Wars" C13
Critics Circle awards.  C13
"Bloodlines," on NBC.  C14

Sports C1-8

Baseball: Here comes George.  C1
Mets' Kent is ailing.  C5
Basketball: An angry Dudley leads Nets past Knicks.  C1
Columns: Anderson on boxing C5
On Pro Basketball C4
On College Basketball C3
Football: Oilers' White has a home; he wants the ball.  C4
Reeves still musing the Giants' quarterback situation.  C4
Golf: Kite wins in Los Angeles.  C7
Hockey: Messier is hurting.  C1
From Siberia with talent.  C2
Devils beat Red Wings.  C2
Islanders defeat Whalers.C2
Sports People C6

Editorials/Op-Ed A14-15

Editorials

Bruce Babbitt's landscape.
Better budget priorities.
Shielding the elderly.

Letters

Anthony Lewis: The two societies.

William Safire: Against the grain.

Eliot Spitzer: Faster justice in New York.

Philip R. Lee and Richard D. Lamm: Europe's medical model.

LOAD-DATE: March 1, 1993

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Summary

                   Copyright 1993 The New York Times Company

                              189 of 255 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                  March 1, 1993, Monday, Late Edition - Final

In Slap at the U.N., Khmer Rouge Charges West Is Backing Vietnam

BYLINE: By HENRY KAMM,  Special to The New York Times

SECTION: Section A; Page 8; Column 3; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 344 words

DATELINE: PHNOM PENH, Cambodia, Feb. 28


Underlining its defiance of United Nations peacekeepers, the Khmer Rouge
leadership has accused United Nations officials and Western powers on the
Security Council of aligning themselves with Vietnam in an effort to eliminate
the Khmer Rouge.

Khieu Samphan, the Khmer Rouge representative on Cambodia's transitional Supreme
National Council, made the complaint in a telegram sent Thursday to Yasushi
Akashi, the head of the temporary United Nations authority in Cambodia.

In the letter, Mr. Samphan said that leading Western nations wanted to eradicate
the Khmer Rouge because it viewed the group as an obstacle to the West's
"strategic and economic designs on Cambodia." He asserted that Vietnam was so
weakened by the collapse of the Soviet Union that it had formed an "alliance"
with the West to maintain its influence in the region.

The Khmer Rouge leader also reaffirmed his group's refusal to abide by its
commitment under the 1991 peace accord, saying that the United Nations authority
and the Western powers "prefer to sacrifice Cambodia on the altar of their
alliance with Vietnam."

United Nations officials here said they viewed the accusations as part of a
continuing campaign by the Khmer Rouge to justify its refusal to abide by
several terms of the peace accords.

Mr. Khieu Samphan said in his telegram that Cambodia had been "invaded" by more
than two million Vietnamese "settlers" He asserted that they were armed and
organized into secret networks and included soldiers and officers disguised as
civilians.

United Nations military officers have said they are convinced that no Vietnamese
army units are operating in Cambodia.

And Mr. Akashi and the United Nations military commander in Cambodia, Lieut.
Gen. John Sanderson have repeatedly challenged the Khmer Rouge to produce
evidence of a continued Vietnamese military presence in Cambodia. Nonetheless,
United Nations officers have said they suspect that Vietnamese military
personnel may be advising the forces of the Cambodian Government of Prime
Minister Hun Sen.


LOAD-DATE: March 1, 1993

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1993 The New York Times Company

                              190 of 255 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                  March 1, 1993, Monday, Late Edition - Final

Books of The Times;
Battles Lost in a War That Is Far From Over

BYLINE: By CHRISTOPHER LEHMANN-HAUPT

SECTION: Section C; Page 13; Column 1; Cultural Desk

LENGTH: 913 words



Computer Wars
How the West Can Win in a Post-I.B.M. World
By Charles H. Ferguson and Charles R. Morris
272 pages. Times Books. $23.

Has this country really lost all its business to Japan? In "Computer Wars: How
the West Can Win in a Post-I.B.M. World," Charles H. Ferguson and Charles R.
Morris, two technology analysts, say that all is far from lost. The electronics
business, shortly to become "the world's first trillion-dollar industry," is
still up for grabs. "A country with a strong vendor's position in computer
technology enjoys an inherent advantage in almost every other technology-based,
productivity-driven industry." The winner of the battle for control of computer
technology has not yet been settled.

True, until very recently the welfare of the American computer industry was
concentrated in the International Business Machines Corporation, and that
gigantic, seemingly impregnable enterprise has lately fallen on extremely hard
times. In fact, so vital to the American computer industry do the authors
consider I.B.M. that they devote nearly the first half of their book to a
painstaking analysis of how the big blue egg had its great fall.

In their view, the causes of I.B.M.'s downfall lay in Project F/S, for "Future
Systems." This was an "absurdly ambitious" attempt undertaken in the 1970's to
retool the entire shape of computer technology. Its inevitable failure was
I.B.M.'s "own quiet Vietnam." "In the new, post-F/S I.B.M., power slowly shifted
to the stakeholders in existing methods and products," the authors write. "For
the first time, I.B.M. had room at the top for placeholders and sycophants."

The subtly different company that emerged was unable to build on successful
products like the I.B.M. personal computer the way it had once exploited its
mainframe computers. Bullied by William Gates of Microsoft into relinquishing
control of the PC's basic operating system, I.B.M. failed, in the authors'
words, to convert "an innovative technology into a broader, longer-term,
proprietary architectural franchise." In short, the company gave up the keys to
the kingdom. It may never fully recover.

Yet despite the collapse of I.B.M., say Mr. Ferguson and Mr. Morris, the issue
of who will control the future of computers remains far from resolved. I.B.M.'s
main competition, the Japanese electronics industry, also has its weakness. What
Japanese companies are superb at doing is producing commodities within
well-defined, stable, open, nonproprietary standards, "standards, that is, that
are defined by regulatory agencies, other government bodies, industry
standards-setting organizations, or very slow-moving incumbents, such as I.B.M.
has been in mainframes in recent years." Such commodities include memory chips,
printers, VCR's, CD players or facsimile machines.

The authors continue, "But industries that are fast-moving, where standards are
constantly evolving, and where the standards themselves are within the
proprietary control of an individual company, are hostile environments for
commodity implementers." And the computer industry in the 1990's "has been
transmuting into just such an industry, shifting the ground out from under both
the slow-moving Western giants and the commodity manufacturing-oriented Japanese
giants."

This then is the United States's golden opportunity: to encourage fast-moving
start-up companies capable of first developing products with "architectural
promise" and then exploiting that promise with perfect timing and a
sophisticated strategy. Potential American winners include Apple, Intel, Sun,
Microsoft, Novell and Adobe. Among the most promising Japanese companies,
surprisingly enough, are the two game makers, Nintendo and Sega.

The trouble with the authors' prescription for industrial success is that it
sounds better as a description of a successfully completed trip than as a set of
directions to be followed when setting out on a journey. Consider the fifth
instruction in their eight-point computer strategy: "Careful development of a
broad, complex supporting infrastructure increases customer switching costs. The
lock-in player encourages second sourcing and third-party development when it
broadens an architecture's reach. The leader can usually pick and choose which
parts of the market to leave to clones." This may be a perfect description of
what Microsoft did with MS-DOS and Windows. But it remains easier said than
done.

The chanciness of a winning industrial strategy is no doubt why the authors
strongly emphasize the right Government industrial policy, which, they insist,
the United States has embraced in the past, if only through programs financed by
the military. They also refer to a persisting anti-business bias in Government,
which, they imply, led to the 13-year anti-trust suit against I.B.M. and did
almost as much damage to the company's psychology as Project F/S.

Tantalizingly, they write in passing of intellectuals "already mocking
organization men early in the 1950's." You wish they had developed that thought
in more detail. You also wish they wrote a prose less easy to be mocked as the
kind written by organization men.

Still, "Computer Wars" remains a useful and highly instructive book, with an
appealing moral. It isn't so much that you want the West to win in the coming
battle for computer dominance. The good news is that victory will go to the
witty thinker with the ability to adapt, a timeless sort of Western hero.

LOAD-DATE: March 1, 1993

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo: Charles H. Ferguson (Rocky Nevins/Times Books); Charles R.
Morris (Jim Kalett/Times Books)

TYPE: Review

                   Copyright 1993 The New York Times Company

                              191 of 255 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                  March 2, 1993, Tuesday, Late Edition - Final

CHRONICLE

BYLINE: By NADINE BROZAN

SECTION: Section B; Page 7; Column 2; Style Desk

LENGTH: 164 words


Gen. H. NORMAN SCHWARZKOPF will return to the scene of his early military career
on April 2 when he goes to Vietnam to work on a documentary that he will co-host
with DAN RATHER.

General Schwarzkopf, who commanded the United States forces during the Persian
Gulf war, started his military career in South Vietnam and served two combat
tours there.

General Schwarzkopf, who retired from the armed forces in September of 1991, and
Mr. Rather, will spend about a week in Vietnam preparing the one-hour CBS News
documentary planned for broadcast in the summer. The general has done other
documentaries for CBS, including one about Pearl Harbor and one on the generals
of World War II. He is also working on a documentary for CBS about Stalin and
Hitler.

The trip to Vietnam will also mark a return for Mr. Rather. The anchor served as
Saigon bureau chief for CBS in 1965 and 1966. He said yesterday that he had
returned half a dozen times during the war, but not since.

LOAD-DATE: March 3, 1993

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1993 The New York Times Company

                              192 of 255 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 March 3, 1993, Wednesday, Late Edition - Final

U.N. Authority Says It Has Found Few Hanoi Soldiers in Cambodia

BYLINE: By HENRY KAMM,  Special to The New York Times

SECTION: Section A; Page 2; Column 3; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 357 words

DATELINE: PHNOM PENH, Cambodia, March 2


Officials of the United Nations say that for the first time since it arrived in
Cambodia to enforce the Paris peace agreement of 1991, it had identified
soldiers from Vietnam in the country.

The soldiers are three Vietnamese who served with the Vietnamese Army that
invaded this country in 1978 and later became members of the army organized by
the Vietnamese-installed Phnom Penh Government, according to Eric Falt,
spokesman for the United Nations Transitional Authority in Cambodia, as the
peacekeeping operation is called. He said two of the three still served in the
Cambodian Army.

A United Nations official said the three were not officers. But the
announcement, which took place Monday, is viewed here as important. The Khmer
Rouge faction, which was ousted from power in Phnom Penh by the Vietnamese
invasion, has based its refusal to comply with the Paris agreement's provisions
for demobilizing and disarming of its troops on the charge that more than two
million Vietnamese soldiers and other "colonizers" had illegally entered
Cambodia, and that many of them remain in violation of the Paris agreement.

The same accusation has also been the main political theme of the anti-Communist
Khmer People's National Liberation Front, headed by former Prime Minister Son
Sann.

United Nations officials who declined to be identified said the authority's
identification of only three soldiers from Vietnam, after intensive inquiries,
constituted a thinly veiled rebuttal of the Khmer Rouge justification of its
refusal to comply with the accord.

Khmer Rouge officials here said they had no immediate comment.

The United Nations spokesman, in a carefully worded announcement, used the
occasion to accuse the factions that complain of a Vietnamese military presence
of failing to give the authority "any verifiable information."

Mr. Falt said Yasushi Akashi, head of the United Nations authority, raised the
issue of the three soldiers with Prime Minister Hun Sen last week, demanding
that the two active soldiers be discharged and that identity cards issued to all
three be withdrawn. No reply has been received.

LOAD-DATE: March 3, 1993

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1993 The New York Times Company

                              193 of 255 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 March 3, 1993, Wednesday, Late Edition - Final

U.S. Envoy to Somalia Says American Mission Has Been Achieved

BYLINE: By DONATELLA LORCH,  Special to The New York Times

SECTION: Section A; Page 6; Column 1; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 936 words

DATELINE: MOGADISHU, Somalia, March 2


For more than three months, Robert B. Oakley, the United States envoy to
Somalia, has cajoled and threatened the country's warlords on the issues of
disarmament and peace talks and of allowing food and aid to reach those in need.

He has played the warring Somali clans against each other in much the same way
the ousted dictator, Mohammed Siad Barre, played the Soviet Union and the United
States.

Mr. Oakley, a former Ambassador to Somalia, who attributes his techniques to
lessons learned from his stints as a diplomat in Vietnam, Lebanon and
Afghanistan, is regarded by many as the toughest diplomat in Somalia, and he has
earned the respect of Somalis as a person who has created the groundwork,
however fragile, for peace.

Mr. Oakley believes he has achieved what the original American mission had set
out to do: to provide a secure environment for the delivery of food and relief
supplies, as well as a level of disarmament to bring relative peace to the
villages and cities of Somalia. But he believes the Americans' greatest success
has been in reducing the power of the warloads and bring into the peace
negotiations everyone from elders to intellectuals to women.

Nation Still Unstable

Now, although food is reaching the hungry, and the influence of the warlords has
been reduced, Somalia remains far from stable, and Mr. Oakley's departure for
Washington on Wednesday will mark a new unchartered phase in the United Nations'
involvement in a country where there is still no government, no infrastructure,
rising banditry and where warring clans have shown they have the firepower to
control the capital's streets.

Today, three people were killed and 16 wounded by hand grenades in the port city
of Kismayu where clan violence and looting has continued for more than a week.
"The U.S. mission was not to rebuild their political system," Mr. Oakley said in
his last press briefing here.

"I don't say it's a bright future but it's a stable future," he said. "The
problem of clan warfare is virtually gone. The downside of all this is an
increase in armed robbery."

Diplomatic successes are often measured in small bites. Mr. Oakley says his last
victory was the decision by all factions to attend a reconciliation conference
in Ethiopia later this month.

For the 61-year-old career diplomat, the achievement lies not in any eventual
peace agreement -- though he holds onto hope -- but that everyone has agreed to
go. Mr. Oakley said he is leaving because his intended mission of securing the
distribution of relief aid is completed and insists the transition will be
seamless.

Less Visible U.S. Role

But United Nations officials said the departure of Mr. Oakley and his
replacement by Robert Gosende, a United States Information Agency official,
underscores Washington's desire to begin playing a much less visible and
prominent role in the United Nations operation here.

At the end of the week, Gen. Cevik Bir of Turkey will arrive to begin the
process of taking over from Gen. Robert B. Johnston, the American commander in
Somalia. But Mr. Oakley said there was no deadline established for the
withdrawal of American troops. The United Nations representative, Izmat Kittani,
is also leaving and will be replaced by an as yet unnamed American, diplomats
said.

United Nations and relief agency officials are concerned that once the Americans
are gone, clans will try to jockey for advantage and further destabilize the
country. United Nations troops are expected to number 15,000 to 20,000, roughly
half of the 38,300 that marked the peak of the international deployment here in
late January. And those troops will be resposible for far more territory than
during the American-led phase of the operation.

"If there is anything the Somalis do well, it is playing each other off and
playing outsiders off against each other," a United Nations official said. "The
Somalis are adept at playing the U.N. and the U.S., but they have understood
that Oakley is tough. Now they will start fresh."

Avoid Playing Favorites

In the past months, Mr. Oakley has juggled the carrot-and-strick approach in his
dealings with the two main warlords, Mohammad Farah Aidid and Ali Mahdi, in an
effort to avoid playing favorites.

At times the Somali clans seem to act like petulant children. In Janaury at the
first Somalia reconciliation conference, Mr. Aidid tried to convince the other
Somalis that the Americans backed only him and refused to go along with a
cease-fire agreement. The same day, the American forces used massive firepower
to take over an Aidid compound near Mogadishu full of weapons, simultaneously
warning Mr. Ali Mahdi that there was no favoritism. Almost immediately, Mr.
Aidid agreed to meet with the other factions.

Mr. Oakley denies any connection between the two incidents. Later in the month
in Kismayu, Mr. Oakley and American forces repeatedly and unsuccessfully warned
Mohammed Hersi, who is also known as Morgan and is a son-in-law of the ousted
dictator, to stop his soldiers from approaching the city. Helicopter gunships
attacked part of the group.

"We were obliged to teach Morgan a lesson," Mr. Oakley said. "He wouldn't
listen. We told him to stop."

Mr. Oakley said the biggest challenge for Somalia will be its ability to assume
responsibilty for its own future and shake decades of reliance on western help.

"They have always been masterful at cornering foreign assistance," he said.
"This country has lived off the dole for as long as i can remember. In future,
Somalis will have to work harder at earning it rather than getting it."


LOAD-DATE: March 3, 1993

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo: Robert B. Oakley. (Associated Press)

                   Copyright 1993 The New York Times Company

                              194 of 255 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 March 3, 1993, Wednesday, Late Edition - Final

ABOUT NEW YORK;
Sociological Musings on Some Women's Search for Fellowship

BYLINE: By Michael T. Kaufman

SECTION: Section B; Page 3; Column 1; Metropolitan Desk

LENGTH: 809 words


IN this age of collapsing sexual stereotypes we are about to tread on dangerous
ground, examining the rise and glory of Wowee, which stands for Women of the
World Eating Everything. It was almost three years ago that Eve Bigelow and her
old Harvard roommate, Lucy Dineen, decided that what they needed was a forum
where women could meet regularly and talk about the world.

"Ever since college it seemed that our men friends had club lives, with eating
clubs and sports teams," said Ms. Bigelow, a fund-raiser for the American Civil
Liberties Union. She got the idea soon after she came to New York from Egypt,
where she had tried to teach poor farmers to raise rabbits. "We felt we needed
something of our own."

At the first meeting, in August 1990, the six women who showed up decided to
recruit women to attend monthly gatherings to be organized around some country
or geographical area. A book might be assigned as a focal point for discussions
and members would prepare and share foods associated with whatever region was
chosen. They decided to call themselves "Cold Soup, Hot Ideas," but that very
quickly gave way to Wowee.

The idea blossomed. By now there have been close to 30 meetings and more than 35
women, mostly in their late 20's and early 30's, have become involved. Last year
when Ms. Dineen moved to Boston, she opened a chapter there and it is also
thriving.

Just how comfortable the Wowee women have grown with the format and with each
other was made clear at a regular monthly meeting last week.

This time the subject was Cuba. The assigned reading was "The Mambo Kings Play
Songs of Love." The 15 women who showed up brought many variations on rice and
beans. There were also Cuban cigars for after dinner. Afro-Cuban jazz came from
the CD player.

After chatting on matters personal and professional, the women gathered in a
circle and began talking about the book, about Cuba. Were the macho qualities of
the musicians in the book culturally accurate? What would happen when Castro
eventually left the scene? Would Cubans stream here in greater numbers than the
Haitians? Should they be welcomed even when they were no longer fleeing
Communism? How did Cuba intend to encourage tourism while trying to keep its
citizens away from the visitors?

It was good conversation but for this interloper the most striking thing was not
the talk so much as the women themselves and the quality of their relationship.
No one was scoring points, no one was embarrassed about not knowing something or
about saying something that proved wrong or mistaken. The women, who included a
graphic designer, several business executives, an economist who finds investment
capital for third world women, two television producers and one assistant
district attorney, were the kind of caring achievers featured in ads for The
Gap.

Not to mince words, they were world-class humans. Yet their gathering was not so
much sophisticated as homey, more like a quilting bee than a cocktail party, an
assembly of friends, rather than of networkers or competitors.

And now -- and here is the pardoxical part -- this quality has gained Wowee the
respect and even envy of the very clubby men whose own socializing had first
inspired Ms. Bigelow. In a tongue-in-cheek but nonetheless admiring gesture, the
men, among them husbands, boyfriends, former boyfriends and just friends of the
Wowee women, have organized MEAT, which stands for Men Eating American Things.
What they do is to try to get together to eat steak, drink beer and talk sports.

One of the main MEAT organizers, John Solomon, said that he had become
fascinated with Wowee. "They were ready to read books just to talk with each
other, they cared enough to cook for each other," said Mr. Solomon, who works as
a program planner for Lifetime, a cable network that specializes in women's
programming. "They really worked at their social life, really took pains for it.
Would men do that? I don't think so. In fact the only time I see my men friends
on any regular basis is at a weekly basketball game."

MEAT's first meeting was held at a steakhouse. There was also a summer cookout
that was not badly attended. No books were discussed. Since then other meetings
were considered but never materialized because nobody got around to calling
anybody.

In January, a breakthrough was attempted, as MEAT and Wowee tried to hold a
joint meeting on Vietnam at Ms. Bigelow's apartment. It turned out that the men
were outnumbered 18 to 5 because the MEAT man in charge of invitations stumbled.
The few who came brought no food, just beer, and had not done the reading. Ms.
Bigelow's husband, John Baxley, said he thought it was a great idea but he had
to leave to play a gig with his band, Foggy Notion.

What's this prove? Maybe just that women don't need to keep score as much as men
do.


LOAD-DATE: March 3, 1993

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Drawing.

                   Copyright 1993 The New York Times Company

                              195 of 255 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 March 3, 1993, Wednesday, Late Edition - Final

Parents Face Questions on Vaccinating Infants for Hepatitis B

BYLINE: By ELISABETH ROSENTHAL

SECTION: Section C; Page 12; Column 1; National Desk; Health Page

LENGTH: 1638 words


MORE than a year after public health groups and medical societies recommended
that every infant be vaccinated against hepatitis B, many pediatricians are
defying this wisdom.

Rebelling pediatricians point out that the hepatitis B virus, which causes a
potentially fatal liver infection, is generally acquired in the late teens or
early adulthood and no one knows whether immunity through a vaccine delivered in
infancy will persist 15 to 20 years later. They say the recommended strategy
will immunize children who are unlikely to be exposed to the disease. And they
add that on top of all that, the vaccine, though safe, is relatively expensive.

"I'm in general very strongly in favor of immunizations, but I'm not in favor of
the hepatitis B vaccine being used in newborns," said Dr. Sydney Z. Spiesel, a
pediatrician affiliated with Yale University who has done research in vaccine
development.

"The current policy is based on getting kids when they are too young to fight
back and hoping there will be enough residual immunity that many will be
protected in later life," he said. "I don't know of a single immunologist who
believes this to be true."

Survey Shows Reluctance

A recent survey of all the pediatricians in North Carolina found only about half
were giving the vaccine to infants and only about a third of family-practice
doctors were doing so.

"There are still a number of doctors who are giving all the other vaccines, but
not this one," said Dr. Gary L. Freed, an assistant professor at the University
of North Carolina, who conducted the survey and supports the use of the shots.

In January, even among vaccine programs sponsored by the national Centers for
Disease Control and Prevention, 11 out of 63 were not offering the vaccine. Some
local governments felt the vaccine was not a priority, given their limited
budgets.

Hepatitis B virus is generally acquired through sexual intercourse or contact
with an infected person's blood, through sharing needles, for example, although
young children living in extremely close contact with a person carrying the
virus may acquire it as well.

While acknowledging some problems with the current vaccination strategy,
officials at the Centers for Disease Control and the American Academy of
Pediatrics say the effort is justified and strongly recommend that the series of
three shots be added as a routine infant vaccination.

They say there is evidence to suggest that at least some infants who receive the
vaccine will remain protected into the teen-age years and that a single booster
shot will probably be all that is necessary for those who do not. They add that
8 percent of hepatitis B infections are acquired before the age of 10, and that
a child's chances of developing a deadly form of hepatitis B are three times as
great as those of adults.

Groups at High Risk

More to the point, these officials say that programs aimed at people at risk for
hepatitis B -- infants of women with the infection, intravenous drug users,
homosexual men, immigrants, health-care workers and people with multiple sexual
partners -- have failed to stem the spread of the disease. About a third of
people with hepatitis B admit to no risk factors.

They believe that many pediatricians shy away from this particular vaccine
because they do not witness the devastation caused by hepatitis B.

"Pediatricians say, 'I don't see this disease, so why should I immunize all my
patients against it?' " said Dr. Caroline Breese Hall, a professor of pediatrics
at the University of Rochester and chairman of the American Academy of
Pediatrics Committee on Infectious Disease. "They don't understand how important
this is."

Children rarely get hepatitis B, and even when they do, it generally does not
cause them problems for decades. At all ages, the initial infection with the
virus often produces minimal symptoms, and in most people the virus disappears
without complications. But 10 percent of people will develop a chronic
infection; these carriers, who may not know they are infected, can spread the
disease and, over decades, the persistent presence of the virus can lead to
liver failure, or in some cases cancer, that often cannot be effectively
treated.

Dr. Melvin Marks, medical director of Memorial Miller Children's Hospital in
Long Beach, Calif., noted that hepatitis B was more common in the inner-city
poor and in certain immigrant communities. "Middle- and upper-class citizens and
their doctors are not in contact with groups that have a problem with the
disease, so they don't feel much urgency about this," he said, noting that
infants born at his hospital receive the shot.

There are about a quarter of a million new hepatitis B infections in the United
States each year, and about 5,000 people die from complications annually. More
than 30 percent of children who get hepatitis B will develop the chronic form of
the disease.

Of those infected in childhood, half are babies born to women with chronic
hepatitis, said Dr. Craig Shapiro of the hepatitis branch at the disease-control
centers. Since the disease does not take hold for several weeks, babies can be
immunized after their exposure during childbirth. The remainder of children who
get the virus do so through close contact with infected family members or with
others in communities where hepatitis is common.

Ways Children Are Infected

Dr. Shapiro suggested that these children might get the disease through bites or
toothbrush sharing, when a mother with the virus helps an infant eat by chewing
his food or by close physical contact between children with bleeding skin
rashes, for instance by sharing a bed.

Ever since the current hepatitis B vaccine became available in the mid-1980's,
Federal health officials have struggled with how best to use it.

The initial strategy was to vaccinate people at high risk for getting the
disease. But many people in the risk groups for hepatitis B never visit doctors,
and to some extent, the boundaries of the risk groups are blurry. Although the
average child is not likely to encounter the virus, the average teen-ager might,
by experimenting with sex or drugs. "We want to immunize people before risk
behaviors are likely to start," Dr. Shapiro said. "You don't pick your
adolescent's sex partners."

While some experts say it would be most logical to vaccinate for hepatitis B in
late childhood or early adolescence, all agree that is impractical. The
hepatitis B vaccine requires three office visits over a six-month period. "It's
very hard to get teen-agers to come in at all," Dr. Spiesel said. "They are
largely abandoned by our health-care system."

"At least with infants you can capture them because you know you see them at
birth," Dr. Hall said. And so various doctors have concluded that the only
practical way to reach the people who are likely to get hepatitis B is to
vaccinate everyone in infancy.

No one knows how long the immunity induced by the current vaccine will last. The
current vaccine, which is made using recombinant technology, has been in use for
only five years; an older version, made from the pooled blood of people with
hepatitis B, was used in the mid-1980's.

While both vaccines produce high levels of antibodies that protect against
hepatitis B, many doctors discovered that these levels dropped over time, and
within a few years they were in theory no longer adequate.

But Dr. Shapiro said studies had shown that even after the antibody levels drop,
people who have received the vaccine seem to retain some immunity to infection.
The centers do not recommend boosters for them.

Further studies to determine the length and strength of the immunity produced by
the vaccine are under way, he said, and will help determine when and if a
booster is required. Even if is it, he said, it should be much easier to get a
teen-ager to come in for one shot than for three.

But others are not comforted by preliminary findings. Before they give the
vaccine to all infants, they want better long-term studies.

"There has been tremendous pressure to get the vaccine out before we have
adequate research on how best to immunize," Dr. Spiesel said.

He said the recommended schedule of three shots was designed for people who were
likely to have immediate exposure to hepatitis B and might not be the best
formula for producing long-term protection

Aside from questions of efficacy, the hepatitis B vaccine has also received
scrutiny because of its price. "It is a relatively costly vaccine and that has
been one of the barriers," Dr. Shapiro said. The list price of the three-shot
series for infants is about $33, but after markup and administration fees, the
cost can run over $100; the shots are usually given during routine office
visits.

Higher Cost for Teen-Agers

A larger dose of vaccine is needed for adolescents. The list price for that age
group is about $100. Since teen-agers will generally be making special office
visits to get the shots, the cost can run well over $200.

The disease-control agency recommends the vaccine for older children and
adolescents who live in areas with high rates of sexually transmitted disease,
Dr. Shapiro said, but not for all teen-agers. He said they had targeted only
certain adolescents because of limited funds, but added that "if parents with
teen-agers have the resources and are willing to pay for it, I would urge them
to go ahead." They are suggesting vaccination of children from populations with
high rates of the disease, like immigrants from Vietnam and Cambodia.

Even Dr. Spiesel, who does not give the hepatitis B vaccine to infants, agreed
that in a perfect world teen-agers ought to be immunized. The "main downside is
that it's overpriced," he added, and "it's very hard to get teen-agers to come
in."

LOAD-DATE: March 3, 1993

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo: Dr. Sydney Z. Spiesel, who is skeptical about vaccine for
infants, with Tracey Savage and her 3-month-old son, Taylor. (Carl David
LaBianca for The New York Times)

                   Copyright 1993 The New York Times Company

                              196 of 255 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 March 4, 1993, Thursday, Late Edition - Final

THE TWIN TOWERS;
Leading Bomb Specialists Sift Explosion Aftermath

BYLINE: By JOSEPH B. TREASTER

SECTION: Section B; Page 4; Column 5; Metropolitan Desk

LENGTH: 1240 words


Within hours of the explosion that ripped through the World Trade Center last
week, Federal officials began assembling a team of the nation's most experienced
bomb specialists. They are highly skilled technicians who have probed the
wreckage after the terrorist attacks on the United States Marine Corps barracks
in Beirut and Pan American Flight 103, assaults on abortion clinics and an
endless string of tit-for-tat bombings by rival gangs.

The experts' job: to find out as swiftly as possible what kind of bomb was used
in the trade center's underground garage, how the bomb was detonated and
anything that might help track down who planted it.

Working against the clock, knowing that each passing day increases the odds
against catching the culprits, the specialists have been hobbled by the threat
of setting off an avalanche of broken concrete and twisted steel in the garage
and by concerns about preserving every scrap of evidence, no matter how small.

Unable to burrow directly into the tangle of debris that fills the crater
extending seven stories beneath the lobby of the Vista hotel at the World Trade
Center, about 70 agents from the Federal Bureau of Investigation, the Treasury
Department's Bureau of Alcohol, Tobacco and Firearms, and the New York City
Police Department's bomb squad have been scouring crumpled cars and trucks for
traces of explosive residue and moving along the outer fringes of the blast on
their hands and knees, scooping up sand, dirt, bits of metal and wire that may
eventually help them piece together the deadly riddle of the bombing.

'The Worst Thing'

No one wants a resolution to the case more than Malcolm Brady, the quiet,
gray-haired chief of the Alcohol, Tobacco and Firearms contingent, who has been
investigating explosions, arson and illegal gun cases for more than 20 years.
But, he says methodically, "the worst thing they could do is tell us to speed up
-- this thing has got to be done right."

On the assumption that the explosion was the work of terrorists, the F.B.I. took
the lead in the investigation and David Williams, the agency's senior explosives
analyst, who worked on the bombings of the Marine barracks in Beirut and of Pan
Am Flight 103, became the principal coordinator. Together with Daniel Boeh, a
Vietnam War veteran who served on the Pittsburgh police force before joining the
Treasury's bureau 16 years ago, he set up a half-dozen smaller teams with men
and women from the three agencies.

Detective Steven R. Dodge and two other members of the New York City Police
Department's bomb squad brought to the team expertise in the components of
bombs, with the ability to identify tiny fragments of metal casings and wires
and other parts that to less experienced eyes might seem inconsequential. In
almost any other city, the local police experts would have been shunted aside by
the Federal experts. But no other city's bomb squad fields more than 1,300 calls
a year to search out and disarm explosives.

A Collegial Group

Few if any members of the all-star team have been working with bombs for less
than a decade. "These are top-of-the-line investigators, well trained and well
seasoned," said Cliff Lund, the director of the International Association of
Bomb Technicians and Investigators, a collegial group whose members trade
information and get together for refresher courses and workshops.

Each day at the World Trade Center, Mr. Williams, who joined the F.B.I. 17 years
ago, and Mr. Boeh (pronounced BAY) have sent the smaller groups of half a dozen
or so investigators to different sections of the blast area.

On Sunday, they all gingerly studied the jagged holes -- as much as 200 feet
across -- that the explosion punched through seven floors of the trade center.
They peered down into the heart of the crater, from the highest point of
destruction, a fountain of torqued steel construction rods and chunks of
concrete, spouting from a corner of the hotel lobby.

As best they could, they examined the pattern of detritus hurled into the
lobby's high ceiling. They sketched. They took photographs. They calculated the
direction of the blast, its speed (an estimated 10,000 to 20,000 feet per
second, investigators say) and temperature. Then they huddled and swapped
theories.

On Monday they filled nearly 40 32-gallon plastic bags with scraps of metal and
wire, sand, dirt, concrete chips, ceiling tiles and chunks of insulating
material.

They spent most of Tuesday and yesterday looking for clues among the wreckage of
scores of cars that were mangled and, in some cases, virtually melted down in
the blast.

On Tuesday afternoon, Detective Dodge, whose regular duty is disarming bombs and
suspicious packages -- some filled with explosives, others with items as banal
as letters or bizarre as dead animals or vibrating sexual devices -- watched the
first 10 cars being hauled out of the underground garage. Some would be junked;
others kept for evidence.

"It's a matter of knowing what to save and what not to save," said the
detective, who, like all New York City police bomb squad members, goes to the
Army's Redstone Arsenal in Huntsville, Ala., every 18 months for intensive
follow-up training.

One Piece at a Time

James M. Fox, head of the F.B.I. in New York, said he expected the investigators
to begin digging into the center of the bomb's crater by Sunday. But some
investigators say Mr. Fox may be overly optimistic. Even when the building is
safely shored up, the investigators say, they will only remove concrete slabs,
steel beams and other rubble one piece at a time so as not to damage or lose
crucial parts, like bits of detonating devices or shards of wrapping paper that
might provide hints to where the explosive material was obtained.

Investigators assume that the bomb was packed in a car or truck and one of their
most prized objectives is the recovery of the remains of the vehicle: the engine
block, the transmission, the axles, wheels and perhaps the chassis.

"When we get that," one Federal investigator said, "we'll get an automotive
expert in from Detroit to identify the vehicle and help us find the owner."

In the investigation of the 1988 bombing of Flight 103 over Lockerbie, Scotland,
the experts reconstructed much of the aircraft in their search to understand how
the attack had been carried out. How much reconstruction will be attempted in
the World Trade Center explosion is not clear, investigators say.

Numbering System

Typically, all recovered pieces are laid out and catalogued on a worksheet. Each
piece is numbered. Those pieces known to have come from the bomb are assigned a
"K" number, like K-1, for "known." Questionable fragments are given a "Q"
number.

Bomb makers tend to follow the same pattern of construction for each of their
bombs, and it is this so-called signature that investigators seek to discover
and match to previous bombings.

For forensic specialists, every crime scene requires the same meticulous,
vacuum-cleaner approach. None of the investigators, of course, had ever seen
anything to equal the magnitude of the World Trade Center explosion. At first,
the mere sight of the destruction was shocking.

"But," Mr. Boeh said, "we've done so many bomb investigations, and that helps
you bring it into perspective. You know you're going to just break it down into
simple work and make it like any other bomb scene you've ever done."


LOAD-DATE: March 4, 1993

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photos: Photographs released yesterday by the New York City Police bomb
squad of the site of the explosion under the World Trade Center show the
wreckage of a car, at top, resting atop another and a fallen steel beam.
(Associated Press)

                   Copyright 1993 The New York Times Company

                              197 of 255 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 March 4, 1993, Thursday, Late Edition - Final

Germans Sentence Anti-Foreign Rioter to 2 1/2 Years

BYLINE: By STEPHEN KINZER

SECTION: Section A; Page 15; Column 1; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 672 words

DATELINE: BERLIN, March 3


A German court sentenced an unemployed 22-year-old man today to two and a half
years in prison for throwing a firebomb at the police in riots against
foreigners in Rostock last summer.

It was the first major prosecution for crimes connected to the Rostock riots,
though there have been 24 convictions on lesser charges.

The defendant sentenced today, Bernd Teuber, testified that he had driven to
Rostock from his home in eastern Berlin, drinking nearly a full bottle of
whiskey along the way. He said he had not assaulted anyone, but he was convicted
of serious disturbance of the peace, violating weapons laws and trying to
injure.

In his closing argument, the state prosecutor unexpectedly withdrew the charge
of attempted murder, which could have led to a life sentence. He said there was
not enough evidence to sustain it.

Spokesmen for Rostock prosecutors said today that prosecutors were preparing
more cases, and rejected assertions that they have dealt too leniently with
rioters. But critics noted that all Rostock defendants tried so far had been
charged with general disorderliness or with assaulting police officers.  None
have been charged with assaulting a refugee.

The Rostock official in charge of dealing with foreigners, Wolfgang Richter,
complained in a radio interview before the verdict today that the police were
not aggressively seeking evidence against rioters. He also asserted that some
rioters who were clearly photographed during the violence had not been arrested.

"We are told only that it is not possible to find these people," he said.

The Rostock riots, which lasted for several days in late August, were set off
when rightist youths attacked an apartment complex where more than 100
asylum-seekers from Vietnam and other countries were living. The police did
little to hinder the attack, and hundreds of local residents gathered to cheer
the attackers.

There were no serious injuries, but the apartment complex was badly damaged by
fire.

When calm was finally restored to Rostock after nearly a week of disorder, angry
legislators began demanding the resignation of the state Interior Minister,
Lothar Kupfer. He insisted that he would remain in office.

Last month, however, as a special legislative commission was completing its
investigation of the riot, Mr. Kupfer was forced to quit. His boss, Premier
Berndt Seite of Mecklenburg-Western Pomerania, a close ally of Chancellor Helmut
Kohl, feared that his own political future might be endangered if he did not
act.

Mr. Kupfer has often said he sympathizes with views held by the youths who
rioted in Rostock. "We have to find solutions to the uncontrolled flood of
foreigners into eastern Germany," he said in an interview in January.

Federal prosecutors reported that rightists committed nearly 2,300 acts of
violence in 1992, a 54 percent increase over the previous year. Rightists killed
seven foreigners and 10 Germans during the year.

Among the victims were three Turkish citizens who burned to death after their
home in the western town of Molln was firebombed in November.  That attack led
to nationwide protests against rightist violence, including candlelight vigils
in which more than three million Germans took part.

Federal and state agencies responded to the Molln firebombing by cracking down
on rightists. New prosecutors and police investigators have been hired, hundreds
of offices and apartments have been searched and three neo-Nazi groups have been
banned.

"Since the end of November 1992, there has been a reduction in criminal acts
against foreigners," Interior Minister Rudolf Seiters said recently.  "This
development is shown by the 70 violent acts which were recorded in January, a
clear decline in comparison with 1992."

But although racist attacks are apparently becoming less frequent, they are
still almost daily occurrences. Last weekend, for instance, 12 rightists aged 15
to 18 were arrested after they gathered to stone a home for asylum-seekers in
the eastern town of Halle.

LOAD-DATE: March 4, 1993

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1993 The New York Times Company

                              198 of 255 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 March 4, 1993, Thursday, Late Edition - Final

7 Percent Pentagon Solution

BYLINE: By Jerome Wiesner and Kosta Tsipis;  Jerome Wiesner, president emeritus
of M.I.T., was science adviser to Presidents Dwight D. Eisenhower, John F.
Kennedy and Lyndon B. Johnson. Kosta Tsipis directs M.I.T.'s program in science
and technology for international security.

SECTION: Section A; Page 25; Column 1; Editorial Desk

LENGTH: 618 words

DATELINE: CAMBRIDGE, Mass.


A new Massachusetts Institute of Technology study shows that President Clinton
can save hundreds of billions of dollars by reducing the Pentagon budget --
without sacrificing the strength of our military forces.

Helped by a colleague, Philip Morrison, we have found how to save $681 billion
(in current dollars) through the year 2000 -- $32 billion in 1993 alone. That is
$21 billion more than the cuts suggested by Defense Secretary Les Aspin. The $21
billion is the equivalent of 40 million families each paying $525 less in taxes
next year.

Since money spent on the defense industry can employ twice as many people in
civilian jobs, the cuts we propose would not create net unemployment so long as
half the amount saved was spent on civilian projects.

Sixty percent of our military expenses during the cold war went to defend the
U.S. and its allies against the Soviet threat. This threat evaporated by 1992,
yet the Pentagon plans to spend only 17 percent less in 1997 than it spent in
1992.

The Chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff, Gen. Colin L. Powell, invoking the
need for "strategic depth," insists America can cut only 2 to 4 percent of
military costs a year through 1998 in order to "retain certain capabilities to
protect our interests around the world." This vague pronouncement does not
justify the size of the military the Pentagon wants.

We recommend cutting the budget about 7 percent a year -- the same rate it was
reduced for a few years after the Korean and Vietnam Wars.

During the Cuban missile crisis, America had five aircraft carrier task forces.
Now we have 14, each costing $3 billion a year to operate. We need no more than
five; two can be decommissioned this year, at a $6 billion net savings at once.

The Army maintains 12 active divisions, the Marines two. In Operation Desert
Storm, not quite eight were used. Now that Europe is not threatened, in this
fiscal year we can retire one division in Europe and one in America, saving $6
billion.

The Air Force has 95 strategic B-1 bombers and 175 B-52's and is procuring 20
additional B-2's at more than $1 billion each. None of these planes is needed
for nuclear deterrence. We should mothball the 81 older B-52's and half the
B-1's this year, saving $5 billion. We should stop procuring the not-so stealthy
B-2 bomber and the C-17, the flawed new transport plane. We don't need these
aircraft because others can perform their functions. Total net savings: $7.3
billion.

Stop procuring the one new Sea Wolf submarine and the four new DDG-51
destroyers, saving $4 billion.

This year, buy half the planned 20 F-18 fighters and 30 Trident-2 missiles for
the Navy, saving $1.5 billion.

Cancel the contract for 60 redundant Army Blackhawk helicopters, and reduce by
10 percent the Army's purchase of ammunition and electronics, saving $1 billion.

Curtail the unworkable Strategic Defense Initiative and save $2 billion.

Overall savings from these cutbacks would come to nearly $40 billion, but $8
billion would have to be spent for terminating contracts and mothballing planes
and ships. The net savings would be $32 billion in 1993. By the year 2000, the
budget can be reduced to $164 billion a year, for a total savings of $681
billion between now and then.

Last month, the Congressional Budget Office, in its publication "Reducing the
Deficit: Spending and Revenue Options," identified 61 cuts in the defense budget
totaling $308 billion for 1994 through 1998. We suggest $346 billion for that
period.

President Clinton can safely order cuts in defense spending, based not on
nebulous strategic pronouncements but on a reasonable assessment, to use defense
community jargon, of "how much is enough."

LOAD-DATE: March 4, 1993

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Drawing.

TYPE: Op-Ed

                   Copyright 1993 The New York Times Company

                              199 of 255 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 March 4, 1993, Thursday, Late Edition - Final
                              Correction Appended

Where Fire Raged, Architecture Blooms

BYLINE: By TRIP GABRIEL

SECTION: Section C; Page 1; Column 1; Home Desk

LENGTH: 2049 words

DATELINE: OAKLAND, Calif.


RECENTLY, Thaddeus Kusmierski was designing an up-from-the-ashes house for a
survivor of the great Oakland and Berkeley fire. Mr. Kusmierski sang the praises
of built-in bookshelves as a way to impart coziness and a sense of much-needed
stability. His client agreed, then suddenly remembered. "But I have no books
anymore," she said sadly.

There was an awkward moment between architect and client.

"The people are very fragile," said Mr. Kusmierski, whose own house burned in
the October 1991 wildfire, the worst in California history. The fire reduced
2,500 homes to char and robbed survivors of all the possessions that add up to
an identity: children's photos, heirloom jewelry, records and books.

"It's sort of all just below the surface," Mr. Kusmierski said. "If you scratch
too deep, it hurts. It's not like working with the young couple who are finally
ready to build a house."

Architects like Mr. Kusmierski, who is designing two post-fire houses as well as
restoring his own, are playing a role significantly different from the usual one
when new clients come to them, primed for esthetic adventure and full of
material self-confidence, seeking to build their dream houses.

The houses being planned and built in the 1,800 acres of mostly rugged hillside
that burned have been conceived in trauma. As such, they reflect their origins
in ways different from houses designed in happier times. Some fire survivors
have seized the chance for a fresh departure, and others, still profoundly
shaken by the fire, which cost 25 lives and billions of dollars in property
damage, seem obsessed with retrieving the past.  Many of the houses tell
stories, expressed in the language of architecture, of how people respond
psychologically to disaster.

Plans for more than 1,000 houses have been approved by the cities of Oakland and
Berkeley, although fewer than 100 are completed. The hills are covered with the
exoskeletons of raw construction. Drawings and models for 13 of the most
distinctive homes by leading California architects are on display through March
31 at the Limn furniture showroom, 290 Townsend Street in San Francisco.

The most aggressive feature of post-fire design is a new sense of massiveness.

"The new buildings look enormous," said Stephen Tobriner, a professor of
architectural history at the University of California at Berkeley, reflecting a
widely held perception.  "My general impression is they look like giant boxes,
strangely unimaginative and ugly." On average, the new homes are 21 percent
bigger, based on approved plans.

The fortresslike houses seem to reflect a conservative inward-turning by
survivors. The fire stripped away the privacy once provided on traditionally
small California lots by curtains of mature foliage.

The first question for everyone who has lost a home is whether to reconstruct or
to design anew. For Deborah and Michael Lesser, who lived with their four
children in a stately 1909 Craftsman style house in Berkeley, it was not an easy
choice.

"We were quite attached to the memory of our old house," Mrs. Lesser said. "One
of our daughters, age 9, was convinced she wanted to have exactly the same
thing."

Photographs of the 14-room house show that it had a wood-shingle exterior, a
two-story living room and a walk-in fireplace.

"My mother said our house was like a giant ship," Mrs. Lesser said.  "Kids would
get lost in it."

The Lessers lived in an architect-aware neighborhood, where homes cost $750,000
and up. On their street there were historic houses by Edward Maybeck, Ernest
Coxhead, William Wurster and Warren Callister, prominent representatives of 60
years of local architecture. The typical Oakland-Berkeley hill house has a
comfortable rusticity, a reverence for native woods, and often terraces and
decks with views of San Francisco Bay that serve as outdoor extensions of the
living rooms.

A life of Arcadian serenity seemed possible in the hills, and the burn area, an
enclave above a poor inner city, was home to professors, artists, writers and
other professionals. The canyons were dense with coastal live oaks and Jeffrey
pines. On some slopes, Tall and rangy eucalpytus trees grew as densely as
triple-canopy jungle.

On the day of the fire, Dr. Lesser, a psychiatrist, escaped on a daughter's
bicycle with only his briefcase and a Paul Klee watercolor. Rather than
reconstruct their home, the Lessers decided to break with the past and build a
contemporary house.

"I felt very strongly it was really important to have a clean slate," Mrs.
Lesser said. "I would not have wanted to reproduce the old house, even though we
lived in it 20 years and loved it. Something about the fire made me want a clean
environment."

They hired Stanley Saitowitz, an architect in San Francisco, who designed a
sleek wood- and stucco-sided house with an Art Deco curve. The house's geometry
mirrors the geometry of the corner lot. The private south-facing exposure has
four levels opening onto nearly continuous balconies, which are covered with
wood trellises. The effect is one of terraces cut into a gently sloping
hillside.

"It's an attempt to reinterpret the Berkeley tradition of building and landscape
being integrated," Mr. Saitowitz said. "I was inspired by the climate and
topography, rather than importing a style."

On the Lessers' lot, a giant redwood that once provided shade is now a blackened
mast. As Mrs. Lesser walked over the site, still waiting for construction to
begin, she picked a paperwhite from the wreck of her garden and kept it close to
her nose, as if hoping for a literal whiff of renewal.

She said it was a daily challenge "to go on with things and not to delay
living." Her family is still living in cramped temporary quarters. Until
recently Mrs. Lesser attended a support group for fire victims sponsored by the
Federal Emergency Management Agency.

But the family members found that being forced to design a new house was yanking
them into the future.  They are soothing their wounds with the ointment of
architecture.

"We've got to move on," Mrs. Lesser said, sounding a bit wistful but resolved.
"I want to be a part of the 21st century. I really don't want to try to
re-create the past."

At the same time, Mr. Kusmierski, the architect who lost his home, is taking the
opposite tack. He is attempting what he admits is the "neurotic" task of
restoring his family's former house, a 1928 Edward Maybeck design. At times it
has seemed almost hopeless, as when he contemplated drawing an entire set of new
plans from memory.

"I felt like someone who'd been in prison 20 years and has written a novel in
his head without paper and pencil and is trying to remember everything," Mr.
Kusmierski said. A search of documents at the College of Environmental Design at
the University of California at Berkeley uncovered a trove: 45 of Maybeck's
blueprints for the house.

Maybeck practiced in the first 30 years of the century, leaving behind
residences that reflect the woodsy Craftsman tradition and yet are comfortably
modern.

The Kusmierskis' five-bedroom, 4,100-square-foot Maybeck was Mediterranean in
style, with stucco walls and a gently pitched clay-tile roof.

"The plan was very, very modern, almost out of the 50's, where you walk into a
central area with activity on one side and the sleeping areas on the other
side," Mr. Kusmierski said.

There were handcrafted iron railings, mahogany floors and doors, and heavy
exposed roof beams 32 feet long and 18 inches deep.

"You can't go down to your neighborhood lumberyard and find beams like that
today," Mr. Kusmierski said. "It's a little bit of a detective job to come up
with the materials."

The beams will have to be custom-milled. Mr. Kusmierski may go to Mexico to have
the roof tiles made.  He plans to involve his two sons, ages 18 and 21, and a
daughter, 23, in the project. He volunteers that many people, not least of all
his wife, question why he's so driven.

When he speaks of rebuilding, Mr. Kusmierski, whose office was in the basement
of the home, is somber and introspective. He seems haunted by memories of the
dry fall day when the radio urged residents to flee for their lives and the
advancing curtain of flame encloaked five houses a second.

"It's absolutely devastating," said Mr. Kusmierski, who was alone in the house
at the time of the fire. "You feel foolish throwing all your things in the car
and running away. You think, this can't possibly be happening."

Today, while power saws screech like wild macaws through his Berkeley
neighborhood and double-parked pickup trucks block the streets in a frenzy of
rebuilding, Mr. Kusmierski still seems a bit shellshocked. He sounds perturbed
at how blithely some people seem to be blotting out the memory of the fire.

"It's like the Vietnam business," he said. "People don't want to talk about it.
People come up and say, 'Aren't you glad you can start all over again?' They
have no idea what you're going through."

His home will be an aid to memory, a reconstruction to remind all who pass by of
how the neighborhood once looked.

Another architect, David Weingarten, has noticed that whether survivors opt to
reconstruct or to start over, they are a hardier-than-usual lot. Perhaps half
the survivors were so distraught that they decided to move away permanently,
according to estimates by city and neighborhood groups.

"We talked to people after the fire who were completely undone by it and decided
to go and buy elsewhere," said Mr. Weingarten, whose firm, Ace Architects, is in
Oakland.  "But the people who made the decision to rebuild see it as an
opportunity instead of a punishing tragedy from which there is no recovery."

In an unforeseen side effect, the fire has led to a democratization of
architecture. Mr. Weingarten and his firm are designing three burn-area homes
for clients who probably would never have worked with an architect. They are
people who, before the fire, had bought existing houses originally built by
developers. Rather than use their insurance settlements to buy elsewhere, they
chose to build for themselves.

"In modern-day America, that's an extraordinary thing," Mr. Weingarten said.
"It's really an activity that's become more the province of the rich."

These clients are esthetically bolder and more uninhibited than the people who
usually patronize architects. One client, a publisher, had lived in a stucco
bungalow on a 40-foot-wide sliver of a lot in a flat area of Oakland. She
declared that she wanted "a house that was a lot of fun."

"For us, that was the perfect design brief," said Mr. Weingarten, whose firm is
known for whimsical and sometimes controversial buildings.

He conceived a small 1,400-square-foot house that looks like an A-frame wedded
to a tower out of "The Arabian Nights." The A-frame, which encloses a vaulted
living room, is in the shape of a Gothic arch. The tower, which contains a
two-story bedroom, is topped by a pointy roof with broad, tentlike overhangs.

"Our house is a lot of house even though it's a little house," Mr. Weingarten
said with an impish laugh.

The house looks eccentric and even jarring, yet it is in the finest traditions
of the area. Its form was inspired by a Berkeley building designed in 1899 by
Maybeck. That structure, Hearst Hall, was built for Phoebe Hearst, the mother of
William Randolph Hearst. It and the 1993 house are remarkably similar, except
that Hearst Hall was infinitely grander, with a cathedral-like interior soaring
54 feet, swathed in Gobelin tapestries and Chinese rugs.

"It's one of my favorite buildings in the history of Bay Area architecture, and
also one of the most idiosyncratic ones," Mr. Weingarten said.

It turns out that Mr. Weingarten's modern interpretation is doubly symbolic. It
alludes not only to the old Maybeck but to the recurring upheavals of nature in
California. In 1923, a wildfire swept through Berkeley, and Hearst Hall burned
to the ground.

Mr. Weingarten sees that event as "a poetic correlation to the current
situation." The modest house he designed is a reminder that in the wake of
disaster, the response of survivors (and of the architects they employ) can be
despair and retreat, or it can just as readily be a witty flight of imagination.


LOAD-DATE: March 4, 1993

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

CORRECTION-DATE: March 6, 1993, Saturday

CORRECTION:

An article in The Home Section on Thursday about rebuilding houses destroyed by
fire in Oakland and Berkeley, Calif., misidentified an architect who originally
designed many of the houses. He was Bernard Maybeck.


GRAPHIC: Photos: Starting Over -- Scaffolding, above, marks reconstruction
efforts overlooking downtown Oakland; Rebuilding a Condo -- The Oakland
condominium project Hiller Highlands, below, is being renovated. (Photographs by
Jim Wilson/The New York Times) (pg. C1); Thaddeus Kusmierski, an architect, is
recreating his house using all that remained: the chimney; In Oakland,
construction has begun on an A-frame with a Gothic arch designed by David
Weingarten of Ace Architects. (Photographs by Jim Wilson/The New York Times); A
model of the new house Stanley Saitowitz, an architect, designed for Deborah and
Michael Lesser (Mark Darley/Esto) (pg. C6)

                   Copyright 1993 The New York Times Company

                              200 of 255 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 March 4, 1993, Thursday, Late Edition - Final

New Barbarians

BYLINE: By Robert Stone;  Robert Stone is author, most recently, of "Outerbridge
Reach."

SECTION: Section A; Page 25; Column 5; Editorial Desk

LENGTH: 712 words

DATELINE: BALTIMORE


Put yourself in the mind's eye of the bomber. Whoever he is, it's likely he
first viewed the city from the air, looked out and saw the twin towers mirroring
each other's dizzying rise. Or maybe he stood at the window of a safe house in
Queens or New Jersey and looked at them thrusting so immodestly over a thousand
feet in the air; no doubt he thought they mocked his passionate intensity.

The World Trade Center towers don't have much poetry in them. It might be
harder, psychologically, to bomb one of the old cathedrals of commerce like the
Empire State or the Chrysler Building. These seem to to aspire beyond mammon.
Belonging to a bygone era, they no longer challenge the world. The Michelin
Guide to New York describes them in virtually archeological terms.

The twin towers were built for an age that will probably never come to pass.
They represent an ultimate reduction of the American Dream: America as home of
the unadorned Economic Man -- practical, rational, powerful, even brutal. They
are the expression of an aspect of America our true-believing enemies have
learned to hate and fear.

Now, as America's influence contracts, the world returns to old romances. In
Europe, blood and soil are back. In what is sometimes still called the third
world, religion flourishes. In our radical interpretation of democracy, our
rejection of elites, our well-nigh demagogic respect for the opinions of the
unlearned, we are alone.

Our country has been so long identified with its wealth and power that a sense
seems to be growing abroad that it will eventually somehow disappear, as though
we were no more than our own compulsive communicating, a media phenomenon, a pop
artifact going out of style.

Although every President since Franklin D. Roosevelt has denied it, we did set
out, years ago, to be the world's policeman. The image was of Uncle Sam rolling
up his sleeves and wading in to do the right thing. The unheralded corollary was
that we might do well by doing it. After all, the original Uncle Sam was a
rather shady defense contractor.

On the international scene these days, our trumpets have sounded slightly sour
and uncertain. Our pro bono military operations have been conducted with
noticeable diffidence. And this has been noticed, in friendly and unfriendly
quarters. Cops make enemies. The best cops are good diplomats, which we have not
always been. The impression of weakness, even relative weakness, invites
predation.

Malcolm X, exercising his customary cruel wit, called the assassination of
President John F. Kennedy a case of the "chickens coming home to roost." His
allusion was to the murder of President Ngo Dinh Diem of Vietnam in which some
felt the U.S. had colluded. The world is much smaller now than even during
Malcolm's lifetime. The poor are poorer and more restless. Entire populations
are on the move. The migration of the world's poor has been compared to the
barbarian migrations of the fifth century A.D. Borders are porous; in jet planes
and on rafts, desperate people cross oceans.

Literally and figuratively, our cities have no walls. We have lived for a long
time like ancient Rome, relying on far-flung power for defense. To a degree we
have claimed exemption from the forces of history. Now, late in "our" century,
history is presenting old, half-forgotten bills.

In striking at symbols, terrorists destroy the real lives of American working
people, traumatize actual American children. We will learn to cope as other
nations have; we are good at coping. Eventually few Americans will remember the
country as it was before X-ray machines appeared at airports and in the
vestibules of public buildings, before security guards were deployed at every
other corporate door.

During the cold war, we lived in fear of nuclear holocaust. Now we know that if
a nuclear device ever goes off in an American city it will not likely come
launched from some Siberian silo. More probably, it will have been assembled by
a few people, perhaps in the guise of immigrants, in that safe house with a view
of lower Manhattan. These days, people are dying again for their national or
religious identity. The new breed of terrorist may be those whose cause we have
offended perhaps by simply being what we are.

LOAD-DATE: March 4, 1993

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Op-Ed

                   Copyright 1993 The New York Times Company

                              201 of 255 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                  March 5, 1993, Friday, Late Edition - Final

$25 and Under

BYLINE: By Eric Asimov

SECTION: Section C; Page 23; Column 1; Weekend Desk

LENGTH: 718 words


All right, get a pad and pencil. And an eraser.

The story begins simply enough with Gerald Faulk, who was born in New Iberia,
La., in the heart of Cajun country, and grew up in nearby Acadia Parish. After
serving in Vietnam, he visited a buddy, William Stack, in Brooklyn in 1971, fell
in love with Mr. Stack's sister, married her and stayed in Brooklyn. Mr. Faulk
got a job as a dispatcher with the Fire Department, occasionally cooking spicy
Cajun meals for his colleagues. His hope was to open his own restaurant.

Six months ago, Mr. Faulk finally got his chance, opening Acadia Parish on
Atlantic Avenue in Brooklyn, and here's where the story gets complicated. Having
never worked in a restaurant, Mr. Faulk enlisted a little help from his family.

His brother, Mark, a carpenter, helped renovate the tidy 40-seat dining room and
kitchen and helps Mr. Faulk with the cooking. Mr. Faulk's wife, Jeanne, a nurse
and supervisor, bakes. His older daughter, Tammy, a police officer, helps as a
waitress. So does his younger daughter, Jacqueline, a student. Tammy's fiancee,
Paul Lestengi, a postal worker, is a waiter. Mr. Faulk's sister, Beth Stack,
who, by the way, married Jeanne's brother William and works for the telephone
company, comes in to help Jeanne on weekends, as does William occasionally.
Their daughter, Laurie, a student, helps out with the waitressing. Mr. Faulk's
mother-in-law, Margaret Stack, also pitches in.

Got that? "I really felt bad in the beginning," Mr. Faulk said. "They really had
to work hard and I didn't want that."

But the hard work has paid off. Despite the plain wooden laminated tables, the
family atmosphere is warm and informal, and Mr. Faulk's food is flavorful and
plentiful, from the big basket of steaming jalapeno corn bread that appears
first thing on your table to the last crumbs of homemade coconut custard pie.

Big meaty crab cakes ($6.50), deep-fried but greaseless, were a fine appetizer,
as were excellent fried oysters ($6), complemented by a sweet mustard sauce.
Duck-and-oyster gumbo ($3 a cup) was rich and dark, full of rice, peppers, bits
of duck and oysters. Cajun popcorn ($6), deep-fried crayfish, was peppery but
bready.

Main courses cover the traditional Cajun territory, with a few surprises thrown
in, like lively fusilli with tomatoes, shrimp, mushrooms and smoky andouille,
fragrant with white wine and lemon ($12.95). Seafood jambalaya ($7.95), rice
melded with andouille, crayfish, okra, peppers and onions, had a lovely texture
and a peppery bite that culminated in a pleasant glow. Etoufee ($9.95), on the
other hand, though full of crayfish, was bland and one-dimensional. Mako shark,
grilled with a garlic-mustard sauce ($12.95), and garlicky grilled shrimp
($14.95) were both well prepared but paled in comparison with a side dish,
tender greens (chicory on one occasion, escarole on another) sauteed in garlic,
soy sauce and peanut oil.

Acadia Parish does not have a liquor license, but there are high-octane
desserts, including a delightfully infantile chocolate and peanut butter pie
($3) and the coconut custard pie ($3), full of ground coconut and not too sweet.

As an extra special treat, diners are rewarded at the end of the meal with a few
delicious chocolates, shaped like crabs or lobsters, hand-made by Mr. Faulk's
sister, Beth. After all, she's got to do something in her spare time.
Acadia Parish

148 Atlantic Avenue (near Clinton Street), Cobble Hill, Brooklyn, (718)
624-5154.

Best dishes: Crab cakes; fried oysters; gumbo; fusilli with tomatoes, shrimp,
mushrooms and andouille; seafood jambalaya; coconut custard pie.

Price range: $13 to $23.

Credit cards: All major cards except Discovery.

Hours: 11:30 A.M. to 10 P.M. Mondays, Wednesdays and Thursdays, until 11 P.M.
Fridays; 5 to 11 P.M. Saturdays; 5 to 10 P.M. Sundays.

Wheelchair access: Entrance and restrooms on one level.

Ratings:

Poor
Satisfactory
Good
Very Good
Excellent
Extraordinary

Ratings are based on the reviewer's reaction to food and price in relation to
comparable establishments.

The Times Restaurant Line offers capsule reviews by cuisine, price and location
(in New York City and suburbs), published in the last 18 months. Touch-line
telephones only: 1-900-988-0101 (75 cents a minute).

LOAD-DATE: March 5, 1993

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Review

                   Copyright 1993 The New York Times Company

                              202 of 255 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                  March 5, 1993, Friday, Late Edition - Final

With Plenty of Food, Water and Bibles, Texas Cult Can Hold Out for a While

BYLINE: By SAM HOWE VERHOVEK,  Special to The New York Times

SECTION: Section A; Page 16; Column 1; National Desk

LENGTH: 1324 words

DATELINE: WACO, Tex., March 4


They bought hundreds of 40- and 50-pound sacks of grain, mostly rice and millet,
at two food co-ops near Dallas. A neighbor saw them in recent months spend
nearly $6,000 on canned goods and juices at Sam's Club, a discount warehouse on
the outskirts of Waco.

There is a water tower in the inner courtyard of their fortified compound, along
with a dirty but usable well. Although agents for the Federal Bureau of
Investigation have yet to cut off electricity to the compound, there are at
least two generators and a stockpile of batteries available if they do.

And there are plenty of each of the two things that the Branch Davidians'
self-proclaimed Messiah, David Koresh, tells cult members to use most of the
day: Bibles for study and shovels for work on a network of tunnels and bunkers.

Enough Supplies for Weeks

Four days after Mr. Koresh's followers engaged Federal agents in a deadly gun
battle at the compound 10 miles northeast of Waco, the F.B.I. agent in charge of
getting them to come out conceded today that cult members seemed to have settled
into "their normal routine."

And accounts from former cult members, Federal officials and a neighbor who
watched the stockpiles accumulate all suggest that there are enough supplies
inside to allow the nearly 100 people there to survive for weeks and possibly
for months.

Even as hundreds of law-enforcement officials with tanks and weaponry keep the
77-acre property surrounded, the F.B.I. agent, Jeffrey Jamar, says that there
are no plans to storm the compound and that he wants a peaceful resolution to
the standoff.

That is what Mr. Koresh says, too, but he insists that the only one who can tell
him just when to come out is God.

Hours after the gun battle, the cult leader told CNN that he had been "shot
through the guts" and was lying on a sheet soaked with his own blood. But he has
been talking away since then, sometimes quoting from the Bible for hours during
telephone conversations with negotiators. "He seems to have recovered
miraculously," Mr. Jamar said dryly at a news briefing today.

The authorities have refused to let any of the 20 children or three adults who
have left the compound talk to reporters. But a picture of what life is like
there now can be assembled from brief reports provided by officials who have
talked to them, and from interviews with two former cult members who say that
Mr. Koresh frequently talked about a day when heathens would lay siege to the
compound and how his followers would respond.

'Starved the People'

Even as he stockpiled large amounts of food, Mr. Koresh never let any of the
cult members eat very much of it. Marc Breault, a computer programmer in
Melbourne, Australia, who left the compound in 1989, said Mr. Koresh was
obsessed with the notion of keeping a year's supply of food on hand and that he
rationed it strictly.

"Vernon sort of starved the people," said Mr. Breault, referring to Mr. Koresh
by his birth name, Vernon Howell, which the cult leader legally changed in 1990.
"The idea was that we were being prepared for war, and with war comes famine. He
said the rest of the people who were out there, the heathen, the ones who were
used to eating whatever you wanted to eat when you wanted to eat it, they
wouldn't be used to famine, so we would survive while they wouldn't."

Another former cult member, who spoke on condition of anonymity because of fears
of reprisals by the cult, recalled that Mr. Koresh enforced his eating rules
with a vengeance.

Once he caught one of his followers, whom he had sent into Waco on an errand,
sneaking a hamburger at McDonald's. He flew into a blind rage, and called all of
his followers into a meeting, the former member said.

"Why have you betrayed me?" a tearful Mr. Koresh asked his hungry follower.

Dan Hartnett, the associate director of the Federal Bureau of Alcohol, Tobacco
and Firearms, said today that the routine followed by cult members included
women working in the kitchen and many of the men "primarily involved in
construction." Even as the siege continues and many cult members are busy
serving as armed lookouts, the construction appears to be going on.

Both Federal and local officials have confirmed that there is a system of
tunnels and bunkers underneath the compound, but they say they do not know how
advanced it is. Lloyd Sandstrom, a school-bus driver who lives near the
compound, said he had watched some of the construction from a nearby pasture.

"They have underground bunkers out there," he said in an interview today. "They
built the last one over the last year and a half. It's too big for a root
cellar. I estimate one side at 60 to 80 feet."

Mr. Sandstrom has also seen other evidence of the cult's self-sufficiency.
"Regarding their ability to hold out, they have their own generators," he said.
"I've seen them. They have their own water well. My neighbors and I have talked
about how long they could last. I estimate they could withstand a standoff like
this for three to four months, and my neighbors agree."

Destroying the 'Babylonians'

Military-style drills for both men and women, including chants, were part of the
daily routine at the compound, and the two former members said they believed
they were probably continuing.

Among Mr. Koresh's regular chants was a simple one he invented himself. Half the
followers would shout out, "Who's gonna destroy the Babylonians?" then march in
place for three counts before the other half would yell out in response, "We're
gonna destroy the Babylonians!"

The authorities also said today that they had heard what appeared to be movie
videotapes in the background during some of the negotiators' discussions with
Mr. Koresh. No one could say what movies they were, but Mr. Breault said the
cult leader had three definite favorites, all about the Vietnam War: "Platoon,"
"Full Metal Jacket" and "Hamburger Hill."

"He showed those just over and over and over again to us," recalled Mr. Breault.
"He told us this was what we could look forward to. He would say the Bible
prophesies war. We were being toughed. He wanted us to learn what it was like to
be in a war."

The compound itself, painted in peach, consists of one large L-shaped building
that contains dormitory-style residences, a gymnasium, a chapel and an adjacent
four-story watchtower. Some, but not all of the walls, are fortified with
cinderblocks, which are visible in aerial photographs.

Another report from Federal officials at the briefing today, that they could
hear Mr. Koresh reading long passages from the Bible, apparently with some of
his followers present, is consistent with what Mr. Breault termed his normal
response whenever the cult leader was tense.

"When Vernon gets stressed out, what he does is give Bible sessions," he said.
"It's mostly to reassure himself and to rev himself up." Asked if the cult
leader had any favorite passages, Mr. Breault cited a passage from Psalm 38, a
Psalm of David: "Mine enemies are lively, and they are strong; and they that
hate me wrongfully are multiplied."

One issue that remains unclear is how scared, if at all, the cult members inside
the compound are right now. Case workers for the Children's Protective Services
here, a state agency, described the understandable fear among the children who
witnessed the shootout and have been released. But the authorities have not
commented on what they know about the adults who remain there.

"Some are real believers in Vernon and they'll do anything; it's O.K.," said a
relative of a cult member. "Some people are just sick and tired; they've lost
everything. They believe he's God, but they hate God; they think he's a real
bastard, and all they can look forward to is dying and getting the pain out of
the way. And a lot of people have just lost the capacity to really worry about
it on their own. They're so mind-washed, they'll do whatever Vernon says."


LOAD-DATE: March 5, 1993

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH



GRAPHIC:  Federal officials say about 100 people are still inside the copmpound
that houses the Branch Davidian cult and its leader, David Koresh, near Waco,
Tex. Electricity to the compound has not been cut off, but even if it is, the
cult has its own emergency generators. In the weeks before the gun battle on
Sunday, sect members brought thousands of dollars of food. There's a large water
tower, but it is not known whether it is filled. There is also a well with
undrinkable water on the grounds and a storage tank for fuel. Diagram shows
layout of the compound. (Sources: Treasury Department and former cult members)
Diagram: "Behind the Walls: The Cult's Compound"

                   Copyright 1993 The New York Times Company

                              203 of 255 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                  March 5, 1993, Friday, Late Edition - Final

Beating Case Prosecutors: 2 Styles Focus as One

BYLINE: By SETH MYDANS,  Special to The New York Times

SECTION: Section B; Page 16; Column 3; National Desk; Law Page

LENGTH: 1306 words

DATELINE: LOS ANGELES, March 4


In a prosecution that is proving remarkably difficult despite a seemingly
damning videotape, two hard-nosed Federal lawyers are drawing praise for trying
to mount a well-focused case against four police officers accused in the beating
of Rodney G. King.

The two prosecutors, Barry Kowalski and Steven D. Clymer, have won some points
and lost some points in the first week of testimony in the high-profile civil
rights trial. But they have made it clear that they think they have a persuasive
story to tell, and that they intend to be masters of the case.

In an interview before the start of the trial, the two men said their case was
based on 10 months of "preparation, preparation and preparation." But their
words and demeanor suggested that also underlying their work was an intense if
somewhat oddly matched relationship in which, they said, they have spent "26
hours a day" together.

At the interview, at a delicatessen near their office, they both ordered apple
juice "for unanimity." And Mr. Kowalski, who moved here for the trial from his
home in Arlington, Va., called Mr. Clymer "my significant other" for the
duration of the case.

Turning Personalities Around

But the two men are strikingly different in both experience and style. Mr.
Kowalski, the puckish partner, turned their contrasting styles upside down,
joking, "Why don't you call me the brooding, intense one and Clymer the light,
conversational one?"

Despite his light touch, Mr. Kowalski, 48 years old, the deputy chief of the
Justice Department's civil rights division in Washington, is a big gun in the
field, one of the Government's most experienced and effective civil rights
prosecutors.

Mr. Clymer, 34, intense and serious, is a rising star of the United States
Attorney's office here. From his opening statement last Thursday, his fierce
concentration has given an edge of excitement to the courtroom.

"Barry and Steve make an extremely formidable trial team because their styles
really complement each other," said the United States Attorney in Los Angeles,
Terree A. Bowers. "Steve is very tenacious, very focused on the task at hand.
Barry is very astute at marshaling and analyzing some of the more intangible
aspects of the case."

Praise From Opponents

In daily remarks on the courthouse steps, their opponents in the case, the
lawyers for the four policemen, have repeatedly praised the performance of the
two men.

"As we know, these prosecutors are very, very talented and they are the best the
Government has to use in this case," said Michael P. Stone, who represents
Officer Laurence M. Powell. That assessment is widely shared.

Officers Powell and Theodore J. Briseno, former Officer Timothy E. Wind and Sgt.
Stacey C. Koon are charged with depriving Mr. King of his civil rights when he
was beaten and kicked during his arrest after a high-speed chase on March 3,
1991. The charge carries a maximum prison term of 10 years.

Riots broke out in Los Angeles when the four men were acquitted last April 29 on
10 of 11 counts in a state criminal trial that relied heavily on an amateur
videotape of the 81-second beating.

In that trial, Assistant District Attorney Terry White told jurors that as they
watched the tape they would at some point have to say, "Enough is enough." But
the defense lawyers successfully presented minutely detailed explanations of
each moment on the tape, raising a blizzard of doubts that the jurors later said
were persuasive.

This time, said Laurie M. Levenson, a former prosecutor who teaches at Loyola
Law School, "The prosecution is trying to stay away from the trap of having to
rely on one piece of evidence, of having the defense attack that piece of
evidence and leave them empty-handed."

The outcome will depend on whose story the jury accepts as an explanation of the
videotape, said Peter Arenella, a law professor at the University of California,
Los Angeles.

'Story About Street Justice'

"My impression is that the prosecution has already done a better job than the
prosecution in the first trial to present a believable story of why these
officers used the degree of force they did," he said. "It's a story about street
justice and officers teaching suspects who resist their authority a lesson."

Mr. Kowalski, a former Marine rifle platoon leader in Vietnam and the son of a
former Congressman, Frank Kowalski, a Connecticut Democrat, has spent his career
on cases like these, winning admirers around the country.

"He's a very nice fellow with a great sense of humor," said Richard Cohen, legal
director of the Southern Poverty Law Center, which has worked with him in
representing victims of racial violence.

"At the same time, he's a very tenacious prosecutor. He's been called the
Justice Department's pit bull," Mr. Cohen said. "The fact that he has been
assigned to this case shows that the department at the highest level considers
it extraordinarily important."

Shortly after joining the department in 1981, Mr. Kowalski helped win
convictions in the lynching of Michael Donald, a young black man, in Mobile,
Ala., the last recorded racial lynching in America. The convictions led to a
civil rights suit that won a $7 million verdict against the Ku Klux Klan,
closing down what was then its largest branch.

The Prosecuted Alan Berg CaseSlayers

Mr. Kowalski also won civil rights convictions in the 1983 slaying in Denver of
Alan Berg, a Jewish radio talk-show host, by a neo-Nazi group. In 1988 he won
convictions of six white supremacists on charges of conspiring to prevent black
and Hispanic residents from using a park in Dallas.

But in 1982 he lost a civil rights case in Indiana against an avowed white
supremacist in the shooting of Vernon E. Jordan, Jr., the former head of the
Urban League who last year was chairman of President Clinton's transition team.
Mr. Kowalski has also prosecuted police brutality cases in Texas, Tennessee and
Puerto Rico, and he said it was cases like these, and now the Los Angeles case,
that hold special meaning for him.

"I'm very concerned about the abuse of power by people in public authority, by
police abuse of power," he said.

Mr. Clymer's experience in prosecuting law officers came in a police corruption
case in Philadelphia.  There, as an assistant district attorney, he helped win
the indictments of 27 officers and civilians in a bribery and gambling ring.

In 1987 he joined the United States Attorney's office in Los Angeles, where he
has handled mostly drug and money-laundering cases. He rose through the posts of
chief of the training section, deputy chief of the narcotics section and chief
of the major crimes section before taking on this case as a special assignment.

Among his successes were the first-degree murder convictions of two men who
killed two Federal drug agents in a 1988 undercover heroin deal in Pasadena.
Colleagues and courtroom opponents describe him as "very, very aggressive" and
relentless but also as "very fair."

'Call Your Own Shots'

Mr. Clymer said he likes courtroom work because "you call your own shots,"
adding, "I can make my own cases and make my own decisions."

When this case is over, he said, he plans to marry his fiancee and go to trial
in a major money-laundering case in which he is the lead lawyer.

Mr. Kowalski and Mr. Clymer were careful in the pretrial interview not to
discuss details of the case. But they said their lives had consisted of little
else since Mr. Kowalski moved here to begin preparing for it last May.

"The best advice I ever got was from a lawyer who told me the three most
important words are: preparation, preparation and preparation," Mr. Clymer said.

"I've spent 15 hours a day on this case and 26 hours a day talking to Barry," he
added, imitating his partner's light banter, as unsmiling as ever.

LOAD-DATE: March 5, 1993

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo: After 10 months of preparation, Barry Kowalski, left, and Steven
D. Clymer are in a courtroom prosecuting the Federal civil rights case against
the four Los Angeles police officers accused of beating Rodney G. King. (Jim
Wilson/The New York Times)

                   Copyright 1993 The New York Times Company

                              204 of 255 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 March 6, 1993, Saturday, Late Edition - Final

Marine Cites Fear in Shooting of 2 Somalis

BYLINE: AP

SECTION: Section 1; Page 3; Column 1; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 244 words

DATELINE: MOGADISHU, Somalia, March 5


An American marine testified today that he had shot and wounded two Somali
teen-agers in self-defense last month, saying foreign troops must view every
Somali on the street as a threat.

"Some people want us here," said the marine, Gunnery Sgt. Harry Conde, who was
testifying on the last day of a two-day hearing to decide whether he faces a
court-martial. "Some people don't. When you're out there, you can't tell."

Sergeant Conde, 33, could be charged with the military equivalent of aggravated
assault. He also is under investigation for using a confiscated weapon, contrary
to orders. At issue is whether the marine fired out of fear or whether he shot
out of revenge while the youth was fleeing. If the court-martial proceeds, the
sergeant, a 13-year veteran from San Juan, Puerto Rico, could face up to 10
years in prison. A decision is expected within a few days.

In his testimony, Sergeant Conde compared the feelings of American troops in
Somalia to those of American troops in Vietnam who feared that civilians were
armed.

Sergeant Conde testified that he had shot without aiming, in self-defense, when
one of the youths reached into the military vehicle in which he was riding and
stole his prescription sunglasses.

"We were approaching the turn," Sergeant Conde testified. "The next thing I
know, something covers my face. All I feel is my head go back. It was just an
instinct, just a reaction. It was my intent to repel hostilities."

LOAD-DATE: March 6, 1993

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1993 The New York Times Company

                              205 of 255 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 March 6, 1993, Saturday, Late Edition - Final

Gen. George J. Keegan, 72, Dies; Warned U.S. About Soviet Arms

BYLINE: By WOLFGANG SAXON

SECTION: Section 1; Page 10; Column 1; National Desk

LENGTH: 400 words


Maj. Gen. George J. Keegan Jr., a former Air Force intelligence chief who often
annoyed the Pentagon with warnings about Soviet military preparations, died on
Wednesday at Bethesda Naval Hospital. He was 72 years old and lived in Oxon
Hill, Md.

His family said he suffered a stroke in January.

General Keegan, a much-decorated former combat pilot, retired in 1977 after five
years as assistant Chief of Staff for intelligence at Air Force headquarters in
the Pentagon. He then disclosed possibilities based on data collected by his
staff that ran counter to interpretations held by his civilian and military
superiors and by the Central Intelligence Agency.

Describing himself as the eye of controversy in Washington, he contested
official estimates of Soviet might and intentions for 22 years, saying the
United States was underestimating the Russians. He did so chiefly using his
access to photographic intelligence data.

Warnings About Russians

He asserted that the Soviet Union was building a civil-defense system that would
insure a reasonable rate of survival from a nuclear exchange. He also believed
that the Russians were close to deploying futuristic charged particle-beam
weapons.

General Keegan's views found a broader outlet in a 1987 book by William E.
Burrows, "Deep Black: Space Espionage and National Security" (Random House), a
history of spy satellites.

Born in Houlton, Me., he graduated from Harvard University with the delayed
class of 1944 and earned a master's degree in international affairs at George
Washington University.

He was commissioned during World War II and flew 56 combat missions in the
Pacific, where he also served as a combat-intelligence officer after the war. He
then held a number of intelligence positions.

Following his graduation from the National War College in Washington, he was
assigned to duty at the Pentagon and, in the late 1960's, served in Vietnam. He
started in his Pentagon job in 1972.

His decorations include the Distinguished Service Medal, the Legion of Merit
with three oak-leaf clusters and the Air Medal with two clusters.

General Keegan is survived by his mother, Beatrice Bailey of New Brunswick,
Canada; two daughters, Constance K. Owen of Boulder, Colo., and Elizabeth A. C.
Chaplin of Mechanicsville, Md.; a son, George J., 3d of Occoquan, Va.; a
brother, Thomas, of Rockport, Mass., and two grandsons.

NAME: George J. Keegan Jr.

LOAD-DATE: March 6, 1993

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo: Maj. Gen. George J. Keegan Jr. (U.S. Air Force, 1977)

TYPE: Biography; Obituary (Obit)

                   Copyright 1993 The New York Times Company

                              206 of 255 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                  March 7, 1993, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

How the Foreign Policy Machine Broke Down

BYLINE: By Mark Danner;  Mark Danner, a staff writer at The New Yorker, writes
often on foreign affairs.

SECTION: Section 6; Page 32; Column 1; Magazine Desk

LENGTH: 2581 words


For a half-dozen years, Iran-contra has haunted American political life. The
ghost arose anew on Christmas Eve, thanks to President Bush's pardons, and it is
fated to reappear one day soon when Lawrence Walsh, the independent counsel,
releases his final report. Next to the fashionable questions about the New World
Order and the need for a "new vision" that now preoccupy many in the foreign
policy community, Iran-contra seems a throwback, an irritating reminder of the
way policy was actually made way back in the cold war. In truth, however,
Iran-contra tells more about what needs to be changed in the way Americans make
foreign policy than any dozen discussions of Somalia or Bosnia.

The triumphalism of the last three years, the endless crowing about how "we won
the cold war," has tended to distract attention from the simple fact that during
the last decade American foreign policy often didn't work terribly well. On
occasion this resulted in initiatives of profound recklessness and stupidity --
most obviously in Iran and Lebanon, where hostages were ransomed and more
seized, but also in Panama and Iraq, where enthusiastic appeasement followed by
diplomatic bumbling forced the country to send its young on needless military
actions.

Increasingly during the 1980's, America's foreign-policy-making apparatus was
showing signs of breakdown. Iran-contra, along with Iraqgate, the Noriega affair
and other mini-scandals, are best seen as bolts thrown by a broken machine,
symptoms of a deep-seated problem whose causes can be traced to the struggle
between the executive and legislative branches over what America's role in the
world should be and who should determine it.

Iran-contra is only the latest incarnation of a struggle that came to prominence
two decades ago, in the wake of the acrimony over Vietnam, when Congress began
drafting a series of laws meant to give it a greater say in foreign policy. They
included the War Powers Resolution, passed over President Nixon's veto in 1973,
and designed to prevent a President from prosecuting another "undeclared war";
the amended Arms Export Control Act of 1976, intended to limit the President's
power to approve arms shipments to "friendly" countries, and the Intelligence
Oversight Act of 1980, meant to circumscribe the President's virtually unlimited
freedom to use the intelligence agencies to intervene secretly abroad.

That last power, like so many others, had been codified in the National Security
Act of 1947, the historic legislation that created the Central Intelligence
Agency, the National Security Council and the other institutions of the postwar
national security system, which was designed to grant Presidents enough power to
prosecute a ceaseless, worldwide "cold war" -- one carried out through means
short of outright hostilities. That system produced what were considered
cold-war successes, like the coups in Iran in 1953 and Guatemala in 1954; but it
also led to damaging failures, like the Bay of Pigs and, ultimately, the Vietnam
War.

The laws of the 70's in effect posited a different kind of President, much more
beholden to Congress, and to the public, for how the United States behaved
around the world.

THAT WAS NOT AT ALL HOW IT worked out. In 1981, Congress came face to face with
the ideological and activist Reagan Administration, which showed itself willing
to exploit the exceptions and loopholes that had been written into many of the
most important laws. This executive, fiercely jealous of his perogatives, would
not be stopped by mere laws. Congress soon discovered that it was one thing to
marshal a majority to pass a law during a time of reaction against executive
power. It was quite another, in a different era and in the face of a popular
President, to muster the power to see it enforced. That meant building a
consensus on what to do and securing the political will to do it -- a feat
Congress showed itself rarely able to perform when it came to divisive issues of
foreign policy.

The result, especially in ideologically charged cases like the Central American
wars, was prolonged conflict, bitter recrimination, and, in many cases, the
resort by the President to a corrosive secrecy intended to conceal Government
actions not only from the people but from Congress as well. This secrecy often
brought with it a debilitating misuse of government institutions; policies that
had been badly conceived to begin with often became amateurish and bumbling in
their execution.

Thus President Reagan, to avoid the Intelligence Committees and the Arms Export
Control Act, conducted his Iran initiative through reckless covert operators on
his National Security Council staff, who then hired private "subcontrators" to
handle the covert legwork. To avoid the 1984 Boland Amendment, which forbade aid
to the contras, the President reduced himself and other high officials to
soliciting "private" contributions from foreign leaders. To support a collapsing
Iraq in its war against Iran while sidestepping the arms export laws, Presidents
Reagan and Bush funneled billions to Saddam Hussein through the Department of
Agriculture and the Export-Import Bank (ignoring warnings by the professionals
in these institutions). To escape the strictures of the War Powers Resolution,
which says a President must seek Congress's approval to commit troops to
hostilities abroad for more than 60 days, Presidents Reagan and Bush fought
their wars rapidly, as in Grenada and Panama -- or, as in the Navy's protection
of Kuwaiti tankers, simply redefined "hostilities" to mean whatever they liked.

This last case was only the most glaring of those in which Congress connived
with the executive in violating the spirit if not the letter of its own laws.
Indeed, little of the executive's "lawbreaking" during the last decade is
comprehensible if understood as merely the isolated evil deeds of arrogant
officials in the executive branch. Time and again in the face of aggressive
executive flouting of the laws, a bitterly divided legislative branch found
itself unable to muster the political will to act. In effect, the series of laws
Congress had passed, combined with the determination of successive Presidents to
find a way around them and the consequent impotence of Congress to enforce them,
worked together to help give much of America's recent foreign policy its
strange, erratic cast.

The real, lasting damage, to the country's institutions and to its self-respect
was done in the case of Iran-contra.

The supposedly "secret" and "illegal" aid to the contras was in fact the product
of political deadlock and cowardice on all sides. Though the Reagan
Administration was deeply commited to the contras, the public never was, and
President Reagan's handlers were unwilling to risk his popularity by waging the
public campaign that would have been required to persuade Americans fully to
support the cause. Congress, for its part, though it had managed to pass the
Boland Amendment, proved too sharply divided to put a decisive end to Oliver
North's activities. Though they violated the Amendment, these were virtually an
open secret in Washington -- and certainly would have been uncovered had
Congress been willing to undertake a serious investigation. But Congress showed
itself content to accept the Administration's bland assurances that it was
complying with the law. In fact, the Administration's contempt for the law was
shared by many in Congress. The entire matter was awash in hypocrisy.

If anything, that hypocrisy grew more pervasive after the scandal broke.
Congress proceeded to open hearings that, in their sheer reluctance to get at
the truth, were a mortifying disaster. The problem was not only the playing to
television, and the consequent coddling of witnesses (particularly Colonel
North); or the ridiculously tight deadline, which allowed the Administration to
stonewall the committee on the release of sensitive documents. Worse, the
committees proved shamelessly eager to accept the Administration's chosen
narrative -- that the diversion of funds to the contras was the only actionable
instance of wrongdoing in the affair. As North himself put it, the diversion
"was so dramatic, so sexy, that it might actually -- well, divert public
attention from other, even more important aspects of the story." Congress showed
itself only too willing to be diverted. After all, a thorough investigation --
of the violations of the arms export laws, say -- might well lead to (as
Lawrence Walsh recently put it) "timely impeachment proceedings against
President Reagan," a prospect no one wanted to contemplate.

The abject failure of the hearings has overshadowed everything that has come
after. If there is any truth to President Bush's irresponsible remark about "the
criminalization of policy differences," it lies here: Congress once again did
not do its job, and, having blown the investigation, simply dumped the matter on
the independent counsel. And Lawrence Walsh has been laboring under this
disadvantage ever since. Not only did the hearings, by "tainting" testimony,
make it impossible for him to sustain convictions against John Poindexter and
North; they have accounted for the air of injustice that has pervaded the affair
as the independent counsel has brought each minor figure before the courts.
Their very appearance cannot help reminding us that the high officials whose
directives they followed escaped with impunity. In the end, what has suffered is
respect for justice, and faith in our Government's ability to provide it.

SIX YEARS AFTER IRAN-CONTRA WAS exposed, the reforms imposed by Congress lie in
ruins. The War Powers Resolution has been weakened to the point of uselessness.
Congress played virtually no role in the decision to send a half-million young
Americans into combat against Iraq, finally managing to stage a belated debate
and vote that did little more than demonstrate its own irrelevance. In the face
of clear evidence that remarkable diplomatic stupidity, and perhaps even
criminal misuse of Government institutions, had helped lead to Saddam's military
buildup and his invasion of Kuwait, Congress could not bring itself to hold
serious hearings -- until, that is, an election loomed and the President began
to appear vulnerable. In the recent decision to send tens of thousands of
Americans to Somalia, Congress, and the public behind it, played virtually no
part.

Through the 80's, divided government -- a stubborn Congress with vivid memories
of Vietnam and an executive branch that took an aggressive view of its own
powers abroad -- only served to bring to the surface a fundamental problem. The
United States, because it became a superpower during the early nuclear era,
created for itself a foreign-policy-making machinery that in the end had little
to do with the principles underlying the country's institutions and political
beliefs.

The last few months have brought much talk of the need for "a new strategy" in
foreign affairs. President Clinton, though he has expressed his determination to
act "with force when necessary" to protect the country's "vital interests," has
said little about how he plans to act forcefully abroad while avoiding
misadventures like Iran-contra. It is not enough to declare a willingness to
intervene. Some way must be found to help insure that when the country does act,
it will do so only after building a true consensus around its policy.

The first task for President Clinton is not to devise a new Truman Doctrine but
to construct a new way of making foreign policy -- of making a democratic
foreign policy. The country badly needs a new National Security Act for the
post-cold-war era, a law that will include procedures to restore true
consultation between the executive and the legislative branches; return secrecy
to its proper role; and insure that both branches play a part in any decision to
commit Americans to hostilities abroad.

It is certainly not beyond the wit of man to design workable mechanisms that
will encourage regular consultation and even collaboration on foreign affairs.
(A version of the "fast track" procedure, for example, which Congress now uses
to vote on large trade bills, might be adopted for legislative approval of
deployments of troops abroad, a remedy described by Prof. Harold Hongju Koh of
Yale, who has written thoughtfully on these matters.) Legislative mechanics,
however, are not the problem; the difficulty lies in securing agreement that
reform is needed -- particularly from the President, who tends to exhibit,
whether he is Democrat or Republican, a jealous determination to hold fast to
his supposedly "inherent" powers. But the Constitution does not confer on the
President sole power over the country's foreign policy, and when a President
behaves as if it did, the result tends to be policies that are ill conceived or
corrupt or both.

After Vietnam and Iran-contra, any President should recognize the perils of
taking strong action abroad without first working to secure public understanding
and support. CNN and other outlets have insured that the public is better
informed about America's role in the world than ever before. To prosecute his
most controversial policies, a President should feel obliged to build a public
consensus by convincing and educating the people, rather than being tempted to
misuse secrecy to avoid their scrutiny. It is not merely that building such a
consensus is central to the American system of government; in the end, an
informed consensus must serve as a cushion of support if things go wrong -- the
sort of cushion that Presidents lacked in Vietnam, and that President Bush would
have found egregiously wanting if matters had become difficult and bloody in
Somalia.

It remains to be seen whether President Clinton will honestly face the task of
building such a consensus over Bosnia. Early signs are a bit disquieting. Having
fashioned a policy that will steadily increase America's involvement in the
Balkans -- and that is likely to lead to the introduction of at least some
American troops there -- the President has tended to emphasize that the United
States is "not committing today to make war" in Bosnia. His focus on what the
country won't do, his reluctance to admit the ultimate destination of the road
he has chosen, suggests that Clinton is feeling the insidious effects of the
Vietnam syndrome. Notwithstanding President Bush's statement after the gulf war,
the country has not "kicked the Vietnam syndrome once and for all." Rather, it
has become enshrined in policy makers' conviction that, because the public is
inherently fickle and impatient, the primary concern in considering any
intervention must be whether American forces "can get out, and get out on our
terms" (as former Secretary of State Lawrence Eagleburger described our strategy
in sending troops to Somalia).

Expediency alone can not serve as the basis for a workable foreign policy. It
leaves out too many things, including moral responsibility. In our system, at
this point in history, creating a workable foreign policy depends on public
understanding. Until the President and Congress find a way to work together to
school the people, treat them not as simpletons to be deceived or halfwits to be
condescended to but as citizens to be educated, we'll still be living in the
shadow of the cold war. And the ghost of Iran-contra will still be abroad in the
land.

LOAD-DATE: March 7, 1993

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Drawing

                   Copyright 1993 The New York Times Company

                              207 of 255 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                  March 7, 1993, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

OUT THERE: PHNOM PENH;
Peace Waits, Dinner Doesn't

BYLINE: By Philip Shenon

SECTION: Section 9; Page 3; Column 1; Styles of The Times

LENGTH: 1241 words

DATELINE: PHNOM PENH, Cambodia


What this war-shattered nation needs is hospitals, schools, factories, roads.
What it's got instead is fresh pasta -- plates and plates and plates of it.

"All of our pasta -- and all of our ice cream -- is freshly made," said Graham
Burgess, a safari-suited Englishman who owns two successful new Italian
restaurants in Phnom Penh, the Cambodian capital. He expects a handsome return
on an initial investment of about $250,000.

"I'd figure 50 percent profit in the first year," Mr. Burgess said with a grin
to match his profit projections. "This is my first experience in running a
restaurant, and I find I quite enjoy it."

A year after the Government of Cambodia and rebel groups signed a United
Nations-sponsored peace treaty intended to end Cambodia's long civil war, this
beleaguered, impoverished city is experiencing, of all things, a restaurant
boom.

Almost every week, a foreign-owned, foreign-run restaurant opens somewhere in
Phnom Penh to serve the 22,000-member United Nations peacekeeping force here and
the rest of Cambodia's newly returned and free-spending expatriate community.

Even as they pack the restaurants and devour the food, United Nations
peacekeepers acknowledge that there is something disquieting about all this. A
postwar restaurant boom would be fine, even welcome, they say, as long as the
peace process worked and other sorts of businesses were thriving alongside the
newly opened restaurants. But in fact the peace process is foundering -- the
largest rebel group, the Khmer Rouge, is refusing to disarm -- and the Cambodian
economy remains in tatters.

With little else to do at night but worry about the fragile peace, foreign
residents of Phnom Penh have become obsessive about their restaurant-hopping.
The subject can dominate conversations here. The Phnom Penh Post, a new
English-language newspaper, has an avidly read restaurant column that, in a
recent issue, went on at length about the comparative merits of the mozzarella
served at competing pizza restaurants.

A United Nations official who dines out almost every night -- and because he is
friendly with several restaurant owners, asked not to be identified by name --
said the restaurants had become "emblematic of our problems in inspiring
long-term investment in Cambodia."

"Money is being drained out of Cambodia by businessmen who have no desire to put
down roots here," he said.

The first foreign-run restaurants did perform a valuable service to the
expatriate community. Before the October 1991 peace treaty, visitors to Phnom
Penh had difficulty finding a restaurant that served edible food prepared in a
kitchen that met even the most basic standards of hygiene.

Now, there are dozens of restaurants catering principally to foreigners. Much of
their food -- and in some restaurants, virtually all of it -- is imported by air
freight on one of the several daily flights from Bangkok, Thailand, or by
container ship up the Mekong River.

Charly Maurer, the owner of the French restaurant La Paillote, imports his meat
from Australia, his fish and lettuce from Vietnam and much of his staff from
Bangkok, where he had a restaurant for years.

While Mr. Maurer is making a genuine effort to train several Cambodians as
workers, all of his chefs and senior waiters are Thai. He said it was difficult
to find educated, English-speaking workers in Cambodia, a nation that has known
civil war and terror for a generation. "I want to give jobs to the Cambodians,"
said Mr. Maurer, who is Swiss. "For now, I don't have a single Cambodian who is
capable of taking an a la carte order from a large table."

Within a 10-block radius of Mr. Maurer's establishment, one can find restaurants
serving tenderloin steak ($10), tandoori chicken ($8), nachos ($5), pad Thai
($6), Sichuan chicken ($7) and chicken cacciatore ($5).

These are prices well beyond the reach of most Cambodians, who remain among the
world's most impoverished people. The United Nations estimates the per-capita
income among Cambodians at $150 a year, less than the cost of dinner for four at
some of the city's better restaurants.

In Phnom Penh's most expensive restaurant, La Mousson, patrons dine beneath a
crystal chandelier, and the menu includes an appetizer of smoked salmon in puff
pastry with caviar on blinis, for $14.

"We're doing well," said its general manager, Dauptain Thierry, a chain-smoking
Frenchman who also runs the Cafe No Problem, which opened last year in a
renovated villa near the National Museum and was the first of the trendy
foreign-run restaurants. "But the competition, it is stiff," Mr. Thierry said,
leaning back in a wicker chair on the veranda of the cafe. "It is very, very
stiff."

A few restaurants that opened since the peace agreement have already closed,
most notably King's, a Thai restaurant a block from the United Nations
headquarters. It was ransacked by employees who said they had not been paid in
months. The owners are said to have fled home to Bangkok.

And they will certainly not be the last to go. Some restaurateurs have been
dubbed "peace profiteers" by diplomats because of what seems to be their obvious
intention to make some money -- and run. Some talk privately of leaving Phnom
Penh just after the national elections scheduled for May, when it is feared that
violence may erupt between the winners and losers.

Mr. Burgess, who may be Phnom Penh's most successful restaurateur, has a calling
card that lists his affiliation with nine companies, with offices from Panama
City to Honolulu to Ho Chi Minh City in Vietnam to his base in Hong Kong. He
said he is considering a permanent move to Cambodia.

"There are a lot of piranha businessmen here who want to make a quick buck and
run out," he said. "That's not me. I don't want to be a rip-off artist. I want
to stay in Cambodia if I can. I've made an investment here."

He said he was willing to make a bigger investment, in fact. Mr. Burgess is also
a garment trader, and he said that if the United States were to reduce import
duties on Cambodian goods, he would consider opening a garment factory here,
just the sort of long-range investment Cambodia needs.

Until that happens, Mr. Burgess is happily occupied with his very popular
Italian restaurant, B.K.'s International Bistro, in the old Bank of Kampuchea
Building. Mr. Burgess rented the building from an official of the Cambodian
Justice Ministry for $5,000 a month, and he has outfitted it with a sparkling
new $60,000 kitchen -- the equipment was imported from Italy, New Zealand and
Hong Kong -- and a $20,000 solid teak bar. The cook is Italian, born just
outside Milan.

Mr. Burgess delights in his celebrity as host to diplomats, Cambodian officials,
foreign correspondents and visiting dignitaries.

"Today we had the British Ambassador for lunch," Mr. Burgess said. "The
Ambassador from Japan comes on a regular basis. The American Ambassador comes
here quite often. We did have an American Assistant Secretary of State. The
French, the U.N. people, they all eat here."

And he has begun to wonder if there is not a bigger business in all of this.
There are international peacekeeping operations all over the world these days,
and Mr. Burgess recalled a recent conversation with a fellow businessman about
opportunities in other troubled parts of the world.

"Somalia?" he asked in a tone that appeared to be only half joking. "Do you
think there's a call for a restaurant there?"

LOAD-DATE: March 7, 1993

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photos: Graham Burgess, left, who owns B.K.'s International Bistro in
Phnom Penh, and Charly Maurer, who owns La Paillote, with workers from their
restaurants. (Photographs by David Portnoy for The New York Times)

                   Copyright 1993 The New York Times Company

                              208 of 255 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                  March 7, 1993, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

With U.N. Role, New Faces for Remote Cambodia

BYLINE: By HENRY KAMM,  Special to The New York Times

SECTION: Section 1; Page 16; Column 1; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 878 words

DATELINE: STUNG TRENG, Cambodia, March 5


For more than two decades, this northeastern province of broad rivers, deep
forests and scarce population was inaccessible to virtually all foreigners
except the Vietnamese invaders. Even in peacetime, few foreigners penetrated its
nearly roadless wilderness.

But today, the extensive United Nations presence in this once reclusive country
is startlingly evident here. Foreigners are everywhere.

The top province representative of the United Nations Transitional Authority in
Cambodia, which is overseeing the peace accord that ended the civil war, is
Belgian. His deputy is Somali and his secretary Kenyan.

From Many Lands

The military commander is Uruguayan. The military observer team is commanded by
a Chinese and includes officers from the United States, Cameroon, Malaysia,
France and Indonesia, among other countries.

The United Nations police force is run by a Jordanian, who has a Filipino deputy
and a mixed force from many other countries.

Preparations for national elections in May are being made by a team headed by a
Dutchman, and an Ivory Coast official is charged with promoting human rights.

"Hola, amigo!" is the way children in town greet foreigners, assuming all to be
members of the Uruguayan battalion. While most people here are bilingual,
Spanish is not one of their languages. Much of the population -- 63,000 in Stung
Treng Province and 11,000 in the capital, also called Stung Treng -- is of
Laotian origin.

The province's Deputy Governor, Koy Sarim, said he did not think a single
foreigner other than Vietnamese and Laotians had been in Stung Treng from the
time the North Vietnamese Army captured it in May 1970, until the arrival last
year of the United Nations teams.

Hardly any were here even before the end of the French colonial presence in
1953. Stung Treng had little to attract foreigners, and malaria to discourage
visits. Tigers and elephants, which used to draw big-game hunters, were
virtually wiped out by American B-52 bombers "interdicting" the western fringe
of the Ho Chi Minh Trail.

It is a mark of Stung Treng's isolation, the Deputy Governor said, that even
from 1979 to 1989, when Cambodia, conquered by Vietnam, was a ward of the Soviet
Union and its allies, no Soviet or Eastern European advisers came to the
province.

The town, on the imposing confluence of the Mekong and Se Kong Rivers, has
nevertheless adjusted rapidly to the influx of foreigners, many of whom enjoy
the spending power of a daily allowance of $130 paid by the United Nations.

Many residents have moved in with relatives and are renting their traditional
wooden houses on stilts to foreigners for prices ranging upward from $400 a
month. The average yearly earnings of a Cambodian, most of whom are hardly on a
cash economy, are estimated at around $150.

The Blue Hotel, the best in town, earns $14,000 a month from United Nations
guests, said Mohamed Warsame, a former Somali representative to the United
States, who is the second-in-command of the United Nations civil administration.

Canned beers of all nations are on sale at about 35 bars, a high-flown name for
the places with thatch roofs over dirt floors that have sprung up.

But there has been no widespread reconstruction of the country, and life for
most Cambodians remains unchanged.

The United Nations presence "has made life a little easier for a few traders,"
said Johann B. Sunder, head of the election supervisors. But he added, "The man
in the street suffers."

The Deputy Governor said the price of rice had risen from from 200 to 430 riels
for 2.2 pounds and meat from 1,200 to 4,000. On the open market, $1 is worth 250
riels.

Teachers, whose salary is $15.20 a month are often paid two to three months
late.

The provincial hospital is a filthy compound of crumbling buildings. The medical
chief, Dr. Tann Theng Hor, who earns $26.40 a month, said that the Health
Ministry sent medicine only twice a year and that shortages were acute. The
hospital has no running water and only occasional electricity.

Historical Enmity

Another problem here is the tension arising from the historical enmity between
Cambodians and Vietnamese. Prostitutes, most of them Vietnamese migrants, do
business in the bars and in houses adapted as hotels by the hour.

Three Vietnamese were stabbed to death in December across the river in
Thalabarivat. Some attributed the slayings to the Khmer Rouge, although Khmer
Rouge activity has been reported only in the westernmost region of the province.
Other Cambodians say matter-of-factly that anybody might have murdered the
fishermen.

Away from this town, in regions reachable largely by boat, Stung Treng's
greatest natural resource -- its woods -- is being consumed. Uncontrolled
cutting of the forest is being carried out by the Government army as well as the
Khmer Rouge.

An internal United Nations report accuses both armies of deep involvement in
"plunder." Mr. Koy Sarim, the Deputy Governor, said "legal and illegal, official
and unofficial" timber trading was going on.

He said a new Government with new laws would put a stop to that. Mr. Koy Sarim,
a former teacher, smiled gently when reminded that the army of the Government
whose election he supports is the principal trafficker.

LOAD-DATE: March 7, 1993

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Map of Cambodia, indicating Stund Treng.

                   Copyright 1993 The New York Times Company

                              209 of 255 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                  March 7, 1993, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

Cambodia Arms Flow Back to Thailand

BYLINE: By PHILIP SHENON,  Special to The New York Times

SECTION: Section 1; Page 16; Column 4; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 970 words

DATELINE: ARANYAPRATHET, Thailand, March 5


The arms that flooded into Cambodia from across the Thai border for more than a
decade, enabling the Khmer Rouge and other guerrilla groups to wage their civil
war against the Cambodian Government, have begun streaming back out into
Thailand.

The flow has stirred suspicion among Thailand's civilian leaders, including the
Prime Minister, that a new wave of cross-border arms trading is benefiting both
the military and police Thailand and the Maoist-inspired rebels of the Khmer
Rouge.

Diplomats, military analysts and merchants operating in Aranyaprathet and other
cities along Thailand's eastern border say the arms first started flowing into
Thailand from Cambodia after the signing of a peace treaty by Cambodia's main
factions in October 1991. The trade increased last year as Khmer Rouge rebels
and other guerrillas decided to sell off excess arms to Thai dealers.

The Thai dealers are reported in turn to be shipping the arms across Thailand to
the country's western border with Myanmar, where they are being resold at a 500
percent price markup to ethnic rebel groups fighting the military Government of
Myanmar, formerly Burma.

Millions in Arms Involved

Diplomats and military analysts say the weapons moved from Cambodia to Thailand
to Myanmar include millions of dollars worth of American-made M-16 assault
rifles, Chinese-made AK-47 assault rifles, rocket-propelled grenade launchers
and mortars.

It is now widely suspected that officers of the Thai military and police are
benefiting from the resale of the Cambodian arms to Burmese rebels through
kickbacks and protection money paid by arms dealers, just as Thai officers
benefited from the original shipments of the weapons to the rebels in Cambodia
during the civil war.

The issue has gained attention since the highest civilian authority in Thailand,
Prime Minister Chuan Leekpai, blamed "men in uniform" last month for the
underground trade in weapons along Thailand's borders.

"Ordinary people absolutely can't transport war weapons." said Mr. Chuan, who
came to power last fall after a military-dominated Government was brought down
in a civilian uprising. "It's the Government's priority, duty, to solve this
problem."

But Mr. Chuan has only a limited ability to rein in the military, which has
repeatedly toppled civilian governments with which it disagreed, most recently
in 1991, and does not feel bound to support the foreign policy outlined by
civilian leaders.

Military Denies a Role

The military flatly denies any involvement in the illicit arms trade across
Thailand's borders. "There is no involvement by soldiers in the weapons trade
along the Thai-Cambodian border," said Col. Palangkoon Kraharn, a spokesman for
the Thai armed forces. He said the military follows Government policy and seeks
to prevent such arms deals.

The movement of weapons out of Cambodia would seem at first to be good news for
that country, where thousands of United Nations peacekeeping troops have
struggled for more than a year to enforce a peace treaty that was meant to
result in the disarmament of Cambodian Army and the rebel factions in
preparation for free elections.

But the disarmament provisions of the treaty were only partly observed. The
Khmer Rouge refused to disarm, even though it signed the peace accord, and its
fighters and two non-Communist guerrilla groups are believed to have retained
vast stores of weapons for use in any new civil war.

They have so many weapons, in fact, that they are apparently able to sell many
of them back into Thailand.

'To Sell, Not to Buy'

"Most of these insurgents are in the weapons market to sell, not to buy, at
least for the moment," a Western diplomat in Bangkok said. "Of course if the war
flared up again, the arms dealers and the Thai military are ready to go, to
reverse the arms flow once more back into Cambodia."

The Thai military has close ties to rebels of the Khmer Rouge despite the
policies followed by the group when it controlled the Cambodian Government from
1975 through 1978. The Khmer Rouge presided over a brutal restructuring of
society in which more than a million Cambodians died. The Khmer Rouge are seen
as useful to the Thais as a buffer against Thailand's much more powerful
neighbor, Vietnam.

After the Khmer Rouge was toppled from power in Cambodia in early 1979 by the
invading Vietnamese Army, the Thai military and police provided sanctuary to
Khmer Rouge leaders, including the group's supreme leader, Pol Pot. The Thais
also helped move Chinese-donated weapons across the border to Khmer Rouge
soldiers afterward during the civil war and cooperated with the United States
and other nations in aiding the two smaller non-Communist rebel groups that were
allied with the Khmer Rouge.

China Halts Supply

China was long the chief supplier of arms to the Khmer Rouge, but it pledged to
cut off the weapons shipments after the United Nations brokered the 1991 peace
treaty.

The Chinese arms cutoff is no immediate threat to the survival of Khmer Rouge,
and it may not pose a distant threat, either. The Khmer Rouge is reported to
have hidden away a supply of modern weapons that would last at least two to
three years if full civil war were renewed.

The underground arms trade out of Cambodia is a murky business, conducted across
the porous Thai border at night by arms traders who are said to hide the weapons
in trucks used to transport produce and hay.

Prime Minister Chuan said last month in The Nation, an English-language
newspaper, that vehicles carrying the smuggled weapons from Cambodia sometimes
traveled in convoys with "leading cars" that he seemed to suggest were under the
control of soldiers or policemen.

"There must be leading cars, and somebody must be giving the green light," Mr.
Chuan said.

LOAD-DATE: March 7, 1993

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo: Arms that for years crossed the border into Cambodia are now
flowing back into Thailand, arousing the concern of Thai civilian leaders. Thai
police officers inspected mortar shells seized by the border patrol. (Agence
France-Presse)

                   Copyright 1993 The New York Times Company

                              210 of 255 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                  March 7, 1993, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

To This Generation, Advertising's a Laugh

SECTION: Section 9; Page 16; Column 1; Styles of The Times

LENGTH: 129 words


To the Editor:

Re: "Lost in the Name Game," by Betsy Israel (Feb. 14).

What nobody, least of all the advertising agencies, wants to acknowledge is that
one thing all my peers have in common is a cynical, humorous view of advertising
and any form of marketing or sales in general. That marketers and agencies are
working to come up with a label for us so that we can be manipulated into buying
their products only proves to us how clueless they are.

Come on, guys. We grew up with Vietnam, all the "gate" scandals, punk rock and
Ronald Reagan as President. We make fun of everything, especially middle-aged
marketing executives (and writers) trying to be hip. Why isn't a member of the
undefinable generation writing this piece?

BARBARA BOYDSTON
Manhattan

LOAD-DATE: March 7, 1993

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Letter

                   Copyright 1993 The New York Times Company

                              211 of 255 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                  March 7, 1993, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

NOSTALGIA EXPRESS;
A Remembrance of Saigon Days

BYLINE: By CRAIG R. WHITNEY;  Chief of the Bonn bureau

SECTION: Section 6; Part 2; Page 10; Column 5; Sophisticated Traveler Magazine

LENGTH: 305 words


SAIGON WAS BATtered by the war when I lived there in the late 1960's and early
70's, and it was a sad and tired-looking place even a decade ago. But now I hear
things are picking up, and I'd like to go back again to see how the city is
doing and to revisit old haunts.

The Continental Palace Hotel, in the center of town, is one of these; the
Majestic, down what used to be Tu Do Street on the riverfront, is another. The
Continental was a blowsy old place, full of charm, when I lived there in 1971,
with bougainvillea climbing all the way up to my third-floor room. Pity if it's
been soundproofed and air-conditioned. I understand that the "dust of life" --
the beggars and prostitutes who reminded us daily of the war going on all around
us -- have been banished from the hotel's veranda bar. And that G.I.'s are
coming back on nostalgia trips.

I want to find out, again, what happened after we Americans left and life went
on. I'd try to find some of my old Vietnamese friends and take them to one of
the sidewalk stands where we used to enjoy a hot bowl of pho, a noodle and meat
soup, for breakfast. I'd smell the wood and charcoal fire the pho cooked on,
avoid the tiny little red pepper slices that float on the soup's surface (and go
off like bombs if you bite into them) and savor the memories. I'd cross the
river and try to find the spot where Madame Leccia's Guillaume Tell restaurant
was, stop by Bodard's, the coffee house on the corner opposite what once was the
National Assembly, order a cafe au lait there and wonder if the Vietnamese
political gossip is still good.

Finally, I'd go into the red-brick Saigon Cathedral to remember the Vietnamese
and Americans I made music with there during the war, and then I'd light a
candle for the many on both sides of the battle lines who never returned home.

LOAD-DATE: March 7, 1993

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1993 The New York Times Company

                              212 of 255 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                  March 7, 1993, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

The Editor as Gap Model

BYLINE: By Walter Kirn;  Walter Kirn is the media columnist for Mirabella.

SECTION: Section 6; Page 27; Column 1; Magazine Desk

LENGTH: 4137 words


At this morning's staff meeting of The New Republic -- the elite weekly journal
of political opinion that has counted Labor Secretary Robert Reich as a frequent
contributor, Vice President Al Gore as a close friend and the moderate political
philosophy known as "Clintonism" as something of an in-house invention -- Andrew
Sullivan, the editor, has two major subjects on his agenda: Somalia and the Gap.

Somalia first. With United States forces about to hit the beach, the 29-year-old
Sullivan, a British, conservative, openly gay Roman Catholic who describes both
himself and America in the 1990's as "post-ideological," plans to devote next
week's lead editorial to the mission's ethical underpinnings. Personally, he has
reservations about Operation Restore Hope, doubting the depth and sincerity of
our military commitment. As befits a former president of the Oxford Union
debating society, where budding dialecticians engage in sometimes fanciful
controversies ("Coca-Cola: Refreshing Beverage or Imperialist Plot?"), Sullivan
makes his case in broad, bold strokes before inviting reaction from his
colleagues -- a wisecracking, startlingly youthful gang of largely white male
and Ivy League-educated opinion makers. Some of the senior staffers, like
Michael Kinsley of "Crossfire" and Fred Barnes of "The McLaughlin Group" -- just
two of the many celebrity alumni of The New Republic's informal finishing school
for TV policy duelists -- have the vaguely indulgent air of elder statesmen. The
younger, 30-ish editors, like Michael Lewis and Jacob Weisberg (both of whom
pursued graduate studies in England and both of whom, with Sullivan, reside in a
renovated Washington schoolhouse nicknamed by Kinsley "the Kindergarten")
exhibit the cocksure, sped-up expressiveness of young men stamped "gifted" from
their earliest report cards. If the nation's ruling bodies were chosen not by
popular elections but according to scores on the verbal section of the
Scholastic Aptitude Test, the Government might look and act much like this staff
meeting of TNR, as the magazine calls itself.

One older man sticks out. Dressed from head to toe in black, radiating pride in
his golden proteges, he is The New Republic's 53-year-old owner and chairman,
Martin Peretz (Marty to friends, and to his many enemies). Since buying the
magazine with his wife, Anne, in 1974, Peretz -- a no-apologies Zionist and
Harvard sociology lecturer who once taught the young Al Gore -- has been
hyperbolically blamed by the columnist Alexander Cockburn for "the utter
collapse of progressive mainstream opinion in Washington" and charged by the
writer Christopher Hitchens with "desecrating" the traditionally liberal TNR. He
sits at the end of the long, crowded conference table, absorbing his underlings'
views on the Somalia mission. Eventually, he clears his throat and says
last-wordishly: "Me, I never saw an intervention I didn't like."

Sullivan cracks an uneasy grin. Given Peretz's record of hawkish editorializing
on Central America and Israel, his Strangelovean jest is hard to ignore --
particularly if you consider his magazine's close ties to power. When Charles
Krauthammer, a New Republic contributor, coined the term "Reagan Doctrine" for
the mid-80's war against Communism in Nicaragua and El Salvador, the White House
eagerly made the phrase its own. In response to an article he wrote speculating
about the Clinton Supreme Court, TNR's fresh-out-of-law-school legal affairs
editor, Jeffrey Rosen, received a phone call from Gov. Mario Cuomo, who chatted
on for half an hour about his own youthful law review essays. What's more, a
recent subscription offering boasts: "It's read by virtually every influential
person across America, including Bill Clinton and Al Gore." And as if to prove
such hyperbole is not unjustified, in 20 minutes, at this very table,
Representative Dave McCurdy, Democrat of Oklahoma, will join the staff for an
off-the-record lunch about the House Intelligence Committee. He is, as they say
around here, "a friend of TNR."

After a last jarring statement from Peretz concerning the Somali warlords ("If
they're hijacking truckloads and trainloads of grain meant for starving people,
then those people ought to be killed"), Sullivan moves the meeting on to other
matters. Describing a story he's researching on Justice Antonin Scalia, Rosen
mentions an obscure ethical doctrine known as "the Lesbian Rule" and the phrase
becomes the meeting's running joke. When a senior editor, Mickey Kaus, says of
White House drug testing policy, "I'm interested in what euphemisms and devices
will be used to let a formerly drug-using generation into power," someone blurts
out, "Maybe they'll use the Lesbian Rule!"

Sullivan brings up the Gap next. To illustrate an essay on "the Twentysomething
Myth," the man who has described himself as "a guardian of the magazine's
traditions, not just its editor," wants to reproduce a Gap clothing
advertisement on The New Republic's cover. As The New Republic's cover, more
like it. He holds up a photo of a curvy blond female fashion model, angling it
so everyone can see.

Sullivan will kill the cover after the meeting ends, but there's more to the
story. Within a few weeks, he will accept a longstanding offer to become a Gap
model himself and pose in a magazine ad. It's true: the editor of what is,
arguably, America's leading political journal lending the dignity of his
position to a line of moderate-priced sportswear. At any other time but this one
-- the dawning post-ideological age of MTV campaign coverage and a President who
played the sax on late-night television -- one might almost think it odd.

AFTER SLIGHTLY more than a year of Sullivan's post-ideological editorship, The
New Republic is a hard publication to classify -- a hybrid political-cultural
journal that routinely does the philosophical equivalent of mixing stripes and
polka dots. On most issues, the magazine lies decidedly to the right of its
progressive competitor, The Nation, and rather less determinedly to the left of
William Buckley's National Review. The typical reader of what the legal editor
Rosen only half-jokingly calls "an intellectual Mad Magazine" is, according to
market research, an extensively educated man in his mid-40's who makes around
$100,000 a year, has a valid passport and owns a VCR. Jack Shafer, a media
critic and editor of Washington City Paper, characterizes it this way: "It's a
life style publication for the mind."

And not just for the portion of the mind concerned with news and affairs --
about a third of every issue is devoted to book, movie and theater reviews that
routinely sprawl and mutate into full-blown treatises on subjects from 1950's
nostalgia to the rise of Israel's radical right. This "back of the book"
cultural section is the intellectual walled estate of the literary editor, Leon
Wieseltier, a middle-aged scholar of medieval Judaism who -- with his
Tennysonian white locks and the bottle of grappa that stands on the desk of his
book-strewn, cavelike office -- helplessly brings to mind that old name for
intellectual: "longhair."

Aided by a senior editor, Anne Hulbert, one of the very few women on the
masthead (Dorothy Wickenden, the executive editor, resigned last month to become
national editor of Newsweek), Wieseltier strives "to slow things down a little
so people can actually think about them." Sometimes he slows things down a lot,
as was the case with a recent multipage John Simon essay on Janacek's operas.
But according to Wieseltier, "The world right now is not suffering from too much
seriousness," and there is an element of stern, headmasterly zeal in his
eagerness to correct the situation, to "teach readers to stop, sit down and make
an effort." Lulling lazy minds to sleep is a risk he gladly runs in return for
the freedom to assign pieces on Hungarian poetry, say, or a psychobiography of
Stephen Crane. "I decided long ago to write about the modern world as if it were
the medieval," says Wieseltier. "The back of the book is for eggheads and lives
in unreal, ideal time."

Not so the front of the book, Sullivan's domain, where the time is now -- the
buzzing post-ideological present of multiculturalism, cappuccino bars,
homosexuals in the military, Serbia and the meaning of the Gap. Dissonance and
paradox are everywhere: a lighthearted sendup of Madonna will precede a sobering
story on medical ethics. Then there's the "Clinton Suck-Up Watch," a regular
sampling of journalistic puffery. Often, TNR's contrarianism feels genuinely
brave (as in a recent Nat Hentoff essay, "Pro-choice Bigots," about the stifling
of the abortion debate within the Democratic Party), but sometimes it seems
easy, a game. When a writer argues, for example, that the "war against
insensitive humor might end up generating the very social and racial tension it
is trying to defuse," one almost suspects that he wouldn't mind if this
happened. More ironic.

If there seems to be a pattern here, however -- a revolt against political
correctness that is fully as predictable as what it's seeking to counter -- it
must be remembered that at The New Republic patterns exist in order to be
broken. Thus Sullivan's continuing commitment to TNR's traditional franchise:
timely political reporting and analysis. This led last year to the series of
articles by Sidney Blumenthal that did as much to burnish Clinton's candidacy
and, simultaneously, tarnish Ross Perot's ("We went overboard against Perot,"
Kinsley now feels) as anything written during the campaign. The magazine's
support for Clinton was not only vigorous -- "a journalistic soul kiss," says
Shafer of City Paper -- but early, extending to an attempt to create a
self-fulfilling political prophecy by dubbing Clinton "the Anointed" on its Feb.
3, 1992, cover. "He was the most impressive politician I have ever seen,"
Sullivan says.

All of which has created yet another powerful paradox, one that will shape The
New Republic for years to come. "The moment Clinton won," remembers Michael
Lewis, "the tone at the magazine changed. He was our guy and suddenly he was in
power, but TNR has a visceral suspicion of powerful institutions." Peretz
purports to share the concern: "We want to be seen as the official program of
the game; on the other hand, we don't want to lose our capacity for insolence."
But Peretz's own courtierlike instincts may constitute the chief threat to this
capacity. His gushing Oct. 19 editorial, "Gore in Private: The Other Al," which
praised its subject as "very much a man of parts," and the TNR-sponsored
pre-Inaugural party, "A Fanfare in Honor of Al and Tipper Gore," do not seem
like the work of someone intent on keeping his distance from newly powerful old
friends.

Yet Sullivan's editorial ambition, he's made it clear, is to define a role as
President Clinton's "loyal opposition." On welfare reform, for instance, the
resident expert, Mickey Kaus -- who is shaping up as the magazine's peskiest
domestic policy gadfly -- supports a strict, straightforward linkage between
benefits and willingness to work; but already there are doubts at the magazine
that Clinton, for all his talk of a New Covenant, will ultimately compel
recipients to hold up their end of the deal. Even on so-called "culture war"
issues of abortion and homosexuals in the military, there is evidence that
Sullivan, who regards himself as "basically pro-life, though that's not the
magazine's position," and who considers the gay ban "not simply a political
issue but one with deep psychological roots," will throw as many curves as fat
pitches.

And yet, despite the magazine's early shows of independence from the
Administration it helped create, many observers suspect that the magazine's new
insiderly clout may blunt its outsiderly edge. Says Jefferson Morley, a former
associate editor who now is assistant editor of The Washington Post Outlook
section: "One of the great paradoxes is that the magazine has reshaped itself
for this political moment, and seems, now that the moment's come, to have less
to say." Christopher Hitchens is also dour: "They did very well in the 80's by
at least having a decipherable take on the Zeitgeist. After a bit, though,
there's always an exhaustion. TNR needs a new act."

Fortunately for Sullivan, The New Republic has specialized in perfecting new
acts ever since its founding in 1914 by the progressive journalist Herbert
Croly. From liberal to socialist to Stalinist to neo-liberal to
neo-conservative, the magazine has tried on and discarded as many political
labels as Bob Dylan has religions. TNR has also, through the years, weighed in
on major questions of the day with something worse than coin-flip prescience.
Unafraid to be inconsistent, and often flat-out wrong, the magazine pooh-poohed,
then championed Roosevelt's New Deal, appealed to Depression-era intellectuals
"to take communism away from the Communists," dithered before supporting
America's entrance into World War II, endorsed, then opposed the war in Vietnam,
boosted McGovern in '72, John B. Anderson (yes, Anderson) in '80 and came out
strong for the contras.

Underlying this shifting ideological history has been the hard-shell
individuality of The New Republic's finest writers and editors. Contributors
like Walter Lippmann, John Dewey, Alfred Kazin and Irving Howe helped build the
magazine into a kind of general-admissions ivory tower from which readers might
command the high ground of modern philosophy and culture. One of John Cheever's
first short stories was published in The New Republic and Delmore Schwartz
reviewed poetry. Edmund Wilson's book "The American Jitters," his grimly vivid
Depression travelogue, arose from a series of pieces assigned by Malcolm Cowley,
then the literary editor. With a circulation that hovers today around 100,000,
The New Republic's intellectual reach has always exceeded its commercial grasp.

Under Gilbert Harrison, TNR's publisher in the 60's, the magazine reached a high
plateau of influence: John F. Kennedy was the last Presidential candidate before
Clinton to ignite its enthusiasm. But the harmonic convergence between The New
Republic and the Presidency on issues from civil rights to cold war
confrontation disappeared under Johnson and Nixon, and by 1974 it had grown
hesitant, decrepit. "It was rather elderly in tone," remembers Christopher
Hitchens, "a liberal, post-New Deal unsurprising sheet." That's when Peretz, a
disillusioned civil rights activist married to Anne Labouisse Farnsworth, a
Singer Sewing Machine heir, saw his chance to get a word in edgewise in the
national political debate.

"When Marty bought TNR, he was despised as an interloper," says Michael Kinsley.
"It's either a betrayal or an accomplishment that we're now taken seriously."
And how did Peretz effect this betrayal/accomplishment? By moving slowly and
steadily right, most observers agree -- particularly on matters of race and
foreign affairs. "In cartoon form," Morley says of his stint there in the
mid-80's, "TNR was about not being easy on blacks, not being easy on Communists
and not being tough on Jews. The magazine was self-consciously evolving out of
its liberal past."

This self-conscious evolution was not always peaceful. Of the contra debate,
Peretz remembers: "It was a position we struggled through. There is a stratum of
American intellectuals who are always looking for the future paradise. Nicaragua
was their last chance. Alas, such intellectuals are now left with the
Palestinians." Sometimes, the evolution away from liberalism was downright
embarrassing, as when New Republic Books published "Merger Mania" by Peretz's
friend Ivan Boesky, of whom Peretz once enthused, "It's easy to be a very shrewd
investor when you're investing with such friends." Other evolutionary growing
pains included raucous screaming matches between Peretz and his editors in the
hallways, out of which developed a peculiar rhythm of editors departing and
returning only to leave and return again. ("TNR," says Fred Barnes, "is a hotbed
of prodigal sons.") Hendrik Hertzberg, twice TNR's editor and now ensconced at
The New Yorker along with Sidney Blumenthal, had a particularly tempestuous
relationship with Peretz. "I fought with Marty virtually my whole time there,"
says Hertzberg. "I still thought the magazine should guard its role as the
leading voice of American liberalism. Still, if Marty had turned TNR into a
simple reflection of his own opinions, it would not be the influential magazine
it is."

But the real credit for The New Republic's current prestige both inside and
outside the Beltway goes by almost all accounts to Michael Kinsley, who came to
the magazine from Harvard Law School along the same well-worn Cambridge-D.C.
towpath that brought Hertzberg, Sullivan and Wieseltier, among others ("Harvard
is the farm team," says Hertzberg). Kinsley, who edited the magazine on and off
through the 80's and writes the popular TRB column -- he's now on a six-month
leave -- embodied "technocracy with a sense of humor," in the words of the media
critic Eric Alterman. "Kinsley invented the persona of the nerdy guy willing to
say anything," says Morley, "and unlike Hertzberg he was willing to cede Jews,
blacks and Communists to Marty." Louis Menand, yet another TNR contributor
recently lured away by Tina Brown of The New Yorker, agrees about Kinsley's
rejuvenating role, and expects the same from Sullivan. "Mike created the whole
post-Marty style and was about Andrew's age when he started," says Menand.
"That's Marty's secret, really: he's not afraid to start all over with young
people."

So what kind of young person is this Andrew Sullivan? And what does
"post-ideological" mean, anyway?

"TWO EXPERIENCES formed my political outlook early on," Sullivan remembers. "The
first experience was growing up without electricity because British Coal was
always on strike. Also, my school was abolished by the Labor Government. It was
what Americans call a public 'magnet' school, and you needed high test scores,
not money, to get in. But Labor turned it private because they felt it was
inegalitarian. Right then, in my early teens, I saw how the left had become a
means of clobbering ordinary people in the name of ordinary people."

When Sullivan speaks of ordinary people, he includes himself. The child of a
father who worked for an insurance company and a mother who worked for the local
newspaper in East Grinstead, a small town 25 miles south of London, he was the
first in his family to attend a university. After winning a scholarship to study
modern history at Magdalen College, Oxford, he plunged into an extracurricular
schedule heavy on drama and debating that quickly won him the Union presidency
as well as a reputation for "pushiness" among his more languid, class-conscious
peers. Adding to his mounting sense of alienation from British society, he had
become aware by this time of his homosexuality -- and of what he describes as
"covert cultural signals" to pursue an "approved" gay career.

"There are a lot of roles for a gay person in England -- actor, arts
administrator and so on -- but they don't include being yourself," Sullivan
says. "It wasn't until I won a Harkness Fellowship to Harvard -- England's
equivalent of a Rhodes -- that I could even imagine such a thing as 'coming
out.' Two months after I got to America, I wrote my parents a letter and told
them I felt I was at home for the first time in my life. In a way, I'm a classic
first-generation immigrant, more pro-American than many Americans and naively
enthusiastic about the culture."

Naive enthusiasm. It fits. For all the authority of his position and the cynical
tinge to many of his views, there is something wide-eyed and unspoiled about
Sullivan. He has the aura of a jaded waif, a slightly ragged cultural Now
Voyager eager to reinvent himself in the land of the free. Showing up for a
happy-hour interview at a cheap Brazilian sangria joint, he resembles -- in his
army-surplus stocking cap and book-filled knapsack -- a slightly undernourished,
underslept and mentally overstimulated European student-tourist. Doing the Gap
ad, one senses, was for him an American experience that simply could not be
passed up.

But what about the adjectives -- the ones that appear in a virtually unchanging
string whenever Sullivan's name comes up in print?

Catholic: "My religious beliefs are quite deeply held. I go to Mass each week."

Gay: "I was nervous when I started at TNR that I would be assumed to be a
cheerleader for a particular gay agenda. My primary concern is that we have good
coverage of the subject from many sides, not that we have the right line. After
I wrote an essay against outing, I was harassed for three or four months. I had
drinks thrown in my face and was screamed at in gay bars: Collaborator! You
don't belong here! It was an interesting experience, realizing that there are
personal costs to political decisions."

Conservative: "Michael Oakeshott, the British political philosopher I wrote my
Ph.D. dissertation on, put it something like this: 'I am conservative in
politics so as to be radical in every other activity of life.' " As if to help
Sullivan dramatize the statement, three young men wearing black leather jackets
enter the restaurant at this point in the interview and he stands up to speak
with them. Hugs and pleasantries are exchanged, then Sullivan sits back down at
the table. "Excuse me," he says, smiling. "Homo moment."

The remark -- crisply confessional, playfully self-conscious and almost
disconcertingly direct -- sums up Sullivan's temperament perfectly. His earliest
innovations as editor were to cut the lead editorial from two pages to one,
encourage writers to make their pieces "shorter and spikier" and generally let
it be known that what Jefferson Morley refers to as "the politics of pleasure,
religion and sexual identity" would be given at least as much play in the pages
of TNR as the proceedings of the House Ways and Means Committee. "Andrew is very
spontaneous," says Jacob Weisberg, who, like Sullivan, joined the magazine as an
intern in the mid-80's. "I can't imagine a 45-year-old having the effect he's
had."

At bottom, age is the key to understanding Sullivan's New Republic and how it
will behave in the coming years. "We're aiming for a younger audience and
getting them with cheekiness," says Peretz, who, when all is said and done, has
demonstrated a remarkable gift over the years for keeping his magazine on course
with savvy, timely appointments. What Jeffrey Rosen identifies as "the younger
editors' tremendous fear of a big politically correct love fest under Clinton"
has already manifested itself in a Jacob Weisberg essay on Clinton's Hollywood
connections that warned of an "infotainment presidency." Weisberg sees his role
"as sort of a hit man, writing stories older journalists might be afraid of."
One such Weisberg story -- his examination of the decline of American publishing
-- drew such a hostile response from industry professionals that it might have
spooked a journalist of any age.

And it's not as if Weisberg and his fresh-faced Gap-attired peers take such
risks for the money. Salaries are low, starting around $20,000 and climbing only
fitfully from there. Jeffrey Rosen, whose law degree from Yale would appear to
entitle him to a higher level of material reward, cites an atmosphere of
"freedom and support" for his decision to take on in print the arguments of
Supreme Court justices. Then there is Michael Lewis, the best-selling author of
"Liar's Poker," who moved last year to Washington and The New Republic's
masthead "because it's the magazine that got me interested in journalism in the
first place." Lewis speaks of "a slight generational divide" at the magazine,
which he seems eager to help widen. "The younger people are much more
irresponsible and more willing to do things on the edge."

Part of what makes this edge possible is the fact that Sullivan & Co. owe no
special allegiance to the new Administration, the Democratic Party or even --
most tellingly -- to the now-triumphant baby boomers' optimism about the
potential of political action. "People around my age don't have many illusions,"
says Sullivan, getting down to the emotional nitty-gritty of post-ideology. "We
live in the ruins of liberalism and conservatism. Our real problems, we see, are
spiritual and psychological. Part of the way we deal with this is through irony,
which is a defense against fear. But politics just won't solve my problems. It
won't save anyone."

And therein lies a final irony. The editor of The New Republic, the political
magazine of the moment and possibly of the coming Clinton era, doesn't have a
lot of faith in politics.

LOAD-DATE: March 7, 1993

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photos: Martin Peretz, above, the magazine's 53-year-old owner, and
Andrew Sullivan, left, its 29-year-old editor. (Photographs by Antonin
Kratochvil for The New York Times)

                   Copyright 1993 The New York Times Company

                              213 of 255 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                  March 8, 1993, Monday, Late Edition - Final

After 3 Decades Working in Senate, Kennedy Gets a Turn for His Agenda

BYLINE: By ADAM CLYMER

SECTION: Section B; Page 8; Column 1; National Desk

LENGTH: 1709 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON


After three turbulent, sometimes triumphant and often troubled decades, Senator
Edward M. Kennedy is entering a singularly calm, optimistic time in his life.

For the first time since he accumulated real power in the Senate, he has a
President as an ally. He has been a committee chairman during four
Administrations, but he often fought Presidents Jimmy Carter, Ronald Reagan and
George Bush over domestic policy. Today, his enthusiasm for President Clinton's
vision seems unbounded. In a recent interview, he compared the new President to
his own brother, John F. Kennedy.

After an unhappy marriage, a divorce and years when supermarket tabloids paid
more attention to his private life than political scientists did to his
legislative skills, he has remarried. Now 61, he takes obvious pleasure in
Victoria Reggie Kennedy's company and proudly interrupted a hearing a few weeks
ago to explain he had to leave for her daughter's seventh birthday party.

And even in the area in which he enjoyed continual success -- getting laws
passed that he felt would help the sick and the poor and victims of
discrimination -- 1993 looks particularly auspicious. For the idea he has
preached from the political wilderness for two decades, universal health care,
is suddenly at the center of the political stage.

Right Place, Right Time

"In politics, as in life and love, a lot depends on being in the right place at
the right time," he said recently. "That's certainly what's happened to me,"
said the Democrat who never fulfilled the destiny many saw for the last Kennedy,
but is ranked by scholars and colleagues like Robert C. Byrd as among the most
effective lawmakers in the history of Congress.

As to Mr. Clinton, Senator Kennedy saw the President's opportunity as similar to
Franklin D. Roosevelt's in the 1930's, and "30 years later, President Kennedy
was beginning to move in the 60's." He said he thought Mr. Clinton understood
"what the Presidency could mean in terms of domestic leadership as well as
international leadership, and his own role in terms of history."

This alliance might seem surprising. Last year's Presidential election was the
first since the Lyndon Johnson era in which Mr. Kennedy did not consider
running. And Mr. Clinton won last year by proclaiming himself a different sort
of Democrat -- different from the old, big-spending Democrat, the Ted Kennedy
Democrat.

That stereotype, used for years by Republicans and some Democrats, had less
validity in the 80's. With soaring deficits, the Senator tempered his views.
Moreover, many of the areas where Mr. Clinton does want to spend money, those
that fall under his general category of "human investment," have been Kennedy
issues since before Mr. Clinton was a household word even in Arkansas.

Health Care Is No. 1

He and Mr. Clinton may come to differ, though no cracks show yet. And if there
is one domestic issue that the chairman of the Senate Labor and Human Resources
Committee is counting on Mr. Clinton to advance, it is the issue of national
health care. That is the issue for which Mr. Kennedy has been the Senate's
foremost advocate since 1970.

Health care is also the issue that first brought him and Mr. Clinton together.
On Dec. 9, 1978, Mr. Kennedy made one of the most memorable speeches of his
career, telling a party conference in Memphis that "national health insurance is
the great unfinished business on the agenda of the Democratic Party."

Plainly scorning the Carter Administration, he said: "There are some who say we
cannot afford national health insurance. They say it has become an early
casualty of the war against inflation."

"Sometimes a party must sail against the wind," he said. "We cannot afford to
drift or lie at anchor. We cannot heed the call of those who say it is time to
furl the sail."

Mr. Clinton, the newly elected Governor of Arkansas, was the moderator that day
as the crowd roared approval with an enthusiasm that startled the Kennedy camp
and encouraged the challenge he mounted against Mr. Carter for the 1980
Democratic nomination.

A Defining Issue

Mr. Clinton, who had spent the morning boning up on health care, called it a
"great speech." He told reporters he thought he had been chosen for the
moderator's role because he was "neutral" on the issue.

But that was 1978. Fifteen years later, health care is the ultimate measuring
rod for his Administration, a staggering challenge.

Mr. Clinton will need all the support he can get. In the Senate, jurisdiction on
the issue is shared between Mr. Kennedy's committee and the Finance Committee,
whose new chairman, Senator Daniel Patrick Moynihan of New York, shares his
sense that something major has to be done.

But in the Senate, anyhow, committee products are less determinative than they
are in the House. This issue will surely be fought over and decided on the
floor. The senior Republican on Mr. Kennedy's committee, Senator Nancy Landon
Kassebaum of Kansas, said of her chairman, "After all these years, he's not
going to let it get away from him."

This is the big issue whose solution has eluded him in 32 years in the Senate,
as he played major roles on Vietnam, reapportionment, Watergate, campaign
finance, tax reform, deregulation of transportation, education, medical
research, and, above all, civil rights -- where he is now the Congress's
unquestioned leader.

Dip in Reputation

He established himself as the leading liberal of a conservative age, even though
the event most recently set in the public's memory came on Good Friday of 1991,
when he roused his nephew William K. Smith to go have a drink in Palm Beach.
When Mr. Smith was arrested and charged with rape, Mr. Kennedy's reputation took
another heavy blow.

And before Mr. Smith was acquitted, the case effectively disabled the Senator
from the role his followers expected in the Judiciary Committee's examination of
the sexual harassment accusations Anita F. Hill made against Clarence Thomas.

His reputation dipped even in Massachusetts, and polls suggested he would be
vulnerable in the 1994 election. Continual appearances across the state, almost
always accompanied by his new wife, whom he married last March, eased those
concerns.

The bumps that have upset his personal and political lives in the last few years
have had remarkably little effect on his life as a lawmaker, or on the
legislative tools he uses.

One is staff. Year in and year out, Mr. Kennedy's aides are praised as among the
smartest and hardest-working on Capitol Hill. Carey Parker, his legislative
director, has worked for him since 1969. Most of his other aides stay several
years.

Senator Kassebaum's predecessor as ranking Republican on the Labor Committee,
Senator Orrin G. Hatch, is the prime example of Mr. Kennedy's other major
legislative weapon -- a knack for forming alliances with Republicans.

For decades, Republicans have raised millions of dollars by using Mr. Kennedy as
the pre-eminent symbol of liberal excess. The Kennedy specter has also been
used, especially in the South, to help defeat Democrats.

But many Republican Senators have been ready to work with him. In 1967, for
example, he worked with Senator Howard H. Baker of Tennessee against Senator
Baker's father-in-law, Senator Everett Dirksen of Illinois, over
reapportionment. In 1991 the ally was Senator John C. Danforth of Missouri on
civil rights.

Making Republican Allies

Mr. Hatch came to the Senate from Utah in 1977 determined to fight Mr. Kennedy
and the liberal ideas he stood for. Today a painting of the Kennedy family's
Hyannis Port compound hangs in his reception room.

When Republicans took over the Senate and Mr. Hatch became chairman of the labor
committee in 1981, he found he could work with the Massachusetts Democrat far
more than he expected. They worked together on a variety of health issues,
including AIDS, and last year they pushed through the only urban aid bill
Congress managed to enact after the Los Angeles riots, although it involved less
money than either man sought.

That ability to work with Republicans was especially critical in the Reagan and
Bush years. The Labor Committee has an immense jurisdiction, ranging over all
manner of labor and health and education issues. If laws were going to be
enacted in those areas in the 80's, some Republican allies had to be found.

This year, several other issues besides health care that are close to Mr.
Clinton's heart will come before Mr. Kennedy's committee. They include the
President's promises to improve job training programs; his hopes to tie college
loans to national service programs; his commitment to improve health programs
for children, and a range of other proposals.

Touchy Issues, Too

And the Clinton Administration will have a major say in the committee's most
time-consuming task of the year. Mr. Kennedy estimates that it will take six or
seven months to rewrite the Elementary and Secondary Education Act, including an
effort to adjust its formula for grants to take account of increasing numbers of
poor children and the growing problems of big city systems with many children
who do not speak English.

And at odd moments it will be facing such hot issues as the Freedom of Choice
Act, civil rights protections for homosexuals, replacement of striking workers,
and the Occupational Safety and Health Act.

But the biggest issue of all is universal health care. Over the years, Mr.
Kennedy has supported one proposal and then another as he sought a majority. He
tells a story to emphasize his attitude these days:

Three geography teachers were competing for a job. The school board had a
two-thirds-vote requirement to choose someone, and was bitterly split over
whether the earth was round or flat. The first applicant was rejected because he
taught the flat earth approach. The second was turned down because he was
committed to a round earth. The third got the job, after telling the board, "I
can teach it flat or teach it round."

"I'm interested this time in practical solutions, in getting this done," Senator
Kennedy said. "I'm ready to teach it round or teach it flat -- if it's
universal, and cuts costs and provides quality."

LOAD-DATE: March 24, 1993

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

SERIES: The Lawmakers: Portraits of the Powers On Capitol Hill -- Third article
of a series.



GRAPHIC: Chart: "Edward M. Kennedy"
Photo: "In politics, as in life and love, a lot depends on being in the right
place at the right time," said Senator Edward M. Kennedy, who has preached the
idea of universal health care for two decades. (Paul Conklin)

Born: Feb. 22, 1932, Boston.

Hometown: Hyannis Port, Mass.

Education: Milton Academy; A.B., Harvard College; LL.B., University of Virginia
Law School.

Career Highlights: 1961-62, assistant district attorney, Suffolk County, Mass.;
1962, elected to U.S. Senate; 1979-80, chairman, Senate Judiciary Committee;
1980, unsuccessful candidate for Democratic Presidential nomination;
1987-present, chairman, Labor and Human Resources Committee. Family: Married to
Victoria Reggie; one son and one daughter from her previous marriage and two
sons and one daughter from his previous marriage to Joan Bennett Kennedy.

Hobbies: Sailing; tennis, amateur painting; reading American history and
biography.

TYPE: Biography; Series

                   Copyright 1993 The New York Times Company

                              214 of 255 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                  March 9, 1993, Tuesday, Late Edition - Final

White House Memo;
One Topic, Several Agendas As Clinton and Nixon Meet

BYLINE: By THOMAS L. FRIEDMAN,  Special to The New York Times

SECTION: Section A; Page 1; Column 5; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 1241 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, March 8


As political odd couples go, Bill Clinton and Richard Nixon surely rank with the
oddest. But there they were today, the Vietnam dove and the Vietnam hawk,sitting
around the White House living room, bonded together by their shared feelings
about Russia.

Never mind that Mr. Nixon rose to the Presidency riding the issue of opposition
to Communist Russia, while Mr. Clinton's only noteworthy experience with the
place was a youthful tourist visit, for which he was attacked during the
Presidential campaign. Today, the two men find themselves sharing a political
trench in the renewed debate over how much aid to give Russia, at a time when
its first democratically elected President is at risk of being toppled.

Just to make things interesting, commanding the opposite trench in this debate
is Mr. Nixon's former Secretary of State, Henry A. Kissinger, who has been
warning in recent articles about the dangers of the West going overboard in
rebuilding Russia, without regard to Russian history. If America aids Russia to
the exclusion of other former Soviet republics, Mr. Kissinger argues, it could
find itself in a few years having to deal with the resurgent imperialist-minded
Russia of old.

A White House Curiosity

Mr. Kissinger has not been invited to the Clintons' living room. Mr. Clinton
invited Mr. Nixon to the family quarters, though, after a 40-minute telephone
conversation between the two last Wednesday. Some of Mr. Clinton's bevy of
twenty- and thirty-something aides, many of whom were in nursery school during
Watergate, angled to get a glance at the former President, whose arrival at the
White House seemed to spark almost as much curiosity as that of the Dallas
Cowboys last Friday.

"Everyone was intrigued," said a young senior White House official. "It came up
at the staff meeting this morning. People just said: 'Can you believe this?
Nixon's coming.' But the fact is, he has something to offer."

Actually each man had something to offer the other. As could be expected for a
meeting between two such calculating politicians, each side came with a public
agenda and a private agenda.

Mr. Nixon's crusade on behalf of Russian aid appears to be based on both a
heartfelt historical judgment about the merits of such assistance and a personal
calculation as to how it can serve him politically. For in seeking to drum up
American support for President Boris N. Yeltsin, Mr. Nixon is not only
rehabilitating the Russian leader, but also himself.

Prodded George Bush

Last March, when President George Bush decided to lie low on foreign policy and
play down the Russian aid question, it was Mr. Nixon's speeches and articles on
the issue that embarrassed Mr. Bush into taking more aggressive steps to help
Mr. Yeltsin, through enactment of the $417 million Freedom Support Act.

"It is all part of a very successful Nixon campaign for ex-President," observed
Daniel Schorr, a longtime Nixon-watcher who was on Mr. Nixon's infamous enemies
list. For almost 20 years now, Mr. Nixon, who resigned in disgrace, has been
trying to be accepted as an honorable former President, like Jimmy Carter,
Gerald Ford and Ronald Reagan have become since. Being invited to the White
House living quarters by Mr. Clinton to talk about foreign policy is a major
step in his comeback.

As for Mr. Clinton, he not only shares Mr. Nixon's views on the need for America
to be forthcoming in aiding Russia, but he also understands that Mr. Nixon can
be very useful in garnering Republican support for any large-scale increase in
American assistance to Mr. Yeltsin. That would almost certainly be a
controversial idea during the current budget debates.

"Nixon can cover Clinton on the right, and Clinton will take care of the left
himself," said Robert Hormats, vice chairman of Goldman Sachs International and
a leading specialist on the Russian aid question.

Selling Russian Aid

The House has 110 new members this year, Senator Dale Bumpers of Arkansas noted,
"and I know what most of them said to get here, and it was essentially 'America
first, we've got to take care of things at home.' Now, you bring Nixon in, and
maybe Ronald Reagan and Gerald Ford and Jimmy Carter, and you still may not sell
Russian aid, but at least people are going to have to think about it."

Clinton foreign policy aides are fully aware of Mr. Nixon's views. He did not
have to come to the White House to convey them. But it is precisely that
symbolic act that is politically useful, although Mr. Clinton clearly was not
quite ready to show off his new friend: photographers and journalists were
barred from the meeting. Still, it was widely advertised.

Whatever his motives, many Russian affairs specialists agree that Mr. Nixon is
on the cutting edge of the debate about Russia aid.

What Mr. Nixon is arguing is that the Western governments, led by Washington,
have to stop looking at the question of financial assistance to Mr. Yeltsin
purely in banker's terms. Because the success of the Russian leader is so
essential for the success of democracy in Russia, and the success of democracy
in Russia so essential for the West's ability to reduce defense spending, he
says, the West should step in with significant financial assistance -- even if
it means some of the money will be wasted and even if the Russians have not met
all the prior financial conditions.

In an article on the Op-Ed page of The New York Times last Friday -- which Mr.
Clinton publicly praised at a news conference -- Mr. Nixon predicted that
"without a substantial increase in aid from the West, the Yeltsin Government
will not survive."

New Premise for Debate

The debate on Russian aid, said Mr. Hormats, is no longer about whether to
provide assistance under terms approved by the International Monetary Fund,
because it is now clear that Russia simply is never going to meet those terms.
The new debate is whether to provide aid without I.M.F. approval, even though
"it may mean wasting some of the money."

Dimitri K. Simes, Russian affairs specialist at the Carnegie Endowment for
International Peace and Mr. Nixon's personal adviser on Russia, said Mr. Nixon's
view is that "we have to give priority to the salvation of Russian democracy
over narrow financial considerations."

Mr. Clinton had asked Mr. Nixon to bring him some concrete proposals today, and
one that Mr. Nixon brought was a suggestion that Mr. Clinton use the occasion of
his April 3-4 summit meeting with Mr. Yeltsin in Vancouver, British Columbia, to
call an emergency meeting of the Group of Seven major industrial democracies to
deal with Russian aid, Mr. Simes said. Mr. Nixon's argument, Mr. Simes added, is
that the international monetary organizations are unqualified to handle the
Russia problem alone and that it requires a political decision-making body,
ready to make a political, not purely financial, decision.

As much as Mr. Clinton has identified with Mr. Nixon's views on Russian aid,
there is still a question of how far the President is ready to go. In this
argument, Mr. Nixon is the radical and Mr. Clinton the conservative.

While White House aides say that Mr. Clinton definitely wants to be much more
aggressive about getting aid to Russian reformers than his predecessor, they add
that he still has not decided how much he will ask the American people to spend
on such an endeavor, at a time when they are being asked to cut spending at
home.

LOAD-DATE: March 9, 1993

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1993 The New York Times Company

                              215 of 255 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                  March 9, 1993, Tuesday, Late Edition - Final

NEWS SUMMARY

SECTION: Section A; Page 2; Column 5; Metropolitan Desk

LENGTH: 1040 words



International    A3-9

MEXICAN CAMPAIGN QUARREL

After promising repeatedly to make political competition in Mexico fairer,
President Carlos Salinas de Gortari has provoked criticism by soliciting wealthy
businessmen for hundreds of millions of dollars in contributions to his party.
A1

CLINTON, NIXON AND YELTSIN

As political odd couples go, Bill Clinton and Richard Nixon surely rank with the
oddest. But there they were, the Vietnam dove and the Vietnam hawk, sitting
around the White House living room bound together by their shared support of of
increased aid to Russia.  A1

ZAIRE'S BATTLING LEADERS

The President and the Prime Minister of Zaire both say they have the authority
to rule the large, impoverished African nation. Their battle for control has
paralyzed the Government and cast doubt about its future stability.  A3

EVACUATION OF BOSNIAN MUSLIMS

The Bosnian Serbs' military commander agreed to allow a limited evacuation of
Muslims from isolated areas of eastern Bosnia, United Nations and Serbian
officials said.  A6

VIOLENCE AGAINST SERBS

Some of the Serbs who remained in Gorazde after Serbian "ethnic cleansing" got
under way in eastern Bosnia have been put to death as suspected snipers.  A6

News analysis: The obstacles to finding peace in Bosnia.  A7

DEBATE OVER MIDEAST AID MONEY

The Clinton Administration was forced by an influential Democrat in Congress to
confront the delicate subject of whether the United States can afford to pour
billions of dollars into Israel and Egypt.  A9

ISRAELI SETTLER SLAIN IN GAZA

Palestinian laborers stabbed an Israeli to death in a Jewish settlement, hours
after the army opened the Gaza Strip after six days, the Israeli military said.
A9

IRISH LEADER TO MEET CLINTON

When Prime Minister Albert Reynolds meets Mr. Clinton on St. Patrick's Day, he
plans to discuss the President's ideas for a U.S. policy on Northern Ireland.
A8

ENGLISH TRADITION: FISH AND CHIPS

Birmingham Journal: Fish and chips endures as England's original hot fast food,
a quintessential institution. More than 9,000 outlets, mostly mom-and-pop
storefronts, dispense the vinegary fare.  A4

National    A12-16

WEIGHING LIMITS ON MEDICAL FEES

As part of their effort to control health costs, Clinton Administration
officials are considering asking Congress to impose restrictions on medical
malpractice lawsuits and limits on doctors' fees.  A1

STOCKS REACH A NEW PEAK

Stocks soared to new highs as investors braved the market's risks in search of
returns no longer available from bank accounts and bonds. The Dow Jones
industrial average rose 64.84 points, or 1.9 percent, to close at 3,469.42.  A1

LESSONS FROM POLICE-KILLERS

Two F.B.I. agents interviewed 50 killers of police officers in an effort to
discover what the victims could have done differently. The result is a chilling
collection of murderous narratives that could change officers' behavior.  A1

KING EXPECTED ON WITNESS STAND

Rodney King is expected to testify for the first time in the case of Los Angeles
four police officers accused of violating his civil rights.  A12

HOLY WAR FOR CULT?

Law-enforcement officials brought in the Army's heaviest tanks and the leader of
the Texas cult involved in a bloody shootout and subsequent siege said he might
welcome an apocalyptic fire fight rather than a gentle surrender.  A12

LABOR PACT UPHELD

In a victory for organized labor, the Supreme Court validated a union-only labor
agreement in the cleanup of Boston Harbor, ruling that states were free to
negotiate such pacts. The Justices also let stand a lower court ruling that
declared Louisiana's strict abortion law unconstitutional.  A13

RENO'S RECORD IS DEBATED

President Clinton praised Janet Reno, his choice for Attorney General, as a
"front-line crime fighter." But her office has lagged behind other Florida
prosecutors in several measures, including the rate at which they take cases to
trial, win guilty verdicts and obtain prison sentences.  A14

CLINTON'S POWERFUL COUNSEL

Other White House counsels have wielded great power. But because of the
vacancies at the Justice Department, Clinton's counsel, Bernard Nussbaum, is in
the unusual position of making some of the department's most important
decisions.  A14

THINKING OF CUTS

Clinton and Congressional budget writers agreed to make deeper cuts in Federal
programs than the President had originally sought. It was a grudging bow to
political as well as fiscal imperatives.  A15

The Administration defended U.S. policy on Haitian refugees.  A16

Metro Digest    B1

DOCTORS WHO'VE HAD ENOUGH

Throughout the New York region and across the country, senior, seasoned doctors
are choosing to retire early because of what they see as a loss of control to
insurance companies and government agencies.  A1

SUSPECT'S ROLE IN BOMBING

Federal and local investigators believe that Mohammed A. Salameh, the
25-year-old suspect arrested in the bombing of the World Trade Center, played a
significant role in what they say is a conspiracy. For the first time, criminal
justice officials also established a link between Mr. Salameh and El Sayyid A.
Nosair, the man tried for the assassination of Rabbi Meir Kahane.  A1

Science Times    C1-11

The abyss yields its secrets to new robot devices.  C1

Social research: experiments with real people.  C1

You're right, this year's weather was really odd.  C1

Arts/Entertainment    C13-18

Theater: "Aven' U Boys." C13

Music: Pollini's Schubert.  C13

Business Digest    D1

Fashion Page    B8

Sports    B9-15

Basketball: Knicks beat Magic in overtime.  B9

Football: Jets sign Ronnie Lott.  B9

Obituaries    B6-7

Billy Eckstine, singer and band leader.  B7

Editorials/Op-Ed    A18-19

Editorials

A guide for Pentagon budget cuts.

Needed: a few brave Republicans.

Gag rule in Romania.

Reviving the Education Dept.

Letters

Russell Baker: The uncobbod code.

Enzo Biagi: Don't blame fate. Blame the Italians.

Al Meyerhoff: No more pesticides for dinner.

LOAD-DATE: March 9, 1993

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Summary

                   Copyright 1993 The New York Times Company

                              216 of 255 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                March 10, 1993, Wednesday, Late Edition - Final

THE TWIN TOWERS;
For Blast Survivors, Shock Waves of Stress

BYLINE: By JON NORDHEIMER

SECTION: Section A; Page 1; Column 2; Metropolitan Desk

LENGTH: 1217 words


By the time he emerged from the smoke-filled World Trade Center that Friday
afternoon, gasping, choking and thankful for deliverance from the most
terrifying event of his life, the high-powered investment banker did what he
always did to shed stress.

He packed his gym bag and headed for the health club.

He did his usual aerobics and Nautilus exercises, the same routine that had
helped sweat off a crisis a month earlier when a multimillion-dollar stock deal
went sour.

Only when he sat down to bench-press did he notice the stares from the other
lifters in the weight room. He followed their gaze to his feet.

He was still wearing the tasseled black leather shoes that had propelled him
down more than 60 flights through thickening smoke in a frantic race to safety
only hours before. Uh-oh, he told himself, something's a little out of whack
here.

"Individuals can react to extreme stress in different ways," said Dr. Leslie
Baliff, supervising psychologist at Beth Israel Medical Center, who told the
story about the investment banker -- now getting counseling as a private patient
in her Long Island practice.

"And even Masters of the Universe," she said, using the phrase made popular by
Tom Wolfe in "Bonfire of the Vanities" for the privileged titans of Wall Street,
"need help to vent their emotional pain and fear."

Perhaps more than in any previous disaster, the survivors are getting it.

Because the target of the car bombing was the World Trade Center towers, most
survivors were either well-paid white-collar professionals or office workers
with access to medical benefits or counseling through employee assistance
programs.

Dr. Joseph T. English, director of the department of psychology at St. Vincent's
Hospital in Manhattan, predicted that in years to come the explosion and its
aftermath may become a textbook study of how tens of thousands of workers
exposed to the same trauma react emotionally and how they resume their lives.
St. Vincent's treated 168 victims of the explosion for injuries.

The Greater New York Chapter of the American Red Cross and the New York City
Mental Health Department held counseling sessions last week for about 50
survivors and more are planned, said Dr. Jane Zimmerman, director of public
education and community affairs for the department. In addition, 375 people have
called the department's stress line, (800) 527-7474, to seek information or help
with emotional turmoil stemming from the explosion, she said.

Need for Prompt Action

Dr. English, who is also president of the American Psychiatric Association, said
it is important that companies in the twin towers recognize that attending to
the emotional health of employees is at least as important as getting them back
to work.

Post-traumatic stress syndrome, a medically recognized disorder, can emotionally
scar the survivors of disasters or other terrifying events. But Dr. English said
it is easily expiated by reassuring the victims that fearful reactions and
feelings of powerlessness are normal.

"Our feeling is that anyone who is experiencing a problem of any kind should be
treated," Dr. English said. "Equally at risk are family members and friends who
watched the disaster on television and waited to hear for hours if a loved one
was safe."

A Variety of Symptoms

He cautioned that symptoms may take weeks or months to emerge, but the earlier a
person gets help, the better the prognosis. The syndrome may emerge in several
symptoms:

*Recurring flashbacks or dreams about the event;

*Persistent avoidance of things associated with the event;

*Numbness or a feeling of detachment from activities or people;

*Persistent irritability, outbursts of anger or exaggerated startled reactions.

Many survivors experience one or all these symptoms in the days after the
traumatic event. If they persist for a month or longer they are telltale
symptoms of the syndrome, he said.

He said he was discussing plans with state and city mental health officials to
open a treatment center at the World Trade Center. It would provide a place for
workers to receive group or individual therapy.

He and other experts expressed concern that the rush to reopen would blind some
executives to the emotional problems of their employees as well as their own
well-being.

"If companies are not educated to what can happen the symptoms can go on and
interfere with job performance or lead to valuable people leaving the company,"
he said.

A Company's Quick Response

Some victims of the World Trade Center explosion got counseling the day after
the blast, a measure of how awareness of the stress syndrome has spread since it
was first described medically 20 years ago in studies of Vietnam veterans.

One company that reacted swiftly was Fortis Inc., a multinational insurance
holding company. It had 57 employees on the 50th floor of 1 World Trade Center
when the noontime explosion rocked the building.

Allen Freedman, the chief executive officer, was in Colorado on business. That
night he spoke by phone with his aides on what to do to help the workers.
"Within 24 hours we were talking with a clinical supervisor at Human Affairs
International, our employee assistance program, and asked them for ideas," said
Martin Seidell, serving as a disaster recovery coordinator for Fortis.

He and Deborah Malewski, the controller, had not been trapped in the tower. But
they talked by phone with survivors who called an emergency number to say they
had made it out.

"I was not prepared for the disorientation and devastation I was hearing," Mr.
Seidell said. "Everyone was babbling about what they went through," Ms. Malewski
said.

Perhaps because an older brother had served in Vietnam, "an experience that
changed him," Mr. Seidell was versed in the pathology of stress. On Monday, 30
survivors, given temporary quarters at a Fortis office in Edison, N.J., met with
a clinical social worker from Human Affairs International to discuss their
feelings.

Trapped in an Elevator

On Tuesday, they took part in group therapy and were encouraged to tell
colleagues how they had escaped the tower four days earlier.

Allen Walker, 33, an administrative assistant, had what everyone agreed was the
most harrowing experience.

While most Fortis workers had eaten lunch at their desks, Mr. Walker had gone to
the ground-floor concourse to buy soup. He had just stepped into an elevator
when the bomb exploded, trapping him and seven others for more than half an hour
before they were rescued.

"We could feel the heat of the fires and we thought we were doomed," recalled
Mr. Walker. "It's strange, but as I lay on the floor of that elevator thinking I
wasn't going to make it, all I could think of was that I hadn't made my bed that
morning. My parents would come to New York to claim my body and they'd find my
apartment a mess!"

Barbara Rieck, who works on accounts for the company, recalled feeling an
unreasonable anger toward her husband that she still couldn't explain. Like
others, she had emerged from the building with a whiskery mask of soot on her
face that made the survivors look like the ensemble from "Cats."

"I refused to wash my face until my husband arrived home from work that night so
he could see what I had gone through," she said.


LOAD-DATE: March 10, 1993

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo: Workers at the World Trade Center yesterday shoring up supports
in the crater left by the explosion. Investigators in search of fingerprints and
traces of bomb materials continued to haul out tons of wreckage. (John
Sotomayor/The New York Times)

                   Copyright 1993 The New York Times Company

                              217 of 255 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 March 11, 1993, Thursday, Late Edition - Final

26 Killed in Cambodia Raid; Most Vietnamese, U.N. Says

BYLINE: Reuters

SECTION: Section A; Page 17; Column 6; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 90 words

DATELINE: PHNOM PENH, Cambodia, Thursday, March 11


At least 26 civilians, most of them Vietnamese, have been killed in an attack on
a village in northwestern Cambodia, a United Nations spokesman said today.

The Phnom Penh Government reported to the United Nations Transitional Authority
in Cambodia that as many as 34 Vietnamese civilians were killed in the attack
about six miles south of the town of Siem Reap, United Nations sources said.

"I can confirm 26 dead," said Eric Falt, a United Nations spokesman, who said he
could not immediately confirm the Government numbers.

LOAD-DATE: March 12, 1993

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1993 The New York Times Company

                              218 of 255 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 March 11, 1993, Thursday, Late Edition - Final

Pop and Jazz in Review

BYLINE: By Jon Pareles

SECTION: Section C; Page 16; Column 6; Cultural Desk

LENGTH: 243 words



Ngoc Lam and Que Lam
Music of Vietnam Metropolitan Museum of Art

Vietnamese music, as played by Ngoc Lam and her daughter Que Lam on Sunday
afternoon, is a sphere of pristine melodies, openwork counterpoint and an
occasional delicate swirl. Both women play dan tranh, the Vietnamese zither that
is kin to the Japanese koto and the Chinese zheng; like those instruments, it
can play sweetly sustained tones that bend and glide like the most delicate
sighs.

Ngoc Lam has studied not only Vietnamese music, but also the Chinese zheng
repertory, and has introduced a 26-string dan tranh modeled on the zheng (the
standard dan tranh has 16 strings). In the program at Uris Auditorium, there was
a subtle difference between older Vietnamese folk songs and newer compositions.
In the traditional material, melodies were often accompanied by a lightly
staggered semi-improvisational counterpoint plinking in gentle crosscurrents.
The newer arrangements, perhaps under Chinese influence, used more sweeping,
harplike effects, including broad swirls of glissando and tremolo chords.

The Lams were joined by a singer, Phuong Dzung, who performed songs from
Vietnam's operatic tradition, cai luong. Her vocal lines, similar to those in
southern Chinese opera, were answered by elaborately unpredictable counterpoint.
Wearing sequined gowns and gleaming tiaras, the singer played both men and
women, by turns imperious and imploring, proud and tearful.

LOAD-DATE: March 12, 1993

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Review

                   Copyright 1993 The New York Times Company

                              219 of 255 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                  March 12, 1993, Friday, Late Edition - Final

33 Vietnamese Are Slain in Cambodia

BYLINE: By HENRY KAMM,  Special to The New York Times

SECTION: Section A; Page 3; Column 1; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 604 words

DATELINE: PHNOM PENH, Cambodia, March 11


At least 33 Vietnamese fishermen, women and children were killed by unidentified
gunmen on Wednesday night in a floating village on Tonle Sap Lake, south of the
monuments of Angkor in northwestern Cambodia, the United Nations Transitional
Authority announced here today. Twenty-six others were wounded.

The United Nations said one of the attackers was killed by a local woman.

Khmer Rouge forces operate in the area, and the villagers, who live on
houseboats or shacks on stilts, have in the past expressed fear of such attacks.
A senior international official said the massacre bore all the characteristics
of earlier Khmer Rouge killings of Vietnamese civilians.

The mass killing is the fifth and biggest of its kind recorded since last July.
In the earlier slayings, 35 Vietnamese were killed; eight others have been
missing since November and are presumed dead. In all but one of the killings,
evidence pointed to Khmer Rouge responsibility; in the killing of three
fishermen in Stung Treng Province last December no evidence has been found.

Vietnamese Are Fearful

The spate of killings, intense propaganda against Vietnamese residents by many
political parties and the ready reception these views find in the population
have made the Vietnamese minority fearful.

In this atmosphere, memories have been revived of the massacre organized in 1970
by the Government of Lon Nol shortly after it overthrew Prince Norodom Sihanouk.
Hundreds, perhaps thousands of Vietnamese were killed by the military and the
police.

In contrast to that time, the Vietnamese-installed Government of Prime Minister
Hun Sen refrains from expressing anti-Vietnamese views. But many of its
followers hold them.

Many Vietnamese have left isolated places and concentrated around towns and
bigger villages. They believe that while United Nations troops, police officers
and officials are here, the Phnom Penh Government will protect them.

"It is a vast, explosive issue fanned by all factions," said Dennis McNamara,
head of the human rights branch of the United Nations Transitional Authority.
Under the 1991 peace agreement that ended a 12-year civil war, the authority is
a virtual government preparing Cambodia for elections in May.

The number of Vietnamese -- Cambodian citizens or unauthorized migrants -- is in
dispute. The Khmer Rouge, who are boycotting the voting, assert that there are
over 2 million, and that 1.3 million have obtained Cambodian citizenship under
the Hun Sen Government and registered to vote.

Former Prime Minister Son Sann, leader of the Buddhist Liberal Democratic Party,
contends that there are 1.5 million Vietnamese. The Government cites numbers
ranging from 120,000 to 500,000.

The Khmer Rouge and the Son Sann faction both charge that the Phnom Penh
Government remains under Hanoi's control despite the departure of Vietnamese
troops in 1989 and conspires with Vietnam to infiltrate Cambodia with police
officers and secret agents for an eventual takeover.

"We are afraid of being invaded by the Vietnamese ants," Mr. Son Sann said in an
interview. "They are 70 million, we are 7 million."

Mak Ben, the Khmer Rouge spokesman here, was asked at a news conference whether
his party's demand that all Vietnamese leave Cambodia, was akin to "ethnic
cleansing" in the former Yugoslavia. He replied: "It is for the survival of the
Cambodian country, people and race."

Yasushi Akashi, head of the United Nations authority, has protested to Khieu
Sampham, the nominal Khmer Rouge leader, for using racist language in constantly
referring to the Vietnamese as "yuon," a derogatory term.

LOAD-DATE: March 12, 1993

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Map of Cambodia showing location of Tonle Sap.

                   Copyright 1993 The New York Times Company

                              220 of 255 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                  March 12, 1993, Friday, Late Edition - Final

Critic's Notebook;
For Gay Writers, Sad Stories

BYLINE: By MICHIKO KAKUTANI

SECTION: Section C; Page 1; Column 1; Weekend Desk

LENGTH: 2290 words


"DR. RIEUX resolved to compile this chronicle, so that he should not be one of
those who hold their peace but should bear witness in favor of those
plague-stricken people, so that some memorial of the injustice and outrage done
them might endure; and to state quite simply what we learn in a time of
pestilence: that there are more things to admire in men than to despise."

This passage from Albert Camus's novel "The Plague" is quoted as an epigraph to
Paul A. Sergios's affecting new memoir, "One Boy at War." It sums up at least
one of the impulses behind the outpouring of books on the subject of AIDS: a
desire to testify, to pay witness, to document the horrible toll of this
disease, to memorialize the dead and the dying, to try to fight despair through
the protest afforded by language.

It has been a dozen years since the first AIDS cases were diagnosed, and as the
disease has insinuated itself into the consciousness of the world, more and more
artists have tried to grapple with it through their imaginations. Just as the
earliest autobiographical accounts of the Holocaust gradually gave way to
documentaries and later to fictional treatments, so too have books on AIDS
followed a recognizable trajectory: memoirs and journals have been followed by a
growing number of documentarylike novels and short stories, and in recent years
by increasingly metaphorical and idiosyncratic works of fiction.

In the beginning so little was widely known about the disease that writers
seemed to feel an urgent need to teach, to remonstrate, to somehow convey raw
facts. The disease had to be named and described so it could be fought, and
early works of fiction tended almost by necessity to be polemical and didactic.
Since then, novels and plays alike have grown both more personal and more
abstract. Larry Kramer's angry, hectoring play "The Normal Heart" (1985), which
accused the Establishment of not doing enough to combat the disease, was
followed seven years later by his intimate and moving memory play, "The Destiny
of Me." Similarly, innovative, form-breaking works like Dale Peck's dazzling new
novel, "Martin and John," have followed more conventional, journal-like accounts
of the disease.

One thing that hasn't really changed is that most of this fiction concerns gay
men; very few novels or short stories deal with the epidemic's impact on
intravenous-drug users or on the urban black and Hispanic poor, who are also
affected in large numbers by AIDS.

How does a writer even begin to describe this terrible disease and communicate
its devastating consequences on the body and the spirit? On one hand, AIDS
embodies the scary confluence of sex and death, two subjects that have produced
much of the world's great literature, and it provides a fertile subject for the
imaginative writer. It's a subject that not only reveals the shape of the human
soul in extremis but that also opens out to disclose anxieties and prejudices in
society at large.

On the other hand, the very awfulness of AIDS poses a daunting challenge to the
imagination. As in the case of Vietnam, the writer must walk a narrative mine
field. Though the sheer accumulation of terrible details may help convey the
day-to-day reality of the illness, this strategy can also devolve into a litany
of horror that leaves the reader detached and emotionally numb.

The gritty, flamboyant approach -- used most recently in Gary Indiana's
disturbing novel "Gone Tomorrow" and in "Tim and Pete," James Robert Baker's
raunchy portrait of gay life in post-modern Los Angeles -- runs the risk of
sensationalizing the subject, even as it seizes hold of the reader's attention.
And the straightforward, documentary approach tends to work better in memoirs,
where the "true story" aspect lends the book a heightened immediacy, than in
novels. "Borrowed Time," Paul Monette's devastating account of his lover's death
from AIDS, for instance, possesses considerably more intimacy and resonance than
his novel, "Afterlife," a soap-operaish account of three men trying to cope with
their lovers' deaths.

For many writers -- including Paul Rudnick, the author of the hit play
"Jeffrey," and the novelists David B. Feinberg ("Eighty-Sixed"), John Weir ("The
Irreversible Decline of Eddie Socket") and Peter McGehee ("Boys Like Us") --
humor, black humor, is a potent weapon in the literary arsenal to fight AIDS.
It's a means of defying the illness and its inducements to sentimentality and
despair, a life-affirming refusal to allow the disease dominion. To cite just
one example, jokes about the Duchess of Windsor's remark that you can't ever be
too thin or too rich recur in several novels, given a chilling satiric twist by
the reality of a disease that reduces robust men in the prime of life to
withered skeletons. As Mr. Rudnick astutely wrote in a recent essay, "Only
money, rage and science can conquer AIDS, but only laughter can make the
nightmare bearable."

In the introduction to "Monopolies of Loss," Adam Mars-Jones's new collection of
short stories about AIDS, the British author writes of using fiction to create
"a psychological space in which the epidemic could be contemplated, with
detachment rather than denial or apocalyptic fear." Toward this end, he
discusses the writing of a story called "Slim" in which the trigger-word AIDS is
never used, thereby forcing the reader to look at the disease afresh without any
of its usual emotional baggage. Another one of his stories tells how a man
abandons his promiscuity after a mild heart attack, a heart attack that serves
as a kind of premonition of the dangers of AIDS. A third story in the volume
uses an aging woman's sudden death from a stroke as a vehicle for examining the
universal emotions of loss and grief and reverence for the dead.

Other writers tackle the disease head on, trying to come up with descriptions of
AIDS that will jolt the reader into awareness. In "An Oracle" (a story written
in 1986 and included in the collection "The Darker Proof"), Edmund White
describes a character worrying that "he was carrying death inside him, that it
was ticking inside him like a time bomb but one he couldn't find because it had
been secreted by an unknown terrorist." In a story in Jameson Currier's new
collection, "Dancing on the Moon," a man pondering the randomness of the disease
thinks "the wrong person had grabbed a seat in a bizarre round of musical
chairs." And in "Eighty-Sixed," Mr. Feinberg's hero, B. J. Rosenthal, declares:
"I'm beginning to feel like a Jew in Nazi Germany. People are dropping like
flies."

Though Susan Sontag has warned of the dangers of using apocalyptic metaphors to
discuss AIDS -- she argues that such terms induce despair and paralysis in the
patients -- many writers, from Mr. Currier to the novelist Andrew Holleran,
deliberately use words like "plague" and "war" to communicate the terrible toll
of the illness and to galvanize a call to arms. To these writers, metaphors do
not increase or distort the suffering of AIDS victims; rather, they help convey
the magnitude of the epidemic.

Certainly the frequently made analogy between AIDS and war is reflected in the
sort of fiction being produced today. Like war stories, AIDS fiction often takes
the form of a first novel, told in the first person and recounting a largely
autobiographical experience. As in so many Bildungsromans, the hero's coming of
age is carefully chronicled, but in this case, his journey from emotional
adolescence to maturity parallels the movement of an entire segment of the
population from innocence and hedonism to disillusionment and fear. Like war
novels, AIDS fiction often recounts an individual's acts of courage in the face
of frightening odds, but in this case, the experience is literally
life-altering: the hero's achievement of wisdom is accompanied by the almost
certain knowledge of death.

As Mr. Mars-Jones has pointed out, AIDS "has a narrative of its own, a story it
wants to tell, which is in danger of taking over." Novels about AIDS, he argues,
tend to recount the same "rites of passage, hard to avoid but hard to reshape,
retroviral equivalents of the Stations of the Cross: first knowledge of the
epidemic, first friend sick, first death, first symptom."

"How do you tell a fresh story," he asks, "when the structure is set?"

Indeed, many novels dealing with AIDS share a predictable architecture. They
neatly divide into two periods: before AIDS and after. Mr. Indiana's "Gone
Tomorrow" juxtaposes a portrait of drugs, orgies and wretched excess in the
early 80's with a nihilistically dark picture, circa 1991, of the emotional and
medical fallout of those years.

The first half of "Eighty-Sixed," titled "Ancient History," documents the New
York gay world of 1980 with hilarious sociological detail. It's a gaudy, raucous
world, a world of bathhouses and bars and one-night stands. "Learning How to
Cry," the novel's second installment, takes place a mere six years later and a
good light-year away, and it depicts a very different world, a world defined by
phrases like T-cell counts, night sweats and Kaposi's sarcoma. One of B. J.'s
boyfriends has tested positive; an ex-lover is in the hospital and B. J. starts
seeing a therapist to deal with his fear. In "Spontaneous Combustion" (1991),
the sequel to "Eighty-Sixed," B. J. himself tests positive and must try to come
to terms with this sudden turn his life has taken.

Those novels and short stories that don't follow the Bildungsroman form
frequently chronicle the effects that a man's illness and death from AIDS has on
his lover and friends. Mr. Monette's "Afterlife," "An Oracle" by Mr. White and
stories by Mr. Currier and Allen Barnett ("The Body and Its Dangers"): such
works take as their subject the extended links of friendship and romance that
both transmit disease and grief and provide emotional support.

In these works, as in so many of the AIDS coming-of-age stories, the disease
takes center stage. Like Satan in "Paradise Lost," its ominous presence takes
over the story, grabbing control of the plot and overshadowing virtually every
conversation, every encounter.

As the illness has become a hideous but seemingly ineradicable part of the
social landscape, however, works of art have begun to appear that treat AIDS
more indirectly. In some cases, like Craig Lucas's play "Prelude to a Kiss" and
Scott McPherson's play "Marvin's Room," AIDS is never even mentioned by name;
its malign presence is simply felt as an awareness of the precariousness of the
modern world, the fragility of all human life.

"Love Junkie," Robert Plunket's sad-funny comedy of manners about a suburban
housewife named Mimi who falls in love with a gay porno star, reads like a
Jonathan Demme movie about clashing life styles before winding to a close at a
memorial service for a friend who has died of AIDS. Played against Mimi's
romantic illusions, the death of this man who had first introduced her to the
heady gay world of the early 80's signals the dissolution of that very world she
had so happily embraced.

Although no novel dealing with AIDS has yet to evince the mythic ambitions of
Tony Kushner's play "Angels in America," a few works of fiction have appeared
that try to integrate the illness into a larger and more stylized tapestry of
emotion. In Michael Cunningham's lyrical novel "At Home at the End of the
World," a character's affliction with AIDS is subsumed in the book's concern
with the difficulty of making emotional connections. Here, AIDS is a fact of
life, a terrible one, but one that must be assimilated into the characters'
everyday relationships and routines. As in William Finn's remarkable musical
"Falsettos," love and family and the idea of home, not AIDS, lie at the heart of
the story.

Geoff Ryman's eloquent novel "Was" weaves together the stories of Judy Garland,
Dorothy of "The Wizard of Oz" and a fictional actor dying of AIDS to create a
fantastical meditation on lost innocence and the enduring power of fantasy to
transform pain. And Mr. Peck's "Martin and John" uses a similarly innovative
narrative technique to tell both the story of a young man's attempts to cope
with his lover's death from AIDS and the story of his imaginative efforts to
reinvent that tragedy and lend it a meaning and a shape.

It seems no coincidence that both these remarkable novels about AIDS are also
stories about the human imagination's capacity to confront and ultimately redeem
the incalculable suffering caused by that disease. Indeed, both books attest to
the enduring power of art in the face of horror.


The Books

"ONE BOY AT WAR," by Paul A. Sergios. Alfred A. Knopf. $23.

"MARTIN AND JOHN," by Dale Peck. Farrar, Straus & Giroux. $21.

"GONE TOMORROW," by Gary Indiana. Pantheon. $21.

"TIM AND PETE," by James Robert Baker. Simon & Schuster. $20.

"BORROWED TIME," by Paul Monette. Harcourt Brace Jovanovich. $18.95.

"AFTERLIFE," by Paul Monette. Crown Publishers. $19.95.

"EIGHTY-SIXED," by David B. Feinberg. Penguin Books. $7.95.

"THE IRREVERSIBLE DECLINE OF EDDIE SOCKET," by John Weir. Harper Perennial. $10.

"BOYS LIKE US," by Peter McGehee. St. Martin's Press. $8.95.

"MONOPOLIES OF LOSS," by Adam Mars-Jones. Alfred A. Knopf. $21.

"THE DARKER PROOF," by Edmund White and Adam Mars-Jones. New American Library.
$8.95.

"DANCING ON THE MOON," by Jameson Currier. Viking. $20.

"SPONTANEOUS COMBUSTION," by David B. Feinberg. Penguin Books. $10.

"THE BODY AND ITS DANGERS," by Allen Barnett. St. Martin's Press. $8.95.

"LOVE JUNKIE," by Robert Plunket. Harper Perennial. $10.

"AT HOME AT THE END OF THE WORLD," by Michael Cunningham. Farrar, Straus &
Giroux. $18.95.

"WAS," by Geoff Ryman. Alfred A. Knopf. $22.

LOAD-DATE: March 12, 1993

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo: A segment of the AIDS Memorial Quilt, shown in Washington in
1987. For writers, the disease embodies a scary confluence of sex and
death.(Paul Hosefros/The New York Times)(Pg. C29).

                   Copyright 1993 The New York Times Company

                              221 of 255 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 March 13, 1993, Saturday, Late Edition - Final

Unaccustomed Role for Clinton at Sea

BYLINE: By RICHARD L. BERKE,  Special to The New York Times

SECTION: Section 1; Page 9; Column 1; National Desk

LENGTH: 1106 words

DATELINE: ABOARD U.S.S. THEODORE ROOSEVELT, off Virginia, March 12


As the first President in half a century who never served in the military, Bill
Clinton has some catching up to do.

So today he squeezed into a green flight jacket and flew to this aircraft
carrier 70 miles off the coast from Norfolk, Va., where he rolled out a snappy
salute, practiced talking like a sailor and carefully avoided delicate subjects
like his plan to let homosexuals serve in the military.

It was the kind of "monarch of the sea" ritual that all Presidents perform,
mostly with gusto: strutting their stuff as Commander in Chief. George Bush
loved to don his bomber jacket with "Lieut. (jg) George Bush USN Ret." stitched
across his chest, fill his speeches with military talk and remind everyone that
he was shot down in World War II.

Sailor Talk in Captain's Chair

Mr. Clinton sat in the captain's chair and rumbled about "ready rooms" and
"snipes in the hole." But when the flight deck he was standing on dropped 50
feet in five seconds so he could tour the hangar below, the President looked
more like a teen-ager on a roller coaster than a top gun.

For Mr. Clinton, who is fighting a perception that he does not understand
military culture because he avoided the draft during the Vietnam War, it was an
unaccustomed adventure on the high seas meant to convey patriotism and martial
vigor.

"There is no greater honor in the office," Mr. Clinton told the sailors and
marines who set out this week for a six-month tour, "than being the Commander in
Chief of the finest armed forces in the world today and the finest America has
ever known."

But among many of the sailors whom Mr. Clinton addressed as "grips on the roof"
and "aviators in the ready rooms," the message did not seem to sell.

"I'm afraid he has contempt for the military," said Tyson Rees, a 20-year-old
airman from Lubbock, Tex. "At some point I might have to put my life on the
line. I want to make sure he's making the right decisions."

'It's All Politics'

Shawn Renaud, 20, an aviation electronics technician from Canton, N.Y.,
complained, "This is just like a show; this is nothing."

Brad Owens, 22, a Marine lance corporal from Grand Rapids, Mich., said: "Put it
this way, Bush knew the military. With Clinton, it's all politics."

Ryan Vaught, a Marine lance corporal from Cincinnati who snapped pictures of the
President, expressed hope that Mr. Clinton would reverse his position on
homosexuals in the military after seeing the sleeping quarters on the carrier.

"We have a couple hundred guys in one small area, stacked one on top of each
other," Mr. Vaught, 20, said. "If he gets out here and gets a look at what's
going on, that we're the ones taking care of the country, maybe he won't take us
for granted so much."

A few of the troops interviewed said the President deserved credit for venturing
aboard ship. Jim Hatch, a 25-year-old Navy Seal from Utah, said it did not
bother him that Mr. Clinton had been accused of a half-hearted salute and did
not know customs of the military.

'Some Guys Are Homophobic'

"I don't care about all that spit-and-polish stuff," Mr. Hatch said. "Who cares
if he can salute? I think he's the kind of person who would listen to his
advisers. I hope he does."

Expressing distaste with the outcry aboard ship over allowing homosexuals in the
military, Mr. Hatch added: "I don't think people are mutinous over it. But some
guys are homophobic."

Even as the President spoke of the "raging debate about defense policy" that was
under way, Mr. Clinton sought to assure the troops that his efforts to shrink
the military would not destroy the nation's military might.

"As we reduce spending," he said to polite applause from several hundred sailors
and marines gathered around him, "we will not leave the men and the women who
helped to win the cold war out in the cold."

Choosing to steer clear of the intricacies of the politically sensitive base
closing proposals that were announced by the Pentagon while he was far out in
the Atlantic Ocean, Mr. Clinton said: "This isn't downsizing for it's own sake.
This is right sizing for security's sake."

As the first President since Franklin D. Roosevelt to not have served in the
military, Mr. Clinton played the role of student during his three-hour tour. He
inspected an F-14 Tomcat, a FA-18 Hornet and an A-6 Intruder in the hangar,
gobbled baked chicken in the mess, chatted with Navy Seals who modeled
camouflage outfits and watched jets catapult off the flight deck. Like he was
one of the men, he put on a black baseball cap with the ship's insignia.

Mr. Clinton told the crew that he and Defense Secretary Les Aspin, who
accompanied him here, "have already learned a great deal and see a lot we admire
and that we like."

Asked whether the tour of the ship was meant to demonstrate his support for the
military on the day when base-closing were announced, Mr. Clinton said, "I think
I need to be here because I'm Commander in Chief."

But Mr. Clinton's visit was part of an aggressive public relations effort to
muffle the controversy over Mr. Clinton's plan to shrink the military. After
addressing the troops here, he repeated most of his speech for broadcast on the
Armed Forces Radio Network to troops around the world.

'Need for New Investments'

"As these bases close, as close some of them must," Mr. Clinton said in the
radio broadcast, "we must not close our eyes and hearts to the need for new
investments, and a need to create new jobs in communities with old bases."

Offering a pledge to the military, Mr. Clinton said: "As long as I am your
President, you and the other men and women in uniform will continue to be the
best trained, the best prepared, the best equipped fighting force in the world.
There is no single decision I take more seriously than those involving the use
of force."

Mr. Clinton told the troops on the ship that the aircraft carrier Theodore
Roosevelt was a good symbol of the future of the military because it had
combined both sailors and marines in what Pentagon officials describe as a more
flexible force than is traditional.

Despite all the furor over Mr. Clinton's relations with the brass, Stan Bryant,
the ship's commander, said he believed the visit would boost the morale among
his crew of nearly 6,000. "I know they're excited to see the President, whether
they agree with his politics or not," he said. "He is, after all, the Commander
in Chief."

Daivd Luckett, a 22-year-old petty officer, said it was no time to dwell on Mr.
Clinton's past, or to relive the campaign debate over his draft record.
"Everyone's got a past that they aren't proud of," he said.

LOAD-DATE: March 13, 1993

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo: President Clinton greeting Senator Charles Robb of Virginia
yesterday aboard the aircraft carrier Theodore Roosevelt, 70 miles off Norfolk.
(Jose R. Lopez/The New York Times)

                   Copyright 1993 The New York Times Company

                              222 of 255 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 March 13, 1993, Saturday, Late Edition - Final

In Twist, a Plea To Close a Base

BYLINE: AP

SECTION: Section 1; Page 8; Column 1; National Desk

LENGTH: 160 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, March 12


While protests mounted across the country today over job losses that will result
from the Defense Department's plans to close or consolidate scores of military
centers, the Governor of Guam felt displeased for the opposite reason: the
Pentagon's list of bases due for shutdown did not include a naval station on his
island territory.

In an unusual complaint, the Governor, Joseph Ada, said he was "shocked and
disappointed" that the Pentagon had decided not to close the Agana Naval Air
Station, which Guam has been asking the Government to shut down for years.

The base has little military value, Mr. Ada said, and could be put to better
uses commercially if control of the land was returned to Guam.

"Ever since the end of the Vietnam War, naval activities have been almost
nonexistent" at the base, he said. "There is no military justification for
keeping it open."

A Pentagon spokesman, Glenn Flood, declined to comment on Mr. Ada's complaint.

LOAD-DATE: March 13, 1993

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1993 The New York Times Company

                              223 of 255 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 March 13, 1993, Saturday, Late Edition - Final

Base Closings Start the Shift

SECTION: Section 1; Page 20; Column 1; Editorial Desk

LENGTH: 598 words


The Pentagon's official list of 165 base closings and reductions, released
yesterday, will spark intense opposition from politicians and hard-hit
communities. Indeed, senators railed against the list even before it was
released.

Senator Alfonse D'Amato said not in his (Staten Island) backyard, but the
Pentagon didn't listen. Senator Dianne Feinstein of California pleaded that her
state's economy shouldn't be forced to absorb more blows. Defense Secretary
Aspin did spare two California installations -- McClellan Air Force Base near
Sacramento and the Monterey Presidio -- but the state will still be socked with
the loss of about 30,000 jobs.

The military drawdown will be painful. Over the next several years, perhaps one
million workers will lose their jobs. But the President won election on a pledge
to expand the economy by shifting Federal and private spending away from the
military toward civilian investment, and base closings are a part of that
process.

Washington has a special responsibility for communities where it operates bases
that are the nucleus of the local economy. That responsibility is best met by
helping them plan for conversion, assisting laid-off workers in finding new jobs
and spurring nationwide recovery so that jobs are easier to find. The $20
billion, five-year program announced this week by President Clinton is a worthy
start.

Tying up tens of thousands of workers and billions of dollars in equipment at
unnecessary military installations does the economy no good. By one Government
estimate, cutting back the military could eventually add $50 billion to annual
output as workers and capital are redeployed to more efficient and more rapidly
growing enterprises.

But the process of finding new work can take years, and many workers face
substantial salary cuts. Though most communities won't be affected very much --
military cutbacks over the next few years will be much smaller than those after
World War II, the Korean War or Vietnam -- there are some places where defense
spending accounts for 20 percent of local employment.

There, cutbacks could prove bloody. Even some large cities and metropolitan
regions will suffer: The San Francisco Bay Area will lose several bases; San
Diego will lose more than 5,500 jobs at a single training center.

The Pentagon already provides planning grants to help hard-hit communities
convert military property into, say, an office complex or an airport. And the
Commerce Department assists communities suffering factory shutdowns or base
closings by subsidizing investment in infrastructure and other development
projects. These Commerce efforts aren't targeted on base closings; nor should
they be. Workers laid off from Boeing or General Motors deserve help too.

President Clinton's package would substantially increase assistance for the
victims of military cutbacks, providing $1.7 billion this year alone to retrain
workers, encourage technology transfer from military to civilian purposes and
promote local economic development. Washington can quicken the healing process,
even if it cannot prevent the pain inflicted by the closings on jobholders and
their communities.

Perhaps the biggest help Washington can provide is to put Mr. Clinton's
short-term stimulus and long-term economic plan into play. The proposals
emphasize public investment in infrastructure, worker training and technology as
well as subsidies for private investment in plant, equipment and research. That
will create jobs -- and put the unemployed to more useful work than perpetuating
unneeded bases.

LOAD-DATE: March 25, 1993

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Editorial

                   Copyright 1993 The New York Times Company

                              224 of 255 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                  March 14, 1993, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

Social Security

SECTION: Section 3; Page 13; Column 2; Financial Desk

LENGTH: 143 words


To the Editor:

The article was typical of the short-sighted, narrow-minded foolishness that has
helped place Bill Clinton in his undeserved office. Most Social Security
recipients are not six-figure income people. The majority have worked a lifetime
in order to enjoy their remaining years with a minimum of financial security.

Politicians should not receive entitlements, as they constitute that minority of
the most affluent members of our society. It was they who created, but did not
fight in, the Korean and Vietnam wars. It was the working slobs who died, and
their families who must now pay for the waste.

Now, after 50 years of hard work, my measly $8,000 in Social Security must be
partly (as of this writing) returned to sender on April 15. What kind of
perverted logic is this?

ERNEST MARANO
Rockville Centre, L.I., March 1

LOAD-DATE: March 14, 1993

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Letters

                   Copyright 1993 The New York Times Company

                              225 of 255 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                  March 14, 1993, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

THE NATION;
'Lead . . . or Leave' Asks: Who's Spending Our Inheritance?

BYLINE: By FELICITY BARRINGER

SECTION: Section 4; Page 3; Column 1; Week in Review Desk

LENGTH: 1066 words


The words travel slowly across the computer screens in the downtown Washington
office: "Lead . . . or Leave." This political signature of angry young fiscal
Puritans doubles as a screen-saver program, somehow fitting for the rallying cry
of the first generation to grow up with computers.

Less than nine months since the words were first typed onto a screen, the group
Lead . . . or Leave is commanding the attention of senators, college students
and Ross Perot. Its founders, clustered in donated office space in downtown
Washington, the heartland of the special-interest lobbyists they deplore, have a
grandiose vision: that the impact of their ideas may rival that of the antiwar
crusade of the 1960's.

Except that one was about death. This one is about taxes or, more properly,
about Uncle Sam's bills and who is going to pay them.

"The deficit," said a co-founder, Rob Nelson, "is our Vietnam." The first-person
plural refers to the men, women and children born during and after that war.
"There was a 14-year-old kid at our rally in Montgomery, Ala., last month," Mr.
Nelson said. "Someone shoved a microphone in his face and asked if he knew what
it was about. He said, 'Somebody borrowed a bunch of money, I'm getting the
bill, I'm going to have to pay it, and I don't get anything for it.' Believe me,
these kids get it."

Generational politics is a verity older than the nation-state, but one that has
become permanently enshrined in American culture during this century with
everything from the Silent Generation to the Vietnam Generation.

Mr. Nelson, 29, and his colleague Jon Cowan, 27, say even if generational
struggles are traditional, Lead . . . or Leave is different. Like soldiers who
arrived at the ammunition depot just as the ammunition ran out, they are
fighting for the right to fight, for the right to inherit a government that will
have something more than spare change to spend on them and their visions. They
feel the Clinton budget could improve their lot, but not as much as they would
like.

"The nation went on a vast spending spree that didn't produce anything but
bills," said Mr. Cowan, who was an aide to former Democratic Representative Mel
Levine of California. "Now we not only have a financial deficit, but a social
deficit, an environmental deficit, an infrastructure deficit. We're selling out
the American dream. Whether you're a liberal and you want a new War on Poverty
or you're a conservative and want a capital gains tax cut, you can't do any of
it."

Mighty MitesA Message

Measured in standard terms, Lead . . . or Leave is a tiny ground-dweller in the
political jungle, with neither membership (1,000 and growing) nor money nor much
but a message. A year ago, its issue -- the deficit -- was talked about but
seemed dry as dust. But by casting its members as children cheated by their
irresponsible parents, the group is riding high on the new concept of
generational accounting.

Generational accounting itself is a 90's creation, the brainchild of three
economists: Laurence J. Kotlikoff of Boston University, Alan Auerbach of the
University of Pennsylvania and Jagadeesh Gokhale of the Cleveland Federal
Reserve Bank. Adding to the political-economic dictionary, they created a new
economic yardstick, lifetime tax rates. By these measurements, Mr. Kotlikoff
predicts, the lifetime tax rate for Americans born in 1900 was 21.5 percent. For
Americans born in 1990, the lifetime tax rate will be 33.5 percent.

In these calculations, which define taxes as total tax payments minus total
income transfers like Social Security, the trajectory is relentless: the later
people are born, the more they will work for everyone else and the less for
themselves. "This," Mr. Kotlikoff said, "is the natural outgrowth of four
decades of Government pursuing a variety of different policies -- most of which
don't show up on the Government's books -- to expropriate the young and future
generations for the benefit of older generations."

However, advocates of the current Social Security structure, including the
American Association of Retired Persons, argue that Social Security is a
self-contained system that actually helps offset Government debt.  A.A.R.P. is
one of the principal targets on Lead. . .or Leave's most-wanted list of special
interests. It was on that lobby's doorstep that these angry young men and women
held a rally last month to protest the debts they said were being bequeathed to
them.

Mr. Nelson and Mr. Cowan also reject the idea that they are simply the
generational mirror-image of A.A.R.P. "What we want to do will help everyone,"
said Mr. Nelson, who did graduate study in international relations before
deciding that he cared more about the situation at home. However, he does not
favor cuts in student loans, which he sees as investment in the future.

Martha Farnsworth Riche, who heads the Population Reference Bureau in
Washington, agrees with the world view of Lead . . . or Leave. "This is the
first time in the country's history the population pyramid has changed shape,"
Ms. Riche said. The pyramid is a demographers' representation of successive
generations, younger underneath the older. But since the 1970's, the pyramid has
begun to look like a pillar with the baby-boom section giving it the appearance
of middle-aged spread.

"Right now the number of older people, 55-plus, is proportionately larger than
we've ever seen before -- but nothing like what we'll see in 20 years," Ms.
Riche said. She believes the nation has a momentary political opportunity --
while the boomers are still paying into the system and before they have an
interest in reaping their own entitlement benefits -- to change entitlements to
lessen the burden on the future's young workers.

Robert Avery, a Cornell University economist, is nervous about neat generational
schematics. While he agrees that the problems posed by the deficit are enormous,
he said there are other issues, including health care, raising the retirement
age and the potential impact of a disease like AIDS on the wage-earning
population. He reminds worried young workers that some of those Government
transfer payments will be coming back to them as inheritances.

"The real issue here is uncertainty," Mr. Avery said. "It's very hard to write
long-term contracts between the generations when we don't know what's going to
happen."

LOAD-DATE: March 14, 1993

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo: Rob Nelson, left, and Jon Cowan, founders of "Lead . . . or
Leave," contend that the Federal deficit leaves the young with no options. (Lisa
Berg for The New York Times)

                   Copyright 1993 The New York Times Company

                              226 of 255 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                  March 14, 1993, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

As 1968 Joins the Centuries, McCarthy Goes On

BYLINE: By B. DRUMMOND AYRES Jr.,  Special to The New York Times

SECTION: Section 1; Page 28; Column 1; National Desk

LENGTH: 873 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, March 13


A quarter of a century has slipped by since Eugene J. McCarthy turned the
Vietnam issue on President Lyndon B. Johnson in the 1968 New Hampshire primary,
forcing him from the race.

But 25 years and a day later, the impact of that upset in the New England snow
lingers in the Democratic Party and in the American political system generally.

And Clean Gene lingers too, writing, making speeches and every four years
returning to New Hampshire for another quirky run for the Presidency.

"Twenty-fifth anniversary," mused the former Minnesota Senator, who turns 77 on
March 29 and is, though now a little whiter in the mane, unmistakably the same
man striding across the old campaign poster that proclaims, "He stood up alone,
and something happened."

Lot to Complain About

"Somebody said something about holding an anniversary celebration, but I told
them I'd rather hold a rally," he said by telephone on Friday from California,
where he was on a speaking tour.

Hold a rally? On what issue?

"Oh, there's no shortage of things to complain about," he replied. "We could
start with the deficit or the trade balance or finding jobs for people. We
didn't get it all done in 1968, not by a long shot."

But he accomplished plenty back then.

He pulled together the antiwar movement within the Democratic Party, and when
primary day, March 12, 1968, was over, he had five times as many New Hampshire
delegates as the President. He eventually lost the nomination to Hubert H.
Humphrey, his fellow Minnesotan, who was then beaten by Richard M. Nixon, but
the antiwar faction hung together fairly well in future elections, though it
switched its attention to issues like the environment. And today, some former
McCarthyites are showing up in the Clinton Administration.

A Lasting Effect

Among them is Eli Segal. He was Gov. Bill Clinton's top aide and is now the head
of the Clinton Administration's new Office of National Service. Shortly after
last fall's Presidential election, Mr. Segal held a dinner party in Little Rock,
Ark., for a dozen or so old McCarthy campaign workers who had worked to elect
Mr. Clinton, people like James Johnson, the chairman of the Federal National
Mortgage Association, and Susan Thomases, a New York lawyer, and Taylor Branch,
the author.

But perhaps the most important effect of the 1968 McCarthy insurgency was the
reform movement the campaign sparked in the Democratic Party, a movement that
cracked open the party's Presidential nominating process and permitted a broader
spectrum of people to have a genuine say.

"Gene McCarthy's greatest accomplishment was to energize a whole new generation
of people, particularly young people, and get them involved in politics," said
Anne Wexler, a Washington consultant who has long been active in Democratic
Party affairs, including the 1968 McCarthy campaign.

As for Mr. McCarthy, he now makes his home in Virginia -- "Mother of
Presidents," he notes -- and spends much of his time writing poetry, a
carry-over from his days as a college professor before he went into politics. He
cranks out books for children and for politicians, the latest a work on
economics titled "Colony of the World." He travels the country making speeches.
He continues to run for President, with five tries so far. But his first run is
still his best. And he continues to be one of the wriest voices on the American
political scene.

"Didn't do so well in New Hampshire in '92 -- just 211 votes," he said. "But
down in the deep backwaters of Louisiana they apparently thought I was old Joe
(Get the Commies) McCarthy, and I did pretty good there. Actually, I wanted to
spend the campaign talking about the deficit and the trade balance and the job
situation. We've really got to do something, get our priorities reordered. But
most of the folks I'd run into just wanted to talk about 1968."

Well, what about 1968, looking back at it over a quarter of a century?

As Always, the Unexpected

"Oh, I don't know," he replied. "I'd rather not talk about 'What did you do in
the war, daddy?' I write poetry now. You can be a former Presidential candidate.
You can't be a former poet."

Pressed for the assessment, he delivered, as he has always delivered, the
totally unexpected.

"O.K.," he said, "what I really think is that the war might have ended sooner if
I hadn't done so well in New Hampshire. If I'd just stung Lyndon real good, the
party might have figured: 'Well, we really do have a serious problem with this
war, so we'd better cut our losses, compromise and get out of it as fast as we
can.' But because I beat him, beat him bad, they decided to fight me head on.
And I'm afraid that caused things to drag out."

How's the new President doing?

"Too early to say," he replied. "But sometimes I worry that he's just more of
the same old stuff that we've been seeing for so long. To be a successful
President, you have to break free of the past."

Does he still have the Presidential bug?

There was a pause at the other end of the line. Then came a transcontinental
chuckle.

"We McCarthys tend to live a long time," he said. "My grandfather made it to 98.
That being the case, I've still got time for -- let's see -- for five more
tries."

NAME: Eugene J. McCarthy

LOAD-DATE: March 14, 1993

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photos: Eugene J. McCarthy campaigning for the 1968 primary amid
students and reporters in Manchester, N.H. (Charles Harbutt/Actuality); Eugene
J. McCarthy (Jim Estrin/The New York Times)

TYPE: Biography

                   Copyright 1993 The New York Times Company

                              227 of 255 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                  March 14, 1993, Sunday, Late Edition - Final
                              Correction Appended

FILM;
Documentaries and the Oscars: No Cinderellas at the Ball

BYLINE: By ANN HORNADAY;  Ann Hornaday writes on cultural subjects for New York
magazine.

SECTION: Section 2; Page 13; Column 1; Arts & Leisure Desk

LENGTH: 2972 words


It's almost Spring and, in what has become a tribal ritual, accusations are
again flying about the Oscar nominees for best documentary feature film. To
bypass complaints next year, the Academy of Motion Picture Arts and Sciences has
agreed to reform some of its procedures, but critics still take exception to the
way the organization handles the selection process.

It has come to be expected that, when the documentary nominees are announced in
February, the list will exclude at least one conspicuous film; indeed, some
well-known movies that haven't been nominated in past years include "Shoah"
(1986), a nine-and-a-half-hour film about the Holocaust; Errol Morris's "Thin
Blue Line" (1988), a stylized true-crime tale of a convicted murderer in Texas,
and Michael Moore's "Roger and Me" (1989), about hard times in Flint, Mich.

Last year was the true annus horribilis for popular documentaries: left out were
"Paris Is Burning," a glimpse into the world of cross-dressing; "Hearts of
Darkness," Eleanor Coppola's record of her husband's filming of "Apocalypse
Now"; "A Brief History of Time," about the physicist Stephen Hawking; "Truth or
Dare," Madonna's concert film, and "Incident at Oglala," about the Indian
activist Leonard Peltier. This year the Elijah at the academy's table is
"Brother's Keeper," Joe Berlinger and Bruce Sinofsky's film about a fratricide
case in upstate New York. It was on more than 50 10-best lists and won many
awards, including the Audience Award at the Sundance Film Festival and best
documentary awards from the New York Film Critics' Circle and the Directors
Guild of America.

Instead, the current nominees for best documentary feature are relatively
obscure films like "Fires of Kuwait," a post-Desert Storm movie that plays in
IMAX theaters; "Changing Our Minds: The Story of Dr. Evelyn Hooker," about the
psychologist who debunked the notion that homosexuality could be "cured"; "Music
for the Movies: Bernard Herrmann," the story of the Hollywood composer, and "The
Panama Deception," on United States involvement in that country. In one
unwelcome development, the fifth nomination, "Liberators: Fighting on Two
Fronts," about a black tank battalion in World War II, has come under attack for
allegedly playing fast and loose with history.

In the last five years, as documentaries have found outlets beyond the narrow
precincts of public television and art houses, charges against the documentary
selection committee have become more vocal. Complaints have ranged from
incompetence to inattention to questionable ethics. In perhaps the unkindest
cut, some have accused the committee of being hopelessly politically correct.

Other critics say the committee is esthetically out of touch and discriminates
against commercially successful films, a symptom of what they perceive as the
poor-cousin status of documentaries within the academy. "That branch of the
academy should be out there to nurture and to help films that are in the
theaters, to get people to start going to see documentaries," says Mr. Sinofsky,
co-director of "Brother's Keeper." "Maybe it's time the academy started making
nonfiction a viable entity in the commercial world."

To every charge, the standard retort from most committee members is, "Have you
seen 82 documentaries this year?" -- a reference to the number of films that had
to be screened this year to arrive at the selected five.

What may look like a conspiracy to disgruntled film makers might be more
accurately described as confusion over the changing definition of documentaries
plus the vagaries of democracy -- or at least the academy's version of it -- in
action.

To qualify for the Oscar competition, a documentary must meet one of three
criteria. It must run for seven consecutive days in a Los Angeles theater. (Some
directors rent a theater during off hours and project to empty seats.) It must
be accepted at an accredited festival (40 were listed this year) or win a Golden
Eagle award from the Council on International Nontheatrical Events, a nonprofit
group that represents international film festivals. With 19 categories of
awards, the Golden Eagle is considered by some to be a rubber stamp.

The argument for such broad standards is that they open the field to small,
independent film makers who don't have the financial support of a major
distributor. "You can't make the system so user-unfriendly that you choke people
off," says Freida Lee Mock, chairman of the documentary committee.

Unlike the 12 "craft" branches of the academy (wherein editors nominate the best
editors, costume designers the best costume designers, and so on) the
documentary selection committee is open to "any academy member with time and
interest," according to Ms. Mock. The result is a committee made up of
directors, producers, writers, editors, costume designers and even actors. "It's
a very wide, democratic and diverse group compared to other juries," Ms. Mock
says of the 47-member group.

Some would say too diverse. Last year, the director Michael Apted -- neither of
whose recent documentaries, "35 Up" or "Incident at Oglala," received
nominations -- spearheaded a campaign to reform the committee and its selection
process. "We feel that the nomination should be made by documentary makers and
people who have been involved in documentaries, and not by this unwieldly,
unorthodox group," he says. "In all the other branches of the academy it isn't
just opinion or taste, it has to do with craft, and there is a craft to
documentary film making. Often people mistake their liking of the material for
good film making."

The demographics of the committee have also been at issue: the academy and its
committees are Los Angeles-based, while many documentarians, who could
conceivably sit on the selection committee, come from other parts of the
country.

Suggestions have been floated to create an adjunct East Coast committee or a
two-tiered judging system to insure the presence of more working documentary
makers. For instance, the International Documentary Association, which gave out
five awards for nonfiction films last fall, is made up almost solely of
documentary makers. The association screens around 200 submissions, then passes
20 finalists on to a blue-ribbon jury for review.

"I think the academy committee is swayed by content," says Betsy Lane, the
association's executive director. "Our committees are also moved by content, but
they come at it from more of a craft perspective." Nonetheless, two of the
organization's award-winning documentaries -- "Liberators" and "Music for the
Movies: Bernard Herrmann" -- duplicate academy nominees this year. The
association's other awards were given to "Dream Deceivers," about the
heavy-metal band Judas Priest, "A Brief History of Time" and "Incident at
Oglala" (the latter two films, because of their release dates, were eligible for
last year's Academy Awards.)

The two-committee solution was discussed at the academy, Ms. Mock says, "but it
wouldn't have increased the committee by that much. It would have just created
two smaller groups."

This past year, the academy's documentary selection committee saw not only the
82 feature-length documentaries but also 28 short-subject documentaries between
November and January. Two and sometimes three films were screened each night.
After a secret ballot was collected, the field was narrowed to the five
nominations. The vote for the winner is thrown open to the entire academy, with
the stipulation that members must have seen all five nominees. Ms. Mock
estimates that "between 10 and 20 percent" of the 5,000 academy members vote on
the documentary award; ballots must be given to Price Waterhouse this year by
March 23.

Referring to the work of the selection committee, Bruce Davis, executive
director of the academy, says, "When people become aware of the sheer magnitude
of the job, many of them blanch and drop out." The result is a committee made up
of people with the time to serve -- that is, largely retirees. One person who
has attended screenings admits that the occasional committee member falls
asleep. Documentary film makers also gripe that if watching a film is deemed too
tedious, the screening will be stopped by a consensus of the committee members,
who vote by turning on flashlights in the dark.

Mark Lipsky, formerly executive vice president of distribution and marketing for
Miramax Films, which distributed "The Thin Blue Line" and "Paris Is Burning,"
calls the documentary nominating process "the mildew conspiracy."

"They're a bunch of unhappy, unfulfilled, frustrated dinosaurs," he says.

But James C. Katz, a producer and committee member, defends the group. "These
are not idiots sitting in this room," he says. "They are knowledgeable film
people. Just because they don't agree with Roger Ebert doesn't mean they're
wrong. We're entitled to our opinion."

The committee accepted 23 new members last fall, "many of them in their
midcareer," according to Ms. Mock. Reforms to tighten award-qualification
requirements are also being discussed. Last November the board of governors
dropped the Golden Eagle qualification, and eight days ago the documentary
committee met to trim the list of festivals that would make films eligible by
about 20 percent. "What I would like to see is for them to get down to a
beginning number of 30 or 50 films," says Mr. Davis. "Then maybe more people
will be able to devote time to watching them."

Still, any new committee members will be culled from the academy at large, a
group that some feel is esthetically conservative (choosing subject matter over
innovation) and tends toward a traditionalist view of documentaries. Critics
note that many of the film makers ignored by the committee are the ones who push
the definition of documentary by using reenactments, narrators as characters and
a structure usually reserved for fiction films.

The subject matter preferred by the committee is "World War II, the Middle East,
the Holocaust, old Hollywood -- the tried and true for documentaries," says
Jonathan Dana, president of Triton Pictures, which distributed "A Brief History
of Time" and "Hearts of Darkness." "Anything too rough or radical doesn't seem
to work."

Susan Froemke, a producer and director at Maysles Films, says, "If you look at
what was nominated this year, they're all politically correct films." Ms.
Froemke was one of the makers of the 1975 film "Grey Gardens." Her 1992
documentary, "Abortion: Desperate Choices," was not among the works nominated
last month.

For her committee, says Ms. Mock, "the ultimate objective is excellence. Our
mandate is to look for a well-crafted, well-executed story, structured
originally to hold the audience -- but finally it comes down to individual
taste."

Many films that have not been nominated over the years have done well in
theaters, some even making box-office history. "Roger and Me," which grossed $8
million, is still the most successful nonmusic documentary ever; "A Brief
History of Time," "Hearts of Darkness" and "Brother's Keeper" all performed well
in theaters. Although hits like "Streetwise" (1986), about teen-agers living on
the street in Seattle, and "Let's Get Lost" (1988), on the jazz trumpeter Chet
Baker, have been nominated, the committee has been accused of overlooking
profitable films.

"Absolute nonsense," says Saul Bass, an Oscar-winning documentary director and
committee member who also sits on the academy's board of directors. "On the
contrary. We love documentaries. We have a passion for them. We're nuts, we're
crazy about them.

"On the one hand," he adds, "the academy is accused of being commercial and then
-- when it suits their mood -- people say we're undercutting commercialism."

Does the lack of a nomination for a commercially viable documentary have a
negative effect? Mr. Berlinger and Mr. Sinofsky, who distributed "Brother's
Keeper" as well as producing and directing it, estimate that they've lost about
$400,000 in theatrical business because of their failure to win a nomination.
"At least 20 percent of our spring bookings are being delayed," says Mr.
Berlinger. " 'The Crying Game' is pushing us out of a lot of the art screens."

On the other hand, an Oscar is not an automatic career boost. When Barbara
Kopple's "American Dream," about the Hormel strike in Minnesota, won an Oscar in
1991, the film disappeared soon afterward from theaters. Asked if an Oscar had
any effect on the film's success or in raising money for future projects, Aviva
Slesin, who won the award for "The 10-Year Lunch: The Wit and Legend of the
Algonquin Round Table," responded: "Not at all. If you win for documentary,
there's no real financial reward or show-business reward."

The rewards for committee members have historically been scant as well. In the
past, the committee has been beleaguered by charges that one member, Mitchell
Block, was in a questionable ethical position. Mr. Block is president of Direct
Cinema, a distributor of short films and documentaries. In 1990, many film
makers protested that three of the five nominees were films Mr. Block
distributed. Subsequently, the academy passed a conflict-of-interest rule,
barring committee members from voting on films with which they're involved.

And documentaries have long been thought to have bridesmaid status at the Oscar
ceremony, eclipsed by the frothier best-picture brides. Last year, the board of
governors tried to eliminate the live-action short film and documentary
short-film categories. (A group including Steven Spielberg, Martin Scorsese and
Robert Redford protested, and the academy relented, for now. A study of the
issue is being prepared under the direction of the board of governors.) Five
years ago, the academy proposed that the awards for documentary and short
subject be received off camera. Though the measure was defeated, proponents of
nonfiction film continue to feel apprehensive.

This year's controversy involves the accuracy of one of the nominees,
"Liberators" -- specifically, sequences showing black veterans from the 761st
Tank Battalion revisiting the Buchenwald concentration camp, which some say they
did not liberate. The charges first came to light in The New Republic on Feb. 8,
but the documentary committee's ballots had been collected on Feb. 2.

Although "Liberators" has been pulled from television and theaters, it is still
available on video by mail order and was screened for academy members in Los
Angeles and New York. Whether the controversy will affect the voting "is hard to
call," says Ms. Mock.

Says Mr. Davis, the executive director of the academy, "I'm certainly ready for
a year where there's no controversy."

But Mr. Bass, the member of the board of governors, takes a more realistic view:
"There will be no process we can engage in that will produce five nominees about
which there will not be disagreement and controversy." It is probably this
year's only safe Oscar prediction.



LONG AGO AND FAR AWAY: THE DOCUMENTARY OSCARS

IN OSCAR POOLS ALL OVER the country, the tie-breaking vote is usually for
best-feature-length documentary -- but most bettors haven't seen even one of the
films. In fact, who can remember any best-documentary winner?

Here are the nominees for the last 10 years. Can you recall which ones won? (A
tip: Oscar winners often deal with music, children, the Holocaust and victims of
discrimination.) 1981 Documentaries "Against Wind and Tide: A Cuban Odyssey"
"Brooklyn Bridge" "Eight Minutes to Midnight: A Portrait of Dr. Helen Caldicott"
"El Salvador: Another Vietnam" "Genocide"

1982 "After the Axe" "Ben's Mill" "In Our Water" "Just Another Missing Kid" "A
Portrait of Giselle"

1983 "Children of Darkness" "First Contact" "He Makes Me Feel Like Dancin' "
"The Profession of Arms (War Series Film No. 3)" "Seeing Red" 1984 "High
Schools" "In the Name of the People" "Marlene" "Streetwise" "The Times of Harvey
Milk"

1985 "Broken Rainbow" "Las Madres: The Mothers of Plaza de Mayo" "Soldiers in
Hiding" "The Statue of Liberty" "Unfinished Business"

1986 "Artie Shaw: Time Is All You've Got" "Chile: Hasta Cuando?" "Down and Out
in America" "Isaac in America: A Journey With Isaac Bashevis Singer" "Witness to
Apartheid" 1987 "Eyes on the Prize: America's Civil Rights Years" "Hellfire: A
Journey From Hiroshima" "Radio Bikini" "A Stitch for Time" "The 10-Year Lunch:
The Wit and Legend of the Algonquin Round Table"

1988 "The Cry of Reason -- Beyers Naude: An Afrikaner Speaks Out" "Hotel
Terminus: The Life and Times of Klaus Barbie" "Let's Get Lost" "Promises to
Keep" "Who Killed Vincent Chin?"

1989 "Adam Clayton Powell" "Common Threads: Stories From the Quilt" "Crack
U.S.A.: A Country Under Seige" "For All Mankind" "Super Chief: The Life and
Legacy of Earl Warren" 1990 "American Dream" "Berkeley in the 60's" "Building
Bombs" "Forever Activists" "Waldo Salt: A Screenwriter's Journey"

1991 "Death on the Job" "Doing Time: Life Inside the Big House" "The Restless
Conscious: Resistance to Hitler Within Germany 1933" "In the Shadow of the
Stars" "Wild by Law"

And the Winners Were . . .

1981: "Genocide" (on the Holocaust). 1982: "Just Another Missing Kid" (a
19-year-old who disappeared). 1983: "He Makes Me Feel Like Dancin' " (Jacques
d'Amboise teaching schoolchildren to dance). 1984: "The Times of Harvey Milk"
(the gay activist). 1985: "Broken Rainbow" (the forced resettlement of Navajo
Indians). 1986: a tie between "Artie Shaw" (the musician) and "Down and Out in
America" (the homeless). 1987: "The 10-Year Lunch" (the Algonquin round table).
1988: "Hotel Terminus" (the Holocaust). 1989: "Common Threads" (AIDS). 1990:
"American Dream" (the labor movement). 1991: "In the Shadow of the Stars" (the
San Francisco Opera chorus).

LOAD-DATE: May 27, 1993

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

CORRECTION-DATE: March 14, 1993, Sunday

 CORRECTION:
An article on March 14 about documentaries and the Academy Awards incorrectly
characterized "Incident at Oglala." It was a nominee for the 1992 International
Documentary Association Award, not a winner.

GRAPHIC: Photos: A neighborhood in Panama City in "Panama Deception," one of
five documentaries nominated this year. (Julio Cesar Guerra D.); Kuwaiti
firefighters after the gulf war, in a scene from "Fires of Kuwait," which plays
in IMAX theaters. (IMAX Corporation); The Hollywood composer Bernard Herrmann,
circa 1940, in "Music for the Movies: Bernard Herrmann." (Bernard Herrmann
Archive, Special Collections)(pg. 13); Evelyn and Edward Hooker in "Changing Our
Minds: The Story of Dr. Evelyn Hooker," a nominee. (Intrepid Productions);
"Liberators: Fighting on Two Fronts in World War II," nominated before its
accuracy was challenged. (Simon Chaput); Lyman Ward in a scene from "Brother's
Keeper," a well-received documentary that has not been nominated this year.
(Derek Berg/Film Forum)(pg. 28)

                   Copyright 1993 The New York Times Company

                              228 of 255 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                  March 14, 1993, Sunday, Late Edition - Final
                              Correction Appended

FILM;
Documentaries and the Oscars: No Cinderellas at the Ball

BYLINE: By ANN HORNADAY;  Ann Hornaday writes on cultural subjects for New York
magazine.

SECTION: Section 2; Page 13; Column 1; Arts & Leisure Desk

LENGTH: 2972 words


It's almost Spring and, in what has become a tribal ritual, accusations are
again flying about the Oscar nominees for best documentary feature film. To
bypass complaints next year, the Academy of Motion Picture Arts and Sciences has
agreed to reform some of its procedures, but critics still take exception to the
way the organization handles the selection process.

It has come to be expected that, when the documentary nominees are announced in
February, the list will exclude at least one conspicuous film; indeed, some
well-known movies that haven't been nominated in past years include "Shoah"
(1986), a nine-and-a-half-hour film about the Holocaust; Errol Morris's "Thin
Blue Line" (1988), a stylized true-crime tale of a convicted murderer in Texas,
and Michael Moore's "Roger and Me" (1989), about hard times in Flint, Mich.

Last year was the true annus horribilis for popular documentaries: left out were
"Paris Is Burning," a glimpse into the world of cross-dressing; "Hearts of
Darkness," Eleanor Coppola's record of her husband's filming of "Apocalypse
Now"; "A Brief History of Time," about the physicist Stephen Hawking; "Truth or
Dare," Madonna's concert film, and "Incident at Oglala," about the Indian
activist Leonard Peltier. This year the Elijah at the academy's table is
"Brother's Keeper," Joe Berlinger and Bruce Sinofsky's film about a fratricide
case in upstate New York. It was on more than 50 10-best lists and won many
awards, including the Audience Award at the Sundance Film Festival and best
documentary awards from the New York Film Critics' Circle and the Directors
Guild of America.

Instead, the current nominees for best documentary feature are relatively
obscure films like "Fires of Kuwait," a post-Desert Storm movie that plays in
IMAX theaters; "Changing Our Minds: The Story of Dr. Evelyn Hooker," about the
psychologist who debunked the notion that homosexuality could be "cured"; "Music
for the Movies: Bernard Herrmann," the story of the Hollywood composer, and "The
Panama Deception," on United States involvement in that country. In one
unwelcome development, the fifth nomination, "Liberators: Fighting on Two
Fronts," about a black tank battalion in World War II, has come under attack for
allegedly playing fast and loose with history.

In the last five years, as documentaries have found outlets beyond the narrow
precincts of public television and art houses, charges against the documentary
selection committee have become more vocal. Complaints have ranged from
incompetence to inattention to questionable ethics. In perhaps the unkindest
cut, some have accused the committee of being hopelessly politically correct.

Other critics say the committee is esthetically out of touch and discriminates
against commercially successful films, a symptom of what they perceive as the
poor-cousin status of documentaries within the academy. "That branch of the
academy should be out there to nurture and to help films that are in the
theaters, to get people to start going to see documentaries," says Mr. Sinofsky,
co-director of "Brother's Keeper." "Maybe it's time the academy started making
nonfiction a viable entity in the commercial world."

To every charge, the standard retort from most committee members is, "Have you
seen 82 documentaries this year?" -- a reference to the number of films that had
to be screened this year to arrive at the selected five.

What may look like a conspiracy to disgruntled film makers might be more
accurately described as confusion over the changing definition of documentaries
plus the vagaries of democracy -- or at least the academy's version of it -- in
action.

To qualify for the Oscar competition, a documentary must meet one of three
criteria. It must run for seven consecutive days in a Los Angeles theater. (Some
directors rent a theater during off hours and project to empty seats.) It must
be accepted at an accredited festival (40 were listed this year) or win a Golden
Eagle award from the Council on International Nontheatrical Events, a nonprofit
group that represents international film festivals. With 19 categories of
awards, the Golden Eagle is considered by some to be a rubber stamp.

The argument for such broad standards is that they open the field to small,
independent film makers who don't have the financial support of a major
distributor. "You can't make the system so user-unfriendly that you choke people
off," says Freida Lee Mock, chairman of the documentary committee.

Unlike the 12 "craft" branches of the academy (wherein editors nominate the best
editors, costume designers the best costume designers, and so on) the
documentary selection committee is open to "any academy member with time and
interest," according to Ms. Mock. The result is a committee made up of
directors, producers, writers, editors, costume designers and even actors. "It's
a very wide, democratic and diverse group compared to other juries," Ms. Mock
says of the 47-member group.

Some would say too diverse. Last year, the director Michael Apted -- neither of
whose recent documentaries, "35 Up" or "Incident at Oglala," received
nominations -- spearheaded a campaign to reform the committee and its selection
process. "We feel that the nomination should be made by documentary makers and
people who have been involved in documentaries, and not by this unwieldly,
unorthodox group," he says. "In all the other branches of the academy it isn't
just opinion or taste, it has to do with craft, and there is a craft to
documentary film making. Often people mistake their liking of the material for
good film making."

The demographics of the committee have also been at issue: the academy and its
committees are Los Angeles-based, while many documentarians, who could
conceivably sit on the selection committee, come from other parts of the
country.

Suggestions have been floated to create an adjunct East Coast committee or a
two-tiered judging system to insure the presence of more working documentary
makers. For instance, the International Documentary Association, which gave out
five awards for nonfiction films last fall, is made up almost solely of
documentary makers. The association screens around 200 submissions, then passes
20 finalists on to a blue-ribbon jury for review.

"I think the academy committee is swayed by content," says Betsy Lane, the
association's executive director. "Our committees are also moved by content, but
they come at it from more of a craft perspective." Nonetheless, two of the
organization's award-winning documentaries -- "Liberators" and "Music for the
Movies: Bernard Herrmann" -- duplicate academy nominees this year. The
association's other awards were given to "Dream Deceivers," about the
heavy-metal band Judas Priest, "A Brief History of Time" and "Incident at
Oglala" (the latter two films, because of their release dates, were eligible for
last year's Academy Awards.)

The two-committee solution was discussed at the academy, Ms. Mock says, "but it
wouldn't have increased the committee by that much. It would have just created
two smaller groups."

This past year, the academy's documentary selection committee saw not only the
82 feature-length documentaries but also 28 short-subject documentaries between
November and January. Two and sometimes three films were screened each night.
After a secret ballot was collected, the field was narrowed to the five
nominations. The vote for the winner is thrown open to the entire academy, with
the stipulation that members must have seen all five nominees. Ms. Mock
estimates that "between 10 and 20 percent" of the 5,000 academy members vote on
the documentary award; ballots must be given to Price Waterhouse this year by
March 23.

Referring to the work of the selection committee, Bruce Davis, executive
director of the academy, says, "When people become aware of the sheer magnitude
of the job, many of them blanch and drop out." The result is a committee made up
of people with the time to serve -- that is, largely retirees. One person who
has attended screenings admits that the occasional committee member falls
asleep. Documentary film makers also gripe that if watching a film is deemed too
tedious, the screening will be stopped by a consensus of the committee members,
who vote by turning on flashlights in the dark.

Mark Lipsky, formerly executive vice president of distribution and marketing for
Miramax Films, which distributed "The Thin Blue Line" and "Paris Is Burning,"
calls the documentary nominating process "the mildew conspiracy."

"They're a bunch of unhappy, unfulfilled, frustrated dinosaurs," he says.

But James C. Katz, a producer and committee member, defends the group. "These
are not idiots sitting in this room," he says. "They are knowledgeable film
people. Just because they don't agree with Roger Ebert doesn't mean they're
wrong. We're entitled to our opinion."

The committee accepted 23 new members last fall, "many of them in their
midcareer," according to Ms. Mock. Reforms to tighten award-qualification
requirements are also being discussed. Last November the board of governors
dropped the Golden Eagle qualification, and eight days ago the documentary
committee met to trim the list of festivals that would make films eligible by
about 20 percent. "What I would like to see is for them to get down to a
beginning number of 30 or 50 films," says Mr. Davis. "Then maybe more people
will be able to devote time to watching them."

Still, any new committee members will be culled from the academy at large, a
group that some feel is esthetically conservative (choosing subject matter over
innovation) and tends toward a traditionalist view of documentaries. Critics
note that many of the film makers ignored by the committee are the ones who push
the definition of documentary by using reenactments, narrators as characters and
a structure usually reserved for fiction films.

The subject matter preferred by the committee is "World War II, the Middle East,
the Holocaust, old Hollywood -- the tried and true for documentaries," says
Jonathan Dana, president of Triton Pictures, which distributed "A Brief History
of Time" and "Hearts of Darkness." "Anything too rough or radical doesn't seem
to work."

Susan Froemke, a producer and director at Maysles Films, says, "If you look at
what was nominated this year, they're all politically correct films." Ms.
Froemke was one of the makers of the 1975 film "Grey Gardens." Her 1992
documentary, "Abortion: Desperate Choices," was not among the works nominated
last month.

For her committee, says Ms. Mock, "the ultimate objective is excellence. Our
mandate is to look for a well-crafted, well-executed story, structured
originally to hold the audience -- but finally it comes down to individual
taste."

Many films that have not been nominated over the years have done well in
theaters, some even making box-office history. "Roger and Me," which grossed $8
million, is still the most successful nonmusic documentary ever; "A Brief
History of Time," "Hearts of Darkness" and "Brother's Keeper" all performed well
in theaters. Although hits like "Streetwise" (1986), about teen-agers living on
the street in Seattle, and "Let's Get Lost" (1988), on the jazz trumpeter Chet
Baker, have been nominated, the committee has been accused of overlooking
profitable films.

"Absolute nonsense," says Saul Bass, an Oscar-winning documentary director and
committee member who also sits on the academy's board of directors. "On the
contrary. We love documentaries. We have a passion for them. We're nuts, we're
crazy about them.

"On the one hand," he adds, "the academy is accused of being commercial and then
-- when it suits their mood -- people say we're undercutting commercialism."

Does the lack of a nomination for a commercially viable documentary have a
negative effect? Mr. Berlinger and Mr. Sinofsky, who distributed "Brother's
Keeper" as well as producing and directing it, estimate that they've lost about
$400,000 in theatrical business because of their failure to win a nomination.
"At least 20 percent of our spring bookings are being delayed," says Mr.
Berlinger. " 'The Crying Game' is pushing us out of a lot of the art screens."

On the other hand, an Oscar is not an automatic career boost. When Barbara
Kopple's "American Dream," about the Hormel strike in Minnesota, won an Oscar in
1991, the film disappeared soon afterward from theaters. Asked if an Oscar had
any effect on the film's success or in raising money for future projects, Aviva
Slesin, who won the award for "The 10-Year Lunch: The Wit and Legend of the
Algonquin Round Table," responded: "Not at all. If you win for documentary,
there's no real financial reward or show-business reward."

The rewards for committee members have historically been scant as well. In the
past, the committee has been beleaguered by charges that one member, Mitchell
Block, was in a questionable ethical position. Mr. Block is president of Direct
Cinema, a distributor of short films and documentaries. In 1990, many film
makers protested that three of the five nominees were films Mr. Block
distributed. Subsequently, the academy passed a conflict-of-interest rule,
barring committee members from voting on films with which they're involved.

And documentaries have long been thought to have bridesmaid status at the Oscar
ceremony, eclipsed by the frothier best-picture brides. Last year, the board of
governors tried to eliminate the live-action short film and documentary
short-film categories. (A group including Steven Spielberg, Martin Scorsese and
Robert Redford protested, and the academy relented, for now. A study of the
issue is being prepared under the direction of the board of governors.) Five
years ago, the academy proposed that the awards for documentary and short
subject be received off camera. Though the measure was defeated, proponents of
nonfiction film continue to feel apprehensive.

This year's controversy involves the accuracy of one of the nominees,
"Liberators" -- specifically, sequences showing black veterans from the 761st
Tank Battalion revisiting the Buchenwald concentration camp, which some say they
did not liberate. The charges first came to light in The New Republic on Feb. 8,
but the documentary committee's ballots had been collected on Feb. 2.

Although "Liberators" has been pulled from television and theaters, it is still
available on video by mail order and was screened for academy members in Los
Angeles and New York. Whether the controversy will affect the voting "is hard to
call," says Ms. Mock.

Says Mr. Davis, the executive director of the academy, "I'm certainly ready for
a year where there's no controversy."

But Mr. Bass, the member of the board of governors, takes a more realistic view:
"There will be no process we can engage in that will produce five nominees about
which there will not be disagreement and controversy." It is probably this
year's only safe Oscar prediction.



LONG AGO AND FAR AWAY: THE DOCUMENTARY OSCARS

IN OSCAR POOLS ALL OVER the country, the tie-breaking vote is usually for
best-feature-length documentary -- but most bettors haven't seen even one of the
films. In fact, who can remember any best-documentary winner?

Here are the nominees for the last 10 years. Can you recall which ones won? (A
tip: Oscar winners often deal with music, children, the Holocaust and victims of
discrimination.) 1981 Documentaries "Against Wind and Tide: A Cuban Odyssey"
"Brooklyn Bridge" "Eight Minutes to Midnight: A Portrait of Dr. Helen Caldicott"
"El Salvador: Another Vietnam" "Genocide"

1982 "After the Axe" "Ben's Mill" "In Our Water" "Just Another Missing Kid" "A
Portrait of Giselle"

1983 "Children of Darkness" "First Contact" "He Makes Me Feel Like Dancin' "
"The Profession of Arms (War Series Film No. 3)" "Seeing Red" 1984 "High
Schools" "In the Name of the People" "Marlene" "Streetwise" "The Times of Harvey
Milk"

1985 "Broken Rainbow" "Las Madres: The Mothers of Plaza de Mayo" "Soldiers in
Hiding" "The Statue of Liberty" "Unfinished Business"

1986 "Artie Shaw: Time Is All You've Got" "Chile: Hasta Cuando?" "Down and Out
in America" "Isaac in America: A Journey With Isaac Bashevis Singer" "Witness to
Apartheid" 1987 "Eyes on the Prize: America's Civil Rights Years" "Hellfire: A
Journey From Hiroshima" "Radio Bikini" "A Stitch for Time" "The 10-Year Lunch:
The Wit and Legend of the Algonquin Round Table"

1988 "The Cry of Reason -- Beyers Naude: An Afrikaner Speaks Out" "Hotel
Terminus: The Life and Times of Klaus Barbie" "Let's Get Lost" "Promises to
Keep" "Who Killed Vincent Chin?"

1989 "Adam Clayton Powell" "Common Threads: Stories From the Quilt" "Crack
U.S.A.: A Country Under Seige" "For All Mankind" "Super Chief: The Life and
Legacy of Earl Warren" 1990 "American Dream" "Berkeley in the 60's" "Building
Bombs" "Forever Activists" "Waldo Salt: A Screenwriter's Journey"

1991 "Death on the Job" "Doing Time: Life Inside the Big House" "The Restless
Conscious: Resistance to Hitler Within Germany 1933" "In the Shadow of the
Stars" "Wild by Law"

And the Winners Were . . .

1981: "Genocide" (on the Holocaust). 1982: "Just Another Missing Kid" (a
19-year-old who disappeared). 1983: "He Makes Me Feel Like Dancin' " (Jacques
d'Amboise teaching schoolchildren to dance). 1984: "The Times of Harvey Milk"
(the gay activist). 1985: "Broken Rainbow" (the forced resettlement of Navajo
Indians). 1986: a tie between "Artie Shaw" (the musician) and "Down and Out in
America" (the homeless). 1987: "The 10-Year Lunch" (the Algonquin round table).
1988: "Hotel Terminus" (the Holocaust). 1989: "Common Threads" (AIDS). 1990:
"American Dream" (the labor movement). 1991: "In the Shadow of the Stars" (the
San Francisco Opera chorus).

LOAD-DATE: May 27, 1993

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

CORRECTION-DATE: March 14,1993, Sunday

 CORRECTION:
An article on March 14 about documentaries and the Academy Awards referred
incorrectly to "Music for the Movies: Bernard Herrmann." The film was a nominee
for the 1992 International Documentary Association Award, not a winner. A
reader's letter, dated April 13, noted the error; this correction was delayed by
an editor's absence from the office.

GRAPHIC: Photos: A neighborhood in Panama City in "Panama Deception," one of
five documentaries nominated this year. (Julio Cesar Guerra D.); Kuwaiti
firefighters after the gulf war, in a scene from "Fires of Kuwait," which plays
in IMAX theaters. (IMAX Corporation); The Hollywood composer Bernard Herrmann,
circa 1940, in "Music for the Movies: Bernard Herrmann." (Bernard Herrmann
Archive, Special Collections)(pg. 13); Evelyn and Edward Hooker in "Changing Our
Minds: The Story of Dr. Evelyn Hooker," a nominee. (Intrepid Productions);
"Liberators: Fighting on Two Fronts in World War II," nominated before its
accuracy was challenged. (Simon Chaput); Lyman Ward in a scene from "Brother's
Keeper," a well-received documentary that has not been nominated this year.
(Derek Berg/Film Forum)(pg. 28)

                   Copyright 1993 The New York Times Company

                              229 of 255 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 March 16, 1993, Tuesday, Late Edition - Final

Cambodia Village Quiet Again After Massacre

BYLINE: By HENRY KAMM

SECTION: Section A; Page 11; Column 1; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 554 words

DATELINE: CHONG KNEAS, Cambodia, March 12


All is quiet again on Tonle Sap Lake. Hardly anybody, except a few United
Nations officials and police officers who had come to investigate, paid heed as
the coffins were brought ashore here, at the edge of the water, from the
Vietnamese houseboat village a mile or two out on the lake.

Thirty-three Vietnamese fishermen, women and children -- perhaps half of them
children -- were shot dead Wednesday evening by Khmer Rouge raiders. Nineteen
others, 10 of them children, lie wounded in nearby Siem Reap Provincial
Hospital, a primitive and filthy place, a few miles from the famed monuments of
Angkor.

Two bodies have been found in the water, one bloated corpse still afloat on its
back near the victim village, waiting, perhaps, to be brought ashore. It is said
that the dead were Khmer Rouge, killed perhaps by their comrades' misguided
fire, or by villagers, or who knows by whom. Few details are known, because the
Cambodian villagers, or the police of the Phnom Penh Government, who are
supposed to provide security on the lake, do not care much for their Vietnamese
neighbors.

Brig. Gen. Klaas Roos, a Dutchman who commands the 3,500 police officers who are
part of the United Nations contingent of more than 20,000 here to see Cambodia
through elections in May, said the two Cambodian police stations in this section
of the Great Lake -- one only a few hundred yards from the scene of the killings
-- had been manned on Wednesday evening, but no one intervened.

As the coffins were brought ashore and loaded onto United Nations trucks,
Cambodians in the small market a few steps away continued to play pool on two
outdoor tables or, squatting on the ground, gamble with a spinning top.

With white cloths tied around their heads in mourning, the bereaved Vietnamese
quietly carried the coffins from the boats. Next to them or on top they placed
trays with farewell gifts: flowers, plates of cookies, fruits and joss sticks.
Then the trucks drove off to a hilltop pagoda and nearby burial.

Military, police and civilian sections of the United Nations are investigating
the crime. British and Russian military observers say they believe that the
raiders, perhaps 20 or 30, started in a village on the lake a few miles east of
here, where they commandeered six fishing boats with outboard motors.

Their first target was a large shack mounted on a boat, which served as a video
theater. Nineteen Vietnamese lay dead and many wounded after the bursts of fire
from Chinese-made AK-47 automatic rifles. The remaining casualties were caused
by raids on at least two family boats.

The military observers said they were convinced that the attackers had come from
a Khmer Rouge unit they had identified as having recently arrived in the area.

The attackers escaped unpursued.

Nguyen Van Hieung, 61, sat with his son, wounded in the right arm, on a hospital
bed. He had fled to Vietnam during the persecution of Vietnamese by the
American-backed Lon Nol Government in 1970 and returned after Vietnam invaded in
1979.

He said the fishermen who had earned enough to see them through in Vietnam had
left again after the Vietnamese troops withdrew in 1989. The poor ones, like his
family, stayed, despite their fear. Where will he go when his son is better?
"Back to the lake," he said. "Where else can we go?"

LOAD-DATE: March 16, 1993

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Map of Cambodia showing location of Tonle Sap

                   Copyright 1993 The New York Times Company

                              230 of 255 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                March 17, 1993, Wednesday, Late Edition - Final
                              Correction Appended

Review/Film;
Superimposing Frills On a Provocative Career

BYLINE: By VINCENT CANBY

SECTION: Section C; Page 17; Column 1; Cultural Desk

LENGTH: 662 words


For some time Noam Chomsky, the linguist, author, political activist and
outspoken critic of what he sees to be the American power elite, has survived
attacks by critics of his radically independent thinking. Now he survives,
though just barely, attempts by some friends to make his views more widely known
in a film, "Manufacturing Consent: Noam Chomsky and the Media."

Put together by Mark Achbar and Peter Wintonick, two admiring Canadian film
makers, "Manufacturing Consent" nearly smothers the often revivifying Chomsky
skepticism under a woolly blanket of fancy graphics, archival material and
redundant images. The film, which runs almost three hours, opens today at the
Film Forum.

When presented without frills and allowed to speak for himself, in dozens of
interviews filmed and taped around the world, Mr. Chomsky is a most provocative,
invigorating commentator on American political and social behavior. Yet Mr.
Achbar and Mr. Wintonick never leave well enough alone. They underrate both Mr.
Chomsky and the film audience.  Nothing Mr. Chomsky says is too clear not to
require some fuller explanation by the film makers.

When Jeff Greenfield, the producer of ABC's "Nightline," says he thinks Mr.
Chomsky's ideas are "from Neptune," the film dutifully shows a clip of Neptune.
A hard-hitting Chomsky debate with Fritz Bolkestein, the Minister of Defense of
the Netherlands, is crosscut with stock material of a prizefight. Take out the
visual similes and "Manufacturing Consent" might be half as long and twice as
effective.

Mr. Chomsky is convinced that American public opinion is being manipulated
through a de facto conspiracy of big business, big television, newspaper
companies (The New York Times in particular), the government and academe. At one
point the film makers visit the New York Times building in New York and somehow
manage to give the impression that they have cracked the security of the
Kremlim.

Whether or not you agree with Mr. Chomsky's conclusions, his reading of the
American scene is persuasive: that the government is most responsive to the
wishes expressed by the minority of citizens who vote, which is also one of the
principal points made by John Kenneth Galbraith in his recent book "The Culture
of Contentment." As Mr. Chomsky sees it, his mission is to wake up and activate
the electorate.

The film is best when Mr. Chomsky talks, which he does with ease, clarity and
wit. It's at its worst when it tries to defend him, employing some of the
trickier eye-catching techniques associated with advertising campaigns for
products the public doesn't yet know it needs. The film offers some interesting
biographical material, especially material relating to his anti-war activities
during the Vietnam era.

Also convincingly presented is Mr. Chomsky's outrage over press and television
inattention to Indonesian atrocities in East Timor, even if these oversights
scarcely seem like a conspiracy. Though the case for The New York Times is well
argued by Karl E. Meyer, an editorial writer for the paper, "Manufacturing
Consent" otherwise presents no Chomsky critics of a caliber to match Mr.
Chomsky.  Cheap shots creep in, as in the unflattering way the film makers treat
William F. Buckley Jr., host of "Firing Line," the syndicated television show.

If you are prepared to sit through a lot of fancified film making, and
starry-eyed adoration that softens the sharp edge of the Chomsky personality,
"Manufacturing Consent" (also the title of one of his books) is an invigorating
introduction to one of the least soporific of American minds.


Manufacturing Consent
Noam Chomsky and the Media

Directed by Mark Achbar and Peter Wintonick; photography by Mr. Achbar and
Norbert Bunge; edited by Mr. Wintonick; produced by Necessary Illusions and the
National Film Board of Canada; released by Zeitgeist Films. Film Forum 3, 209
West Houston Street, South Village. Running time: 165 minutes. No rating.

LOAD-DATE: March 17, 1993

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

CORRECTION-DATE: March 18, 1993, Thursday

CORRECTION:

A film review yesterday about a documentary at Film Forum 3 devoted to the
writer and critic Noam Chomsky rendered the title incompletely in the heading of
the credits in some copies. The film is "Manufacturing Consent: Noam Chomsky and
the Media."



TYPE: Review

                   Copyright 1993 The New York Times Company

                              231 of 255 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 March 18, 1993, Thursday, Late Edition - Final

SENATORS APPROVE A BILL THAT EASES VOTE REGISTRATION

BYLINE: By MICHAEL WINES,  Special to The New York Times

SECTION: Section A; Page 1; Column 6; National Desk

LENGTH: 1189 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, March 17


In an effort to encourage voter registration, the Senate today passed
legislation that would allow a person to register to vote when applying for a
driver's license.

The quick and relatively lopsided approval of the bill, by a vote of 62 to 37,
belied the two angry weeks of partisan sniping that preceded it. Passage came
only after the Senate's 57 Democrats conceded that they lacked the 60 votes
needed to halt a Republican filibuster against the bill, and after they gave in
to demands for small but politically important changes that must now be
negotiated with the House before the bill can become law.

Without the concessions, the Democrats would have been unable to break the
filibuster. That would have been an even deeper embarrassment for the White
House, which had declared the voter-registration bill a priority in the new
Congress. President Clinton himself had worked the phones on the issue, lobbying
swing-voting Republicans for days.

The 'Motor Voter' Bill

The bill, nicknamed "motor voter," would require states to permit every adult
over the age of 18 to register to vote simply by filling out a form while they
obtain a driver's license or apply for disability benefits. It would also
establish a nationwide system of voter registration by mail.

Under Republican pressure, the Senate removed provisions that would have
required voter registration at welfare and unemployment offices. But the bill,
heavily favored by Democrats who believe it would increase turnout in poorer
precincts, where their support is concentrated, would sharply increase the
number of registered voters. Ninety percent of American adults have a driver's
license.

Thomas Mann, a political scientist at the Brookings Institution, estimated that
the bill would increase turnout in major elections by five percentage points.
Only 50 percent to 55 percent of all eligible voters now go to the polls in
major elections.

Why Republicans Objected

Republicans, who filibustered the bill for two weeks, have called the bill a
partisan scheme to lard the voter rolls with new Democrats and to heap the cost
-- up to $20 million annually, by Congress's estimate -- on state and local
governments. They also objected to the notion of imposing a Federal mandate on
what has historically been a matter of state discretion.

The final vote came after a furious bout of amending and political
horse-trading. Among other changes, the Republicans weakened a clause that would
have signed up as new voters millions of predominantly Democratic welfare
recipients, and the Democrats rejected a bid to automatically register hundreds
of thousands of predominantly Republican military workers.

George J. Mitchell of Maine, the Senate majority leader, later dismissed
suggestions that the Republicans' success presaged more trouble for the
Democrats on other vital legislation, such as Mr. Clinton's budget and his $31
billion package of economic stimulus measures. "Different bill, different issue,
different circumstances," Senator Mitchell said.

Senator Wendell H. Ford, the Kentucky Democrat who sponsored the bill, said the
Democrats had preserved 90 percent of what they sought in the legislation and
had produced "a reasonably good bill."

But his Republican colleague from Kentucky, Senator Mitch McConnell, who led the
fight against the bill, said his party had just begun to flex its muscles. "This
week we demonstrated that we can improve a bill," he said. "There may be future
instances in which we will have to defeat a bill."

The Senate will now try to reconcile the legislation passed today with a broadly
similar version that the House passed last month. The finished product will go
to Mr. Clinton, who has promised to sign it. A similar bill was approved by
Congress last year but vetoed by President George Bush.

As part of today's compromise, Democrats pledged a good-faith effort to persuade
the House to accept the Republican amendments when the two versions of the bill
are melded. But the chief Democratic sponsor of the House bill, Representative
John Conyers Jr. of Michigan, immediately signaled that that would not be easy.

"The Senate has sold the farm and dramatically undermined the hope that the
House bill offered," he said in a statement, adding that the House "ought to
reject the Senate bill."

Decline in Voter Turnout

The legislation aims to reverse a 30-year decline in voter turnout in American
elections. About 9 out of 10 registered voters go to the polls in Presidential
election years. But the turnout in major elections is much lower because many
people do not register -- 70 million of 180 million prospective voters.

Both the Senate and House bills would dramatically increase the share of
citizens registered to vote, largely by making registration an almost seamless
part of everyday tasks like getting a driver's license.

Everyone over 18 who applied for or renewed a driver's license or sought public
assistance for a disability would register to vote, simply by signing an
affidavit appended to each application. Military recruitment centers would
develop their own procedures to routinely sign up new servicemen and women as
voters. The bill also orders states to adopt a standard procedure for
registering new voters by mail.

Modest Impact Predicted

But outside experts suggest that the actual impact on Election-Day turnout at
the polls will be more modest.

"Given what we know about states where motor-voter has already been implemented,
you're really looking at a five to 10 percentage-point increase in turnout, and
that's at the most," said Ruy A. Teixeira, a sociologist at Brookings
Institution scholar who is the author of "The Disappearing American Voter"
(Brookings, 1992).

"A lot of these people are somewhat disconnected from political issues and the
political process," he said of the nonvoters. "There's no guarantee that they're
going to go out and vote just because you sign them up."

To the 57 Senate Democrats who voted for the bill, and to many civics and civil
rights groups as well, the legislation is nevertheless a historic expansion of
the constitutional right to vote. Republican opposition to expanding that right,
Senator Mitchell said today, was "pathetic."

But the Republicans were incensed by the Democrats' zeal to register the jobless
and welfare recipients, who would have been added to the voter rolls more or
less automatically in the original bill. And the Republicans were equally
dismayed by the Democrats' omission, at first, of any plan to register members
of the military.

Senator John McCain of Arizona, a Vietnam war hero, said 200,000 servicemen and
women are denied a chance to vote each year because of registration problems
related to their nomadic lives. Today he carved out the Republican position with
a broadax, offering an amendment that would have automatically registered every
member of the armed services.

The amendment was tabled, largely on a party-line vote. But, under Republican
pressure, the legislation was changed to insure that recruits are signed up to
vote in nearly automatic fashion.

LOAD-DATE: March 18, 1993

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1993 The New York Times Company

                              232 of 255 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 March 18, 1993, Thursday, Late Edition - Final

Cambodia Election Snared as Peace Pact Unravels

BYLINE: By HENRY KAMM,  Special to The New York Times

SECTION: Section A; Page 3; Column 1; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 1448 words

DATELINE: PHNOM PENH, Cambodia, March 16


With elections two months away, the United Nations effort to bring peace to this
ravaged country is falling far short of its goals, United Nations officials,
Cambodians and foreign diplomats say.

The goals, defined by the Paris Agreement of October 1991, are to achieve a
"comprehensive political settlement of the Cambodia conflict," "restore and
maintain peace" and "promote national reconciliation."

But, Yasushi Akashi of Japan, head of the United Nations Transitional Authority
in Cambodia, said in an interview, "we have not been able to achieve peace and
national reconciliation."

Theo Noel, a United Nations official in Kompong Cham province, was even blunter:
"At present, in practice, these goals no longer exist."

Khmer Rouge Say No, Loudly

To achieve these ends after a 12-year civil war, the United Nations has
undertaken its most ambitious and expensive operation, budgeting nearly $1.4
billion and deploying more than 20,000 officials, technicians, soldiers and
clerks from more than 100 nations who are virtually running the country.

But the Communist Khmer Rouge, whose agreement with the pro-Vietnamese Phnom
Penh Government and two other factions was the key element of the peace plan,
have reneged. They have refused to put their troops and weapons under United
Nations control; they also plan to boycott the May 23 elections for a
constituent assembly. These actions in effect nullify the pact.

The Khmer Rouge's rejection has been followed by a change in attitude by the
other principal party, Prime Minister Hun Sen's Government, which Vietnam
installed after overthrowing the Khmer Rouge Government in 1979.

Government Changes Heart

After cooperating with the United Nations when the mission began in November
1991, the Government has maintained its armed forces and has become increasingly
critical of the United Nations organization, which is known by its acronym
Untac. And in recent months the Government has been accused of instigating
attacks on the two non-Communist parties that signed the accord; more than 25
people have died in these attacks.

Adding to the climate of violence have been attacks on the Vietnamese minority,
for which the Khmer Rouge have been held responsible.

Mr. Akashi argues that the United Nations "is here to begin the process, to make
the process irreversible if we can, but not to complete that process."

But this represents a considerable scaling back: the peace agreement does speak
of achieving goals, not beginning to achieve them.

Registration Going Well

Mr. Akashi, most of his senior associates and diplomats from the major powers
point to the election preparations as the principal accomplishment of the
mission. Nearly five million Cambodians in a population of more than nine
million have registered to vote, and the return of more than 300,000 Cambodian
refugees from a kind of limbo on the Thai border is also generally seen as
positive.

But a senior associate of Mr. Akashi said the focus on elections amounts to
concentrating on means, not ends. The elections, he said, were intended to
ratify peace and national reconciliation -- goals that seem out of reach before
Untac ends its mission three months after the voting.

"The elections will be artificial," an ambassador from a Communist country in
Asia said. "The Khmer Rouge are irreconcilable, so their substance will be
zero."

While Mr. Akashi and diplomats from the major powers stress positive
achievements, ambassadors of smaller countries say bluntly that the accord has
failed.

An envoy of a formerly Communist nation said the major powers had imposed the
accord, each on the Cambodian faction closest to it. The agreement was brokered
by the Soviet Union, which backed the Vietnamese-installed Government; the
United States, which backed the non-Communist forces of Prince Sihanouk and Son
Sann, and China, which aided the Khmer Rouge.

"The results prove that reconciliation among the big powers is much greater than
among Cambodians," the envoy said.

Consolidating Control

In his view and that of many others, what was intended as reconciliation has
turned into an effort by the Government to maintain its hold over about 90
percent of the territory and more than 90 percent of the population, and a
struggle by two losers to regain control that was once theirs.

These two groups are the Khmer Rouge, who ruled from 1975 until 1979 and
presided over the deaths of perhaps a million Cambodians, and Prince Sihanouk,
chief of state from independence in 1953 until his overthrow in 1970 by Lon Nol,
a client of Washington.

The framers of the peace agreement brought in the Prince as head of the
nominally ruling Supreme National Council, thinking his popularity among the
people would give him the authority to reconcile the two Communist forces.

Instead, Prince Sihanouk frequently denounces the United Nations and
periodically announces his refusal to take any further part. To underscore his
detachment, he spends much time far from Cambodia, mainly in China (where he is
now, ostensibly for the funeral of an aunt who died last month) and North Korea.
This offends many ordinary Cambodians, who would prefer that he paid court to
non-Communist powers that could provide aid and investment.

Goliath and David

In private, senior United Nations officials and diplomats accuse the 70-year-old
Prince of self-indulgence. But in public they defer to him as a former King.
Despite his unpredictability and his declining health, Prince Sihanouk is the
only person who can play a unifying role, these officials say.

Much discussion here centers on whether Untac could have been more effective, or
whether, in particular, the commander of the 15,000 United Nations troops,
Lieut. Gen. John Sanderson of Australia, interpreted his mandate too narrowly.

"On one side there is the absurdly enormous United Nations presence," a European
ambassador said. "On the other, the little Cambodians. And yet the tail wags the
dog. They all try to humor the Cambodians, so Untac can leave without having
lost face."

Cambodian political leaders, on the other hand, accuse Mr. Akashi and Untac of
failing to act against their respective opponents.

A Matter of Security

Foreign Minister Hor Namhong, for example, speaks harshly of what he called the
unwillingness of the United Nations to apply the Paris agreement to the Khmer
Rouge.

General Sanderson holds strongly to a view that "internal security" is the
mission of the factions that control parts of Cambodian territory."When you move
into enforcement," he said in an interview, "your neutrality is gone. You have
no one to talk to."

The general said his talks with the Khmer Rouge, who have fired on United
Nations helicopters and occasionally detained United Nations troops, had served
to "moderate" their behavior.

But the Khmer Rouge have not softened their stand toward the United Nations, and
they are being blamed for the latest attack on Vietnamese, in which 34
fishermen, women and children were killed last Wednesday on Tonle Sap Lake.

Chiding the General

Despite General Sanderson's aversion to providing the "internal security" to
avoid such attacks, the massacre led Mr. Akashi to demand more involvement from
the United Nations security forces. "I have had to shake our police and military
colleagues to adopt a more activist viewpoint in that regard," he said after a
meeting with his top aides, including the general.

Still, Mr. Hor Namhong said Untac was an utter failure.

"They are incapable of doing anything," he said. "They take no risk whatsoever.
They are here to pile up dollars and have no idea what their humanitarian
mission should be."

A $130 daily allowance for almost all United Nations workers here except
soldiers, who do not get an allowance, is considered excessive in a country
whose estimated annual per-capita income is not much more that that.

Little has been done to rebuild the country; only about $100 million of $880
million in rehabilitation aid pledged in June at a conference in Tokyo has been
disbursed. The Government, the Khmer Rouge and the non-Communist factions have
profited from the sale of timber and gems, but the lives of most people have not
improved.

"Untac was awaited as a Messiah," said Eric Goemaere, coordinator of Doctors
Without Borders, an international volunteer organization; like most
non-governmental officials here, Dr. Goemaere is critical of the United Nations.
"They were expected to govern, and they didn't."

A Cambodian doctor summed up this view: "With these enormous possibilities, with
that budget, one would have to say the result is despairing."

LOAD-DATE: March 18, 1993

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo: This burial in Moat Peam, Cambodia, took place after a mass
killing of Vietnamese last week that is being ascribed to the Khmer Rouge.
Because of the massacre, a United Nations official in Cambodia is demanding more
involvement from the United Nations security forces. (Agence France-Presse)

Map of Asia showing location of Cambodia; map of Cambodia showing location of
Phnom Penh.

                   Copyright 1993 The New York Times Company

                              233 of 255 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 March 18, 1993, Thursday, Late Edition - Final

College Chief Is Reported Picked to Run U.S.I.A.

BYLINE: By DAVID BINDER,  Special to The New York Times

SECTION: Section A; Page 12; Column 1; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 667 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, March 17


President Clinton has selected Joseph D. Duffey, president of American
University and an old friend, to head the United States Information Agency,
Administration officials say.

No date has been set for the appointment. But it is expected that when Mr.
Duffey, long active in the Democratic Party, is named, the appointment will be
coupled with an announcement that his deputy will be Penn Kemble, a conservative
Democrat, the officials said.

Mr. Duffey, 60, and Mr. Kemble, 52, said that they had discussed appointments
with the Administration, but that they could not provide details.

The selections, on the one hand of Mr. Duffey, who was in top educational and
cultural posts in the Carter Administration, and on the other hand of Mr.
Kemble, who is counted in the conservative camp, appear to create an ideological
balance at a critical moment. The information agency, with 8,900 workers and a
$1 billion annual appropriation, is being buffeted by crosswinds over its
mission and budget.

Advocates of the agency, including the bipartisan United States Advisory
Commission on Public Diplomacy, endorse a proposal by Mr. Clinton to consolidate
all Government-sponsored international broadcasting operations under the
U.S.I.A., which sponsors the Voice of America. That would mean phasing out Radio
Free Europe and Radio Liberty.

Defenders of the stations in Munich, Republicans and conservative Democrats
began campaigning recently to preserve them as preferable to the Voice of
America.

The conservative Democrats have complained bitterly that none of their number
had been named to a high post in the new Administration. Recently some carried
their complaint to Anthony Lake, the national security adviser, and his deputy,
Samuel Berger, saying at least one favorite, Representative Dave McCurdy,
Democrat of Oklahoma, or Richard Schifter, a former chief of human rights at the
State Department, deserved a choice post. They got nowhere, said Ben Wattenberg,
the conservative columnist.

Proposals have also been made to take the Voice of America from the U.S.I.A. and
turn over its foreign educational-exchange programs to a foundation while
placing its remaining functions in the State Department. But officials at the
agency took heart from Mr. Clinton's strong support for instruments of "public
diplomacy."

Mr. Duffey became acquainted with Mr. Clinton when he was running for the Senate
in Connecticut in 1970 against Lowell P. Weicker Jr., then a member of Congress.
Mr. Duffey had been a Congregational minister, chairman of the Americans for
Democratic Action and a participant in Eugene J. McCarthy's Presidential
campaign in 1968. Mr. Clinton, having just completed studying under a Rhodes
Scholarship at Oxford, was attracted to Mr. Duffey through opposition to the
Vietnam War and went to work in the ultimately unsuccessful campaign.

The two stayed in touch through Mr. Clinton's career in Arkansas politics and
Mr. Duffey's Carter years as Assistant Secretary of State for Educational and
Cultural Affairs and chairman of the National Endowment for the Humanities.
Before being called to head American University, Mr. Duffey was chancellor of
the University of Massachusetts at Amherst.

On Monday the Clintons and the Duffeys had supper together with the actors Paul
Newman and Joanne Woodward in a restaurant here. Mr. Duffey's wife, Anne Wexler,
was Deputy Under Secretary for Commerce in the Carter Administration and is a
prominent lobbyist.

In the weeks after Mr. Clinton's inauguration, there was a wide-ranging
competition for the top U.S.I.A. job involving public figures and former
Government officials who were put forward by others or put themselves forward.
They included Mary Bitterman, a former director of the Voice; Rozanne L.
Ridgway, a former ambasssador; David Gergen of the Reagan White House, Martin
Peretz of The New Republic, Bill D. Moyers of the Johnson White House, Pierre
Salinger of the Kennedy White House and Mr. Wattenberg.

NAME: Joseph D. Duffey

LOAD-DATE: March 18, 1993

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Biography

                   Copyright 1993 The New York Times Company

                              234 of 255 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 March 18, 1993, Thursday, Late Edition - Final

New KLM Routes

BYLINE: By Bloomberg Business News

SECTION: Section D; Page 20; Column 6; Financial Desk

LENGTH: 44 words

DATELINE: AMSTERDAM, March 17


KLM, the Dutch airline, will fly to four new destinations this summer and
increase flight frequencies to allow for 16 percent more seat capacity. The
airline will start up new routes to San Francisco, Boston, Havana and Ho Chi
Minh City, Vietnam, on March 28.

LOAD-DATE: March 18, 1993

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1993 The New York Times Company

                              235 of 255 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                  March 19, 1993, Friday, Late Edition - Final

Old Alliances, New Asia

SECTION: Section A; Page 28; Column 1; Editorial Desk

LENGTH: 482 words


North Korea's defiance of the world over nuclear inspections should remind
Americans that peace in Asia can't be taken for granted. But while the reckless
antics of Pyongyang's time-warp dictatorship are familiar to Washington, newer
challenges have crept up on policy makers almost unnoticed. America's cold war
era security treaties are inadequate to meet the challenges ahead.

China has doubled its military spending since 1988, using the money to build its
first seagoing navy since the Ming Dynasty half a millennium ago. This week it
threatened to attack if Taiwan moves toward independence. Japan has stretched
the limits of its constitutional ban on overseas military deployment. And
smaller powers like Indonesia and Malaysia have embarked on arms-buying sprees.

Meanwhile, ideological changes have scrambled Asia's political geography and
created new diplomatic alignments -- as demonstrated by Russia's strong stand
against North Korea this week.

Washington's system of bilateral mutual security treaties with Japan, South
Korea and the Philippines were formulated with a monolithic Communist enemy in
mind. Future conflicts are more likely to be nationalistic, potentially pitting
one U.S. ally against another. America, as a Pacific power, still needs to play
a central role in keeping the Asian peace. But to do so it will need new
arrangements, leading toward a collective security system open to all countries
prepared to play by its rules.

Unlike the cold-war treaties, collective security aims at maximum inclusion. All
participating states agree to basic rules like respecting each other's borders,
abiding by arms control agreements and avoiding suspicious troop movements.
Participants also agree to cooperate in enforcing these rules against any
transgressor.

Asian collective security was anathema to the cautious Bush Administration. But
the Clinton hands have proved more receptive. They have already endorsed the
regional security discussions held under the auspices of Asean, the six-member
Association of Southeast Asian Nations.

Japan, South Korea, Australia, New Zealand and the U.S. are formal Asean
"dialogue partners." But that still leaves East Asian military powers like
Russia, China, Vietnam and Taiwan excluded.

China's flouting of proliferation rules and Taiwan's peculiar diplomatic status
might argue for proceeding without them, at least initially. But Russia surely
belongs in any post-cold-war Asian security system, as its role in the Korean
crisis demonstrates. And now that it is cooperating with its neighbors over
Cambodia, so might Vietnam.

Asean deserves credit for starting this needed discussion. And the Clinton
Administration deserves strong encouragement in taking on a more active,
constructive role. The peace of Asia may well hinge on how quickly Washington
updates its policies and expands its alliances.

LOAD-DATE: March 19, 1993

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Editorial

                   Copyright 1993 The New York Times Company

                              236 of 255 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 March 20, 1993, Saturday, Late Edition - Final

France Finds a Hero in Balkan Town

BYLINE: By ALAN RIDING,  Special to The New York Times

SECTION: Section 1; Page 4; Column 1; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 642 words

DATELINE: PARIS, March 19


Lieut. Gen. Philippe Morillon, the French Army officer who led a United Nations
convoy into the besieged Bosnian Muslim town of Srebrenica today, has been
hailed as a hero by his compatriots for refusing to abandon its 60,000
inhabitants until much-needed food had reached them.

Several times a day over the last week, General Morillon's anguished reports of
the imminent starvation facing Srebrenica have been broadcast on television and
radio here, invariably followed by commentaries praising his courage in
remaining there until Bosnian Serbs allowed a food convoy to enter.

"He has become very popular because I think the French are tempted to say,
'Morillon is a hero, therefore, as a Frenchman, I am also a hero,' " a French
Government official said. "But it's true. We are proud of him. He does honor to
the French Army and the United Nations force."

As the commander of United Nations forces in Bosnia and Herzegovina, the
57-year-old general has in fact been in the public eye here for many months,
serving as a constant reminder that France has already sent almost 5,000
soldiers to the Balkans.

Compared to French Heroes

Yet General Morillon's personal decision to stay with the people of Srebrenica
touched an emotional nerve here, bringing comparisons with de Gaulle's defiant
stand after the fall of France in 1940 and with Gen. Christian de Castries, who
stayed with his troops as they went down to defeat at Dien Bien Phu in Vietnam
in 1954.

"His 'I am, therefore I stay,' which does not lack panache, commits the entire
international community to stand up to the Serbs who consider his presence there
to be a challenge," Yves Cuau wrote in a commentary this week in L'Express.

"Bosnia: A Gesture of Honor" was the headline on a report in Le Point about
General Morillon's decision to stay in Srebrenica. "Vote Morillon!" an article
in Le Nouvel Observateur was headlined in an allusion to this weekend's
parliamentary elections.

For many ordinary French, the general's gesture has also brought the reality of
the Bosnian conflict into their homes. "He's very French, he has a 'look
francais,' " the Government official said, "so it's easy for the Frenchman who
drinks red wine and eats Camembert to identify with him."

Served in Foreign Legion

A lifelong army officer, General Morillon served in the Foreign Legion during
Algeria's independence war in the late 1950's and, over the years, alternated
between staff and regimental posts. "He has always been well respected here,"
the Government official said. "He was intelligent before he went to Bosnia."

A Foreign Ministry spokesman brushed aside the suggestion that by drawing the
public's attention anew to the plight of Bosnian Muslims, General Morillon had
indirectly prompted the French Government to take a tougher stance against
Serbia and its Bosnian Serb allies at the United Nations.

On Thursday, France reversed itself and joined the United States in advocating
Security Council action to add enforcement provisions to a ban on flights over
Bosnia. But the spokesman noted that last week, two days before the general
reached Srebrenica, President Francois Mitterrand warned Slobodan Milosevic, the
Serbian leader, to expect new sanctions against Serbia if Bosnian Serbs rejected
a peace plan drawn up by United Nations and European Community mediators.

"Morillon has not made us discover the virtues of enforcing the 'no-fly' zone,"
the spokesman said. "It's just that the time has come to talk aloud about new
sanctions."

In an apparent reference to Washington's desire to see the North Atlantic Treaty
Organization involved in future peacekeeping in the former Yugoslavia, the
spokesman asserted that the siege of Srebrenica had underlined the importance of
coordinating all international peace efforts through the United Nations.

NAME: Philippe Morillon

LOAD-DATE: March 20, 1993

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo: Lieut. Gen. Philippe Morillon crossing his fingers at a news
conference earlier this month after being asked about getting relief supplies to
residents of eastern Bosnia. Yesterday, the French Army officer led a United
Nations convoy carrying those supplies into the besieged Bosnian Muslim town of
Srebrenica. (Reuters)

TYPE: Biography

                   Copyright 1993 The New York Times Company

                              237 of 255 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                  March 21, 1993, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

ENDPAPER: Public Stages;
Clintonian Cinema

BYLINE: By Frank Rich

SECTION: Section 6; Page 76; Column 1; Magazine Desk

LENGTH: 1116 words


You don't have to be a politician, a pollster or a foreign-policy wonk to figure
out that Americans don't want to send even a few good men to Bosnia or any war
front where they might get bloodied in the crossfire. You need only see the
movies that will be fighting it out for Oscars next week.

While the Academy Award nominations may be a joke as a measure of art, good
taste or even common sense, they are an index of commerce, and what is
commercial in Hollywood entertainment reflects the country's mood, from the
World War II-eve nationalism of "Gone With the Wind" to the James Bond
adventurism of the Kennedy era. No matter how many talking heads debate the
merits of American military intervention on Sunday morning television, the
voters who go to the multiplex on Saturday night have already made up their
minds. And they are not pining for "The Green Berets." Best Picture contenders
like "A Few Good Men," "The Crying Game" and the presumptive winner,
"Unforgiven," are antiwar and anti-machismo. When even Clint Eastwood, who
inspired Ronald Reagan to make a national cause out of the taunt "Make my day!,"
won't pack a gun anymore, who outside of the National Rifle Association will?

The Oscar-nominated movies, like their audiences, have forgotten that the
jingoistic gulf war ever happened.  Their definition of an ideal man --
pacifistic except in self-defense, misty-eyed, in touch with his feminine side
-- is a central-casting call for the new President, who escaped the Vietnam
draft and makes empathy an art. The heavies in these films are reminiscent of
George Bush in full bellicose sputter and the lunatics in uniform who ran amok
in the Iran-contra scandal.

"A Few Good Men," the Oscar-nominated film with the largest box-office take so
far, smacks its lips over the sleazy service mentality of Tailhook, not the
heroics of Desert Storm. Its villain is a post-cold-war Marine commander played
by Jack Nicholson. He may be in line for a White House job with the National
Security Council, but his unregenerate saber rattling and felonious cover-ups in
pursuit of "patriotism" tar him as an Oliver North, not a Norman Schwarzkopf.
For added nastiness, he is patronizing to women and blacks, sounds like the
Joker and looks alarmingly like Richard Nixon.  When Nicholson makes such
pronouncements as "We live in a world with walls, and those walls have to be
guarded by men with guns," it's not a call to arms but a one-way ticket to the
funny farm.

And who is the hero of "A Few Good Men"? None other than the iconic professional
of the Clinton Administration -- a lawyer (a Navy lawyer who, pointedly, has
never seen active duty). He keeps "The Andy Warhol Diaries," of all light
reading, conspicuously on his shelf and is played by Tom Cruise with none of the
sexy flyboy outfits of that Defense Department promotional epic "Top Gun" and
all the righteousness of the antiwar Vietnam vet of "Born on the Fourth of
July."

"The Crying Game" touches the same anti-macho chords as "A Few Good Men," though
far more subtly. This, more than its plot surprise, may explain why an Irish
movie has so moved American audiences. The hero, an I.R.A. gunman played by
Stephen Rea, refuses to fire his gun even when his cause depends on it. The two
other sympathetic male characters with weapons in "The Crying Game," one a
British soldier, enjoy blurred sexual identities. Even the country anthem "Stand
By Your Man," sung by Lyle Lovett over the final credits, is stripped of its
rigid sexism by this film, in which evil is represented by a female assassin
(Miranda Richardson) as manly as Nicholson's marine.
 In "Unforgiven," Eastwood also champions what "The Crying Game" presents as the
womanly sensitivity of good men. Cast as a reformed and widowed outlaw who lives
with his children in the West of the 1880's, Eastwood credits his dead wife with
teaching him "to stop killing, drinking and whipping animals." When he finally
picks up his rifle after 11 years of nonviolence, it is not to war with Indians
but to avenge a scarred prostitute whose vicious male assailant was left
unpunished by the law. The sexist sheriff is the villain, and Gene Hackman, who
plays him, is competing against Nicholson in an Oscar category that might be
called Most Psychotic Officer in a Supporting Role.

Throughout "Unforgiven," Eastwood refers to "the old days" of Western shootouts
guiltily, as a gruesome spree during which he was "drunk most of the time." The
assassination of President Garfield hangs over the movie like a dark omen; the
movie hero who once was the fascist cop Dirty Harry now seems to support the
Brady Bill. "It's a hell of a thing . . . killing a man," Eastwood says bitterly
in "Unforgiven." He hides his violent past from his children and watches both
his sidekicks turn against gunslinging.

Eastwood may have been a Republican poster boy, but this movie is a parable of
the Clinton foreign policy the American public now wants: send the military on
safe mercy missions to help victimized women and children (preferably from the
distance afforded by airdrops), but don't let Americans return to the perilous
gulf combat role of Rambo. "Unforgiven" disinters the old Western heroics only
to bury them for keeps. It paints the Old Frontier as a dreary, self-destructive
wasteland and buries any romantic notions of a New Frontier that might prompt
Kennedy esque adventures in some new Bay of Pigs. In its epilogue, "Unforgiven"
even goes so far as to endorse the Clinton laser focus on the domestic economy.
Once the Eastwood hero has rescued wronged women in the uncivilized badlands, he
resettles in San Francisco and makes an acceptable killing -- as a
small-business man.

America's fighting spirit is not entirely dead, of course. Some of the
Oscar-nominated films titillate with a last-reel shootout, real or verbal, which
will come in handy if new horrors in a Beirut or Baghdad should pull the
nation's hair trigger yet again. But for now, at least, war games are on hold;
crying games are in. Should Al Pacino, the star of another Best Picture nominee,
"Scent of a Woman," win Best Actor as predicted, it will be for a role that
perfectly encapsulates the country's current attitude toward the military: he
plays a blind and despotic retired Army officer of Vietnam vintage whose
regeneration can begin only after he smells the humanizing scent of a woman and
throws away his gun.

Corny, yes, but, for the moment, a refreshing change of Hollywood
administrations after a dozen years of Schwarzenegger, Stallone and Charlton
Heston, whose blowhard tenure as Malibu Secretary of Defense may have at last
reached its merciful "The End."

LOAD-DATE: March 21, 1993

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Drawing

                   Copyright 1993 The New York Times Company

                              238 of 255 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                  March 21, 1993, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

FILM;
Classic War Films, Contemporary Echoes

BYLINE: By ROBERT PLUNKET;  Robert Plunket's novels include "Love Junkie" and
"My Search for Warren Harding."

SECTION: Section 2; Page 13; Column 1; Arts & Leisure Desk

LENGTH: 1874 words


Many gay activists say they were stunned by the vitriolic reaction to President
Clinton's promise to open the military to admitted homosexuals. Veterans' groups
protested, retired admirals said bigoted things, Congress was deluged with calls
and letters leading up to last week's hearings. All I could think was, what did
gay activists expect? Haven't they seen "From Here to Eternity?"

Movies are the closest most of us get to the military. And while they may be
dreams and fantasies, it is precisely this quality that gives them emotional
truth. Over the years, films have provided answers to questions about the armed
forces that have suddenly become crucial. What kind of people join up?  How are
relationships formed in a narrow, unnatural world? Most of all, how does the
military solve its moral dilemmas? The answers supplied by Hollywood are not
exactly what gay activists want to hear.

Movies and war have always been naturals for each other (the 1915 "Birth of a
Nation" is a war movie), but it wasn't until World War II that the war movie
came into its own. The cliche platoon has a farm boy from Iowa, a Jew from
Brooklyn, and so on. They appear over and over in films like "Guadalcanal
Diary," "Destination Tokyo," "Air Force" and "Bataan."

The best word for these movies is "rousing." They all tell the same essential
story: a group of strangers, many from identifiable minorities, learn to love
one another after being tested in battle. The fact that these films take place
in an all-male world forces them to deal with male friendships, and the picture
they paint is indeed a rosy one. In fact, the beginning of "Guadalcanal Diary,"
when soldiers sun themselves on the poop deck of their transport and then dance
to the latest tunes, is reminiscent of nothing so much as a weekend on Fire
Island. There is even physical intimacy -- the way Richard Jaekel and Anthony
Quinn keep leaning against each other certainly raised my eyebrows -- and an
oddly sensitive atmosphere.

Everyone, it seems, has a monologue about how scared he is, and later they cry
when their friends get killed. There is no doubt that a certain love is
occurring, a love that is no less stirring for not being sexual. In "The Purple
Heart," the men decide to die together rather than betray one another. And you
believe it.

But in the 1950's, with the country at peace and prosperous, Hollywood took
another look at World War II. The military was now seen as a thuggish place,
fueled by alcohol and run by sadistic superiors with sexual dysfunctions. This
revisionist view is at the heart of a slew of benchmark movies from the 50's
that range in tone from the ironic "Mr. Roberts" to the grand "Caine Mutiny" to
the ambitious and awful "Naked and the Dead." But the best of the bunch, it is
generally acknowledged, is "From Here to Eternity."

It is filmed in a Herb Ritts-like black and white, and its justly famous, highly
sexual performances don't disappoint (particularly Deborah Kerr's: the way she
nibbles Burt Lancaster's hand is their whole relationship in a nutshell). But if
"From Here to Eternity" is great movie making, its real importance at the moment
may be in how clearly it delineates the central myth of the military. It is the
one story we keep seeing again and again, like Joseph Campbell and his hero with
1,000 faces. Simply stated, it is the journey of the sensitive misfit into a
brutal world that tries to break his will.

This myth is retold in almost every movie about the military. It has enormous
range and versatility; it can accommodate light comedy ("Private Benjamin") as
well as high melodrama ("An Officer and a Gentleman"). But "From Here to
Eternity" provides the myth in its purest and most thought-provoking form.

The sensitive misfit is Pvt. Robert E. Lee Prewitt, played by Montgomery Clift.
The new man in the company, Prewitt refuses to box in the regiment championships
because he blinded a man in an earlier fight. For this he is given "the
treatment" -- that is, he is mercilessly harassed by the major, a pompous skirt
chaser. Prewitt's only friend, a drunken loser named Maggio (Frank Sinatra in
the role that won him an Oscar), is brutally beaten in the stockade by the
hyper-testosteroned Ernest Borgnine. After killing the Borgnine character in a
dark alley, Prewitt goes A.W.O.L., hiding out at his girlfriend's house. She's
another outsider, a prostitute who yearns to become proper.

"From Here to Eternity," based on the James Jones novel, strikingly parallels
today's headlines. While just as masculine as all the other guys, Prewitt is
decidedly unmacho and a talented musician to boot. His love for the Army, which
does nothing but treat him like dirt, is unwavering -- just like those gay and
lesbian soldiers we read about. He can't understand why people think he should
quit; he sounds exactly like the gay and lesbian soldiers being interviewed on
television. And the fact that he is played by Montgomery Clift, an actor now
known to have been homosexual, adds another layer.

The way the myth is resolved is crucial.  Whatever happens, one fact is
immutable: the Army always wins. It is usually structured in a pleasant way; the
misfit overcomes his flaws and is accepted into what has somehow metamorphosed
into a happy band of brothers. "From Here to Eternity" uses the alternate
ending, the unhappy one in which the Army kills the misfit. The misfit doesn't
just quit or go away or die in a convenient accident. The Army kills him.
Literally. Prewitt is shot while trying to return to base as Pearl Harbor is
attacked.

Perhaps nothing so underscores the unpopularity of the Vietnam War than the fact
that Hollywood ignored it while it was happening. One movie was made -- John
Wayne's "Green Berets" -- but otherwise it was the AIDS of its day. It wasn't
until 10 years later that the Vietnam movies started coming out. The most
prominent ("Platoon" "Full Metal Jacket" "Casualties of War") present the
sensitive misfit with a new dilemma, a much weightier one than whether to fight
in the boxing championship. Now there are evil men in the company who like to
kill and rape innocent civilians. What is he going to do about it? He usually
makes the right choice, but the Vietnam movies remain the saddest and most
painful war movies of all.

If Hollywood in the late 60'S did not deal with Vietnam, it still had
interesting things to say about the armed forces. It was during this time that
two movies dealing explicitly with homosexuality in the military were made.
Oddly enough, in both cases the homosexual is not a sensitive misfit but a
superior officer who falls, secretly and unrequitedly, in love with the misfit.

"The Sergeant," released in 1968, starred Rod Steiger as Sergeant Callan, a
macho career man consumed with passion for a handsome private played by John
Phillip Law. The moment of revelation, when Mr. Steiger boldly kisses Mr. Law,
leads to the sergeant's eventual suicide. A year earlier, John Huston's
"Reflections in a Golden Eye" had arrived. It was one of those oddball,
high-budget curiosities they used to make in the 60's, back before movies had to
affirm life. What "Reflections" affirms more than anything else is Carson
McCullers's genius for creating characters so traumatized by secret hurts that
they go slightly nuts. It's high Southern Gothic, moody and claustrophobic, and
best of all, it has Marlon Brando chewing up the scenery as the pathetic,
repressed homosexual, Captain Penderton.

"Reflections" uses the sensitive-misfit myth, but with a twist: it's told from
the point of view of the tormentor. The tormentor character is always the
villain of the piece: sometimes he's the drill instructor, sometimes the bully
in the barracks, sometimes a superior officer. It is often hinted that he has
problems of his own, usually sexual.

And does Captain Penderton have problems! He keeps pictures of naked men in a
cigar box, he slathers on his wife's cold cream and makes funny faces, he talks
in a squeaky little voice (said to be based on Tennessee Williams's). He's
married to Elizabeth Taylor, who hates his guts and is sleeping with the captain
next door, played by Brian Keith. Mr. Keith's character, in turn, is worried
about his wife (Julie Harris). She mutilated her breasts with a pair of
gardening shears and he's afraid she may do worse. Like I say, it's a weird
movie.

Enter the sensitive misfit, the extremely good-looking Private Williams (Robert
Forster). He has no friends and seems, well, different. The captain is soon
following him around, picking up his discarded candy wrappers to put in his
cigar box and spying on him as he indulges in his favorite hobby, which --
fortunately for the captain -- happens to be riding horses through the woods
without any clothes on.

Who, in this cauldron of emotions, is going to be murdered? McCullers said that,
when she began writing, even she did not know. But, as dictated by the myth,
there could be only one possible answer: the Army must destroy the sensitive
misfit. And this is indeed what happens. Private Williams gets murdered by
Captain Penderton. And in such a way that he will get off and the dead private
will be blamed for everything.

Many gay film critics hate "Reflections in a Golden Eye" for the same reason
they hate "Basic Instinct" -- the homosexual is a bad homosexual. According to
the late Vito Russo, the author of "The Celluloid Closet," the film offered no
possibility of homosexual relationships; it dealt "only in sexually motivated
manipulations, spitefulness and petty jealousy, most of it unconscious or
unexplored." Exactly, and that's what makes it such a good movie. Homosexuality
does have an evil side. It's called repressed homosexuality, and it is what's
really at the core of gay bashing. Captain Penderton is driven to murder by his
unresolved homosexual yearnings. He must destroy what threatens him so.

Today's movies that deal with the military continue to mine the myth of the
sensitive misfit. Neil Simon's 1988 film "Biloxi Blues," about barracks life in
Mississippi in the waning days of World War II, has a whole batch of them. The
misfits include a homosexual (played by Michael Dolan) -- whom the system
destroys -- and a suspected homosexual (Corey Parker), who is almost ruined by
the rumor. And in the recent "Few Good Men," the entire plot revolves around an
investigation into of the death of a sensitive misfit.

Though the provenance of "A Few Good Men" goes straight back to the great
military movies of the 50's (it's the "Caine Mutiny" crossed with "From Here to
Eternity"), the movie has a twist that breaks with tradition. This time the
truth comes out and the military's cruelty and deceit are exposed. Similarly,
the surprise hit "The Crying Game," though hardly an American military movie,
presents sexual experimentation as a positive, even redemptive option for
soldiers. Does this signal a change in attitudes, or merely a movie fantasy?

It's too early to tell. But the approaching showdown between the military and
the misfit is shaping up to be much more than a civil rights issue. It is an
acting out of the central myth of the military, with an ending that could go
either way.

LOAD-DATE: March 21, 1993

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo: Montgomery Clift, on trumpet, and Frank Sinatra, right, in "From
Here to Eternity" -- The movie reveals the misfit in his purest and most
thought-provoking form. (Columbia Pictures)

                   Copyright 1993 The New York Times Company

                              239 of 255 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                  March 21, 1993, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

TRAVEL ADVISORY;
Chinese Language and Culture

SECTION: Section 5; Page 3; Column 4; Travel Desk

LENGTH: 323 words


Buddhist sites in northern China are the focus of a tour to be led by the China
Institute in America from May 25 to June 14. Buddhism took root in China in the
first century, when Chinese merchants traveling the Silk Road, an ancient
trading route, brought back two Buddhist monks from India. Led by Dr. Laura
Kaufman, a professor of Asian art history at Cooper Union and at Manhattanville
College, the tour will focus on Buddhist art that flourished from the fourth to
the ninth centuries. Among the sites on the itinerary are the ornamented caves
of Mount Maiji, the 400-room Xiangtongsi Temple at Mount Wutai and the
Yonghegong, a Tibetan Buddhist temple still functioning in Beijing. The cost for
the tour is $5,865 a person, which includes round-trip air fare from New York,
accommodations, three meals a day in China, and a $500 tax-deductible
contribution to the China Institute. Information: (800) 225-4262

This summer, HoliAsia Tours is offering four study and travel programs in China,
two starting June 10 and two on July 10. The programs include either three weeks
in Nanning, capital of Guangxi province, which borders on Vietnam, or three
weeks in Shanghai, China's largest city. Students will take an intensive course
in Mandarin and learn about Chinese culture and practices, including tai chi and
qi gong, both traditional forms of exercise, plus brush painting and
calligraphy. Participants will also meet Chinese students and visit their
families. Each program is followed by an optional two-week tour of Beijing,
Xian, Luoyang, Zenghzou, and Kaifeng. The Nanning Study Program plus China tour
costs $2,695 a person, double occupancy (study program only, $1,895). The
Shanghai study program plus China tour costs $2,985 a person (study program
only, $2,195). Prices include round-trip air fare from L the West Coast,
accommodations, meals sightseeing and local transportation. Information: (800)
553-3533.

LOAD-DATE: March 21, 1993

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo: The Yonghegong Tibetan Buddhist temple in Beijing. (Beijing
Slide Studio)

                   Copyright 1993 The New York Times Company

                              240 of 255 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                  March 21, 1993, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

For Defense of Los Angeles Officers, 4 Lawyers Come Together (Usually)

BYLINE: By SETH MYDANS,  Special to The New York Times

SECTION: Section 1; Page 22; Column 4; National Desk

LENGTH: 1686 words

DATELINE: LOS ANGELES, March 20


With cameras and microphones banned from the courtroom, the most exciting public
event of the day in the trial of four police officers accused in the beating of
Rodney G. King has been the often acerbic sound-bite analyses offered by the
four defense lawyers.

As citizens of this anxious city strain for insights into the Federal civil
rights trial, fearing a repetition of the rioting that resulted after acquittals
in the state criminal trial, the defense lawyers have stirred their own
controversy with highly charged comments from the courthouse steps.

"He's ridiculous," said one defense lawyer about a prosecution witness.

"He's a dope," added another lawyer. "He's a fool."

One lawyer suggested that Mr. King was the aggressor and should apologize to his
client, who is shown beating Mr. King, a black man, in an amateur videotape of
the incident on March 3, 1991.

Another called the prosecutors immoral, desperate and "scraping the bottom of
the barrel."

After three weeks of this, amid complaints from some black politicians, Judge
John G. Davies of Federal District Court asked the lawyers to tone down their
comments. Now, the defense spin has shifted from the banks of waiting television
cameras to the courthouse hallways and cafeteria.

In the courtroom, the four defense lawyers have shown themselves to be
businesslike and well prepared as they began presenting their witnesses this
week. They are also coordinating their separate defenses more smoothly than in
the state trial last year.

Their individual styles and strategies are helping to differentiate for the jury
the four defendants, who might seem on the videotape to be interchangeable
blurry forms.

Sgt. Stacey C. Koon, Officers Laurence M. Powell and Theodore J. Briseno and
former Officer Timothy E. Wind face possible maximum sentences of 10 years in
prison and fines of $250,000 on charges of depriving Mr. King of his civil
rights by intentionally using excessive force when they arrested him for
speeding.

The defendants, who are white, were acquitted of assault charges 11 months ago
in a state trial despite the prosecution's success in turning one defendant,
Officer Briseno, against the others. He asserted that they were "out of
control."

This time Officer Briseno has a new lawyer, Harland W. Braun, and a new strategy
in which he says he now understands that he was in no position to pass judgment
on the conduct of his fellow officers.

Sergeant Koon also has a new lawyer, Ira M. Salzman, and it took some time
before the four lawyers arrived at a working relationship.

Before the trial began, Mr. Salzman and Mr. Braun tried to get Michael P. Stone,
the lawyer for Officer Powell, ejected from the case on technical grounds.
Together with Paul M. DePasquale, who represents Mr. Wind, they had shown
irritation with Mr. Stone. He had mysteriously received a confidential outline
of the prosecution's strategy in the mail but returned it immediately without
sharing it with his colleagues.

Bygones now seem to be bygones. In court, the defense lawyers can be seen
sharing a happy wink or slipping each other a note. "He's my hero," Mr. Braun
said one day of Mr. Stone.

Mr. Braun said later: "We got all the venom out in pretrial motions, fighting
and accusing each other of various things and not liking each other."

This stops short of being a coordinated defense, and Mr. DePasquale said he
bristled at references to a "defense team." With separate interests to advance,
the four lawyers remain wary, ready to cross-examine each other's clients if
need be.

Some of the surprises sprung by the lawyers have caught their colleagues off
guard as well as the prosecutors.And at one point, cross-examinations by two of
the lawyers seemed to stumble over each other and damaging material was admitted
into evidence.

"There is some sharing of points that are harmful to no one," Mr. DePasquale
said. "But everyone involved knows that there are limits and there are tensions
that are involved because there are strategic differences."

In addition to helpful ideas, he said, the notes they hand each other might say,
in effect, "What? Why? Why are you doing this? Why are you opening up this area
of inquiry?"

The case may be bringing the lawyers fame, but it is not bringing fortune. The
police union, which paid their fees in the state trial, is picking up only part
of the bill this time and the officers themselves are out of money.

Here is a glimpse of the four lawyers and their varying approaches.

Michael P. Stone

If there is a lead lawyer, it is Mr. Stone, a 46-year-old former police sergeant
with neatly combed blond hair and bow tie who served for four years as the
general counsel of the Los Angeles police union. Thoroughly familiar with police
work, sprinkling his questions with police and medical jargon, Mr. Stone is
painstaking in his presentation of elaborate charts and even more elaborate
lines of questioning.

His task is the hardest as he defends Officer Powell, the man shown delivering
most of the 56 baton blows during the 81 seconds of videotaped beating. In both
trials, it is Mr. Stone who has carried the main line of defense: that Mr. King
was uncooperative and combative and that every kick and baton blow on the
videotape was justified.

As Mr. DePasquale put it: "A 60-second zoom through the tape looks nasty bad.
But if you take it apart and you look at the individual movements of the
participants, you see a different story."

Mr. Stone's successful tactic in the state trial, which he appears to be
pursuing again, is to bury the impact of the tape in distracting details,
focusing obsessively, for example, on Mr. King's route before he was stopped by
the police.

Ira M. Salzman

It is Mr. Salzman's client, Sergeant Koon, a man with a degree in criminal
justice who says he has mastered every one of the tens of thousands of pages of
legal documents.

Mr. Salzman, 40, an experienced criminal and civil litigator, is handling his
first Federal criminal trial and his first police-misconduct defense. He is the
lawyer who receives the most written notes from his client. "Stacey is a very
knowledgeable client," Mr. Salzman said. "He's got a lot of strength, and it
helps me, because this case has caused me a lot of ups and downs."

Among the downs, Mr. Salzman said, is the hostility of friends and family
members and other lawyers who are shocked that he is defending Sergeant Koon.
"People want to throw out our innocent-until-proven-guilty standard," he said.
"It's very distressing."

Taking a cue from his client, who has written a book on the case, "Presumed
Guilty" (Regnery Gateway, 1992), Mr. Salzman said it was both his defense before
the jury and his duty to the public to explain the harsh realities of police
work.

The widely condemned videotape of the beating is like the televised images of
the Vietnam war, Mr. Salzman said.  Those images shocked a public that wanted
its wars won but did not want to accept the ugliness of the process.

"I believe the Rodney King case brought big-city police work into people's
living rooms," he said, "and it is jarring and it is sad and it is not pleasant.

"The guts of my defense is to educate the jury and hopefully the public as to
what produces a big-city cop."

Harland W. Braun

Mr. Braun, a 50-year-old criminal lawyer, likes to say he is the kind of person
who might have joined in the condemnation of Mr. Salzman. A self-described
"left-wing Democrat," he said he turned down the case when it was offered to him
during the state trial because he was convinced by the videotape that the
officers were guilty.

The defense lawyer with the most glamorous resume, Mr. Braun was involved in the
Charles Manson murder case, represented a defendant in the "Twilight Zone" movie
manslaughter case and represented Elizabeth Taylor's doctor in a criminal
investigation for overprescribing drugs.

Now he describes himself as "God's avenging angel" on behalf of his client,
Officer Briseno, who was indicted on the basis of just one stomp of the foot.

The most tart-tongued of the defense lawyers, Mr. Braun seems eager for a brawl.
"If the prosecutors want to go to the depths," he said, "I'll be the captain of
the U-boat." His behavior has caused Judge Davies to chide him for what the
judge called showboating and inflammatory remarks.

In the jury selection, Judge Davies issued a gag order specifically aimed at Mr.
Braun, barring him from continuing to disparage the prosecutors and saying that
black jurors could not be impartial. An appeals court overturned the ban on
criticism of the prosecutors but let stand the ban on racial remarks.

Mr. Braun seems to love the controversy. "I'm a lawyer," he said one day.  "I'm
impervious to pain."

Paul M. DePasquale

In contrast to Mr. Braun, Mr. DePasquale has a penchant, which seems both
personal and tactical, for hanging back. A 47-year-old civil rights specialist
and former district attorney, Mr. DePasquale communicates a heartfelt sympathy
for his client. Mr. Wind, a rookie recently arrived from Kansas, was dismissed
after the beating while his fellow defendants were suspended without pay.

Mr. DePasquale's tactic in the state trial, and apparently now, is to keep a low
profile for Mr. Wind and to try to persuade the jury that he was a minor player
in the beating. Repeatedly, he emphasizes Mr. Wind's obedience to his superiors.

"Every time Tim Wind used that baton he used it in response to apparent attempts
by Rodney King to get up," he told the jury on Tuesday. "He didn't use it in
anger, out of rage, for fun, for recreation, for sadism. He used it as a tool,
as a control tool, and he used it at the direct order of his sergeant."

A man who says law school was "not a big thrill in my life," a movie-lover whose
real passion is pre-Nazi German film, Mr. DePasquale said he had devoted much of
the past two years to this one case.

When it is over, he said, he looks forward to catching up on the movies he has
missed. And they will be cheaper, he noted, because they will already be out on
cassette.

NAME: Michael P. Stone; Ira M. Salzman; Harland W. Braun; Paul M. DePasquale

LOAD-DATE: March 21, 1993

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo: With the press banned from the courtroom, the most exciting
public events of the Rodney G. King trial have been the daily analyses offered
by the defense lawyers. Michael Stone, the lawyer for Officer Laurence M.
Powell, faced microphones and cameras at a briefing earlier this month.
(Associated Press)

TYPE: Biography

                   Copyright 1993 The New York Times Company

                              241 of 255 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                  March 22, 1993, Monday, Late Edition - Final

Clinton and Foreign Issues: Spasms of Attention

BYLINE: By THOMAS L. FRIEDMAN with ELAINE SCIOLINO,  Special to The New York
Times

SECTION: Section A; Page 3; Column 1; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 1783 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, March 21


The subject was Haiti and the President was not happy.

Gathered around the Cabinet table in the Roosevelt Room, Mr. Clinton's foreign
policy advisers had just presented him with their latest proposals for restoring
democracy to Haiti, in advance of the President's meeting with the exiled
Haitian President, the Rev. Jean-Bertrand Aristide.

"That's the same report you gave me in Little Rock during the transition -- it's
just not good enough," the President fumed at his advisers, who included
Secretary of State Warren Christopher, the national security adviser, Anthony
Lake, and a number of Latin America specialists. "I want more progress. I want
people in Haiti who want democracy restored to believe that something is being
done."

Approach Is Emerging

The Latin America specialists defended their proposals, but Mr. Christopher cut
them off: "Mr. President, we hear your message. We will try to implement it --
totally."

But there was no way to get around the fact that Mr. Clinton was not prepared to
fulfill his campaign promise to abandon the Bush Administration policy of
forcibly returning Haitians picked up at sea. All that emerged from the meeting
was the appointment of two special envoys to try to break the political impasse
in Haiti.

The scene over Haiti policy that played out eight days ago illustrates in many
respects the emerging approach, and frustrations, of Mr. Clinton as his
Presidency shifts from one initially absorbed by domestic affairs to one
increasingly diverted by events overseas, from Port-au-Prince to Sarajevo to
Moscow.

Even before Boris N. Yeltsin's assumption of virtually unlimited powers on
Saturday, Mr. Clinton, aides say, was becoming fixated with the situation inside
Russia, devoting about 50 percent of his foreign policy day cramming to
understand the place.

He has used many of his 30 conversations with world leaders in recent weeks,
from Francois Mitterrand to Yitzhak Rabin, to elicit their opinions on events in
Russia, and after each session with a foreign statesman he has asked his top
national security advisers to stay behind and jaw over how they should go about
supporting Russian reform.

The national security advisers say they have been bombarded every day for weeks
by handwritten notes from Mr. Clinton, attached to newspaper articles on Russia,
asking for follow-up.

Setting Broad Guidelines

But while Mr. Clinton is now ready to be seen doing more foreign policy, and is
being forced to do so by the turn of events, aides still describe his management
style as one of setting broad guidelines, and paying spasmodic attention to
different issues. One day, they say, he was barely focused on Haiti, and the
next day aides were told to drop everything to deal with it. As Secretary of
State Christopher delicately put it, Mr. Clinton lays down "the broad guidelines
of foreign policy, expecting his State Department and national security advisers
to implement them as a team, working together, and holding them accountable if
they don't carry it out in a fairly straightforward way."

As for substance, unlike his predecessors, who were usually called on to shape
alliances against the Soviet Union, or deal with wars between countries, Mr.
Clinton finds himself more and more having to deal with international
implications of domestic upheaval in countries like Haiti and Russia. Such
problems often require coming up with money or being willing to intervene
selectively in the internal affairs of other countries, and Mr. Clinton still
has not made up his mind how much of either he is ready to do, or where.

This explains the gap, at least in some areas, between the President's ambitious
oratory of the campaign trail and the tentative steps he has taken so far in
foreign affairs. In fairness, Mr. Clinton inherited a good deal of unfinished
business from the previous administration, but he also made some promises on
foreign policy -- to vastly increase aid to Russia, to be more aggressive in
rescuing Bosnia, to lift the ban on Haitian refugees -- that even aides now
concede were naive.

Contrasts With Bush

For instance, last week, Mr. Lake told aides before the arrival of the Irish
Prime Minister that "I think we are at the point we can go to the President and
walk him back from the commitment" to send a special envoy to Northern Ireland,
a proposal that won Irish-American votes but the ire of the British Government.
Mr. Clinton now says he will only send a fact-finder -- if the British and
others would find one helpful.

Foreign and American diplomats who have met with Mr. Clinton in the Oval Office
have come away intrigued by the many contrasts between him and President George
Bush. The 46-year-old Mr. Clinton is the nation's first post-cold-war President,
and the generation issue crops up in some way in virtually every meeting.

Sometimes it is just little things, like the way Prime Minister Brian Mulroney
of Canada, instead of giving the President the usual diplomatic gift of a book
or a silver dagger, brought him a pile of the latest Canadian jazz and
rock-and-roll compact disks and cassette tapes.

"Hey, Brian, thanks for the tapes; you can't get them in the United States,"
said Mr. Clinton, who presented the Canadian leader with a Dallas Cowboys
windbreaker that had been autographed by the team.

"It matters to belong to the same generation," said Mexico's Ambassador, Jorge
Montano, who is 42 years old. "When I was talking to President-elect Clinton, I
was thinking: 'We went to school in England at the same time. Perhaps we liked
the Beatles at the same time. Perhaps we shared the same view about Vietnam.' "

Deferential to His Elders

With world leaders who are much older, Mr. Clinton is a master political
charmer, adopting the deferential approach, as with the 76-year-old French
President, Mr. Mitterrand.

"Clinton treated Mitterrand like a younger man turning to an older man for
advice," said one French official. "He would begin sentences by saying say
things like, 'You have such experience in this matter,' or, 'You know more about
such complex things.' I am sure there was a bit of false modesty there, but it
played very well with Mitterrand."

Mr. Mitterrand was not so deferential. At one point he turned to Mr. Clinton and
said: "There is one thing I would always ask that would always upset your
predecessor, but I'm going to ask you all the same. Why do you maintain the
blockade of Cuba?"

Mr. Clinton responded briefly with the standard American policy line about Fidel
Castro's Communism.

"Well, Castro is Castro," lectured Mr. Mitterrand. "He is not just a Marxist. He
likes cigars and he likes to tell stories. He is a Latin before he is a
Marxist." Mr. Clinton, who is not about to offend the anti-Castro lobby in
Florida, nodded but let Vice President Al Gore argue back.

Even when he is meeting with foreign leaders, domestic policy is never far from
Mr. Clinton's mind. During the Mulroney meeting, aides said, Mr. Clinton and Mr.
Mulroney lapsed into an "excruciatingly detailed" discussion of comparative
deficit reduction programs and the need to cap increases in entitlement payments
at the cost of living plus one percent. At one point, Mr. Clinton got so
involved that he took out a notepad and began taking notes of Mr. Mulroney's
remarks, despite the presence of a White House stenographer.

Aides Seem Intimidated

Another thing that strikes all foreign visitors is how Mr. Clinton alone
conducts the meetings from the American side, while his aides seem rather
intimidated. His Secretary of State and national security advisers speak only if
called upon by the President.

"The only one who really interjected an opinion of his own was Vice President
Gore, who did not seem inhibited at all," said the French official. "The others
let the President do the talking. It wasn't like with Baker and Bush and
Scowcroft, where they would all just interrupt each other, or jump in whenever
they wanted."

In contrast with Presidents Bush and Reagan, Mr. Clinton likes to get his
information from reading, not from briefings from advisers, experts or even
videos.

"The secretaries at the N.S.C. are tearing their hair out," said one White House
official. "With George Bush, the briefing books for a foreign visitor were 15
pages. The briefing books for Clinton are now up to 100 pages."

After reading his briefing books, the President meets with all of his principal
advisers to discuss strategy, bristling if someone tries to feed him a script
that he is supposed to read in the meeting with his foreign counterpart. "He
likes you to feed him the concept, and then he formulates it in his own words,"
said one aide. "He never brings notes into the room."

Formally speaking, foreign policy in this administration is made through the
usual interagency committees.

Real Business Done Informally

But insiders say the real foreign policy business is done in three informal
settings. The most important is the President's 7:30 A.M. foreign policy
briefing with Mr. Lake, in which he is updated on the world and in turn issues
his orders. A second is during post-mortems after meetings with foreign leaders,
when top aides are asked to stay behind. Finally, there is the weekly Wednesday
lunch in the West Wing among Mr. Christopher, Mr. Lake and Secretary of Defense
Les Aspin, at which decisions are refined.

While Mr. Clinton may be the great communicator on domestic affairs, on foreign
policy there is already a great deal of grumbling by representatives and
senators about the poor quality of briefings they have been receiving from the
Administration.

"I have not had a face-to-face conversation with President Clinton," said
Richard Lugar of Indiana, the most influential Republican on the Senate Foreign
Relations Committee. "Christopher is sent out almost daily to dodge the bullets,
but it is not clear where the President is in all of this."

Perhaps the best way of describing Mr. Clinton's approach to the world is that
he comes to it very much as a governor, and not a grand geopolitical
theoretician. He keeps asking on every issue, "How will it change things on the
ground? How will change people's lives?" said one senior aide. "He does not
think in geostrategic terms."

"It may be that a guy who is not a geostrategist type has less of an intuitive
sense of how you rejigger NATO or refine the Start treaty," the official said.
"He might look right past you. But ask him to look at people wallking down the
streets or to deal with social unrest, and he'll react. That's something he has
an intuitive feel for. But how that translates into effective action is hard to
do."

LOAD-DATE: March 22, 1993

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo: Insiders say White House foreign policy business is done in
informal settings. President Clinton met with Defense Secretary Les Aspin,
center, and Gen. Colin L. Powell, Chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff. (White
House Photograph)

                   Copyright 1993 The New York Times Company

                              242 of 255 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                  March 22, 1993, Monday, Late Edition - Final

Brien T. Collins, 52, California Lawmaker

BYLINE: AP

SECTION: Section D; Page 8; Column 2; National Desk

LENGTH: 222 words

DATELINE: SACRAMENTO, Calif.,


State Assemblyman Brien T. Collins, a brash Vietnam War hero turned politician,
died Friday at Mercy General Hospital here. He was 52 and lived in Sacramento.

He died of a heart attack, hospital officials said.

Mr. Collins was an officer in the Green Berets and lost his right arm and right
leg in Vietnam in 1967, when a grenade he was throwing exploded prematurely. He
often poked fun at his condition and used the hook he wore in place of his right
hand as a prop for hijinks.

His political career was as unconventional as his style. Mr. Collins, a
Republican, served as chief of staff for a Democratic Governor, Edmund G. Brown
Jr. He gained nationwide attention in the 1970's when he headed the California
Conservation Corps, a program to provide youths with discipline and basic job
skills.

In 1991, at the urging of Gov. Pete Wilson, a Republican, he ran in a special
election for a Sacramento seat in the Assembly. He became an important Wilson
ally and was planning to run for re-election in 1994.

He is remembered by most Californians for a stunt in 1981, when he was director
of the conservation corps. Corps members were reluctant to pick fruit that had
been sprayed with the insecticide malathion to eradicate the medfly, so Mr.
Collins drank a glass of the chemical to show it was harmless to humans.

LOAD-DATE: March 22, 1993

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Obituary (Obit); Biography

                   Copyright 1993 The New York Times Company

                              243 of 255 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                  March 22, 1993, Monday, Late Edition - Final
                              Correction Appended

THE MEDIA BUSINESS;
A Window on the Fast-Growing Audience of Asian-Americans

SECTION: Section D; Page 5; Column 1; Financial Desk

LENGTH: 946 words


In a spare 600-square-foot office in Manhattan with three computers, a laser
printer, a fax machine and two phone lines, an unusual small publication called
A. Magazine has been started.

The magazine, a quarterly that made its debut in August, is a typical blend of
commentary, fashion and news. What sets A. Magazine apart is its market: It is
written for and about Asian-Americans.

Other publications serve Asian-American readers, but they differ substantially
in focus, distribution and format. One of them, Asian Week, is an established
newspaper based in San Francisco, with a majority of its coverage focused on
Asian-Americans in California. A host of publications, many of them newspapers,
cover local communities. Others aim for readers of a particular national group,
like Japanese-Americans or Chinese-Americans, and are often bilingual.

A. Magazine is modeled in part after life-style magazines for other minority
groups, like Ebony and Hispanic. For every such magazine that has succeeded,
however, a great many have failed, and some media analysts are cautious about
A.'s prospects. The publication needs a viable market to survive, they say, a
difficult task in an industry that does not always believe that members of
ethnic groups will buy publications tailored for them.

"This market has been seen as a black hole," said Phoebe Eng, who is publisher
of the 40,000-circulation magazine. "In the past, the Asian market has been
perceived as a mystery -- nobody knows the secret to the puzzle." Ms. Eng and
Jeff Yang, who is the magazine's editor in chief and founder, looked to 1990
census figures for the answers.

Doubling of Population Share

According to the census, Asian-Americans are the country's fastest-growing
minority, and more than seven million people, a little less than 3 percent of
the population, trace their ancestry from Asian nations, up from 1.5 percent in
1980. The greatest number are from China, the Philippines, Japan, India, Korea
and Vietnam.

Both immigrants and the children of immigrants have added to the population
increase, said Jeffrey Passel, a demographer with the Urban Institute in
Washington, a research group. If current immigration levels continue, Mr. Passel
estimates, there will be 17.1 million Asian-Americans by the year 2010, 5.7
percent of the projected national population.

He added that 2.4 million of the current 7 million Asian-Americans were born in
this country. It is this group A. wants to reach.

According to the magazine's research, its readers, almost evenly divided between
men and women, are mainly 18 to 40. They have a median household income of
$57,000, 88 percent are college graduates, and 38 percent have advanced degrees.

In some ways, Ms. Eng and Mr. Yang are very much like the readers they are
hoping to attract. Before she joined the magazine as publisher last June, Ms.
Eng, who would say of her age only that she was in her 30's, was a corporate
attorney for Coudert Brothers, a Manhattan law firm. Mr. Yang, 24, a Harvard
graduate, writes for The Village Voice, where he is an assistant editor.

Industry analysts laud the magazine's concept but think it faces a challenge.
Referring to Asian-Americans, Stephen A. Socha, vice president of Magazine
Capital, an investment and consulting firm in Princeton, N.J., said:

"Why would American individuals read A. Magazine as opposed to Time, Newsweek or
People? It's very hard to hold a special interest for this group and yet capture
the hearts and minds of advertisers, particularly in a time when successful
magazines are increasingly targeted."

In fact, other magazines have tried to tap the Asian-American market;
Transpacific, which is published every other month in Malibu, Calif., is
believed to be the longest running. Originally called Asiam, it has been out for
seven years; it differs from A. in that it includes articles on life styles and
business trends in Asia, while A.'s focus is entirely American.

The publisher and editor of Transpacific, Tom Kagy, recently began Face, an
Asian women's beauty magazine published every other month. And this November, he
plans to start XO, a men's publication.

Family Stories

A. Magazine's fall cover article was "Networks," a feature on Asian-American
broadcast journalists. The winter issue's cover piece is "The Family Album,"
stories of four families, including that of a Japanese-American woman whose
parents had an arranged marriage and who was interned with her family during
World War II.

The magazine has a staff of eight senior editors, most of them part time. Its
freelance writers are generally in their mid-to-late 20's.

Ms. Eng estimates the cost of producing an issue at $105,000, a figure that
includes rent, administration and the salaries of two full-time staff members.
Metro East Publications, a privately owned company, publishes the magazine. Its
newsstand price is $3, and it is also available by subscription at $10 for four
issues.

A. has run a total of 30 advertising pages in three issues, a 10-to-1 ratio in
favor of editorial content that Ms. Eng hopes to improve to 3 to 1 by the end of
this year. Advertisers have included Kirin Beer, Prescriptives makeup, The Asian
Wall Street Journal and Chivas Regal Scotch.

Ms. Eng says she is seeking about $1 million from private investors or groups
here and abroad.

But for now, she and Mr. Yang say they are just trying to get in touch with
their readers, who, Mr. Yang feels, have a common interest.

"For all that there may be a vast, fragmented market out there, there is a
community," he said. "I identify more with being Asian-American than
Chinese-American."


LOAD-DATE: March 22, 1993

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

CORRECTION-DATE: March 27, 1993, Saturday

CORRECTION:

Because of an editing error, an article on the Media Business page on Monday
about magazines aimed at Asian-American readers referred incompletely to the
frequency of publication for one magazine, Transpacific. The magazine,
previously published every two months, now appears monthly.


GRAPHIC: Photo: Jeff Yang, editor in chief and founder of A. Magazine, said, "I
identify more with being Asian-American than Chinese-American." (Ed Quinn for
The New York Times)

                   Copyright 1993 The New York Times Company

                              244 of 255 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 March 25, 1993, Thursday, Late Edition - Final

Hanoi Sees 'Positive Sign' From U.S. on Relations

BYLINE: By HENRY KAMM

SECTION: Section A; Page 5; Column 1; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 554 words

DATELINE: HANOI, Vietnam, March 24


Deputy Foreign Minister Le Mai says Vietnam has received what he calls "the
first positive sign" from the United States since the Clinton Administration
took office.

In an interview on Tuesday, Mr. Mai disclosed that after the massacre of 34
Vietnamese by Khmer Rouge troops in Cambodia on March 10, Hanoi had requested
Washington "to do everything possible" to prevent such killings. He said the
message had been delivered by the departing delegate to the United Nations,
Trinh Xuan Lang.

The Deputy Minister said the State Department followed with a strong
condemnation of the massacre and a request to United Nations officials in
Cambodia to investigate the killings and punish the criminals. He said the
United States also urged other Governments to take similar action.

"We consider the statement quite positive," Mr. Mai said. In a further move
viewed here as encouraging to Vietnam's efforts toward normalizing relations
with the United States, Washington sent a reply to Vietnam concerning its
request, and Assistant Secretary of State William Clark received Mr. Lang for a
farewell call last week.

Without linking the two actions, Mr. Mai later in the interview cited
disapprovingly an official Chinese comment on the massacre. "China said it
'disapproves,' " he said. "They could find a stronger word for murder."

Vietnamese officials do not hide their eagerness for the Clinton Administration
to move toward lifting the trade embargo and the establishment of diplomatic
relations. They profess not to be disappointed that Mr. Clinton has not yet
stated his intentions.

The Deputy Minister said Hanoi had been told by Americans that the lack of a
United States initiative was because of unusual slowness by the Clinton
Administration in filling top State Department posts.

Asked whether there was any action that Vietnam planned to prompt an initiative
by the new Administration, Mr. Mai said: "We have done everything possible. We
are asking the United States, 'What do you want?' "

On the main obstacle for normalization, Vietnamese cooperation in the search for
1,654 American servicemen still listed as missing in action, Mr. Mai said
Vietnam was continuing "without interruption" its "full cooperation," begun
under the Bush Administration.

Lieut. Col. Jack Donovan, head of the team of 90 Americans now in Vietnam as
part of the Joint Task Force-Full Accounting, said in an interview at his
headquarters: "Vietnam at this point in time is increasing the level of
cooperation. They are bending over backward to help us. I agree with Vietnam on
the progress being made."

Mr. Mai urged the United States to respond to what Vietnam calls its changed
foreign policy since the collapse of the Soviet Union, Hanoi's main ally and
source of support.

"We were strong supporters of the Soviet Union and Eastern Europe," he said. "In
today's situation, we adapt to the changing world. We try everything possible.
It's up to the United States to decide: either normalize or prolong this
abnormal state."

Asked to give a personal rather than diplomatic view, Mr. Mai said: "It's more
than 20 years since the Paris Agreement with the United States. We should be in
a position to look into the future. If our generation can't solve the issue,
it's bad. We should not leave it to the next generation."


LOAD-DATE: March 25, 1993

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1993 The New York Times Company

                              245 of 255 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 March 25, 1993, Thursday, Late Edition - Final

Ronald P. Kriss, 58, An Executive Editor Of Time Magazine

BYLINE: By BRUCE LAMBERT

SECTION: Section B; Page 10; Column 6; Metropolitan Desk

LENGTH: 309 words


Ronald P. Kriss, an executive editor at Time magazine, died yesterday at the
John F. Kennedy Medical Center in Edison, N.J. He was 58 and lived in Manhattan
and Woodstock, N.Y.

The cause of death was complications from cancer, his family said.

For almost a decade Mr. Kriss was one of two executive editors at Time. His was
the third-highest editing position.

In his 30-year career at the magazine, he was in charge of hundreds of cover
articles and wrote more than 40 himself, including articles on the Vietnam War,
the art of diplomacy and President Lyndon B. Johnson.

First Moon Landings

After becoming a senior editor in 1969, he supervised Time's coverage of the
first moon landings and was in charge of foreign news and later all breaking
news. He coordinated special issues and special reports, including those
commemorating the anniversaries of the beginning of World War II, D-Day, the
dawn of the atomic age and the fall of Saigon.

For two years in the early 1970's, he left Time to serve as the executive editor
of Saturday Review magazine.

Mr. Kriss was a native of Brooklyn. While studying at Harvard, where he was
accepted when he was 16, he wrote for The Boston Globe.

From 1954 to 1956, he served in the United States Army in Korea, then earned a
master's degree in journalism from Columbia. After serving as a correspondent
for United Press International in Tokyo and working for The Daily News in New
York City, he joined Time as a writer in 1961.

His marriage to Lorna Smith ended in divorce.

He is survived by his wife of six years, Suzanne Richie; a son, Erik, of Delmar,
N.Y.; a daughter, Evan Kriss of Manhattan; a sister, Jacqueline Mastrandrea of
West Islip, L.I., and two grandchildren.

The funeral will be at noon on Sunday at the Stephen Wise Free Synagogue, at 30
West 68th Street in Manhattan.

NAME: Ronald P. Kriss

LOAD-DATE: March 25, 1993

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Obituary (Obit); Biography

                   Copyright 1993 The New York Times Company

                              246 of 255 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 March 25, 1993, Thursday, Late Edition - Final

John Hersey, Author of 'Hiroshima,' Is Dead at 78

BYLINE: By RICHARD SEVERO

SECTION: Section B; Page 11; Column 1; Cultural Desk

LENGTH: 1418 words


John Hersey, the novelist and journalist whose "A Bell for Adano" won a Pulitzer
Prize for fiction in 1945 and whose nonfiction work "Hiroshima" awakened
Americans to the horrors of atomic warfare, died yesterday at his home in Key
West, Fla. He was 78.

The cause of death was cancer, said his family.

In the course of his five decades as a writer, Mr. Hersey emerged not only as a
first-rate reporter but also as a storyteller who nurtured the idea that writers
had to pursue a moral goal. He involved himself deeply in the issues of his day.


Speaking Out on War and Writing

In public appearances and in work on special committees, he never hesitated to
speak out on such issues as the Vietnam War, which he strongly opposed; on
problems in American education, and on issues central to the craft of writing,
including censorship, government intimidation of writers, copyright protection
and fair taxation for those who create the nation's literature. He was a
tireless worker for both the Authors League of America and the Authors Guild.

Mr. Hersey sent his latest manuscript to his publisher, Alfred A. Knopf, just
six weeks ago, said Judith Jones, his editor at Knopf for the last 20 years.
Entitled "Key West Tales," it consists of short stories, set in the past and
present, about people and events in his hometown. The book is to be published in
the winter of 1994, Ms. Jones said.

From the beginning of his career, Mr. Hersey won praise for the directness of
his style, his eye for detail and his ability to get to the heart of any
situation. But most critics suggested that his past as a journalist somehow
showed in his novels and that his fiction was not developed as deeply as it
might have been.

This kind of criticism was heard even after the publication of "A Bell for
Adano," in 1944, Mr. Hersey's acclaimed novel about events that occurred in
Licata, a small town in Sicily that was ravaged by World War II. The book used
some experiences of Maj. Frank E. Toscani, the American Army officer who became
Licata's military governor and learned from townspeople that their most pressing
need was the return of their bell.

The centerpiece of their community, the bell, had been taken down by the enemy
and melted for the war effort against the Allies. Major Toscani became very much
a part of the town's lore when he somehow succeeded in securing another bell
from a Navy destroyer.

Over Dinner, Settling a Suit

In the book, which became a best seller, Licata became Adano and Major Toscani
became Major Joppolo. Mr. Hersey had the fictional major have an affair with an
Italian woman. Major Toscani promptly sued Mr. Hersey for libel, stating that
the book seemed so true to so much of what happened that many people mistakenly
thought that the amorous adventure was true, too. The lawsuit was finally
settled amicably over dinner in New York at a restaurant named after the novel.

The novel got excellent reviews, although Diana Trilling, who reviewed it for
The Nation and who basically liked it, wrote that Mr. Hersey's ideas, "like his
prose, have undergone a process of conscious falsifying and purposeful
simplification." Even so, "A Bell for Adano" won a Pulitzer Prize. In 1945, it
also became a successful motion picture, starring John Hodiak in the role of
Major Joppolo.

Taking On Hiroshima

Mr. Hersey's next big project was "Hiroshima," a major work of nonfiction that
traces the lives of six people who survived the atomic bombing of Japan in 1945.
It was written as a three-part series for The New Yorker, but the magazine's
editors, Harold Ross and William Shawn, instead decided to print it in full on
Aug. 31, 1946, allowing it to consume nearly all the editorial space in the
issue.

The New York Times ran an editorial calling attention to the piece, and Lewis
Gannett, writing in The New York Herald Tribune, called "Hiroshima" "the best
reporting" of the war and Time magazine praised its restraint. Albert Einstein
was said to have ordered a thousand copies for distribution and a great many
newspapers clamored to serialize it. Mr. Hersey allowed this, provided that they
made contributions to the American Red Cross, rather than pay him.

The piece was developed into a book, published by Alfred A. Knopf.

Similar praise came in 1950 with publication of "The Wall," Mr. Hersey's novel
about events in the Warsaw ghetto from November 1939, with the German
occupation, to May 1943, when the last houses in the ghetto were razed. "The
Wall" won the Daroff Memorial Fiction Award of the Jewish Book Council of
America and the Sidney Hillman Foundation Award. It was dramatized by Millard
Lampell, produced at the Billy Rose Theater in New York in the early 1960's and
filmed for television by CBS in 1982.

Speaking Chinese Before English

John Richard Hersey was born on June 17, 1914, in Tientsin, China. His father,
Roscoe, worked for the Young Men's Christian Association there; his mother, the
former Grace Baird, was a missionary. John, who spent most of his first 10 years
in China, spoke Chinese before he spoke English. His life was eventful: at one
point, he took a two-year trip around the world with his mother. But in later
years he said he could recall very little of his childhood and described it as
"no more exciting than the average child's."

In 1924, the family moved to Briarcliff Manor, N.Y., in Westchester County.
After attending public schools there, John Hersey was enrolled in the private
Hotchkiss School in Lakeville, Conn., which he attended from 1927 to his
graduation in 1932. After that came Yale, from which he graduated in 1936, and
then Clare College, Cambridge. By the time his college days were over, he was
determined to become a journalist.

Returning to the United States in May 1937, he learned that Sinclair Lewis
needed a private secretary. Mr. Hersey thus became Mr. Lewis's summertime
factotum, copying pages of a play that Lewis was writing about Communism. Mr.
Hersey later recalled that he worked intensively with Lewis without ever
realizing that his employer had a serious drinking problem.

A Criticism of Time Magazine

Later in 1937, he was hired by Time magazine. "Time seemed to me to be the
liveliest enterprise of its type and I wanted more than anything to be connected
with it," he later said. He talked the editors into hiring him by submitting to
them an essay in which he told them what he thought was wrong with the magazine.

In 1939, Time sent Mr. Hersey to the Far East, where he covered the initial
stages of World War II. His first book, "Men on Bataan," was produced in 1942,
and the next year he wrote "Into the Valley," a novel about a skirmish on
Guadalcanal. John Chamberlin, reviewing it for The New York Times, said the book
gave evidence that Mr. Hersey was "a new Hemingway." Moreover, Mr. Hersey was
commended by the Secretary of the Navy for his role in helping to remove wounded
men from Guadalcanal.

During the years immediately after the war, as he developed his novelistic
skills in such books as "The Marmot Drive" (1953), "A Single Pebble" (1956) and
"The War Lover" (1959), Mr. Hersey also kept alive his interests in things that
had nothing to do with his books. He joined a number of local and national
educational organizations and became master of Pierson College at Yale
University in 1965, holding the post for five years.

Killing of 3 Men

In the 1960's Mr. Hersey became an early opponent of American involvement in the
Vietnam War, and in 1965 he was a sponsor of a March on Washington for Peace in
Vietnam. He was no less concerned with racism in America and in 1968 wrote "The
Algiers Motel Incident," which described the killing of three black men in a
Detroit motel.

Mr. Hersey became involved in a literary uproar in 1976 when an article he wrote
for The Saturday Review was pulled by the magazine's editor, Norman Cousins. The
article condemned the influence wielded by certain large corporations, and Mr.
Cousins reportedly felt it was not upbeat enough.

Mr. Hersey married Frances Ann Cannon in 1940. They were divorced in 1958 and
Mr. Hersey married Barbara Day Addams Kaufman that year.

He is survived by his wife; their daughter, Brook Hersey of Manhattan; three
sons by his first marriage, Martin, of Eastampton, N.J., John Jr., of Millbrook,
N.Y., and Baird, of Willow, N.Y.; another daughter, Ann Hersey of Cambridge,
Mass.; a brother, Arthur, of Annapolis, Md., and six grandchildren.


NAME: John Hersey

LOAD-DATE: March 25, 1993

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo: John Hersey with students at Pierson College at Yale in 1967.

Chart: "A Writer's Journey From War to Music"

John Hersey began his long writing career in 1942 with "Men on Bataan," a book
about a bloody World War II battlefront. Among his last efforts was the 1991
"Antonietta," the story of a Stradivarius violin. Here is a Hersey bibliography.



 Men on Bataan 1942
 Into the Valley 1943
 A Bell for Adano 1944
 Hiroshima 1946
 The Wall 1950
 The Marmot Drive 1953
 A Single Pebble 1956
 The War Lover 1959
 The Child Buyer 1960
 Here to Stay 1963
 White Lotus 1965
 Too Far to Walk 1966
 Under the Eye of the Storm 1967
 The Algiers Motel Incident 1968
 Letter to the Alumni 1970
 The Conspiracy 1972
 The Writer's Craft 1974
 My Petition for More Space 1974
 The President 1975
 The Walnut Door 1977
 Aspects of the Presidency 1980
 The Call 1985
 Blues 1987
 Fling and Other Stories 1990
 Antonietta 1991

TYPE: Obituary (Obit); Biography

                   Copyright 1993 The New York Times Company

                              247 of 255 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                  March 26, 1993, Friday, Late Edition - Final

Zolton Ferency Dies; Political Champion Of Liberals Was 70

BYLINE: By MARVINE HOWE

SECTION: Section B; Page 6; Column 3; National Desk

LENGTH: 294 words


Zolton Ferency, retired professor at Michigan State University, former
Democratic state chairman and perennial crusader for liberal causes, died on
Tuesday at Sparrow Hospital in Lansing, Mich. He was 70 and lived in East
Lansing.

His son Mark of Bath Township, Mich., said the cause was cardiac arrest.

At the time of his death, Mr. Ferency was trying to change the state's form of
government. As a member of the East Lansing City Council, he was completing work
on a proposal to establish a unicameral proportional legislature, which would
open the way for a much broader range of political opinion.

Mr. Ferency started to champion liberal causes at the age of 11, when he marched
beside Walter Reuther in a labor protest. As state Democratic chairman in 1967,
he opposed President Lyndon B. Johnson over the Vietnam War and urged him to
withdraw American troops unilaterally.

Mr. Ferency served as chairman of the state Democratic Party from 1963 to 1968.
Although he ran unsuccessfully against Gov. George Romney in 1966, he won
re-election as chief of Michigan's Democratic organization for a third term.

He broke with the Democratic Party in 1970 to found the Human Rights Party, made
up largely of anti-war Democrats. After running unsuccessfully twice for the
state Supreme Court and again for governor, he rejoined the Democratic Party in
1976.

Joining the faculty of Michigan State in 1971, he taught criminal justice until
his retirement in 1990.

He was born and reared in Detroit. He graduated from Michigan State University
and earned a law degree from Detroit College of law.

He is survived by his wife, Ellen; another son, Michael, of Williams Township,
Mich.; a brother, John, of Grosse Isle, Mich., and three grandchildren.


NAME: Zolton Ferency

LOAD-DATE: March 26, 1993

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo: Zolton Ferency. (1967)

TYPE: Obituary (Obit); Biography

                   Copyright 1993 The New York Times Company

                              248 of 255 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 March 27, 1993, Saturday, Late Edition - Final

NEWS SUMMARY

SECTION: Section 1; Page 2; Column 5; Metropolitan Desk

LENGTH: 977 words



International     2-5

RUSSIANS WORK ON A COMPROMISE

With the campaign to oust President Yeltsin collapsing, a special session of
Russia's Congress of People's Deputies moved increasingly toward a compromise
that would include new elections for President as well as the legislature.  1

MORE I.M.F. AID TO RUSSIA SOUGHT

The Clinton Administration has proposed that the International Monetary Fund
vastly increase its aid to Russia, to more than $10 billion a year, Western
officials said.  1

Russia's pugnacious new Finance Minister is a fighter for reform.  5

CEASE-FIRE IN BOSNIA

The commander of United Nations forces in Bosnia secured agreement on a
cease-fire starting at noon tomorrow from the commanders of the Muslim, Croatian
and Serbian nationalist armies fighting the war in Bosnia and Herzegovina.  1

U.S. TO RELY ON PRESSURE ON SERBS

President Clinton said the United States intended to rely for now on economic
sanctions and diplomatic pressure to get the Bosnian Serbs to accept a peace
plan, even though Bosnia's Muslim President told him that without some arms aid
his country would not long survive.  4

President Clinton and Chancellor Kohl find common ground: dinner.  4

THE PARADOX OF SANCTIONS

News Analysis: Sanctions imposed so far have ended up strengthening the Serbian
leader, Slobodan Milosevic, and entrenching most Serbs in a dogged commitment to
the war in Bosnia.  4

U.N. TO SEND 30,000 TO SOMALIA

The United Nations Security Council agreed to set up the largest and most
expensive peacekeeping operation it has ever undertaken, voting to send some
30,000 soldiers and civilians to Somalia.  3

A JEWISH PRESIDENT FOR GERMANY?

German politicians and commentators have begun suggesting that the leader of the
country's principal Jewish organization, Ignatz Bubis, a Frankfurt real estate
broker, run for President next year.  3

ENVOY IN BRITAIN TO BE RETAINED

In a move meant as a boost to the professional Foreign Service, Raymond G. H.
Seitz, the career diplomat who is the American Ambassador to Britain, will be
kept in the post, officials say.  3

VIETNAMESE PORT IN DECLINE

Haiphong Journal: Vietnam's largest port, until a few years ago backed up with
ships waiting to be unloaded and masters and shipping agents angry over costly
delays, now stands nearly idle.  2

National     6-9

HOMOSEXUALS WARN CLINTON

Advocates for homosexual rights warned that if President Clinton did not better
demonstrate support for homosexuals in the military, a march on Washington next
month would turn into an embarrassing protest.  1

THE ARKANSAS CONNECTION

Forged on the rubber-chitterlings circuit of Arkansas politics, the friendship
of President Clinton, Senator David Pryor and Senator Dale Bumpers is among the
most important alliances in Washington today.  1

SECRET IDENTITIES NO MORE

President Clinton abandoned his effort to conceal the names of more than 500
people charged with developing a new health-care policy for the nation. The
list, in full.  1

HOPING TO CLEAR-CUT A DISPUTE

The forest conference President Clinton is convening in Oregon will be the
Administration's biggest and perhaps most difficult effort to show it is
possible to protect a rare natural resource without putting a lot of people out
of work.  6

PENTAGON PROPOSES WIDE CUTS

The Clinton Administration will propose a military budget of $263 billion for
1994, about $10 billion less than authorized in 1993, requiring wide cuts in
troops and weapons systems, Pentagon officials said.  9

CARE ORDERED FOR HAITIANS

A Federal judge ordered the Administration to provide better medical care for
the Haitian refugees with AIDS detained at the U.S. naval base at Guantanamo
Bay, Cuba.  9

I.B.M. NAMES NEW CHIEF

I.B.M. officially named Louis V. Gerstner Jr. as its chief executive. The former
Nabisco executive must now accelerate I.B.M.'s evolution into a loose
confederation of more nimble businesses.  1

RANDOM SHOTS IN WASHINGTON

Frightened residents of two Washington neighborhoods began locking themselves in
their homes at night after the police said someone had been cruising the streets
and randomly shooting pedestrians.  6

RULING ON WORKPLACE INJURIES

An administrative law judge issued a decision that significantly weakens the
Government's ability to penalize companies whose workers develop repetitive
stress injuries.  7

MORE SURPRISES IN OFFICERS' TRIAL

A highway patrol officer called by the defense in the trial of four Los Angeles
police officers broke down in tears as she testified about the beating of Rodney
King. 6

Metro Digest   23
HARTFORD'S FIGHT OVER GAMBLING

As a debate over casino gambling intensifies in the Connecticut Legislature,
casino operators have begun one of the most sophisticated and expensive efforts
ever undertaken in this state to win friends and influence the people who count.
1

Business Digest   35

Arts/Entertainment 11-17, 47
Return of a 1968 cult film.  11
Theater: "The Confessions of Stepin Fetchit." 12
Film: "Combination Platter." 11
"Virgina," from Yugoslavia.  15
Music: Nanci Griffith concert.  11
Classical reviews.  14
Sade at the Paramount.  17
Dance: Two by Harlem troupe.  16

Sports   27-32

Obituaries   10
Reuben Fine, chess genius.
Louis Falco, choreographer.

Editorials/Op-Ed   20-21
Editorials
South Africa's unexploded bombs.
Prudent approach to student work.
No gay stockades, please.
Topics: Bus stop.
Letters
Russell Baker: Unmarried doesn't help.
Warren Mitofsky: Mr. Perot, you're no pollster.
William J. Taylor: Cool off Korean tensions.
William E. Burrows: U.S. space grab.
John Hockenberry: Tirades and sympathy.

LOAD-DATE: March 27, 1993

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Summary

                   Copyright 1993 The New York Times Company

                              249 of 255 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 March 27, 1993, Saturday, Late Edition - Final

Haiphong Journal;
With Aid Gone, a Once-Bustling Port Turns Quiet

BYLINE: By HENRY KAMM,  Special to The New York Times

SECTION: Section 1; Page 2; Column 1; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 882 words

DATELINE: HAIPHONG, Vietnam, March 24


Vietnam's largest port, until a few years ago backed up with ships waiting to be
unloaded and masters and shipping agents angry over costly delays, stands nearly
idle. Only three or four in the long row of berths are occupied; stacks of empty
containers await cargoes that do not come or go.

"The port is a victim of the end of the Soviet Union and the other socialist
states," Nguyen Van Nha, the deputy harbor master, said. He was interviewed in
the stillness of what was once a bustling flight of offices at dockside.

Haiphong was the main point of entry for everything that the Soviet Union and
its allies sent to Vietnam.  In its poverty and near-isolation from the
non-Communist world, it was their ward. Much of what Vietnam ate, the fertilizer
and pesticides that made its rice grow, raw materials for its industries and the
arms, ammunition and equipment to keep its large army girded in war and peace
arrived here.

The aid has vanished since its donors have themselves become recipients of
foreign assistance.

Good Rice Harvests

Moreover, Mr. Nha said, northern Vietnam has been experiencing excellent rice
harvests in recent years, so the one million or so tons that sometimes had to be
brought from the south have not been needed. Haiphong port is operating at half
or less of its yearly handling capacity of five million tons, the harbor master
said.

At best, Mr. Nha said, the port handled 3.2 million tons a year in the crisis
years of 1978-80, when Vietnam invaded and occupied Cambodia. Bureaucratic
central control once made the port notorious for delays in loading and
unloading, but since the Vietnamese program of economic liberalization and
decentralization, cargo-handling has been greatly speeded. This makes the
emptiness of the port even greater.

The loss of port activity poses a grave problem of social conscience for a
country that remains Communist and cannot admit having unemployment.

"We employ more than 5,000 people, but at the moment we require limited numbers
of workers," Mr. Nha said. It was an understatement that fell far short of
describing the virtual absence of anybody on the dock at 2 in the afternoon,
except for a cleaning crew of cheerful women and a fierce-looking North Korean
guarding his freighter.

"We try to divide the work among them," the deputy harbor master continued.
Shifts are shortened, he said, and the night shift was eliminated. He said
workers were sent for training to increase efficiency for the future and given
language courses.  Most of Vietnam seems to believe that English is the key to
prosperity.

Truong Van Thai, a Polish- and Belgian-trained port-management specialist who is
secretary of the harbor administration, said workers were being laid off if no
work or training could be found for them at 75 percent of their pay. Base pay is
about $30 a month, high for this country, where teachers earn $20.

"We know we will need them again, so we don't want to lose anybody," he said.

Pointing to the extensive warehouses, rebuilt after the end of the devastating
years of American bombing in 1973, Mr. Thai said that 10 years ago the port was
fining shippers for not removing their cargoes promptly. "Now we give them 10
days' storage for free for imports and 20 for exports," he said. "And our
warehouses are still empty."

No Ill Feeling Toward U.S.

The bombs have not been forgotten.  "They were horrible days," said Vu Thi Ngoc,
a flower vendor opposite the Opera. "Every few minutes the sirens sounded. We
haven't gotten over it."

But Mrs. Ngoc, echoing a theme heard throughout Vietnam, said she "really"
harbored no ill feelings toward any American and wished the United States would
end its boycott.  "You can't keep that sentiment of bitterness forever," she
said. "If the Americans come back in peace, it will be good for both of us."

The deputy harbor master said Haiphong's main hope was becoming a transit port
for China's southern inland provinces like Yunan. He said the Governor of Yunan
had said on a visit that he could provide more than two million tons of cargo a
year to a port that is only about 600 miles from Kunming, Yunan's capital.

Looking More Prosperous

Despite the plight of its chief employer, this bustling city of half a million
people looks far more prosperous than it did before liberalization. The main
reason is that an extensive new private sector is providing second and third
jobs in a "gray" economy. "Nobody can survive on Government pay," said a
geographer selling trinkets on a Hanoi street.

Small shops offering a great variety of bottom-of-the-line clothes and consumer
goods give the old port city's main streets a scent of its pre-Communist past.
Fine old French-colonial buildings -- the Opera House, Government palaces and
hotels -- have received long-overdue coats of paint. A new hotel, Haiphong's
only high-rise, is being built with Hong Kong money.

It dwarfs the lovely 100-year-old refurbished hotel next to it, which has
restored its name, l'Hotel du Commerce. After the Communist victory in 1954 it
had been renamed, Soviet-style, as Friendship Hotel.

But the street on which it stands has kept its name. It is still called Dien
Bien Phu Street, after the battle that ended French colonialism in Indochina.

LOAD-DATE: March 27, 1993

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo: Once a bustling port, and once the target of American bombs,
Haiphong, Vietnam, now has idle docks and empty warehouses. It has little to do
since the collapse of European Communism stemmed the flow of aid. (Henry
Kamm/The New York Times)

Map of Vietnam showing location of Haiphong.

                   Copyright 1993 The New York Times Company

                              250 of 255 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                  March 28, 1993, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

THEATER;
Monarchs of the Forest Rise to a Dramatic Occasion

BYLINE: By CHRISTOPHER GRAY

SECTION: Section 2; Page 5; Column 1; Arts & Leisure Desk

LENGTH: 506 words


In the Redwood Forests of the California and Oregon coasts, the giant evergreens
tower over a wide needle-brown floor. A grove of these ancient trees is like a
huge pipe organ, the trunks shooting 30 to 40 feet in the air before the
branches even begin. At that point, the blue-green needles act as a lense for
the light, directing smoky shafts to the moss and ferns below. In this perpetual
late afternoon, everything is quickly miniaturized, especially human beings.

It was no different at the Brooks Atkinson Theater on Broadway recently.
Stagehands wrestled with 24-foot sections of the aluminum-framed "trees" that
dominate the set of Lanford Wilson's play "Redwood Curtain," opening on Tuesday.
In the sunlight outside, the scrunched-velour "bark" with red and green silk
highlighting had looked laughably fake. But on the dim stage -- the deep ridges
of the soft brownish trunks, the "forest floor" of sound-deadening carpet, the
way the trees soared up into blackness even as the men seemed to grow smaller --
the mysteriousness and cathedral-like proportions of a redwood grove were
evoked.

Mr. Wilson's three-character play, which has had productions in Seattle,
Philadelphia and San Diego, is set in 1990 and takes place mainly in a redwood
forest in northern California and the music room of a country house. It involves
an adopted teen-ager (played by Sung Yun Cho), the child of a Vietnamese mother
and an American soldier, who desperately wants to find her real father. On a
visit to an aunt (Debra Monk), her adoptive father's sister, she comes upon a
"bush vet," a Vietnam veteran (Jeff Daniels) who has retreated deep into the
redwoods.

"With this one, I got to recreate much of my childhood," said the set designer
John Lee Beatty, who grew up in Claremont, Calif., and since 1974 has designed
many of Mr. Wilson's sets. "But Lanford warned me," he added, watching the
stagehands, "that there was 'a difficult one coming' when he did 'Redwood
Curtain.' " As Mr. Beatty talked, the trees rocked and clanged -- as if a giant
woodpecker were attacking -- while the trunks were bolted together. The forest
and the music room are accommodated by twin cable-drawn turntables that swing
the trees partly out of the way in scene changes.

The designer has set the trees much closer together -- one to three feet apart
-- than they would be in a real redwood forest, where the separation is measured
in tens of feet. Were they real, these trunks would burst out of the theater
roof. One of Mr. Beatty's illusionary devices is to have the bark darken as the
trees rise, to give the impression of height. During performances, the grove
will be enveloped in a light fog, but the typical forest floor of ferns will be
absent. "I didn't want a stage full of salad," Mr. Beatty said.

His precise Queen Anne-style town house interior is across the street in "The
Sisters Rosensweig," but he said he didn't try for perfect realism with the
redwoods. "I wanted to make them a little magical. Only God can make a tree."

LOAD-DATE: March 28, 1993

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo: From the redwood forests to the stage for a new Lanford Wilson
play. (Angel Franco/The New York Times)

                   Copyright 1993 The New York Times Company

                              251 of 255 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                  March 28, 1993, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

'They Were the Bravest, Most Committed Americans I Know'

SECTION: Section 4; Page 14; Column 4; Editorial Desk

LENGTH: 377 words


To the Editor:

In covering the tragic armed conflict between the Federal Government and the
Branch Davidians at Waco, Tex., wire services have identified the cult as "a
splinter group of the Seventh Day Adventist Church." Since the mass media also
use David Koresh to preach their own gospel against "religious zealots," some
might suspect the Seventh Day Adventists of a similar cultic trend.

As a priest of the Orthodox Church who writes on religion and culture, I am
hardly a missionary for the Seventh Day Adventists. In the Vietnam War, however,
I served as an Army medic with many S.D.A.'s, as they were called. As
conscientious objectors, these young men refused to bear arms but agreed to
serve as medical personnel. Most of those I trained and served with were black
Southerners.

Vegetarian, cheerful, stolidly faithful to their tradition, they were harassed
mercilessly by drill instructors, who routinely insulted their beliefs. Some
were chosen to participate in a "white coat" program, where they served as human
subjects for what they thought was humanitarian research. Later, the program was
identified as a facet of our germ warfare program. (Cynics point out that
Seventh Day Adventists were chosen as guinea pigs because their beliefs forbid
them to bring suit in civil court.)

Most often, Seventh Day Adventists were sent to combat units, where without even
a sidearm they crawled directly into enemy fire to patch the wounded and
retrieve the dead. Their casualty rates were among the highest of the war. There
are names of Seventh Day Adventists etched in the the wall of the Vietnam
Veterans Memorial. Their memory is seared into those hapless cynics who served
with them. They were the bravest, most committed, most heroic Americans I have
ever known.

Given that they openly confessed Jesus as Lord, a habit the mass media find
annoying, I guarantee that Hollywood or the secular press will never tell their
story as a counterweight to people like David Koresh. But to honor the memory of
those whose faith led them to die, rather than take up arms, we can spare the
Seventh Day Adventists in condemnation of cults.

ANTHONY UGOLNIK
Elijah Kresge Professor
Franklin and Marshall College
Lancaster, Pa., March 20, 1993

LOAD-DATE: March 28, 1993

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Letter

                   Copyright 1993 The New York Times Company

                              252 of 255 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                  March 28, 1993, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

Comrades and Family Fighting to Honor a Hero

BYLINE: By RICHARD BERNSTEIN,  Special to The New York Times

SECTION: Section 1; Page 18; Column 4; National Desk

LENGTH: 1091 words

DATELINE: LOS ANGELES


The photograph, pulled out of a yellowed envelope by Anese Rivers Woodfork, is
of a lean young man in military khaki. He has a long face, an assertive jaw and
in his eyes the faraway look of a youth who expects to live forever.

"I was 13 when Ruben went away," Mrs. Woodfork said of the young man in the
photograph, her older brother Ruben Rivers. He left their home in Oklahoma and
went off to war almost exactly 50 years ago, dying in a fierce tank battle with
the Germans in eastern France.

Mrs. Woodfork, showing memorabilia of her brother to a visitor at her modest
home in South-Central Los Angeles, is among the relatives, including nine
surviving brothers and sisters, and a small group of aging combat veterans who
are trying to rectify what they see as a serious oversight by the Government.

In all, 79 black soldiers have been awarded Medals of Honor, 24 in the Civil
War, 18 in the Indian wars, and most of the others in the Spanish-American,
Korean and Vietnam wars. But no black soldier in World War II was awarded the
Medal of Honor, the country's highest decoration for heroism, even though 1.2
million blacks served in the armed forces. By contrast, 470 Medals of Honor were
awarded to white soldiers and two to American Indians in a war when segregation
meant that blacks were mostly service troops, seldom allowed in combat.

'That Was Ruben'

If any black soldier is to be awarded the Medal of Honor, Mrs. Woodfork feels,
her brother would be a strong candidate, though she says she often wishes that
he had not ignored his commander's order to be evacuated for treatment of a leg
torn to the bone by shrapnel. She asks herself why her brother did not play it
safer, instead of holding out against a withering assault for two days and
nights until he was finally killed.

"Well," Mrs. Woodfork said with a sigh, "that was Ruben."

But others fighting for a Medal of Honor for Sergeant Rivers are less
ambivalent.

"Why Rivers?" asked David Williams, his commander in the black 761st Tank
Battalion and the man who has probably fought the hardest for the award.

"Nobody surpassed Rivers's feat," he said. "He was seriously wounded. I begged
him to be evacuated. I told him, 'Hey, this is your chance. Your war is over.'
But he insisted on fighting, and you know why? Out there it's not for country
and Coca-Cola. Out there it's for each other. He said, 'You need me,' and he was
right. We did need him.  Only he got killed."

Mr. Williams, who is retired and lives in Florida, is one of a small band who
have been striving for years to nudge the Government to award Sergeant Rivers
the medal, which would mean waiving a 1952 deadline established by the Army for
such recommendations.

"We have to recognize that World War II came during a period in which blacks
were not recognized for many of the things that they did," said Major Clark, a
veteran of the all-black 597th Field Artillery Battalion who knew Mr. Rivers's
parents in Oklahoma. "That was the policy, both military and political."

Complications From Film

Now, Mr. Williams and the others campaigning on Sergeant Rivers's behalf feel
that the atmosphere has changed and there is a keen interest in providing just
recognition of blacks for their contributions in many areas of life. But the
case of Sergeant Rivers has been complicated by a documentary film, "The
Liberators," that tells the story of the 761st Tank Battalion of which he was a
part. It was shown nationally on public television last November and has been
nominated for an Academy Award. Members of the group seeking the medal for
Sergeant Rivers say they are thankful that the film covers a neglected aspect of
black history, but they are not sure if it will help or harm their cause.

In fact, Mr. Williams and Mr. Clark are among the critics of "The Liberators,"
contending its assertion that battalion members were among the troops liberating
the Dachau and Buchenwald concentration camps in 1945 is false.  Mr. Williams,
who was a company commander in the 761st and two other surviving officers of the
battalion have said in interviews that none of their troops were ever near those
concentration camps and could not have played a role in liberating them.

The documentary's producers, William Miles and Nina Rosenblum, have maintained
that their film contains no innaccuracies.

But Mr. Williams and others are worried that the questions about the film will
have the paradoxical effect of casting doubt on what they regard as the
battalion's real exploits, including the heroism of Sergeant Rivers.

Still, while the effect of the film on Sergeant Rivers's prospects for the Medal
of Honor is unpredictable, the already long history of the effort to secure the
award has, until now, produced no results. Mr. Williams was an undergraduate at
Yale University at the same time as former President George Bush. So he wrote to
Mr. Bush when he was Vice President asking him to intervene in the matter. Mr.
Bush replied there was little he could do because the awards are a Congressional
matter.

World War I Award

Two years ago, in a precedent that Mr. Williams and his supporters see as
important in their case, Cpl. Freddie Stowers, a black who fought in World War
I, was awarded the Medal of Honor for his heroism in 1918.

Ruben Rivers, who was part American Indian, but mostly black, was born in
Tecumseh, Okla., in 1921, one of 12 brothers and sisters. The actions for which
his supporters say he should be awarded the medal came near the town of Guebling
in eastern France, which the 761st Battalion was trying to seize from the
Germans. Affidavits written to support the campaign for the medal say that
Sergeant Rivers, his leg torn to the bone, refused not only evacuation but also
morphine to kill the pain. He fought for two days and nights in the teeth of an
enemy assault and died trying to knock out anti-tank positions that were firing
on his company.

That was Nov. 19, 1944. Now, nearly 49 years later in Los Angeles, Mrs. Woodfork
sometimes casts her eye on the papers that recognize her brother's service to
his country -- a citation for a Purple Heart, letters he wrote to his mother in
Tecumseh and a yellowed Western Union telegram announcing that he had been
killed in action.

"Our mother died in 1980 back in Oklahoma," Mrs. Woodfork said. "Our father
passed on in 1985. But we are still here, six brothers and three sisters. We
hoped to get the medal when mother and father were still alive, but we'd be very
proud to get it now."

LOAD-DATE: March 28, 1993

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo: Anese Rivers Woodfork is working to have the Medal of Honor
awarded to her brother Ruben Rivers, who died in France in World War II. To
date, no black soldier who served in that war has been awarded the nation's
highest decoration for heroism. (Bart Bartholomew for The New York Times)

                   Copyright 1993 The New York Times Company

                              253 of 255 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                  March 28, 1993, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

Robert Rushworth, 68, Test Pilot of the X-15

BYLINE: AP

SECTION: Section 1; Page 39; Column 3; National Desk

LENGTH: 197 words

DATELINE: CAMARILLO, Calif., March 27


Robert A. Rushworth, a retired Air Force major general who test-flew the
pioneering X-15 rocket plane, died March 17 at his home here, the Air Force
Association announced this week. He was 68.

He died of a heart attack, the organization said.

The X-15 paved the way for the nation's space program by testing unknowns like
the effect of heat on an aircraft during re-entry.

General Rushworth, who was born in Madison, Me., flew a record 34 test flights
in the X-15, traveling at six times the speed of sound in some cases. He won his
astronaut rating in 1963 when he took the fixed-wing craft 54 miles high, just
over halfway to outer space.

In 1990 he was inducted into the National Aviation Hall of Fame in Dayton, Ohio.

A lifelong pilot with 6,500 flying hours, he flew C-47 transports over the
Himalayas into China in World War II, fought in the Korean War and flew 189
combat missions in Vietnam.

He was promoted to major general in 1975 and retired in 1981 as vice commander
of the Aeronautical Systems Division at Wright-Patterson Air Force Base, Ohio.

He is survived by a daughter, Cheri Cox, of Ramstein Air Force Base in Germany,
and two grandchildren.

LOAD-DATE: March 28, 1993

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Obituary (Obit); Biography

                   Copyright 1993 The New York Times Company

                              254 of 255 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 March 30, 1993, Tuesday, Late Edition - Final

Vietnamese Residents Flee Cambodia Attacks

BYLINE: AP

SECTION: Section A; Page 3; Column 4; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 161 words

DATELINE: PHNOM PENH, Cambodia, March 29


More than 2,000 ethnic Vietnamese are fleeing by boat down the Tonle Sap River
toward Vietnam after attacks by Khmer Rouge guerrillas that have killed 80
people in recent weeks, United Nations officials said today.

In another act of ethnic violence, an unidentified man threw a bomb into a cafe
here, killing at least two Vietnamese.

The latest exodus follows the shooting and stabbing deaths of eight ethnic
Vietnamese last week. On March 10, 33 ethnic Vietnamese were shot and drowned in
the worst such attack since the United Nations peacekeeping operation began in
Cambodia a year ago. Since then, ethnic Vietnamese have been fleeing Cambodia,
but the killings last week pushed the number of refugees into the thousands,
said Eric Falt, a United nations spokesman.

Mr. Falt said that 410 families began their flight from a cluster of villages in
the central province of Kompong Chhnang on Sunday. The convoy was expected to
pass Phnom Penh tonight.

LOAD-DATE: March 30, 1993

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1993 The New York Times Company

                              255 of 255 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                March 31, 1993, Wednesday, Late Edition - Final

Review/Theater;
Lanford Wilson's Comment on the U.S. in the 90's

BYLINE: By FRANK RICH

SECTION: Section C; Page 15; Column 3; Cultural Desk

LENGTH: 1243 words


Everyone knows America's Vietnam nightmare has finally been laid to rest, buried
both by the heroic military victory of Operation Desert Storm and by the
Presidential victory of an antiwar protester of the Vietnam era. So why would an
American playwright be so rude, let alone unfashionable, as to disinter the
rotten corpse again right now?

Lanford Wilson has his reasons, and they may not be the ones you expect, in
"Redwood Curtain," his first play since "Burn This" five seasons ago and his
most powerful since "Talley's Folly" in 1979. This work, a Circle Repertory
Company production at the Brooks Atkinson Theater on Broadway, is set mostly
among the towering redwoods in Northern California where untold thousands of
Vietnam veterans have disappeared into a feral, ghostly existence, their only
contact with civilization an occasional visit to town for an odd job or a meal
scarfed from a garbage can. But Mr. Wilson has not written another melodrama in
which a crazed Vietnam vet refights the war.

"Redwood Curtain" is instead a state-of-the-nation piece for the early 1990's.
Its disturbing subject is the self-destructive American habit of practicing
amnesia about all its past nightmares, not just those of Vietnam. Standing in
rootless contrast to the trees around them, the people in this play, and by
implication their country, cannot find their way out of the woods until they
figure out how they got stranded there in the first place. But that is not so
easily accomplished in a society where families are fragmented and memories are
so short that the casualties of the greedy peacetime 1980's seem nearly as
distant as those of the 1960's. "Half the people in America are looking for
their fathers," says a character in "Redwood Curtain," and surely she is not
referring just to M.I.A.'s.


That Mr. Wilson writes with enormous wit and compassion and a minimum of
preaching will come as no surprise to anyone who shares my belief that his first
play about a Vietnam veteran, "Fifth of July" (1977), was the wisest and
funniest of its generation of stage renderings of the war's fallout at home. Mr.
Wilson is also a master storyteller, and "Redwood Curtain" is a real yarn with a
satisfying old-fashioned mousetrap of a plot, a search for truth through the
twisted paths of unhinged psyches, paternity and scandal, all delivered through
three characters in just over 100 intermissionless minutes of progressively more
cinematic action.

The plot will not be detailed here, but the situation that propels it is simple
enough: Geri (Sung Yun Cho), a 17-year-old Amerasian girl raised by wealthy
adoptive parents, follows Lyman (Jeff Daniels), a grizzled, homeless veteran,
into the redwood forest, convinced that he either is or can lead her to the
American father who abandoned her in infancy in Saigon. The evening's third
character is Geri's Aunt Geneva (Debra Monk), to whose palatial Mission-style
home on the forest's edge the girl is paying a yearly visit.

"Redwood Curtain" falters only in its opening scene, when Geri and Lyman meet,
and meet much too cute. Not only is the scene overloaded with exposition and
stiffly staged by the otherwise exemplary director, Marshall W. Mason, but it
also asks the impossible from Ms. Cho's heroine. Geri is as smart and articulate
as she is rich -- she's a piano prodigy with a Sony record contract, we
eventually learn -- and she's also a fantasist with mystical tendencies. The
precocity overload would be daunting to even the most experienced young actors,
and Ms. Cho does not always escape being cloying. Since Mr. Daniels's Lyman is
equally stylized at first, as a secretive, suspicious and monosyllabic hermit,
the scene's arch theatricality turns as thick as the forest fog.


But the mist lifts for keeps once the scene shifts to a highway, and Ms. Monk is
in the driver's seat. Aunt Geneva, a cultured, uninhibited wisecracker with a
Western twang and a dull marriage, is the sort of priceless Wilson role Swoosie
Kurtz once played, and Ms. Monk imbues her with perfect sardonic pitch and comic
timing. Besides leavening "Redwood Curtain" with jaundiced asides on every
subject, Geneva gives the play's action its larger frame. The heiress to a
family lumber business that has just been plundered by corporate raiders, she
sees her niece's Vietnam obsession as part of a larger story reaching into both
buried American history and buried family secrets; her sharp observations
inexorably bring crucial offstage characters and events to life.

With Ms. Monk as grounding, the other two actors soon deliver the rending
performances "Redwood Curtain" demands. Mr. Daniels, who first came to
prominence in "Fifth of July," is almost unrecognizable here with his matted
hair, bushy beard and booming voice. As his veteran ceases to seem a freakish
troll and stands revealed as an ordinary person who rightly or not has chosen
his fate, the actor becomes as delicate as a burly outdoorsman can be, a soul
too fragile to withstand the company of people. When Geri finally must find
herself as well as her biological parents, Ms. Cho is transformed from an
imitation grown-up into a true adult, her face and personality weathered by
complex new self-knowledge that lowers the curtain on her glib youth.


As the "Redwood Curtain" acting trio finds its harmony well before the play
reaches its denouement, so does Mr. Mason's deft staging. He and his longtime
Circle Rep design team -- John Lee Beatty (sets), Laura Crow (costumes), Dennis
Parichy (lighting) -- remain Mr. Wilson's essential collaborators, in tune with
an idiosyncratic poetic vision that, as always, suggests Chekhov by way of
Twain. For this occasion, Mr. Beatty has orchestrated a sweeping set change that
gives the evening's finale a visual boost to go with its emotional payoff, and
Mr. Parichy has infused such settings as Geneva's music room and a small-town
coffee shop with film noir light that heightens the play's mysteries as if they
belonged to the rougher California terrain of James M. Cain.

As entertaining as those mysteries and their solution are, "Redwood Curtain" is
not, finally, about its plot twists. The play concludes not with some thunderous
revelation or reconciliation but with the sound of a piano piece, a Satie
"Gymnopedie," and a tranquil tableau of its characters listening to it. Such is
Mr. Wilson's achievement in "Redwood Curtain" that he invests the abstract music
with a flood of reverberant meaning, using it to sound an affectingly optimistic
final chord. For a moment anyway, the thread of melancholy notes seems to tie
the solitary lives on stage to one another and bind them at long last to the
timeless American landscape that soars above.

Redwood Curtain
By Lanford Wilson; directed by Marshall W. Mason; set by John Lee Beatty;
costumes by Laura Crow; lighting by Dennis Parichy; sound by Chuck
London/Stewart Werner; original music composed by Peter Kater; fight director,
Nels Hennum; production stage manager, Fred Reinglas; associate producers, Susan
Sampliner and Nick Scandalios. The Circle Repertory Production presented by
Robert Cole, Benjamin Mordecai, Deborah D. Mathews, James M. Nederlander, James
D. Stern, William P. Suter and the Circle Repertory Company, Tanya Berezin,
artistic director. At the Brooks Atkinson Theater, 256 West 47th Street,
Manhattan.

Lyman . . . Jeff Daniels
Geri . . . Sung Yun Cho
Geneva . . . Debra Monk

LOAD-DATE: March 31, 1993

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photos: Sung Yun Cho and Jeff Daniels in Lanford Wilson's "Redwood
Curtain," at the Brooks Atkinson Theater. (Ken Howard/"Redwood Curtain") (pg.
C15); Debra Monk in a scene from "Redwood Curtain." (Ken Howard/"Redwood
Curtain") (pg. C22)

TYPE: Review

                   Copyright 1993 The New York Times Company
