
                               1 of 312 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 April 1, 1993, Thursday, Late Edition - Final

U.S. TO URGE ASIA TO BUILD SECURITY

BYLINE: By ELAINE SCIOLINO,  Special to The New York Times

SECTION: Section A; Page 8; Column 4; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 363 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, March 31


In a reversal of the Bush Administration policy that opposed steps by Southeast
Asian countries to solve their regional security problems, the Clinton
Administration will both encourage and take part in such efforts, Winston Lord,
the Assistant Secretary of State-designate for East Asian and Pacific Affairs,
said today.

The new approach reflects a realization that as the United States reduces its
military presence in the region, there is an increased need for the Asian
countries to solve their diverse security problems on their own.

"We must develop new mechanisms to manage or prevent emerging concerns," Mr.
Lord told the Senate Foreign Relations Committee during his confirmation
hearings. He added that planned security talks by the Association of South East
Asian Nations can help the members to "share information, convey intentions,
ease tensions, resolve disputes and foster confidence."

Baker Rejected an Umbrella

In an effort to keep a degree of control over Asian security goals, the Bush
Administration strongly opposed regional arrangements for Asia. Secretary of
State James A. Baker 3d wrote in Foreign Affairs in late 1991 that Washington
preferred a "loose network of bilateral alliances," not an overarching security
umbrella.

But Mr. Lord said today that Asian nations need their own security structure and
that the United States now is "open minded" on how to best help. As an
illustration of Mr. Clinton's commitment to help, Mr. Lord said he would
participate in regional security talks in Singapore in May.

"I don't see us coming up with a grand scheme or master plan for Asia," a senior
Administration official said. "On the other hand, we are less worried than the
Bush Administration about an alternate security system without an organizational
relationship to the United States."

Mr. Lord dodged repeated questions on the policy toward Vietnam, saying no
decisions had been made.

Even some of the most conservative members of Congress have urged the
Administration to make a concrete gesture toward Hanoi, by ending the economic
embargo and a ban on international bank lending, even by normalizing diplomatic
relations.

LOAD-DATE: April 1, 1993

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1993 The New York Times Company


                               2 of 312 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 April 1, 1993, Thursday, Late Edition - Final

Eye on Ball For Israel;
Peace and Terror: Search for Balance

BYLINE: By CLYDE HABERMAN,  Special to The New York Times

SECTION: Section A; Page 3; Column 1; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 1107 words

DATELINE: JERUSALEM, March 31


Prime Minister Yitzhak Rabin has repeatedly said since he took office last July
that talking peace with the Arabs is one thing and fighting Arabs who shoot and
stab Israelis is something else entirely. His slogan is "We shall fight
terrorism as if there is no peace process, and pursue the peace process as if
there is no terrorism."

To Mr. Rabin, Israelis have to keep their eye on the ball, which means not
letting bursts of Arab violence get them so hysterical that they lose sight of
the bigger objective they have pursued for years: a peace treaty.

But that ball has been awfully elusive for many here after a violent March that
came in like a lion and went out the same way, with 15 Israeli soldiers,
policemen and civilians killed by Palestinian assailants -- the highest monthly
toll in several years. About twice as many were wounded.

It does Israelis no good to hear that, by the traumatic standards of American
big cities, 15 deaths in a month may not seem startling for a population of 5
million. New York City, with a population of about 7 million, often has 10
homicides in a single weekend. It certainly does them no good at all to hear
that many more Palestinians, at least 26 in March, died in conflicts with
Israeli soldiers.

Sense of Vulnerability

There is an easily inflamed sense of vulnerability in this country born of the
Nazi Holocaust, and with the press and television showing vivid images of
spilled Jewish blood, no national leader could let the death count rise as it
has without doing something.

On Tuesday, Mr. Rabin acted. He was not nearly as dramatic as in December, when
he responded to another spurt of killings by expelling more than 400 accused
Islamic militants from the territories to Lebanon. But he did enough so that,
despite his own slogan, he may have wrapped the fight against terrorism and the
Middle East peace talks into a tighter bundle.

Starting today, for an indefinite period, the occupied West Bank and Gaza Strip
are closed, meaning that military checkpoints have been set up to turn
Palestinian vehicles around, including those carrying the 120,000 Arab workers
with jobs in Israel. Jewish settlers in the territories and other Israelis,
whose cars bear different license plates from those of Arabs, can drive past the
checkpoints.

Even for Palestinians, however, the West Bank borders are porous, and the police
today rounded up several hundred of them who were found to be in Israel in
violation of the new orders.

Tightening Controls

Military operations and hunts for wanted fugitives are to be intensified, Mr.
Rabin said, and loosened regulations permit soldiers now to shoot at any armed
Palestinian, whether or not he presents an immediate threat.

A main goal, the Prime Minister said, is to separate the two populations for a
while so that tensions can subside. Indeed, the policy appeals to many Israelis
on both the political right and left: the right because it makes it more
difficult for would-be Arab killers to maneuver, the left because it means de
facto recognition of the line separating the territories from pre-1967 Israel.

When asked by a television interviewer how long the closing will last, Mr. Rabin
replied that it is up to the Palestinians.

"Dear friends, if you want to solve the problem, the place is around the
negotiation table," he told them. "It is permissible for me to keep the
territories closed for as long as is required."

That response was an example of how Israelis and Palestinians listen with
different ears. Many Israelis heard the call to the peace table, and sensed a
reasonable gesture. To many Palestinians, it sounded like a threat: If you don't
talk to us, the crackdown will continue.

"This is not going to be helpful," said Elias Freij, the Palestinian mayor of
Bethlehem. "I don't think our people will go to the peace talks under duress."
As it is, Palestinian delegates have been hesitant about going because the issue
of the December deportations is still not resolved to their satisfaction. This
latest Israeli action seems unlikely to soften their position.

Israel's Vietnam?

Hundreds of thousands of Palestinians and their families depend on Israel for
their livelihood. Even without a curfew imposed on individual towns, residents
of the northern part of the West Bank are effectively cut off from the southern
sector because they must pass through Jerusalem, which is now off-limits to
them. Rather than a cooling off, resentments could fester. And the only winners
could be the militants on both sides who want the peace negotiations to fail.

The latest killings have also forced Israelis to begin rethinking some
fundamental ideas that have shaped national policy since they captured Gaza and
the West Bank in the 1967 war.

One question is how committed they are to holding on to the territories,
especially turbulent Gaza, the source of much of the violence. When it comes to
Gaza, the six-day triumph of 1967 is beginning to look to many uneasy Israelis
like their Vietnam. A rising chorus says that the coastal strip should be given
up, now.

Another issue is whether Israelis are prepared to change how they live. Despite
high unemployment, veteran Israelis and new immigrants from the former Soviet
Union are no more eager than, say, Germans to do back-breaking, low-paying work.
Here, gastarbeitern are called Arabs.

And although Mr. Rabin wants to reduce the country's dependence on Palestinian
labor, and although there are calls by others to bring in workers from Southeast
Asia as replacements, forces in the Labor Party of Mr. Rabin oppose the idea.

More immediately, the Prime Minister must get past a crisis that may have
limited his maneuvering room in the peace talks.

A Delicate Balance

Given the present Israeli dark mood, it is hard to imagine, for example, how Mr.
Rabin could bend much further on the December expulsions -- concessions demanded
by the Palestinians as the price for resuming the talks.

In December, 5 Israelis were killed and Mr. Rabin deported 400 people. Now there
are 15 dead, three times as many. What is he going to do? Expel 1,200? Fresh
expulsions on any scale seem out of the question because they would be
devastating not only to the peace talks but also to the good relations with the
Clinton Administration that he has cultivated.

So Mr. Rabin's main hope is that the worst will blow over quickly, perhaps aided
by the Passover and Easter holidays next week. What he has prescribed thus far
is "extra-strength aspirin," the newspaper Maariv said today, adding, "Rabin has
not yet declared 'Emergency.' "

LOAD-DATE: April 1, 1993

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo: Prime Minister Yitzhak Rabin said he closed the occupied West
Bank and Gaza Strip to separate the two populations so tensions can ease.
(Associated Press)

TYPE: News Analysis

                   Copyright 1993 The New York Times Company


                               3 of 312 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 April 1, 1993, Thursday, Late Edition - Final

Richard H. Growald; Journalist, 61

SECTION: Section D; Page 24; Column 2; National Desk

LENGTH: 102 words


Richard H. Growald, a columnist at The San Diego Union-Tribune and a former
correspondent for United Press International, died Tuesday at his brother's home
near Fort Worth. He was 61.

The cause was lung cancer, his brother, Martin, said.

Mr. Growald grew up in Fort Worth. He reported for the Fort Worth Press, which
no longer exists, before leaving there in 1952.

His 40-year career with U.P.I. took him from Boston to the wire service's
bureaus in London, Germany and Moscow. He covered Vietnam and the White House
before joining The San Diego Union in 1982.

He is survived by his brother.

LOAD-DATE: April 1, 1993

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Obituary (Obit); Biography

                   Copyright 1993 The New York Times Company


                               4 of 312 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                  April 2, 1993, Friday, Late Edition - Final

Atomic Energy Agency Asks U.N. To Move Against North Koreans

BYLINE: By DAVID E. SANGER,  Special to The New York Times

SECTION: Section A; Page 2; Column 3; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 673 words

DATELINE: TOKYO, April 1


The International Atomic Energy Agency declared today that North Korea had
violated its obligations to open its suspected nuclear weapons sites to
inspections. For the first time, the agency asked the United Nations Security
Council to enforce the provisions of international agreements intended to limit
the spread of nuclear arms.

The action, at a special meeting of the agency's board of governors, came a day
after North Korea defied the latest deadline to permit inspectors into two sites
near Yongbyon, a heavily guarded nuclear installation that American intelligence
satellites suggest would provide evidence of how close the Communist Government
is to producing a bomb. North Korea declared three weeks ago that it was
withdrawing from the treaty to halt the spread of nuclear arms, but the action
does not take effect until June.

The action today by the agency, while expected, poses the Clinton Administration
with its first major challenge in Asia: how hard to push an unpredictable
Government that many of its neighbors say they fear could strike out if pressed
too far.

So far the Administration's effort to get China, North Korea's last remaining
major ally, to join in the public effort to press Pyongyang has failed: In the
vote today, China and Libya were the only two countries against the resolution
asking the United Nations to intervene.

28 Nations Favor Resolution

Twenty-eight countries voted for the resolution, but India, Pakistan, Syria and
Vietnam abstained. Neither India nor Pakistan have signed the treaty, and both
are believed to have extensive nuclear weapons projects of their own.

The resolution passed today said "the Agency is not able to verify that there
has been no diversion of nuclear material" to "nuclear weapons or other nuclear
explosive devices." American intelligence officials, though disagreeing among
themselves on the stage of North Korea's bomb program, say they suspect the
country already has enough plutonium to produce one or more crude nuclear
weapons.

While the agency has issued reports to the Security Council before about nuclear
developments in specific countries, this is the first time that it has sought
the Council's help in gaining access to sites it has been barred from entering.
The inspections of Iraq, which have also met tremendous resistance, are being
carried out under the Security Council's direct supervision as part of the
agreements signed at the end of the Persian Gulf War.

Nonetheless, it may be several weeks before the Security Council acts against
North Korea, or seriously considers imposing an embargo on fuel and food as
suggested recently by Secretary of State Warren Christopher. The resolution
today did not specify what kind of action it sought at the United Nations.

Disagreement on Strategy

Officials from the four countries that have the most at stake -- the United
States, China, Japan and South Korea -- have disagreed on how to best force the
Government of the 80-year-old Kim Il Sung to abandon the project. While the
United States and Japan have pressed for faster, harsher action, China and South
Korea, each for different reasons, have urged caution and private diplomacy.

"We are in no haste to go to the Security Council," Yu Myung Hwan, the spokesman
for the South Korean Foreign Minister, said tonight in Tokyo. The minister, Han
Sung Joo, is in Japan for consultations on the handling of the nuclear issue.
"We think that obtaining Chinese support, or at least acquiescence, is a must,"
Mr. Yu said.

Many predict the sanctions would not be imposed until early June, when North
Korea withdrawal from the treaty would be complete. But China could exercise its
veto power to block such sanctions altogether.

In a letter earlier this week to Hans Blix, the Director General of the
international agency, the North Korean Minister of Atomic Energy, Choi Hak Gun,
said the panel lacked "impartiality and objectivity." Mr. Choi has argued that
the agency is acting as a pawn of the United States.


LOAD-DATE: April 2, 1993

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1993 The New York Times Company


                               5 of 312 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                  April 2, 1993, Friday, Late Edition - Final

Wipe Draft Off Books In U.S., and the World

SECTION: Section A; Page 32; Column 4; Editorial Desk

LENGTH: 325 words


To the Editor:

Military conscription is a coercive act of government. It is an infringement of
one's personal liberty, the taking away of the right to run one's own life.

The tolerance of military conscription by the people of the United States since
the conclusion of World War II is beyond my comprehension. In high-technology
modern warfare, there can be no possible need for conscription in the United
States.

If the United States were to engage in war to protect its national interests,
there would be more than enough volunteers, men and women, to fill the personnel
needs of the armed services in combat and noncombat units.

President Clinton, who as a youth strongly opposed military conscription and who
managed to avoid military service during the Vietnam War by taking advantage of
the escape provisions in the Selective Service Act available to college
students, is now in a position, as Commander in Chief of the United States armed
forces, to lead the United States and the rest of the world away from military
conscription.

And by so doing, he can also immeasurably improve the prospects for peace in the
world.

I suggest that President Clinton and Congress take action immediately to put an
end to the Military Selective Service Act, which was enacted during the Carter
Administration, under which young men in the United States upon reaching the age
of 18 are required to register for possible military service, even though no one
has been drafted since the enactment of that law.

I further suggest that Mr. Clinton, as President, go in person before the United
Nations and propose that all nations end military registration and conscription
in whatever form and that the nations that end them then deny military,
financial and economic assistance to all other nations that have military
registration and conscription in any form, without exceptions.

CHARLES F. MC LAUGHLIN
Philadelphia, March 27, 1993

LOAD-DATE: April 2, 1993

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Letter

                   Copyright 1993 The New York Times Company


                               6 of 312 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                  April 2, 1993, Friday, Late Edition - Final

Clinton and Perot Call Off Truce; Both Say, No More Mr. Nice Guy

BYLINE: By GWEN IFILL,  Special to The New York Times

SECTION: Section A; Page 1; Column 2; National Desk

LENGTH: 941 words

DATELINE: ANNAPOLIS, Md., April 1


President Clinton and Ross Perot abruptly dropped all pretense of diplomacy
today in a fit of cross-country name-calling that noisily shattered their uneasy
peace.

In a speech at the United States Naval Academy here, Mr. Clinton said in
response to a question that Mr. Perot had engaged in "rumor mongering" by
repeating unflattering stories about the Administration's relations with the
military.

Mr. Perot responded tartly in a telephone interview from Dallas, asserting that
Mr. Clinton had "ducked" military service and thus lacked the moral authority to
criticize an Army general who recently complained of poor treatment at the hands
of a White House aide. "If he wants to climb into the ring," Mr. Perot said
ominously, "any time, anywhere."

The flurry of invective between the two men, who have circled each other like
prize fighters but largely avoided delivering any direct blows, was apparently
unplanned. But the result was to effectively halt the tentative peace that Mr.
Clinton and his aides had cultivated assiduously in hopes of attracting Mr.
Perot's supporters.

Between the insults, Mr. Perot declared, "There's no bad blood as far as I'm
concerned."

But the President was clearly piqued as he responded to a question about Mr.
Perot during a question-and-answer session at a luncheon sponsored by the
American Society of Newspaper Editors.

Perot Spoke Derisively

"You know, Mr. Perot came to Washington the other day and attacked my chief of
staff as not being a real business person, and he had to call him on the phone
and personally apologize the next day," Mr. Clinton said. "I mean, people can
say anything from the podium."

In an appearance before a Congressional committee early last month, Mr. Perot
derided Mr. Clinton's energy-policy strategists as "poets, philosophers and
beekeepers," adding, "Not one of them has ever run a business or created a job,
far as I know."

Mr. Clinton went on today, "I'd be more interested in why my economic program --
which is 85 percent what Ross Perot recommended in the campaign, except we
raised taxes less on the middle class and more on the wealthy and don't have
unspecified health care savings -- hasn't been endorsed since it's almost
identical to the one he ran on."

'His Plan Won't Work'

Mr. Perot, in his strongest criticism of the economic plan to date, said he had
no intention of endorsing Mr. Clinton's proposals.

"His plan won't work," Mr. Perot said. "His plan is going to drastically
increase spending. It is not being candidly presented to the American people."

Of the deficit reduction plan in particular, he said: "Most of it is based on
really tentative premises and guesses."

The shots across the bow, bitter in tone and apparently the result of
frustration in both men, was long in coming. Mr. Clinton has taken some tiny
digs at Mr. Perot in recent days.

At a black-tie dinner for radio and television correspondents on March 18, he
wrapped his criticism in a joke. When Mr. Perot spoke of the lack of business
experience in the Administration, Mr. Clinton took that as a slap at his
childhood friend, Thomas F.  McLarty Jr., who is the President's chief of staff
and ran an energy company until recently.

"He just resents it because Mack's a short guy with real power," Mr. Clinton
said.

Poll's Findings on Perot

In the latest New York Times/CBS News poll, conducted Sunday through Wednesday,
42 percent of registered voters said they viewed Mr. Perot favorably, virtually
unchanged from the 45 percent who said the same in January. The percentage of
those who viewed him unfavorably remained fairly steady as well, at 26 percent
in January and 23 percent in the new poll.  Each poll had a margin of sampling
error of plus or minus three percentage points.

Mr. Clinton's thin skin has apparently thinned more in recent days because of
articles about his strained relations with the military, among other things..

Mr. Clinton seemed especially annoyed by Mr. Perot's repeating a widely
circulated story that a member of the President's staff had refused to speak to
a uniformed general on the White House grounds.

"The other story, like all those military stories, was an abject lie," he told
the members of the American Society of Newspaper Editors, who traveled here from
their convention in Baltimore.

Mr. Clinton never served in the armed forces and was forced to defend himself
through most of his campaign against accusations that he dodged the Vietnam-era
draft.

The President, who has been struggling to establish a relationship with members
of the military who oppose his plan to lift its ban against homosexuals, had
lunch with 4,000 midshipmen at the Naval Academy today before speaking to the
editors.

"I don't think we ought to be out here rumor-mongering myself," he added. "I
think it does very little to support the public interest."

The officer, Lieut. Gen. Barry R. McCaffrey, told The Washington Post in an
article published today that the incident did occur. General McCaffrey went on
to say, however, that the incident was overblown and that the resulting debate
over the Clinton Adminstration's relationship with the military was a "grossly
unfair rap."

In responding to Mr. Clinton's remarks today, Mr. Perot said the President had
his facts wrong on the military story and when he asserted that the decision to
remove United States Attorneys who were holdovers from the Bush Administration
was not politically motivated.

"Nobody likes to be called a liar," Mr. Perot said in the telephone interview.
"But to be called a liar by Bill Clinton is really a unique experience."

LOAD-DATE: April 2, 1993

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo: As President Clinton's relations with the military came under
new attack yesterday, he prayed with midshipmen before joining them for lunch at
the United States Naval Academy in Annapolis, Md. (Agence France-Presse) (pg.
A20)

                   Copyright 1993 The New York Times Company


                               7 of 312 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 April 3, 1993, Saturday, Late Edition - Final

Rodney King Coverage Wins a Peabody Award

BYLINE: AP

SECTION: Section 1; Page 55; Column 5; Cultural Desk

LENGTH: 766 words

DATELINE: ATHENS, Ga., April 2


Broadcast stations in Los Angeles and Miami have won Peabody Awards for their
coverage of the Rodney G. King case and Hurricane Andrew.

The awards, given each year for outstanding broadcast and cable programming,
were announced on Thursday by the Henry W. Grady College of Journalism and Mass
Communications at the University of Georgia, which administers them.

KTTV in Los Angeles was cited for its coverage of the 1992 state trial of the
officers accused in the videotaped beating of Mr. King. KJLH radio in Los
Angeles also won, for coverage of the riots after the officers' acquittal.

WTVJ-TV in Miami was honored for its hurricane coverage.

WGBH, the public television affiliate in Boston, won four Peabodys, two shared,
for news programs and the geography quiz show "Where in the World Is Carmen
Sandiego?"

"Nightline," the ABC News program, and Home Box Office each won two awards.

Channel One, the Whittle Communications program shown in schools, won its first
Peabody for educational programming on the AIDS epidemic. And two top-rated
comedy series, "Roseanne" on ABC and "Seinfeld" on NBC, were cited for the first
time.

These are the other winners:

National Public Radio for "Prisoners in Bosnia," "thorough, accurate and
insightful reporting by correspondent Sylvia Poggioli."

NPR and WBUR in Boston for "Car Talk," "a show which simultaneously takes us
under the hood and into the head and entertains us all the way."

KFFA radio in Helena, Ark., for "King Biscuit Time," "a local music program of
historic and contemporary interest."

American Folklife Radio Project, David Isay, independent producer, for "a series
of thoughtful, reflective and humorous accounts of American folk life."

Propaganda Films and the Fox Broadcasting Company for "Rock the Vote," "an
unusual documentary which resulted in action -- a noticeable increase in voter
participation by young viewers."

KIRO-TV in Seattle for "When the Salmon Runs Dry," "timely and important
documentation of the environmental situation in the station's service area -- a
compelling local documentary."

KNME-TV and the Institute for American Indian Arts in Albuquerque, N.M., for
"Surviving Columbus," "simultaneously an important local document and an
instructional film for future generations."

Signifyin' Works of Berkeley, Calif., and the Public Broadcasting System for
"Color Adjustment," "an important reflection and analysis of the image of
African Americans in television over the years."

Canamedia Productions Ltd. and TV Ontario, Toronto, for "Threads of Hope," "an
absorbing documentary which reveals the role of art and folk life in fighting
oppression."

HKO Media Inc. and WKBD-TV in Detroit for "Close to Home: The Tommy Boccomino
Story," which "reveals in first-person terms the toll in many American
communities and households of the expanding AIDS crisis."

GPN-Nebraska ETV Network, Lincoln, Neb., for "Reading Rainbow: The Wall," "an
instructive and insightful examination of the construction and impact of the
Vietnam Veterans Memorial."

WCVB-TV in Needham, Mass., for "The Incredible Voyage of Bill Pinkney," which
"educates and inspires young viewers and provides a role model to emulate."

NBC for "The More You Know," "a model national public service campaign to
provide a range of useful information to its vast television audience."

MTV for "Choose or Lose Campaign," "a multi-media effort to mobilize the youth
vote, contributing to the greatest voter turnout among young adults in more than
two decades."

CBS and Finnegan-Pinchuk Company, in association with Brand-Falsey Productions,
for "Northern Exposure: Cicely," "an episode of this previously recognized
series which raises the program to an even higher standard."

CNN, Atlanta, for "Larry King Live Election Coverage 1992," "a program which
played a pivotal part in domestic and international coverage of the American
political campaign."

CBS and Granada Television, London, for "Age Seven in America," "a powerful and
compelling attempt to replicate in America a landmark series of programs that
originated in England."

Daniel Schorr, a personal award for "a lifetime of uncompromising reporting of
the highest integrity."

BBC Radio, an institutional award for "the consistency, range, variety,
intelligence and humor provided to English-speaking audiences worldwide."

C-SPAN, an institutional award for "ongoing, sustained, honest and frequently
compelling coverage of the democratic process in action."

Fred Rogers, a personal award "in recognition of 25 years of beautiful days in
the neighborhood."

LOAD-DATE: April 3, 1993

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1993 The New York Times Company


                               8 of 312 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                  April 4, 1993, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

Vietnam Poet Sings a Song Of Endurance

BYLINE: By HENRY KAMM,  Special to The New York Times

SECTION: Section 1; Page 7; Column 1; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 706 words

DATELINE: HO CHI MINH CITY, Vietnam, March 31


In South Vietnam before the Communist victory of 1975, Trinh Cong Son sang of
the longing for peace in a divided country, the sorrow of war between brothers
and the grief of mothers and sweethearts. He was the voice of the young and the
bane of the Government.

The poems that he wrote, set to music and recorded were often banned as
"defeatist" by the American-supported Governments, but that only enhanced their
popularity among those who felt that Mr. Son sang what they could not say. The
songs circulated throughout South Vietnam in cassettes, and many a coffee shop
was temporarily closed because a policeman happened in before somebody could
turn off the stereo.

In a long conversation 20 years ago, the poet said he was certain the Communists
would win and he was equally sure that he would not leave Vietnam. With a little
bit of luck, he said, Communist Vietnam would one day resemble what Yugoslavia
was back then -- Communist but freer and more independent than other such
countries.

A Nation Striving for Balance

In any event, Mr. Son said, Vietnam would be at peace and reunited, and that is
what mattered most to him.

Today, the 54-year-old poet's philosophy seems as ambiguous as that of all
intellectuals and artists in Vietnam, a nation that is striving for a balance
between the freedom that brings economic benefit and the repression that keeps
one party, professing a stern ideology, in uncontested power.

"I am conserving myself," he said, sipping a whisky and soda on a sultry
midmorning on the terrace of his house. "I must above all exist. I am marginal,
and I protect myself."

Pressed to explain, he said: "I am another now. I have become wise with age, if
you will. I hide my treasure."

But Mr. Son noted that in limiting his singing to love songs, as he does now, he
has remained the most popular artist among the young of Vietnam.

All of Vietnam, he added, emphasizing the unity of the country. He said he
regularly ranked first in popularity in polls by the official youth organization
and newspapers.

"I had a painful choice," said the artist, who has now also become a successful
painter in a figurative style. "I chose tranquillity and peace of soul."

"I must put aside everything that brings discomfort to my life," he added. "I am
54 years old; I am aged."

When the Communists completed their defeat of the South Vietnamese leadership by
seizing this city, then the enemy capital, Mr. Son went where he had always gone
when he felt he should lie low for a while. He returned to his native city of
Hue, where Vietnamese say the soul of the nation resides.

The following year, he said, choosing his words delicately, he was told to go
"to learn what peasant's work was like and understand its value." He was sent to
a village in the northernmost area of the former South Vietnam, "where the
fields were full of everyone's mines, American mines, Vietcong mines."

For four years, he and a painter friend helped the peasants grow rice, potatoes
and cassava.

In the late 1970's he said he was the focus of a propaganda campaign for having
sung of "20 years of civil war." In the Communist version, the war was one
against the United States and its "puppets."

One day in 1978, he recalled, he was taken to the television studio in Hue and
asked to deliver a "self-criticism."

"I sang a song about a woman going to market instead," he said. Subsequently he
was told to write a self-critical article. "I did it in the form of a letter to
an unknown person, in which I expressed my joy at the reunification of the
country," he said.

Mr. Son said the article was widely printed and broadcast, and in 1980 he was
allowed to return here and resume his artistic life. "Love, the human condition,
nature," are his themes, he said.

Yes, he said, there are "forbidden zones." But life today is better than it was
in the early years of reunification and in some ways similar to life under the
old South Vietnamese Government.

"It is more breathable," he said, adding later, "Today, the dictatorship is
imperceptible."

Asked whether he had any regrets about the past, he said he had "made the right
choice."

"I feel at ease only here," he said. "It's like sleeping in my own bed."

LOAD-DATE: April 4, 1993

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1993 The New York Times Company


                               9 of 312 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                  April 4, 1993, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

Influential Christian Journal Prints Last Issue

BYLINE: By PETER STEINFELS

SECTION: Section 1; Page 31; Column 1; National Desk

LENGTH: 681 words


Christianity and Crisis, a journal that provoked and guided the liberal wing of
American Protestant Christianity for half a century, is publishing its last
issue this weekend.

The ethicist and theologian Reinhold Niebuhr founded the nonprofit magazine in
New York in February 1941 to encourage American intervention in the European war
against Nazism. Adlai E. Stevenson, Karl Barth, Hans Morgenthau, Margaret Mead,
Jacques Maritain, Lewis Mumford, Paul Tillich and Alan Paton were among the
magazine's contributors.

Appearing every two weeks in a simple eight-page format, it was cited by secular
and religious leaders far beyond its early circulation of 3,000 to 7,000. Under
Wayne Cowan, who succeeded Niebuhr as editor, the magazine increased its size
and circulation, which peaked at 19,000 in 1967. It has recently hovered around
13,000, a level that editors said was not enough to cover expenses.

In recent years, Christianity and Crisis has reflected the shifts in American
liberalism since the 1960's. It has been a vehement critic of almost all
American military actions overseas as well as a leading platform for trenchant
critiques, mounted by feminist, black and gay theologians, of traditional church
teachings.

Each step in the magazine's course, including its closing, has been accompanied
by intense debate about whether it is being faithful to its theological origins.
But Leon Howell, the magazine's editor since 1985, said that financial matters
like the escalating costs of postage and health insurance, rather than any
theological dispute, had doomed the journal.

A contributing editor of the journal, Harvey Cox, a professor of divinity at
Harvard University, said, "It was faithful to its original calling, but that
always meant skating on thin ice and taking risks."

But the Rev. Max L. Stackhouse, a professor of social ethics at Andover Newton
Theological School in Massachusetts and once a Christianity and Crisis writer,
said that in recent years "it became boring, predictable, and filled with empty
leftish cliches."

For its first two decades Christianity and Crisis reflected the theological
current known as neo-orthodoxy and its political face, Christian realism.

Both developments were reactions to the faith in modern progress professed by
established Protestantism in the 19th and early 20th centuries. Neo-orthodoxy,
in contrast, stressed the limits of human nature and the need for humility
before God.

Christian realism challenged all forms of utopianism by stressing the sinfulness
inescapable in human endeavors, even the most high-minded.  Christianity and
Crisis opposed totalitarianism, yet rebuked Americans who believed their
nation's role in the cold war to be free of blemish.

The editors condemned McCarthyism and early pointed to fractures in the
Communist bloc. Attacking stereotypes dividing Protestants and Catholics, the
journal criticized religious leaders opposing the 1960 Presidential bid of John
F. Kennedy because of his Catholicism.

In 1966 Christianity and Crisis condemned the war in Vietnam and the editors
made clear their dissent when Vice President Hubert H. Humphrey spoke that year
at the magazine's 25th anniversary celebration.

In the 1960's and 1970's the magazine helped introduce Latin American liberation
theology to the United States, provoking discussion of whether liberation
theology, with its unqualified advocacy of the poor and condemnation of their
oppressors, represented a utopian departure from Christian realism or only an
extension of its political focus.

The editorial board was expanded to include proponents of black and feminist
theologies. But Professor Stackhouse said that the magazine "was so predictably
60's and never quite outgrew that."

"The religious language the magazine retained was Sandinista Christianity or
radical feminist," he said.

Professor Cox, however, called the journal "a loyal opposition in the churches"
that would be sorely missed.  "If you don't have a Christianity and Crisis,
someone is going to have to invent one," he said.

LOAD-DATE: April 4, 1993

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1993 The New York Times Company


                              10 of 312 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                  April 4, 1993, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

Alumni Colleges Bring Them Back

BYLINE: By Ari L. Goldman

SECTION: Section 4A; Page 30; Column 3; Education Life Supplement

LENGTH: 1144 words


ALL YOU ADULTS who wish you had gone to an Ivy League or other hard-to-get-into
college but never had the chance, take heed. It is not too late. For an intense
summer week or two, you can sample what life is like on some of America's finest
colleges by living there, attending classes, eating in dining halls and rubbing
shoulders -- and minds -- with professors.

It is a phenomenon known as alumni college, and the best part is this: You don't
have to take the College Boards or be an alum to participate. The programs --
offered independently at campuses such as Dartmouth, Cornell, Brandeis, Harvard,
Yale, Smith, the University of Michigan and Washington and Lee -- go well beyond
the routine evening continuing-education classes taught by often exhausted
faculty members.

The alumni college programs vary from campus to campus, as there is no central
organization; even the names vary. But all provide a taste of what full-time
campus life is like by housing "students" in dormitories and offering the
undivided attention of faculty members who teach groups of special classes
usually organized around a theme, such as American politics or the environment.

Program administrators say they are designed to serve graduates and maintain a
loyal alumni base rather than for fund raising. "They're not our biggest
donors," said Mardy High, the director of Dartmouth's Alumni College, referring
to participants. "But they become articulate spokesmen for the college. They
come away knowing that a lot of learning still goes on here."

No Credit, No Exam

"When you have 29 lectures and films and time to pick the brains of the
faculty," Mrs. High added, "it's like being through a Dartmouth course. The only
thing that is missing is the credit and having to write an exam."

Others said their schools felt an obligation to continue teaching even after
graduates have left their gates. "This is a way to provide the kind of
intellectual stimulation to our alumni that brought them here in the first
place," said Terry K. Shaller, associate director for continuing education,
clubs and programs at Harvard.

And while enrollment priority goes to graduates and their families, those with
no connection to the university or college are welcome. For example, I was one
of 175 adults enrolled last summer at Dartmouth's pastoral campus in Hanover,
N.H., a far cry from the gritty urban setting of Manhattan's Yeshiva University,
from which I graduated 20 years ago.

The Dartmouth program, titled "Facing Mecca," explored the politics, society and
culture of Islam (subjects not covered at Yeshiva). This summer Dartmouth will
focus on "The New World Order" in the wake of Communism's demise. Harvard will
hold its Alumni College over a long weekend in October; the subject, "The
Nation's Educational Crisis." Mr. Shaller said past programs had drawn 200 to
350 participants.

By contrast, universities such as Cornell offer various one-week courses for
alumni and their families throughout a summer month. Among upcoming topics will
be astronomy, the Civil War, writing, acting and literature. Ralph Janis, the
director of Cornell's Adult University, as its program is known, said that about
1,200 participants are expected.

Yale also takes the interdisciplinary approach, offering four different courses
over a long weekend in June.

Variations in Cost

Costs vary. Harvard charges $100 tuition for its weekend; room and board at
local hotels is extra. Yale charges $400 for the weekend, which includes lodging
in dormitories and meals in dining halls. Cornell charges $700 a week for
tuition and room and board, using dormitory facilities.

The cost of the 12-day Dartmouth program that I attended, including room and
board in dorms and an optional Arabic language course, was just under $1,000.
For an additional $325 I was able to take along my 8-year-old son, Adam, and
enroll him in the "junior program" of swimming, sports and field trips that had
as an added component an introduction to Islam through songs, art and
calligraphy.

Dartmouth's Alumni College, which has been running for 30 years, is among the
oldest. In the 1970's, Mrs. High said, it was a popular and inexpensive family
vacation, but with the trend toward two-income families, fewer working couples
have been able to take time off together to participate.

Today Dartmouth's program, like many others, attracts an older population. For
example, in my Arabic class, which was taught by Carol Bardenstein, an assistant
professor of Arabic language and literature, we were supposed to describe our
professions from a prepared list in Arabic. But as we went around the room we
had to add "Ana fil-maash" ("I am retired") to the list.

My classmates' reasons for attending varied widely. For some, the topic was
important: A teacher from a Rhode Island boarding school, for example, hoped to
develop a unit on Islam. By contrast, a retired engineer who had worked in Saudi
Arabia for five years and "left with a bad taste" in his mouth explained that he
had enrolled because he hoped to answer some of his unresolved questions about
Islam. Others came out of a mixture of curiosity about the subject and loyalty
to Dartmouth.

As always, the faculty was home-grown, recruited in this case from Dartmouth's
departments of history, religion, art, music, government and Asian studies.
While these instructors are accustomed to dealing with bright young
undergraduates, their refrain during Alumni College was how nice it was to teach
people who brought experience and a sense of history to the enterprise.
Lecturers could mention F.D.R., the Vietnam War or the Shah of Iran without
having to explain them.

Mornings were taken up by lectures before the whole group in a large lecture
hall; after a coffee break, we formed smaller units for faculty-led discussions.
Afternoons were open until 4 P.M., when there was another lecture and then a
social hour before dinner.

Films Often Shown

Films were shown almost every night, including "The Sheik" and "Lawrence of
Arabia," and documentaries like "Afghan Women" and "Islam in America," a
Christian Science Monitor Video production.

The unstated agenda of the "Facing Mecca" program appeared to be to put a more
rational construction on Islam, a religion long seen by many Americans as
inspiring violence and fanaticism. Speaker after speaker sought to put Muslim
fanaticism in perspective and separate it from the religion whose very name has
as its root "salam," the Arabic word for peace.

It was a sometimes difficult lesson for the largely Christian and Jewish
audience to assimilate, but by the end of the 12-day program participants had
gained a better understanding, and even an appreciation, for the faith second
only to Christianity in numbers of adherents. As one participant said, "Life is
about learning."

LOAD-DATE: April 4, 1993

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Drawing

                   Copyright 1993 The New York Times Company


                              11 of 312 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                  April 4, 1993, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

WHAT WORKS;
Juvenile Offenders' Salvation Strategy

BYLINE: By Larry Rohter

SECTION: Section 4A; Page 34; Column 3; Education Life Supplement

LENGTH: 1189 words


THE TWO buildings, tan and drab, have that standard institutional look, and
their residents all have criminal records for robbery, drug dealing, armed
assault or other felony offenses. But Honor House in Eatonville, Fla., is not a
jail, and the 18 teen-agers who live there are not inmates, even though they
have been sentenced to serve time.

Honor House offers an alternative to traditional juvenile detention programs, a
last chance for teen-age offenders to redeem themselves before the courts begin
treating them as adults. Founded three years ago by Wilbert C. Danner, a
criminal justice professor and former probation officer, Honor House operates on
the assumption that education, combined with discipline and affection, can
transform even the most hardened youths into productive, law-abiding citizens.

"I'm saying, 'Send me the hard-core kids, send me the kid with the 19 felony
arrests,' " Mr. Danner proclaims during a tour of the grounds, just north of
Orlando. "I know it sounds corny and old-fashioned, but the basis of our
philosophy is that there are no secret ingredients to helping people, just
individual attention, self-esteem, pride and, above all, love."

Mr. Danner and his staff strive to instill those traditional values through a
mixture of classroom instruction, counseling, community service and
self-government. After class there are obligatory projects to clean the main
street in town. Other programs teach basic social skills needed to function in
mainstream society, and on weekends, there are field trips to events such as
space shuttle launchings or basketball games, plus regular visits to church. The
typical length of a boy's stay is four to six months.

A Small Budget

The agenda is sweeping, the budget small: $75 per day per boy received from the
State of Florida, plus occasional donations from community groups.

During its first year the program admitted 50 teen-age boys, mostly black, but
with some whites and Hispanics, residents of an area stretching from Orlando
south and east to West Palm Beach. Mr. Danner said only seven had committed new
offenses since their release, a high enough rate of success that the Florida
Department of Health and Rehabilitative Services has awarded new contracts that
will allow Honor House to expand its activities.

"I've been elated with the work he's done," said Paul Snead, the state agency's
regional administrator in Orlando, speaking of Mr. Danner. "I've been in this
line of work 28 years, and this is fresh and new. This is past being just a
program. It's a mission for him, it's consuming him. I think he's really the
wave of the future."

Like his charges, Mr. Danner admits, he was a tough kid "from the projects" who
could easily have taken the wrong path. The son of a cook and a maid, he grew up
in Orlando, joined the Marine Corps, served in Vietnam, earned degrees from two
local universities and spent a decade as a Federal and state probation officer.
Now 39 and married, with two children of his own, he teaches criminal justice
courses at Valencia Community College, which also supplies volunteers for the
program.

"A lot of kids have been labeled incorrigible, but just need some direction and
a hug and a pat on the head," Mr. Danner said. Until they enter Honor House, he
added, many of the boys have heard a single negative litany all their lives: "
'Your daddy weren't nothin', you ain't nothin' and you ain't never gonna be
nothin'.' "

On entering Honor House, each boy is told he is expected to make progress toward
four goals: establishing family relationships, building self-esteem, choosing a
career and getting a high school diploma. Classes are held weekdays from 7:45
A.M. to 3 P.M., with instruction in science and math, social studies and
English.

"These are boys who need to be in a regular high school setting," Mr. Danner
said, but "don't know how to greet people, or how to sit down and eat right, or
pray, or take a bath, or go downtown. There's no family structure for most of
them."

Street-Corner Visits

As part of their education, counselors use dramatic methods to demonstrate the
futility of life on the streets. Mr. Danner said he has taken boys to street
corners where drugs are sold so that he can ridicule the drug runners, who
scatter like frightened rabbits every time a police patrol car appears on the
scene. Other groups have visited a local cemetery, noting the growing number of
young people, some of whom they know, who are buried there.

In addition to attending classes, residents are responsible for doing their
laundry and for kitchen duty and maintenance, from toilets to classrooms. By
performing those chores and attending class, they earn points. When they have
accumulated 100 points, they are eligible for weekend home leave. No resident
can go home the first month; after that, visits are limited to two a month.

When the teen-agers go home, they do not go alone. Staff members drop the boys
off in a van and then check into a local motel, so that they can enforce a
nightly curfew and be available for counseling if a problem arises. The
round-the-clock access is one of the program's innovations and allows Mr. Danner
to make maximum use of counselors cast from the same mold as their boss: tough
and smart, but sympathetic.

Among the residents of Honor House is Antonio C., a quiet boy with just the
beginnings of a mustache. At age 15, he already has arrests for grand theft
auto, burglary, arson and criminal mischief on his record. He has been sentenced
in lieu of jail time to other juvenile detention and reform programs, but always
ran away.

Why not cut and run from Honor House? "I don't want to be on the run all my
life," he said. "I want to go back to school, get a legal job. This was a last
chance for me, and I decided to take it."

His friend Gregory F., a 16-year-old facing grand theft and aggravated assault
charges, said he had doubts about the Honor House program when he arrived in
January, but decided to take a wait-and-see attitude. "I liked it from the first
day," he said. "You can talk to the staff here, like they're your own brother. I
want to do what's good, but I'm a person with a bad temper, and they've been
working with me on that. I've learned to think before I do something. When I go
home, my parents see the change in me."

Mr. Danner said that because of the harshness of their lives outside, many
residents come to see Honor House as a haven or refuge. "Our escape rate is very
low, and the reason is that these kids feel safe here," he said. "There's no
drive-by shooting here, no sexual abuse. Why would you want to leave here and go
out into the jungle? This is the Hyatt Regency compared to what they've been
through out there."

Some residents, Mr. Danner said, have asked to stay on after they complete their
terms. Others who have been released show up on the center's doorstep later,
seeking advice or fleeing problems at home or in their neighborhoods. "Our
problem is getting kids to leave here," said David E. Smith, a program
supervisor. "We have a lot of boys who don't want to go back home."

LOAD-DATE: April 4, 1993

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo: Julia Davis working in classes with residents of Honor House in
Eatonville, Fla. (Phelan M. Ebenhack for The New York Times)

                   Copyright 1993 The New York Times Company


                              12 of 312 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                  April 4, 1993, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

ART VIEW;
Chicano Art: A Lustier Breed of Political Protest

BYLINE: By Holland Cotter

SECTION: Section 2; Page 37; Column 1; Arts & Leisure Desk

LENGTH: 1054 words


There are two very differment kinds of political art on view in New York these
days.

One can be seen at the Whitney Biennial, an exhibition distinguished chiefly by
the unrelieved didacticism of its contents. Installation is the preferred
format, as if individual objects were inadequate to the task of conveying ideas,
and the topics alluded to -- gender identity, racism and sexual abuse -- are
those that have received particularly close attention in the New York art world
in recent seasons. The environmental and consumerist issues so pressing just a
few years back are nowhere to be found.

Yet "political" in this context is a slippery term. Despite the presence of some
good artists, much of the work settles for looking threatening or sexy or
outrageous only in a general, theatrical sort of way, as if politics were a
matter of attitude rather than argument, of style rather than logic. In part,
this is just a liability of a one-note group show. Indignation starts to sound
repetitious and competitive. Protest takes on an abstracted, academic ring, as
if sounded in a vacuum. Precisely whose grievances are being voiced, one is led
to wonder, and to whom are they addressed? One comes away from the show as from
a film made up entirely of special effects, titillated and entertained but not
especially enlightened.

An altogether different species of political art is to be seen in "Chicano Art:
Resistance and Affirmation, 1965-1985," organized at the Wight Art Gallery of
the University of California at Los Angeles, and installed at the Bronx Museum
of the Arts through May 2. Formally speaking, much of the work is conservative.
Painting, virtually absent at the Whitney, is the dominant medium, social
realism the prevailing style. Almost every one of the show's 125 objects is
specific in its political content, and that content grows directly from the
immigrant experience of a single group of people, the Mexican-Americans, or
Chicanos, who first settled in the American Southwest more than a century and a
half ago.

The exhibition begins at the time of the alliance of Chicano farm workers and
urban laborers in the early 60's. Referred to as El Movimiento or La Causa, the
alliance joined forces with the Vietnam antiwar movement later in the decade.
Like other civil rights groups of the time, it grew from conflict, was grass
roots in origin, and sought justice for people shut out from the socioeconomic
mainstream. At the same time, like the Black Power movement then developing, the
group resisted cultural assimilation. The art it produced reflects this complex,
contentious, vibrant agenda.

Chicano art's debt to the Mexican muralists of an earlier, revolutionary time --
David Alfaro Siqueiros, Jose Clemente Orozco and Diego Rivera -- is clear at a
glance. Although contemporary murals from California, Texas, New Mexico and the
Midwest appear only in a continuous slide presentation in a side gallery,
several small-scale agitprop paintings, especially those from the 60's and 70's,
distill the narrative energy of the larger form. These range from Emanuel
Martinez's "Farm Workers' Altar" (1967), with its simply rendered images of a
crucifix, grapevines and raised clenched fists, to Ernesto Martinez's "Si Se
Puede" (1973), a visionary emblem of worker solidarity.

Equally though more obliquely political is the exhibition's detailed
documentation, through paintings, photographs, prints and sculptural assemblage,
of a way of life circumscribed by poverty, fraught with internal inequalities
(the subservience of women is endemic in this society) yet imbued with a
transformative humor and pathos.

One need only compare a painting of a nude, haloed, fecund Frida Kahlo by Yreina
D. Cervantez with a silk-screen image of the Virgin of Guadalupe, labeled
"Protectress of My People," by Amado M. Pena Jr. to understand the crucial role
that spirituality and the feminine image play in a culture whose religious roots
run far deeper than Christianity.

Similarly, the joining in one exhibition of images as diverse as Joe Ramos's
haunting black-and-white photograph "My Grandmother's Bedroom, Mexicali," Jose
Montoya's witty, delicate ink drawings of zoot-suited Chicano teen-agers, Carmen
Lomas Garza's dreamy painting of children watching the moon from a roof, and
Malaquias Montoya's poster of the Statue of Liberty wielding a meat cleaver
demonstrates, far better than the Whitney Biennial does, how expressively varied
and conceptually subtle political art can be.

What "Chicano Art: Resistance and Affirmation" shares with the Whitney show,
unfortunately, is a catalogue clogged with the all-purpose theoretical language
of the academic establishment. This hothouse-grown rhetoric makes sense at the
Biennial, with its curiously pedantic moral tone, but the same approach sits
oddly on the Bronx show, which is at pains to define itself as being outside the
mainstream and which worries about how Chicano art will be interpreted when
deprived of its original context .

How much more valuable it might have been to offer bilingual statements by
Chicano artists (who, with few exceptions, remain voiceless here) and by members
of the community who lived with this art as it was being created. The catalogue
proves most useful, in fact, when it is most concrete, speaking from inside the
culture, defining untranslatable terms like "rasquachismo" or explaining the
meaning of the United Farm Workers' black-eagle emblem -- information otherwise
inaccessible to the non-Chicano.

It is that organic grounding in experience that ultimately separates the Bronx
Museum's political art from the Whitney's. The Bronx show is far from perfect.
Some of the work, especially that created collectively, simply needs its
original ambiance of music, poetry and street theater to come to life. (The
dazzling and scary Biennial installation by the Puerto Rican-born artist Pepon
Osorio actually comes closest to providing just such dynamism.)

But where the Whitney show remains largely an attempt by art-world insiders to
simulate an outsider art, "Chicano Art: Resistance and Affirmation" is the real
thing, coming straight from the heart and mind of an entire culture, and having
both the vitality and the limitations that such breadth of intention and
intensity of feeling bring.

LOAD-DATE: April 28, 1993

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo: Ernesto Martinez's "Si Se Puede" -- A debt to the muralists of
an earlier time. (Bronx Museum of the Arts)

TYPE: Review

                   Copyright 1993 The New York Times Company


                              13 of 312 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                  April 6, 1993, Tuesday, Late Edition - Final

Winds of Change Ruffle Fashion's Lull

BYLINE: By BERNADINE MORRIS

SECTION: Section B; Page 8; Column 1; Style Desk; Fashion Page

LENGTH: 945 words


Fashion indeed has reached a watershed. Traditionalists and revolutionaries
agree. That is about all they agree on.

The style that has dominated fashion for about 15 years -- since Giorgio Armani
gave it cachet -- is the suit. Severely structured with broad football shoulders
at the beginning, then made almost as simply as a sweater, with shoulder pads
all but eliminated, the jacket was the alpha and omega of fashionable dressing.

Fifteen years is a long time in the ephemeral business of fashion, and change
was inevitable. A suitable substitute has yet to be found.

The most determined advocates of a new order were the designers who became known
as the deconstructionists in Paris. Rei Kawakubo of Comme des Garcons with her
rips, tears and visible seams was the earliest spokeswoman, more than a decade
ago, and developed a sizable following. A few years later, the Antwerp school,
headed by Martin Margiela, with Ann Demeulemeester and Dries van Noten coming up
strongly, developed thir own brand of anti-fashion fashion.

The last time fashion had an anti-establishment focus was in the 1960's and
1970's, a period which has strongly influenced current collections. The
difference is that in swinging London, where the movement started, designers
were reflecting the youth culture, with their miniskirts and ethnic-inspired
clothes. In this country, the Vietnam War provided another focus, along with
drugs.

Fashion was reflecting social changes, as it did during the 1920's after women
finally acquired the vote, cut their hair and threw away their corsets. They
bound their breasts to look more, as Miss Kawakubo recognized, like the boys.

Are there comparable forces at work today to inspire major fashion changes? Or
are the shifts in emphasis due to the desire of young designers to make
themselves known? (In Europe as well as in this country, the biggest names
belong to designers in their 50's and 60's, with a few in their 40's -- there is
obviously room for new ones.) It's fine to make noise if you have a view that
needs airing. And a fresh hand attracts attention even if it is off the beaten
track, as Christian Lacroix's short pouf skirt was in 1985. The pouf made the
designer a star, but that's because he has a feeling for shape and color as well
as a need to change the shape of fashion. Too many of today's experiments seem
an expression of art for art's sake.

The fall showings in New York were hardly an unmitigated disaster. There was a
tendency, as always, to exaggerate the styles presented on the runways. When
retailers returned to designers' showrooms to place their orders, they usually
found a familiar assortment of more conventional clothes than they saw in the
shows. There was also a handful of designers who proved they could produce
exciting clothes that were relevant without being destructive.

Geoffrey Beene bypassed the standard runway show in favor of a static
presentation far from Seventh Avenue, at the Asia Society. Beautifully mounted,
the exhibition had plenty of style. What was missing, the designer agreed, was a
sense of how the clothes looked in motion. The tradeoff was that viewers could
get close enough to examine the workmanship, even touch the fabrics.

But what made the show a success was the quality of the clothes. They represent
no radical new direction for this designer, who has long been concerned with
modernity. But with each collection, he carries his ideas further. These involve
searching out the lightest possible materials, with the emphasis on those that
do not wrinkle, evolving new methods of seaming (most seams are curved, not
straight) and figuring out ways the pieces can be made interchangeable. A
checked fly-front jacket can be worn during the day with its above-the-knee
skirt or pants, dressed up with the addition of a lace bolero, or a sparkling
blouse or worn at night over a bare-arm long dress. Mr. Beene shows no long
skirts for day: he doesn't consider them modern.

Ralph Lauren came up with an ethnic theme that worked. He didn't reach into a
grab bag and come up with a country or a place that hadn't been noticed much.
Instead, he picked Russia, which has been very much in the news. He showed the
dashing military coats of old Russia, the kind of casual tweed jackets that he
attributed to intellectuals and that are a mark of bohemians anywhere; some
marvelous paisley-pattern chiffon Cossak shirts, and lovely evening clothes that
gave full homage to the season's penchant for velvet and chiffon. None of the
styles looked as if they came from musty closets.

Richard Tyler came out of the west with a collection that settled easily into
the New York scene. His first show here was filled with Edwardian and Napoleonic
jackets and princess dresses. He put dandy jackets over flowing or pipestem
pants and his evening dresses included Empire waist taffetas with smocked tops
as well as velvet sheaths. Nothing looked thrown together, and the craftsmanship
was impeccable. Though the same themes turned up in many collections, Mr. Tyler
made them viable.

As a result of a trip to Austria, Byron Lars adapted Tyrolean costumes, bringing
them cleverly into the modern world. He used black leather, for example, for
laced-up corselets, hooded boleros and a skin-tight jumper loosely inspired by
the dirndl. Peasant blouses were worn over turtleneck sweaters and shorts, and
patent leather toggles closed contemporary duffle coats.

At 28, he has already developed his own point of view and has learned how to
make clothes. He has a sense of whimsy and looks as if he could soon develop
into a major player in the continuing game of fashion.

LOAD-DATE: April 6, 1993

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photos: Geoffrey Beene's fall collection was displayed on mannequins
instead of being introduced at a conventional fashion show.; Checked wool
evening dress by Geoffrey Beene has matching scarf and jacket.; Tweed long
jacket pants suit by Ralph Lauren was inspired by Russian revolutionaries.
(Photographs by Marylinn K. Yee/The New York Times); Peasant blouse and corselet
waistline mark Byron Lars's Tyrolean-inspired outfit. (Bill Cunningham); Lace
edge of shirt peeps below jacket hem of softly tailored pants suit by Richard
Tyler. (Star Black for The New York Times)

                   Copyright 1993 The New York Times Company


                              14 of 312 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 April 7, 1993, Wednesday, Late Edition - Final

Books of The Times;
What's to Complain About? Plenty, It Seems

BYLINE: By HERBERT MITGANG

SECTION: Section C; Page 19; Column 1; Cultural Desk; Word and Image Page

LENGTH: 928 words


Culture of Complaint
The Fraying of America
By Robert Hughes
210 pages. New York Public Library/Oxford University Press. $19.95.

Lest you think after reading Robert Hughes's brilliant book of essays, "Culture
of Complaint," that he is simply looking down his nose at American society,
politics and culture, here is his affectionate though critical interpretation of
the United States in the final decade of the 20th century:

"The fact remains that America is a collective work of the imagination whose
making never ends, and once that sense of collectivity and mutual respect is
broken the possibilities of Americanness begin to unravel. If they are fraying
now, it is because the politics of ideology has for the last 20 years weakened
and in some areas broken the traditional American genius for consensus, for
getting along by making up practical compromises to meet real social needs."

So the good news (even if there isn't much of it) is that the country still
stands a chance to heal and flourish if it grows up and disenthralls itself.
Most of what Mr. Hughes has to say is cast in negative terms; after all, he is
the longtime art critic for Time magazine and there's a lot to criticize in
every field about the bogus idols in our culture. Furthermore, he's an
Australian who has lived for many years in New York City, which enables him to
view the American scene close-up as well as at a distance.

Although Mr. Hughes hasn't got the range of knowledge of H. L. Mencken about the
United States and its institutions, he has this in his favor over the great
Baltimore essayist: he doesn't consider the American people an irreparable
"booboisie." Instead, he directs his main ire against their political leaders
and role models. In this respect, he resembles Gore Vidal, the most literate
American social critic around today (who also sees the country at a distance:
from his villa in Italy).

On the big business of entertainment, Mr. Hughes says American popular music was
once full of exaltation and appealed to grown-ups. Now, he says, instead of the
"virile inventiveness" of Duke Ellington, we get Michael Jackson. In the past,
George Gershwin and Cole Porter provided the style and wit for theater and film
musicals; now we are down to "illiterate spectaculars about cats or the fall of
Saigon." He calls Oliver Stone's "J. F. K." a "lying film," with its "paranoid
elevation of a discredited New Orleans prosecutor into a political hero."

Hollywood once treated history as "harmless gadzookery" or "devotional
claptrap," without saying it was educating the young. "But in a time of
docudramas and simulations," he writes, "when the difference between TV and real
events is more and more blurred -- not by accident, but as deliberate policy
from the bosses of electronic media -- such exercises fall into a mushy, anxious
context of suspended disbelief that old Hollywood pseudohistory never had."


Mr. Hughes exposes both political correctness on the left and what he calls
patriotic correctness on the right. He says they feed upon each other: "Where
would George Will, P. J. O'Rourke, the editors of The American Spectator and
some of the contributors to The New Criterion all be without the inexhaustible
flow of P.C. claptrap from the academic left?"

In one of his overwrought but amusing metaphors, he writes: "One would rather
swim than get in the same dinghy as the P.C. folk. But neither would one wish to
don blazer and Top-Siders on the gin palace with its twin 400-horsepower
Buckleys, its Buchanan squawk box, Falwell & Robertson compass, its Quayle depth
finder and its broken bilge pump, that now sits listing on the Potomac as its
crew bickers over who 'really' lost the 1992 election."

Mr. Hughes holds Presidents Ronald Reagan and George Bush responsible for the
demeaning of language, manipulating the public and running down the country.
"The loss of reality by euphemism and lies was 20 times worse and more
influential in the utterances of the last two Presidents and their aides than
among bien-pensant academics," he writes, "although you didn't find any
complaints about that in Commentary or The New Criterion."


He describes what the Clinton Administration inherited in these blunt words:
"Reaganism did more to uncouple American business from its traditional moorings
than any political ideology in the country's history.  This orgy, which
culminated in the Savings and Loan scandal, went unchallenged by the public at
first, mainly because the Government kept the public in the dark about what was
happening." And: "The new business heroes, the corporate raiders and junk-bond
merchants -- Michael Milken, Ivan Boesky, Kohlberg Kravis -- exploded the
traditional business relationship between investor, employee and customer."

Mr. Hughes's main targets are hypocrisy, hucksterism, racism, anti-Semitism,
religious bigotry, feminist extremism, anti-abortionists, ignorant and biased
professors, political and patriotic correctness and, in general, respected
right-wing spokesmen, editors and their publications.  Which gives him more than
enough to write about!

"Culture of Complaint" is a small gem with a few flaws of emphasis: there's too
much on the history of slavery and it could use even more on the author's main
field, the modern art world, about which he has written so perceptively in "The
Shock of the New" (1981 and 1991). In future printings -- and there should be
many more for this outspoken book -- an index might well be added. Meantime, I
can't wait for the sequel.

LOAD-DATE: April 7, 1993

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo: Robert Hughes (Joyce Ravid/Oxford University Press)

TYPE: Review

                   Copyright 1993 The New York Times Company


                              15 of 312 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 April 8, 1993, Thursday, Late Edition - Final

CBS Producer to Head NBC News

BYLINE: By BILL CARTER

SECTION: Section C; Page 16; Column 1; Cultural Desk; Word and Image Page

LENGTH: 798 words


NBC has chosen Andrew Lack, a longtime news producer for CBS, to become
president of the network's embattled news division.

Robert C. Wright, the president of NBC, said yesterday that he had chosen Mr.
Lack for his experience in television news, for his integrity and especially for
his range of production work in prime-time news programs, which Mr. Wright said
would be "our main area of focus over the next few years."

Mr. Lack, who is 45, accepted NBC's offer after receiving a release from the
five-year contract with CBS he signed only a month ago.

Ending a Search

The announcement ends a monthlong search for a news president to replace Michael
G. Gartner, who resigned under pressure on March 2. The resignation came after
the network's admission that it had rigged a General Motors truck to explode
during a report on truck safety broadcast on "Dateline," the NBC News magazine
program.

Mr. Lack has been a producer of news programs at CBS News for 17 years. He
created the news-magazine program "West 57th" and was its executive producer for
four years. Then he moved to another CBS news magazine, "Face to Face With
Connie Chung." In January, he took over as the executive producer of "Street
Stories," another news-magazine program.

He had also been executive producer of "CBS Reports" and was involved in such
programs as the 1979 documentary on Senator Edward M.  Kennedy, which had a
strong negative effect on his campaign for the Presidency. Mr. Lack was also
tangentially involved as a senior producer on the 1982 CBS documentary on body
counts during the Vietnam War, which led to a libel suit's being filed against
the network by Gen.  William C. Westmoreland. Mr. Lack was never called to
testify in that suit, which General Westmoreland withdrew.

'The Fabulous Opportunity'

Mr. Lack said he had not pursued the NBC position. "Obviously I had just signed
a long-term arrangement with CBS," he said. He added that he had always seen
himself as a producer of television shows, saying, "I have lived for what goes
onto that screen."

But when Mr. Wright called last week, Mr. Lack said he became enthusiastic about
"the fabulous opportunity" of taking over NBC News.

Part of the assignment will be to help NBC recuperate from its recent
calamities, a challenge Mr. Lack said he discussed at length with Mr. Wright.

Mr. Lack fulfills several requirements that NBC News staff members said were
necessary for the news division to overcome the lingering problems of low staff
morale and damaged credibility created by the "Dateline" scandal and Mr.
Gartner's subsequent resignation. He has long experience in television. Mr.
Gartner had none when he joined NBC. Mr. Lack also has some impressive
journalistic credentials, having won 16 Emmy Awards, 4 Alfred I. du
Pont-Columbia Awards and many other awards for news programs he has produced.

Mr. Lack has also managed or worked closely with some of the top news
personalities in television, including Dan Rather, Mike Wallace, Connie Chung
and Ed Bradley. He is also personally close to Tom Brokaw, the NBC News anchor.

On Tom Brokaw

Mr. Brokaw's contract with the network will expire this summer, and one senior
NBC News executive said Mr. Lack's appointment "should mean that we'll be able
to keep Tom, which is a priority that has been on the front burner."

Mr. Brokaw said: "Finding the right person for this job is so complicated. Andy
has real talent as a producer, and we need that. And I think he's going to have
the absolute confidence of the people upstairs."

An NBC News executive familiar with the network's search for a new news
president said Mr. Lack's name had come up only recently after the network
explored several other options. As recently as last week, NBC had been
negotiating with Tom Johnson, the president of CNN, the NBC News executive said.

Mr. Lack encountered some criticism as the executive producer of "West 57th,"
which critics said had more style than substance. And when "Face to Face With
Connie Chung" went on the air in 1989 it used a highly debated technique of
actors recreating news events. That technique was quickly dropped.

Mr. Lack said yesterday that many CBS News executives had told him that had
either of those news-magazine programs stayed on the air, despite the criticism,
they would now be prime-time hits.

One senior NBC News executive, who spoke on condition of anonymity, said Mr.
Lack should benefit from the fact that the news division has essentially
bottomed out in terms of problems in recent years, after staff layoffs and the
ethical questions raised by the "Dateline" report.

"A lot of the worst has to be over," the executive said. "Some of us feel this
place is like Mogadishu before the Marines landed."

NAME: Andrew Lack

LOAD-DATE: April 8, 1993

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo: Andrew Lack (CBS News)

TYPE: Biography

                   Copyright 1993 The New York Times Company


                              16 of 312 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                  April 9, 1993, Friday, Late Edition - Final

The Sex Market: Scourge on the World's Children

BYLINE: By MARLISE SIMONS,  Special to The New York Times

SECTION: Section A; Page 3; Column 1; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 1188 words


BRUSSELS -- Doctors, police officers and social workers accustomed to dealing
with sexual abuse are reporting a troubling phenomenon: children and adolescents
are increasingly in demand as prostitutes because clients see them as "safer"
and likely to be free of AIDS.

In the brothels of Manila and Bangkok, the port district of Rio de Janeiro and
the backrooms of Frankfurt, pimps hawk the services of children as young as 8 to
13 years old by emphasizing that they are "clean," experts reported here
recently at a conference organized by Unesco on "the sex trade and human
rights."

Customers are willing to pay far more for very young girls or boys who are
described as virgins or whose youth suggests innocence, they said, and most of
the children are kept working secretly to avoid attracting attention from the
authorities.

"Since the massive arrival of businessmen from Japan, Hong Kong, Taiwan, the sex
business is rising," said Dr. Duong Quynh Hoa, director of a pediatric hospital
in Ho Chi Minh City, Vietnam. "The customers are afraid of AIDS. So there is a
high price on virginity. The procurers are going after children 10 or 11 or 12
years old."

AIDS Only One Factor

Specialists seeking to curb the sexual exploitation of children, including
police officials, lawyers and social workers, said at the conference that the
demand for child prostitutes was increasing for varying reasons in different
parts of the world, and not simply because of fear of AIDS. But they agreed that
the global AIDS epidemic was a major factor.

The experts also pointed to pornography, peep shows, "sex tours" and other
products of the multibillion-dollar sex industry, which they said have
normalized the open buying and selling of sex and have eroded taboos against
sexual exploitation of children.

"It's frightening," said Wassila Tamzali, Unesco's director for women's rights.
"We are losing all boundaries. More and more children are being sacrificed to
the sex industry. We must break down the wall of silence around this."

Doctors from Asia, Latin America and the United States have also reported that
they are treating far more children below the age of 14 for sexually transmitted
diseases than they did 10 years ago, said Janice Raymond, a professor of medical
ethics at the University of Massachusetts at Amherst.

Dr. Raymond said doctors were treating young boys and girls who had not yet
reached puberty for oral gonorrhea and deep cuts and fissures related to sexual
abuse.

"As a pediatrician I see the terrible consequences," said Dr. Hoa, 63, who said
that in 30 years of practice she had never before encountered such "sadism"
involving the prostitution of children. "Adults are paying money to make
children suffer," she said.

"Often a father brings in a daughter 10 or 11 years old, ripped and bleeding.
The children are in terrible pain."

Few Statistics Available

Statistics on child prostitution are hard to come by, but studies published by
Unesco last year on the phenomenon cite Colombia, Brazil, Benin, Thailand and
the Philippines as countries in which child prostitution is rampant.

In Latin America and Africa, street children often operate independently, while
in Thailand and the Philippines, countries with vast industries marketing sexual
services, the children are usually recruited to work in brothels. Laws
explicitly ban prostitution of minors in most countries, but enforcement is
uneven.

One Unesco study estimated that two million Thai women work as prostitutes and
that 800,000 are adolescents and children. Demand for sex with young girls comes
mainly from Asian tourists, the study said, demand for young boys from
Westerners.

Another Unesco report estimated that more than 10,000 boys between 6 and 14 work
as prostitutes in Sri Lanka, serving mainly foreign men.

Child prostitution in the Middle East is more carefully concealed and therefore
more difficult to track, conference delegates said. But they reported that boys
and girls from Bangladesh and India have in some cases been sold by their
families and taken to the United Arab Emirates, Oman and other countries to work
in brothels or appear in pornographic films.

Emmanuel Herman, chief of police of Brussels, told the audience that young Asian
girls recruited as prostitutes in the West are often taken first to Cyprus,
where they are trained and then provided to clients from the Middle East.

"Girls have told us this a number of times," Mr. Herman said. "They said that
after their training they first served special Middle Eastern clients who pay a
lot of money for virgins."

Experts note that "sex tours" of Asian and Latin American cities marketed in the
West often involve adolescent girls. And while the bulk of sexually explicit
magazines and photographs marketed around the world involve adults, delegates
said that an increasing number depict children.

Different Kicks?

Such materials seem to be changing the habits and expectations of customers,
some prostitutes attending the conference said.

"Now with the sexual freedom, people are looking for different kicks," said Cora
Molloy, a prostitute who said she has worked in Germany for 15 years. "There's
more sadomasochism and there's more interest in kids."

Asked if customers sought out children because they feared contracting the virus
that causes AIDS from older prostitutes, Mrs. Molloy replied: "Maybe. But
clients have to be very naive to think the young kids are virgins, or totally
clean."

She and other prostitutes agreed nonetheless that the number of girls and boys
working as prostitutes seemed to be expanding rapidly in Western Europe. "There
are a lot of kids these days, 13 and 14," Mrs. Molloy said. "Because they're
under-age, they have a very hard time."

Child prostitution is emerging as a crucial issue for human rights and women's
groups and has recently led to debates in the European Parliament in Strasbourg,
France. At the conference in Brussels, delegates from human rights groups
circulated a draft for a new international convention against sexual
exploitation, written to replace a 1949 United Nations convention against
trafficking in prostitution that many countries had never ratified.

Fathers Are Questioned

Dr. Hoa, the pediatrician from Vietnam, said she asked the fathers of her young
patients why they sold their daughters' services. "It's always the father who
comes with the child, never the mother," she said.

"One father came with his 12-year-old daughter," Dr. Hoa recalled. "She was
bleeding from her wounds and as torn as if she had given birth. He told me:
'We've earned $300, so it's enough. She can stop.' "

Another father brought his 11-year-old daughter, Dr. Hoa said. "She was
terrorized and in terrible pain." Dr. Hoa said she asked the father how he could
let this happen to his child. "He told me: 'First of all, we are very poor. And
this is a good age to do it. She is still too young to get pregnant.' "

What about the child's future, the doctor asked. The answer, Dr. Hoa said, was:
"She is very young now. She will grow up and she will forget."

LOAD-DATE: April 9, 1993

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo: Specialists report that children and adolescents around the
world are increasingly sought out as prostitutes, in part because customers
consider them more likely to be free of the virus that causes AIDS. A young girl
stood in a red-light district in Dhaka, Bangladesh. (Shehzad Noorani/Drik
Picture Library Ltd.)

                   Copyright 1993 The New York Times Company


                              17 of 312 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                  April 9, 1993, Friday, Late Edition - Final

Hanoi Journal;
Colonel Fights With His Pen, Defending the Poor

BYLINE: By HENRY KAMM,  Special to The New York Times

SECTION: Section A; Page 4; Column 3; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 980 words

DATELINE: HANOI, Vietnam


For a lieutenant colonel who retired only last year after 27 years of service,
and a Communist Party member since 1970, Nguyen Khac Truong holds decidedly
nonconformist views. What's more, he has expressed them in a novel that not only
was published but even shared the 1991 fiction prize of the Vietnamese Writers
Association.

Mr. Truong is a writer with a mission. He stated it bluntly: "I want to remind
everybody that 80 percent of the Vietnamese people are peasants.  If our country
is built on a model that is not suitable to peasants, they will be poor forever.
Why are our peasants still living in tatters?"

The author, born in 1946, grew up on a collective farm 50 miles north of here
and still considers his village, Xuan Dang, his home. His wife and two children
live there, and he returns there every month from his job at Literature and Art,
a weekly of the Writers Association.

"Every time I see my native land I am sad," Mr. Truong said in an interview.
Like most villages, Xuan Dang has no electricity or hope of being electrified
soon, he said. People still do not have the brick houses that they want, he
said, and all work is still done by hand. "They are dying for mechanized tools,"
he said.

The Poverty Is Evident

The writer, who spoke in Vietnamese through an interpreter, said the only
improvement was that villagers now had enough to eat, "but not the nice food
they would like."

The poverty of peasants, particularly in the North, which Communists took over
between 1945 and 1954, is evident to any visitor. But in a state that has
glorified peasants and workers as the chief beneficiaries of the Communist
revolution, it is heresy to say so.

In Mr. Truong's view, expressed in his long novel "The Plot of Land That Has a
Lot of Human Beings and Many Ghosts," Communist rule has been a successor to the
historic feudalism under which Vietnam's peasants have always suffered. In a way
it is worse.

"In feudal times, there was only the chief of the commune," the writer said.
"Now there is the party secretary, the commune chairman, the youth leader, the
head of the women's organization and all the others. In the collectives, the
peasant had to pay for all those who dominated his life. And on the lower level
of the village there are more bureaucrats."

Although collective farming was liberalized in 1987 and land privatized, Mr.
Truong said, peasants still remained in many ways under the old domination.
Procurement of seed, fertilizer and pesticides is still in the hands of the
communal leadership, and so is access to irrigation.

Those who oppressed peasants before by direct rule now exploit them through
their monopoly over all farm inputs, he said. The party and state officials are
the middlemen who oblige peasants to buy from them.  "They still find loopholes
for corruption," he said, "and the people are still unhappy."

But Mr. Truong said the sense of impotence of the individual in the face of
authority has greatly diminished. "Before, they were afraid of officials and
felt they were very lowly as peasants," he said. "They are not afraid anymore
but angry about their unhappiness."

He said that in Thanh Hoa Province recently, two communes rejected leaders who
had been imposed and declared themselves leaderless.  Province officials then
allowed them to choose leaders of their own, the writer said.

The major problems remaining, Mr. Truong said, are "social equality and
democracy, the relations between the people and the authorities and between the
countryside and the city." Basic services and cultural opportunities are much
better in urban areas than in the neglected countryside, he said.

The publication of his book, as well as the novel that shared the Writers
Association prize, Bao Ninh's "The Sorrow of War," an unheroic account of the
conflict with South Vietnam and the United States, were other signs of doi moi,
or renovation, the Vietnamese version of Soviet perestroika and glasnost.

"The head of the ideological section of the Central Committee read my novel and
said it caused him pain," Mr. Truong said with evident pleasure. "But he said it
was correct, so he couldn't blame me."

No Prize Awarded

Nonetheless, no such outspoken books have appeared since 1991, Hanoi
intellectuals say, and the Writers Association awarded no prize last year.

Indicative of the Communist orthodoxy that still reigns in Vietnamese
intellectual life, however much economic practice now differs from old dogmas,
Mr. Truong said the "Ghosts" of his title aroused objections that had to be
overcome by the publisher. "It was considered a remnant of superstition,
incompatible with materialism, that is, Marxist-Leninism," he said.

But the writer related with pleasure that "superstitions," dear to a nation that
prizes traditions, were returning to villages after decades of being banned
without being forgotten.  The communal festivals, usually celebrated in each
village after the Lunar New Year, are again being celebrated.

The festivals combine the rites of ancestor worship with those of Buddhism and
had through the ages been the high points of the rural year.  Forbidden as soon
as the Communists took over a village, the festivals made their return four
years ago and have been tolerated since.

"The older people remembered the tradition and re-introduced it, and the young
find spiritual appeal in it," Mr. Truong said. "All the party officials take
part."

He said he saw no contradiction in serving the party and religion. "They feel
that is their real life," he said, referring to the festivals.

"I believe fully in Buddhism," the writer said. He laughed when reminded of his
23 years of Communist membership.

"As a writer you must keep an open mind," he said. "Some problems are bigger
than the class struggle. If you have no spiritual life you can't be an
interesting writer."

NAME: Nguyen Khac Truong

LOAD-DATE: April 9, 1993

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo: "Before, they were afraid of officials and felt they were very
lowly as peasants," the Vietnamese writer Nguyen Khac Truong said of his people.
"They are not afraid anymore but angry about their unhappiness." (Agence
France-Presse for The New York Times)

TYPE: Biography

                   Copyright 1993 The New York Times Company


                              18 of 312 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                  April 9, 1993, Friday, Late Edition - Final

The Lone Dissenter

SECTION: Section A; Page 26; Column 5; Editorial Desk

LENGTH: 161 words


To the Editor:

"Remembering Jeannette" (Op-Ed, April 2), on Jeannette Rankin, America's first
woman member of Congress, omits critical information about her two terms in the
House of Representatives.

In her first term, 1917-19, she became the only member of the House to vote
against United States entry into World War I. Her opposition led to her defeat
in the next election.

Ironically, when Jeannette Rankin returned to the House for a second term in
1941, Congress again voted to declare war, this time World War II. Again, Rankin
became the only member of Congress to vote against the declaration and again was
defeated in the next election.

One of her final political gestures was in 1968, at age 88, leading the Jeanette
Rankin Brigade to the Capitol in Washington to protest the Vietnam War.

PHYLLIS J. READ, BERNARD L. WITLIEB
Yorktown Heights, N.Y., April 2, 1993

The writers are authors of "The Book of Women's Firsts" (1992).

LOAD-DATE: April 9, 1993

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Letter

                   Copyright 1993 The New York Times Company


                              19 of 312 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                  April 9, 1993, Friday, Late Edition - Final

SPORTS PEOPLE: MARATHON;
Bill Rodgers Retires from Marathon

SECTION: Section B; Page 10; Column 1; Sports Desk

LENGTH: 117 words


In his last marathon, BILL RODGERS wilted in the heat and humidity of Vietnam
and walked the final three miles. In that race, two weeks ago, he took such a
pounding he still feels the effects.

So yesterday, at age 45, after 20 years of long-distance racing and victories in
21 major marathons, Rodgers announced his retirement from the sport he once
dominated.

"Marathoning is one of the ultimate grinds in sport," he said. "I've been ground
down enough. I don't want to do it anymore."

He has no serious injuries and plans to run shorter races. He might even come
back for the 100th Boston Marathon in 1996, an event he won four times. He also
won four New York City Marathons. (AP)

LOAD-DATE: April 9, 1993

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1993 The New York Times Company


                              20 of 312 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 April 10, 1993, Saturday, Late Edition - Final

NEWS SUMMARY

SECTION: Section 1; Page 2; Column 5; Metropolitan Desk

LENGTH: 903 words



International    2-5

U.S. ATTACKS IRAQI MISSILE SITES

Administration officials said U.S. jets had bombed Iraqi antiaircraft batteries
that fired at them as they flew a routine surveillance mission over the northern
no-flight zone. Iraq denied shooting at the jets, saying the U.S. attack was
unprovoked.  1

KEEPING FAITH IN JERUSALEM

In Jerusalem, Christian, Jewish and Muslim worshipers passed a holy day in
harmony, respecting one another's rites and not shoving more than was absolutely
necessary to negotiate streets that in certain spots were packed with people.  1


LITHUANIA BACKSLIDES ON CHANGE

When voters in Lithuania elected the former head of the Communist Party to be
their President in February, it represented a measure of the degree to which a
disintegrating economy has tilted the political debate in the Baltic republic of
3.7 million.  1

U.N. OFFICERS ARE REBUFFED

The top two United Nations military commanders in the Balkans received an angry
rejection in Belgrade from the Serbian commander in Bosnia on their request to
allow 150 Canadian troops into the besieged enclave of Srebrenica.  3

I.M.F. ACTS TO HELP RUSSIA

After receiving heavy pressure from the Clinton Administration and other Western
governments, the International Monetary Fund is moving to ease restrictions on
aid to Russia with the aim of freeing several billion dollars in assistance.  5

U.S. TO SEND AN AIDE TO HANOI

John W. Vessey Jr., the Bush Administration's envoy to Hanoi, will be returning
there on a fact-finding mission on missing American servicemen, a move that
could lead the U.S. to drop its opposition to international bank lending to
Vietnam.  3

NEW JOB FOR NORTH KOREAN'S SON

Kim Jong Il, the son and heir apparent of North Korea's President, was named
chairman of the National Defense Committee, one of the three top posts in the
nation. The action removes most doubts about whether he will succeed his his
father.  4

ITALY'S LANDSCAPE OF GRAFT

As Italy's corruption scandal moves southward, into Naples and beyond, the array
of projects born in corruption prickling the landscape seems one more indictment
of the politicians who carved up power and patronage across the land.  2

South Africa is acting to transfer control of the broadcast media.  5

National    6-9

TAX CREDIT CALLED DOOMED

The Administration described its proposed investment tax credit as crucial to
its economic package, but opposition in Congress and even among business groups
appears to have doomed the idea.  1

The Administration plans to issue "health security cards." 7

The top Pentagon doctor says homosexuality is not a health issue.  7

U.S. ASKS G.M. TO RECALL PICKUPS

The Federal Government asked General Motors to voluntarily recall 4.7 million
pickup trucks built between 1973 and 1987 that critics say are fire hazards.  1

KOREAN STORES PLAN FOR TROUBLE

Frightened Korean retailers, a top target of Los Angeles looters and arsonists
last year, are making grim preparations as the second trial of four officers who
beat Rodney King nears a conclusion.  1

The defense made closing arguments in the Los Angeles trial.  8

N.A.A.C.P. NAMES NEW LEADER

The National Association for the Advancement of Colored People selected the Rev.
Benjamin Chavis Jr. of Cleveland as its new executive director.  6

CLUES TO DANGER IN MILWAUKEE

A Milwaukee AIDS group found evidence five months ago of intestinal parasites in
Milwaukee, but never told health officials.  6

CONGRESSMAN IS ACQUITED

Representative Harold Ford, Tennessee's only black Congressman, was acquitted of
fraud and conspiracy, culminating a long, racially charged legal battle.  6

Louisiana students described the terror of a killer tornado.  8

A rabbi's Playboy interview infuriates his Brazilian synagogue.  9

Metro Digest    21

A SISTER'S ANGUISH

The case of a New Jersey woman imprisoned on charges she strangled her
78-year-old sister illustrates the anguished questions and ambivalent answers in
society's debate over assisted suicide.  1

Business Digest    33

Arts/Entertainment    10-15

Film making in Toronto.  11

Music: Classical reviews 10

Music Notes 11

Peter Gabriel returns.  11

Dance: Russian stars.  15

New faces in "Swan Lake." 15

Sports    26-30

Baseball: Yanks spoil White Sox's home opener.  27

Astros topple Mets in 10th inning.  27

Rockies win home debut.  28

Bonds returns to Three Rivers.  29

Basketball: Knicks won't rest on laurels.  30

Column: Anderson on the Masters.  27

Golf: Maggert takes second-round Masters lead.  30

Hockey: Rangers routed by Penguins.  27

Sports People 30

Obituaries    38

Rabbi Joseph Dov Soloveitchik, a major Jewish philosopher.

Richard Schmiechen, documentary producer.

Charles W. Lanphere, a hotel entrepreneur and executive.

Editorials/Op-Ed    18-19

Editorials

The Mayor's record on crime.

South Korea steps forth.

Another barely balanced budget.

Progress, at last, on school aid.

Letters

Russell Baker: Pork out of season.

Charles Adams: More reasons to dislike the I.R.S.

Fred Plotkin: Invite Gore to Wagner's "Ring."

Margery Tabankin: No fund-raising favors for women.

LOAD-DATE: April 10, 1993

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Summary

                   Copyright 1993 The New York Times Company


                              21 of 312 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 April 10, 1993, Saturday, Late Edition - Final

U.S. to Send General to Vietnam, Hinting a Thaw

BYLINE: By ELAINE SCIOLINO,  Special to The New York Times

SECTION: Section 1; Page 3; Column 1; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 879 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, April 9


In its first policy decision on Vietnam, the Clinton Administration will send
John W. Vessey Jr., a retired Army general, to Hanoi on a fact-finding mission
on missing American servicemen, a move that could lead the United States to
withdraw its opposition to international bank lending to Vietnam, senior
Administration officials said today.

The officials stressed that President Clinton will make no decision on easing
any American pressure on Vietnam until he is convinced that Hanoi is doing all
it can to cooperate with the American authorities on the contentious and
emotional issue of Americans missing since the Vietnam War.

But the Administration is trying to work out the broad outlines of a Vietnam
policy before late April, when the International Monetary Fund will decide
whether to take steps toward resuming lending to Hanoi. France, Germany, Japan
and a number of Asian nations are poised to lend Vietnam enough money to repay
its longstanding I.M.F. debts, which could allow Vietnam to qualify for new
loans.

The new Administration is caught between its isolation on the loan issue and its
desire to increase Vietnam's commercial dealings with the rest of the world on
the one hand, and the reluctance of Mr. Clinton, who opposed the Vietnam War and
did not serve in the military, to take any step that would expose him to
criticism that he is soft on Vietnam.

Mr. Clinton cannot afford another bruising battle, given the controversy over
his own military record and the furor over the issue of whether to lift the ban
on allowing declared homosexuals to serve in the military.

For his part, Secretary of State Warren Christopher is keenly aware that
Vietnam, a country of 70 million people, is a great untapped business
opportunity, one he does not want American businesses to lose to foreign
competitors. Liberal and even some conservative lawmakers have begun calling for
more liberalized relations with Hanoi.

But senior Administration officials stress that even if the United States were
to end its opposition to international loans to Vietnam, lifting the 18-year-old
American trade embargo is another matter, and would happen only slowly and in
stages. Some senior officials speak of the possibility of an eventual economic
relationship with Vietnam but no full-scale normalization of diplomatic
relations.

General's New Mission

In a question-and-answer session after a speech on American foreign policy, Mr.
Christopher raised expectations that the United States might lift the embargo.
Asked about the American approach to the embargo, he repeated the
Administration's conditions, but said, "It's unfortunate that many other
countries around the world are getting ahead of us in their commercial endeavors
in Vietnam and I hope that we can enable our businesses and industries to catch
up by moving more rapidly down the road."

General Vessey, a former Chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff who was the Bush
Administration's special envoy to Hanoi, will seek detailed information on a
range of issues, including full American access to Vietnam's archives, the
resolution of outstanding cases where there are discrepancies in reports, and
the return of the remains of American soldiers. The Administration acknowledges
Vietnam's increased cooperation in the last 18 months, but there are differences
between senior officials over the lending issue.

When asked on Thursday about the pending vote at the I.M.F., one senior
Administration official said, "I think the United States Government hopes very
much to be in a position to join the group that is positive about the situation
in Vietnam." But he added that Mr. Clinton is firmly committed to insuring that
the United States gets all the available information on the missing Americans.

Vietnam's Burden of Proof

Other senior officials involved in the decision said that they were not yet
satisfied that Vietnam had fully cooperated on the issue and that the burden of
proof was on the Vietnamese.

Even some of the most conservative members of Congress have urged the new
Administration to make a concrete gesture toward the Hanoi Government.

"I've been a hard-liner in a lot of ways," Senator Larry Pressler, a South
Dakota Republican, said last month during the Senate confirmation hearing of
Winston Lord as Assistant Secretary of State for East Asian and Pacific Affairs.
"I'm a Vietnam veteran and served two tours there," he said. But he added that
the time has come for President Clinton to "recognize Vietnam."

Senator John F. Kerry, the Massachusetts Democrat, who recently issued a
comprehensive report on the fate of several hundred American servicemen missing
since the Vietnam war, asked Mr. Lord to explain why the new Administration was
so willing to engage with China as a way to push for change there, but took a
"don't be involved" approach toward Vietnam.

Last fall, the Bush Administration made conciliatory gestures toward Vietnam
after receiving what officials considered extraordinary assistance in
identifying missing Americans. Mr. Bush allowed American companies to open
offices in Vietnam and to sign agreements that would take effect as soon as the
United States lifted the embargo, but he left the White House without doing so.

LOAD-DATE: April 10, 1993

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo: John W. Vessey Jr., a retired general who is to go to Vietnam on
a fact-finding mission on missing American servicemen. (Associated Press)

                   Copyright 1993 The New York Times Company


                              22 of 312 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 April 10, 1993, Saturday, Late Edition - Final

I.M.F. Easing Rules for Moscow Aid

BYLINE: By STEVEN GREENHOUSE,  Special to The New York Times

SECTION: Section 1; Page 5; Column 4; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 907 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, April 9


Under heavy pressure from the Clinton Administration and other Western
governments, the International Monetary Fund is moving to ease restrictions on
aid to Russia with the aim of freeing several billion dollars in assistance.

The much-needed burst of new assistance to the suffering Russian economy would
follow a year when the monetary fund gave Moscow far less money than anticipated
because Russia failed to take the strict austerity measures the fund demanded.

In the face of criticism that the fund has done too little for Russia, fund
officials said a program they hope to set up by late April could provide about
$4.5 billion in loans in the next few months, without the usual tough
requirements for slashing inflation and budget deficits.

Urgent Aid for Imports

The fund's 24-member board on Thursday informally endorsed the new program to
provide urgent aid to countries whose tattered economies are making the
transition from Communism. Officials from the fund said their new aid program
would help finance desperately needed imports.

In a news briefing today, a senior Treasury Department official, who spoke under
condition of anonymity, praised the plans, but signaled impatience with the
amount of aid the fund has provided at a time when President Boris N. Yeltsin is
fighting with conservatives for survival.

"This is not a situation where aid can be delayed until every 'i' is dotted and
every 't' is crossed," the official said. The official noted that the fund's
loans are expected to be part of the package that the finance and foreign
ministers of the Group of Seven major industrialized nations are expected to
unveil in Tokyo on April 14 and 15.

Anticipating similar pressures, World Bank officials have proposed to their
board of directors that $4 billion in loans, more than double the amount they
were considering just last month, be provided to Russia over the next 12 to 18
months.

At a time when most industrial nations are plagued by anemic growth and budget
deficits, the Clinton Administration and Group of Seven Governments are looking
increasingly to the International Monetary Fund and World Bank to help Russia.

Speaking about these international lending institutions, the Treasury official
said, "They're certainly going to be very important players in any ongoing
efforts to support Russia."

In today's briefing, the official called on Japan, as host of next week's
meeting, to make a substantial new aid commitment to Russia.

Expansion Considered

Monetary fund officials said the new program may also provide aid to the 14
other former Soviet republics as well as to Mongolia, Vietnam, Cambodia and
Laos.

But the creation of this more generous program was obviously a response to the
desire to help keep Russia from falling into chaos as it adopts measures to
bring its economy under control.

"This is probably the greatest economic reform task that the world has ever
faced," the senior Treasury officials said. "The design of policy needs to be
very sensitive to that."

Officials from the International Monetary Fund denied that they were reacting to
American pressures in creating this program. But one American official said it
was no coincidence that the fund was acting with such urgency soon after
American officials had indicated in private that they thought the fund was being
too cautious with Russia.

Broke Vow on Inflation

The monetary fund was supposed to provide Russia with $3.5 billion in loans last
year, but it ended up providing only $1 billion. Russian officials had pledged
to reduce inflation to less than 10 percent a month, but the central bank
printed so many rubles to plug its budget deficit and to keep teetering
enterprises afloat that inflation soared to 25 percent a month.

American and monetary fund officials said they hoped this new program would lead
to Russia's signing a stricter aid agreement with the fund by October. Under
such an accord, known as a standby agreement, not only would Russia qualify for
another $4 billion in loans, but it could also receive an additional $6 billion
supervised by the fund to stabilize the ruble.

The fund hopes to win full approval for the plan by its spring meeting on April
30.

Some fund officials said one proposal would be to let Russia receive two $2
billion loans, one for 1992 and one for 1993. Another $500 million might also be
made available as a supplement under a temporary aid agreement signed last year.


Germany Cites Its Burdens

German officials have also called on the fund and the World Bank to carry more
of the aid burden, asserting that Germany not only has a huge budget deficit and
the burden of rebuilding eastern Germany, but that it has also provided far more
aid to Russia than any other country.

Under the World Bank proposals, its $4 billion in possible loans would include
$250 million to help develop a private banking system, $100 million for
management training, and $100 million to develop a social safety net.

There would also be $600 million to modernize farming and $500 million for the
oil industry. The plan also suggests $300 million for highway rehabilitation and
$400 million for emergency housing construction, especially to help house
soldiers returning from postings outside Russia. There would also be a new $600
million loan to finance critical imports, in addition to a $600 million loan
already committed for that purpose.

LOAD-DATE: April 10, 1993

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1993 The New York Times Company


                              23 of 312 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                  April 11, 1993, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

SUNDAY VIEW;
Partying Into the Night At Sondheim's

BYLINE: By David Richards

SECTION: Section 2; Page 5; Column 1; Arts & Leisure Desk

LENGTH: 1926 words


While it would be especially gratifying to be able to welcome Julie Andrews back
to the New York stage in a full-blown musical, "Putting It Together," the revue
of Stephen Sondheim songs at the Manhattan Theater Club, will serve the purpose
just fine.

More than fine, actually.

This is one smart and sexy evening, populated by some smart and sexy performers,
plus the playwright/chanteur Christopher Durang, who is not exactly sexy,
perhaps, but has a definite ursine charm and the gleam of the friendly lunatic
in his eye. Not content to be your usual anthology, "Putting It Together" is
trying something different with three dozen or so of Mr. Sondheim's songs, some
familiar, some not, and nary a clinker among them. Although they've been taken
from musicals as diverse as "Assassins," "Merrily We Roll Along" and "A Little
Night Music" and the movie "Dick Tracy," the goal here is to weave them all
together in a show they can call their own. There's a plot, sort of, just as
there are characters who trace a discernible dramatic arch in the course of the
revue's two acts. More about that in a minute, though.

First things first.

The big question, the burning question, the ungallant but unavoidable question
on everyone's mind is this: Just how well is Ms. Andrews holding up these days?
Her last Broadway appearance was in "Camelot" more than 30 years ago, and while
movies and television have kept her in view since then, movies and television
have their devices for covering up a performer's shortcomings. Live and in
person, you lay it all on the line.

Ms. Andrews has absolutely nothing to fear. Dressed in a periwinkle blue
pantsuit, she looks as trim as ever, moves with grace and generally conducts
herself in her best my fair ladylike manner. The fine arch of her neck has
always been slightly deceptive, however. If she possesses impeccable breeding,
she also has a spine, and it bends only so far before the spark of rebellion is
ignited in her small frame. No one can get a laugh, as Ms. Andrews can, simply
by dropping her voice, turning elegantly on a boor and snapping, "Oh, shut up."
For others, the karate chops and the cans of Mace. She can put a person in his
place with diction.

The upper register of her singing voice may no longer be as crystalline as it
was back when she was announcing triumphantly to the world that she could have
danced all night. No matter. She has matured handsomely as an actress, and
"Putting It Together" affords her two distinct occasions to display a quickened
intelligence and the sharp pinpricks of feeling. At the end of Act I, she takes
effortlessly to the mocking wit and bitter irony of "Could I Leave You?" (from
"Follies"), suggesting in the process how Medea might have behaved had she lived
on Park Avenue.

Her big second-act number, "Getting Married Today" (from "Company"), contains
what are probably Mr. Sondheim's tongue-trippingest lyrics -- the
stream-of-consciousness mile-a-minute doubts of a bride who's experiencing
second, third and fourth thoughts on the day of her wedding. Ms. Andrews gives
herself over completely to the flood of emotions, even as she is bouncing
consonants off the back wall with a marksman's precision. I've never heard panic
articulated so crisply.

Most of the time, however, the performer, forgoing a star's prerogatives,
functions as part of an ensemble that, in addition to Mr. Durang, includes
Stephen Collins, Michael Rupert and Rachel York, all dressed for a party and
primed for whatever chance encounters may drift their way. That's the loose
conceit that Mr. Sondheim and the director Julia McKenzie have devised to
justify the various numbers. (There's no dialogue to speak of.) Ms. Andrews and
Mr. Collins, disaffected husband and disabused wife, are throwing the black-tie
affair at which Mr. Rupert, a bachelor, and Ms. York, a bombshell, are in
attendance. No one is quite sure who Mr. Durang is. All the same, he proves a
most obliging presence by circulating the champagne, playing the piano and, when
the hour grows late, proposing a round of parlor games.

In the course of things, flirtations are struck, jealousies are aired,
seductions are chanced and a few blunt truths get uttered. Not all of the
evening's songs adapt automatically to the new context. Some have to be coaxed
and others bullied a bit. The mordant "Gun Song" (from "Assassins"), asked to
undergo the unlikeliest transformation, occasions one of those reckless
truth-telling games -- "Whom in this room would you boom?" -- that have dampened
more than one gathering.

On the other hand, all that's required to send "You Could Drive a Person Crazy"
(from "Company") into fresh orbit is a simple change of pronoun. "I could drive
a person crazy," warbles Mr. Durang, who, when he comes to the "doo-doo, doo-doo
doos" normally chimed by three women, sings them with the delight of a drunken
reveler blowing his party horn in the ear of the nearest guest.

Such numbers as "Lovely," "Sooner or Later," "Hello Little Girl," "Have I Got a
Girl for You" and "The Miller's Son" can be easily used to chart progressive
steps in the mating game, just as "Every Day a Little Death," "Sorry-Grateful"
and "Like It Was" can take us through a troubled relationship and out the other
side. The dynamics of social and sexual intercourse are the evening's underlying
concern, and a more specific organizing principle just might rob the revue of
its spontaneity. It's enough to know that living rooms are never far from
bedrooms and that the Art Deco-ish ramp leading into Robin Wagner's penthouse
set can be traveled in two directions.

Mr. Collins may not be the world's best singer, but his sleek good looks and his
slightly weary air of sophistication make him an ideal foil for Ms. Andrews.
"Sorry-Grateful," as he delivers it, sitting stock still in a chair, becomes an
expression of painful self-examination. After exulting in the carefree side of
bachelorhood in "Live Alone and Like It," Mr. Rupert succumbs to the gnawing
yearnings in his heart. His rendition of "Marry Me a Little" explodes with
earnestness and passion. As for Ms. York, she is frankly and unapologetically
deployed as the evening's bimbo. Theoni V. Aldredge hasn't costumed her so much
as spray-painted her in impudent pink. Nonetheless, the actress has the
unflappable assurance that comes from knowing the paint looks sensational. "The
Miller's Son" is her standout number, and she's fully up to its tumbling lyrics
and its sassy hedonism.

As the title suggests, though -- and Ms. McKenzie's direction and Bob Avian's
musical staging subtly illustrate -- "Putting It Together" is really a
collective enterprise. The individual performers have their front-and-center
moments, but they're always keenly aware of what's going on across the room and
respond to shifts in the party's mood either by putting up a mask or letting one
fall.

Mr. Sondheim's songs are dazzling on their own merits. Has there ever been any
doubt of that? Link them as they've been linked here, and you also get an
eminently civilized investigation into the myriad ways we catch one another or
let ourselves be caught. Not to mention what we do once the trap has sprung
shut.

'Redwood Curtain'

If you happen to drop in on "Redwood Curtain," Lanford Wilson's new Broadway
play, it may help to look upon the strange story he's recounting on the stage of
the Brooks Atkinson Theater as a fairy tale.

Much of it takes place, after all, in a giant redwood forest, which, as designed
by John Lee Beatty and lighted by Dennis Parichy, has the timeless enchantment
of the real thing. Into its labyrinthine depths one morning ventures a confused
young girl, searching for the long-lost father who will, presumably, tell her
who she is and help her find her way in life. She soon comes upon a burly troll,
who talks in gruff monosyllables when he talks at all. If he is not her father,
perhaps he knows who is. He resists her inquiries and tries to frighten her
away.

The young girl is not so easily put off, however, and has secret ancestral
powers at her disposal. Retreating to the house of her aunt at the woods' edge,
she enlists the good and sensible woman in her quest. Together, they will return
to the forest, coax an answer from the secretive troll -- by charm or by
trickery, if need be -- and lure him back to civilization.

Of course, Mr. Wilson -- the author of such esteemed dramas as "Talley's Folly,"
"Fifth of July" and "Balm in Gilead" -- does not write fairy tales. The troll
(Jeff Daniels) in this instance is a traumatized Vietnam veteran, who, like many
apparently, has chosen to lead a hermit's existence in the California redwood
forests. The young girl (Sung Yun Cho) is a Vietnamese war baby, adopted at a
tender age by a wealthy American family and now a much sought-after piano
prodigy who has lost her inspiration to perform. The good aunt (Debra Monk) is
the heir to a prosperous lumber fortune, but the company has just experienced a
hostile takeover and she faces the troubling prospect of exile herself.

So Mr. Wilson is really writing about the torn fabric of our society, about
people uprooted and what the uprooting does to them, about our need to know
where we come from if ever we're to move ahead. Yet "Redwood Curtain" is such a
curious mixture of fantasy and realism, of earthy humor and unearthly
hocus-pocus, of mysticism and social criticism that you're never entirely
certain how to respond. The play struck me as vaguely incoherent at times,
downright confusing at others. But its vagrant tones are less off-putting if you
view the piece as a dark post-Vietnam fairy tale.

Ms. Monk fares best, and not merely because she is assigned the most direct --
and the funniest -- of Mr. Wilson's lines. She conveys ditziness forthrightly --
with none of the fuss and muddle that usually accompany states of
dicombobulation. Her feet are planted firmly on the moss and her comic
directness couldn't be more welcome here. Mr. Daniels, you see, is playing a
grizzly bear in a quilted down vest -- all curt misanthropy and defiant enigma.
While the actor does a highly persuasive job of it, the character by his very
nature is hiding from us. He's not going to reveal his secrets easily and, until
he does, there's no getting close to him.

It's pretty hard to cozy up to the young girl, too, partly because she's at a
difficult age, 17, and has a fair amount of sulkiness to show for it; partly
because identity crises in the young -- even young adopted geniuses -- are not
all that interesting, and partly because Ms. Cho isn't a gifted enough actress
to overcome such obstacles. Although the three performers occupy the same stage,
I had difficulty believing that they were in the same drama. And, since Mr.
Wilson means to show how they are eventually drawn together and reintegrated
into society, the climax of the play was clearly wasted on me.

To my mind, the real hero of the enterprise is Mr. Beatty, whose name should be
popping up around Tony time, if there is any justice in the nomination process.
His redwood forest is truly majestic, in addition to which he's designed a
handsome contemporary house for the aunt. Here's the breathtaking part of it. As
the characters thread a path out of the forest at the end, the stately tree
trunks start to revolve in great kaleidoscopic circles. Round and round they go.
Then, just as a child's bedtime story would have it, the house emerges
miraculously from their towering midst -- a haven in the nick of time.

LOAD-DATE: April 11, 1993

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo: From left, Stephen Collins, Christopher Durang, Julie Andrews,
Rachel York and Michael Rupert in the Stephen Sondheim revue "Putting It
Together" -- Three dozen songs and nary a clinker among them. (Joan
Marcus/"Putting It Together")


TYPE: Review

                   Copyright 1993 The New York Times Company


                              24 of 312 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                  April 11, 1993, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

Foreign Affairs;
No Success, No Power

BYLINE: By LESLIE H. GELB

SECTION: Section 4; Page 13; Column 1; Editorial Desk

LENGTH: 714 words


Success feeds power. And President Clinton has little prospect of a
power-building success in foreign policy, one that would catapult him to new
stature at home and abroad.

From potshots in Iraq to human rights in China, from genocide in Bosnia to trade
negotiations with Europe and Japan, from propping up Boris Yeltsin in Russia to
cajoling Arabs back to the bargaining table with Israelis, Bill Clinton faces
mostly quicksand and mudholes. His best bet for a quick diplomatic score might
be in Haiti, but even there peace talks remain wobbly.

For 50 years, Presidents have defined themselves decisively and dramatically by
their actions on the world stage. John F. Kennedy flew to the Berlin Wall to
proclaim his solidarity with besieged Berliners. Ronald Reagan's popularity
soared after he "conquered" Grenada. George Bush led a world crusade against
Saddam Hussein and instantly transformed himself into a world leader.

Mr. Clinton is not likely to have such opportunities, and his foreign policy
successes are likely to be much more modest. In his search for post-cold-war
glory, he may well have to focus less on traditional security concerns and more
on international economics. Money lacks the sex appeal of a tidy, victorious
war, but has its political attractions in times of economic distress.

Americans would not applaud Mr. Clinton's dragging them into military conflicts.
They might even be quietly grateful to him for making questionable excuses to
avoid intervention. But they will not show their gratitude by lifting him onto
their shoulders as a non-conquering hero.

The new President's choices in Bosnia and Iraq are like President Lyndon
Johnson's dilemma in Vietnam: damned if he got into an Asian land war, damned if
he gave the Vietnamese Communists a victory at the negotiating table.

No nation now has the stomach for another fight against Saddam Hussein or a new
war against the Serbs. At the same time, none is openly willing to accept
Saddam's staying in power. Nor are American and European leaders prepared for
what has become the only realistic way to stop the slaughter of Bosnians --
trisecting Bosnia among the warring factions and thereby legitimizing Serb
aggression and genocide. Dreading both war and peace, Mr. Clinton and the others
prefer the classic approach: stall and pray for a miracle.

No miracles are needed on China policy. Mr. Clinton simply has to walk the high
wire between standing up for human rights and getting along with this growing
power on the Asian block. Best for him to explain this difficult stunt
forthrightly now before people start accusing him of playing games.

Conversely, a little diplomatic sleight of hand will help Mr. Clinton promote a
Syrian-Israeli deal. First the two sides must position themselves for agreement.
When the time is ripe, he has to jump in personally and powerfully.

Mr. Clinton handled the Vancouver love feast with Mr. Yeltsin well, yet the
Russian leader still could lose his referendum later this month. A Yeltsin
defeat won't destroy Mr. Clinton, because he's worked so hard for more aid to
Russia. But avoiding political blame for "losing Russia" does not constitute a
diplomatic triumph.

The U.S. President needs to demonstrate that he knows how to orchestrate a
triumph and close a tough diplomatic deal. He could help reinstate democracy in
Haiti if he involved himself directly.

The man from Arkansas has to keep his eye on all these political and military
flash points. But the real payoff for him is bound to be in the international
economic arena. At home and abroad, everyone wants growth and jobs, which means
promoting freer trade.

Mr. Clinton's first test will come on April 16 when he meets with Prime Minister
Kiichi Miyazawa of Japan. Japanese-American trade has gotten tense and messy.
The two industrial giants could slip into mini-trade wars unless the two leaders
signal a commitment to compromise. That will require both to show some political
guts.

It's going to be harder for Bill Clinton to make his mark in the world arena
than it was for his predecessors. But he needs to start somewhere. He has to
begin lining up diplomatic triumphs to prove his mettle and skill. For without
successes, he will lack the power to lead an unruly world.

LOAD-DATE: April 11, 1993

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Op-Ed

                   Copyright 1993 The New York Times Company


                              25 of 312 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                  April 11, 1993, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

The Fighting Words of Homer Bigart: A War Correspondent Is Never a Cheerleader

BYLINE: By Malcolm W. Browne;  Malcolm W. Browne spent eight years as a war
correspondent in Indochina. He is now a senior science writer for The New York
Times.

SECTION: Section 7; Page 13; Column 1; Book Review Desk

LENGTH: 1571 words


GENERALLY speaking, a book patched together from old news clippings is a poor
candidate for success. The contents of newsroom morgues may be immensely
interesting to scholars, but a reader browsing through the average file of some
deceased reporter is apt to encounter prose that seems as yellow and decayed as
the paper on which it was printed.

But "Forward Positions: The War Correspondence of Homer Bigart" (University of
Arkansas Press, $24.95) is a stunning exception. The 51 battlefield dispatches
collected here by Betsy Wade, Ho mer Bigart's colleague at The New York Times,
ring with genuine drama shorn of facile cliches, propaganda and
self-congratulation. Assembled in book form, they afford a rare overview of a
great journalist's career.

I was privileged to know Homer in Vietnam during the last of the many wars he
covered for The New York Herald Tribune and, later, for The New York Times. When
Homer arrived in Saigon in 1962, I was the Associated Press correspondent there,
and we became friends and occasional competitors.

Homer had won many honors for his coverage of World War II and the Korean War
(including two Pulitzer Prizes), and he was a journalistic legend by the time he
arrived in Vietnam at the age of 54. But it represented a transition for him.
His reportorial passion for detail and his spare, eloquent prose were never
stronger than during his six months in Vietnam, but for Homer the conflict was a
new and distasteful kind of war that he regarded as an ordeal rather than a
satisfying professional challenge.

He hated Vietnam -- the country as well as the war. One reason was Saigon's
tropical climate, not easy on a man who was no longer young. But what really
galled him was that all the major participants in Vietnam, Americans as well as
Vietnamese, were playing deceitful games that left no room for trust in anyone.
Homer was a confessed curmudgeon, skeptic and cynic, but underneath it all, he
liked to trust people if he could. He had always found at least a few
trustworthy people in previous wars, but toward the end of his Vietnam tour he
told me that he had come to think of the place as a snake pit, where nothing was
as it seemed and no one told the truth.

During the time I knew Homer, I often felt that he was uneasy with the
confrontational style of journalism that evolved as a response to the poisonous
atmosphere of the Vietnam War. Homer had never played the role of cheerleader
for the home team, but however critical his reporting of such military blunders
as the Anzio beachhead could be, there was never any doubt which side had his
sympathies. In Vietnam, by contrast, Homer could never wholeheartedly identify
himself with an American team that often looked arrogant and wrongheaded, and
whose cause seemed questionable to him.

In Vietnam, Homer was treated as an enemy by some of his own compatriots for the
first time in his career. American diplomats and commanders in 1962 were under
orders to keep the Ngo Dinh Diem regime happy, and that meant keeping the hated
American press at a distance. When Saigon authorities reported some battle as a
victory, United States military and diplomatic spokesmen generally parroted the
claim even when they knew it to be a lie, and relations between officials and
reporters settled into a more or less permanent state of confrontation. World
War II and Korea saw plenty of bickering between journalists and military
spokesmen, but it was never so continuous or bitter as in Vietnam.

Homer was in the thick of these disputes, and they sapped his (and everyone's)
energy. The tension was a constant source of irritation, but something else
disturbed him at least as much -- the changing style of reporting that news
organizations were imposing on their foreign correspondents. By and large,
editors wanted no more first-person narratives and no more injection of personal
opinion into news dispatches. The issues in Vietnam were muddy enough, news
directors and editors believed, without their having to weed out the particular
biases of the men and women on the scene.

Moreover, some American news executives came to harbor serious doubts as to
whether their representatives in Vietnam were entirely trustworthy. The gloomy
tone of reporting from Vietnam, which told of corruption, bungling and defeat,
was in stark contrast to reports from the Washington press corps, which painted
a far more sanguine picture of the war. If an editor had to choose between a
dispatch from Saigon saying one thing and a dispatch from Washington reporting
the exact opposite, which was he to trust?

Many newspapers, like The New York Times, adopted a policy of printing both
versions and letting the reader split the difference. Homer despised this
practice, which he called "clerkish."

"How ca-ca-ca-can a fact and a lie both be correct?" he would stutter. "Aren't
we supposed to choose?" Then, after one of his pregnant pauses, he would add,
"Yes."

In 1962 Homer was overweight, wore glasses, often dressed in business suits
despite the heat, and stuttered more than usual when he was angry, which was
most of the time. He had none of the egotistic flamboyance of some of the star
correspondents of World War II and Korea, who sometimes succumbed to the
temptation to depict themselves as their own heroes. Throughout his career he
avoided that snare; he never visited the Saigon tailor shops that outfitted
American network correspondents with safari suits. But in one respect Homer was
a war correspondent in the old tradition: he felt most comfortable writing news
in the first person.

As Homer saw it, all news passes through the eyes, ears and biases of the
reporter, and however objective the reporter and his editors may seek to be,
news is ultimately dependent on the senses of its gatherers -- in other words,
it has a personal spin. Readers should be warned of this, he felt, and a
graceful way to provide them with the needed cav eat was to write each dispatch
as a first-person narrative. That kind of news writing seems archaic today. But
archaic or not, the sampling of Homer's war reporting collected in "Forward
Positions" is a breathtaking reminder of how good the genre can be when handled
by a master.

Homer was skilled in gracefully alerting readers that his personal perspective
on some event might be skewed, and that they should make allowances. In one of
the dispatches included in this sampler, dated March 6, 1943, Homer reflects on
his experiences while riding in an American bomber on a raid over Wilhelmshaven,
Germany. He tries to assess the effects of the raid on the target and the
raiders, but he disarmingly cautions readers that any reporter may inadvertently
exaggerate the importance of an event he personally covers.

The bomber formation in which Homer was flying was decimated by German fighters,
and the three correspondents aboard the B-17's -- Bigart, Gladwin Hill (then
with The Associated Press, later with The New York Times) and Walter Cronkite
(then with United Press) filed vivid stories. But Ho mer included this warning
in his own analysis of the raid: "True perspective is rather hard to maintain in
the hours immediately after an assignment in which your own neck was directly
involved. You are apt to feel you had a ringside seat at the most crucial
engagement since Waterloo."

Homer had an eye for details that were often lost in the more general reporting
of many of his colleagues and competitors. When he and other correspondents
toured Hiroshima at the end of World War II, he highlighted the destructive
power wrought by the atomic bomb by focusing on the city's devastated shopping
district. The shops were identifiable, he wrote, "only because of office safes
that lay at regular intervals on sites that retained little else except small
bits of iron and tin. Sometimes the safes were blown in."

THE most hair-raising of his combat adventures is described in a long dispatch
from Korea, dated July 10, 1950, which included a minute-to-minute log of the
North Korean onslaught he had just covered. In that action, the two other news
correspondents with Homer were killed, and seven American soldiers captured by
the North Koreans were shot with their hands tied behind them. Caught between
North Korean tanks and a "friendly" barrage from American artillery, Homer
narrowly escaped death, but he still managed to file a coherent recapitulation
of the day's horrors.

Had he covered them, I think Homer would have hated America's Grenada, Panama
and Persian Gulf expeditions at least as much as he did Vietnam. Since Vietnam,
many American military officials have continued to regard newsmen as enemies,
and a lot of ordinary Americans evidently share this hostility toward their
press. When reporters publicly complained of Pentagon restraints imposed on
battlefield coverage in Saudi Arabia and Iraq, news organizations were deluged
with hostile letters from readers and viewers that seemed to echo Gen. William
Tecumseh Sherman's remark, during the Civil War, that "Napoleon himself would
have been defeated with a free press."

When Homer retired to New Hampshire in 1973, I don't think he was sorry to leave
the profession he had served so well; it's possible, I think, to overdose on
worldly wickedness. He died in 1991, but one may hope that despite the changing
times, the Bigart approach to news reporting will long survive the man himself.

NAME: Homer Bigart

LOAD-DATE: April 11, 1993

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo: Homer Bigart in a publicity photograph distributed in 1946, when
he won his first Pulitzer Prize. (Associated Press)

TYPE: Biography; Review

                   Copyright 1993 The New York Times Company


                              26 of 312 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                  April 11, 1993, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

Fear and Ghosts: The World of Marcus, 19

BYLINE: By DON TERRY,  Special to The New York Times

SECTION: Section 1; Page 1; Column 1; National Desk

LENGTH: 2306 words

DATELINE: CHICAGO, April 10


Dusk had just slipped into darkness on a recent night when a man parking his car
was shot during a robbery and left bleeding in a vacant lot.

Minutes later, flashing blue police lights drew a crowd, and among the onlookers
was Marcus Tramble, a lanky 19-year-old who lives just down the street.

Marcus did not watch long. Seeing the wounded stranger filled him with dread and
anger, and he walked away, shaken.

"That could have been me lying in that mud," he said later. "You got to watch
your back all the time. There's never no time to rest. But you adapt to it or
you die. That's the law of the street."

Dying Young

Marcus Tramble, an urban survivalist, follows that law as closely as he can.

For years his daily decisions have been governed by his fear of dying young,
another victim of the violence that hovers over his world. There are places he
will not go, clothes he will not wear, words he will not say and feelings he
will not let out.

Stay away from that street corner; it's a crack dealer's hangout. Don't wear a
baseball cap; cocked the wrong way it can be gang symbol and a magnet for
violence. Never say anything, even in jest, that can be taken as an insult;
retribution can be deadly.

But some things Marcus cannot control: his skin color, his size, his youth. When
he looks into the mirror he sees not a monster or a mugger but a slender
brown-skinned teen-ager, 6 feet 3 inches tall, with hair cropped close on the
sides and a smile that breaks out more easily than these mean streets would seem
to warrant.

When he goes out, though, Marcus feels accused of a crime he knows nothing
about. White strangers with their hostile stares and nervous glances seem to
fear he will pounce at any minute. Even some fellow blacks, he says, see him not
as a son or a brother but as a threat.

The 'White' World Nearby

Just trying to stay alive takes so much of his concentration, Marcus says, that
he can hardly think about the future. He dropped out of high school in the 11th
grade, a source of friction between him and his mother. He says he will go back
after he works for a while and contributes something to his family. He has
applied for jobs as a messenger and a dockworker but has not had an offer.
Frustration is worming its way into his soul.

On the occasions when Marcus looks for work or fun in the Loop, Chicago's
downtown, his mother tells him he would be treated better if he dressed "more
white," says Marcus, who favors the hip-hop uniform of baggy jeans, hooded sweat
shirts and high-top sneakers.

His mother, Julia Tramble, said, "I tell my sons that they want to fit in, that
they want to ease into the white world with as little friction as possible."

But Marcus's world is his South Side neighborhood, Washington Park, where
dressing "more white" will make him stand out, not fit in. Standing out is
something Marcus says he cannot afford to do. Growing up, fighting was an almost
daily part of life, as common as learning to ride a bike, stealing a first kiss
or holding back the tears at the wake of a friend.

He remembers when he was in grade school and his family moved to the city
housing project where he lives now, a 16-story building with what Marcus calls
"cages" of wire mesh on the balconies. New to the neighborhood, he had to prove
himself regularly, in fistfights and shouting matches.

What Not to Do

Now he fits in and has earned a measure of respect. He is not about to change
that by trying to adapt to the downtown world. He says he no longer gets into
fights. But he also knows that a fight now would end not with fists but with a
gun. "People won't fistfight me," Marcus says, almost sadly. "I'm too big.
They'd shoot me, step over my dead body and go about their business."

Much of what Marcus knows about the streets he learned by watching older men,
men who now are either dead or in jail. "I learned from their mistakes," he
said.

Those lessons are what he calls "the sure enoughs of the street":

*"Never, ever, steal from somebody, especially if they're rollin'," which means
selling drugs.

*"Never, ever, mess with another brother's woman.

*"Never, ever, hit someone's mother.

*"And never, ever, disrespect somebody."

"Respect," he said, "is like money: you got to have it. No respect, no
cooperation; no cooperation, no money."

At Home
A Mother of 10, A Father Gone

Julia and Eddie Tramble, she a clerk-typist in a local hospital and he a young
Vietnam veteran with a wisp of a mustache, were wed in 1967. The marriage lasted
11 rocky years and produced nine children. Marcus Charles Tramble, born on Nov.
8, 1973, was the fifth.

Marcus proudly points to his father in a photograph from his parents' wedding,
"eons ago." In the snapshot his father, in a dark suit, looks stern, his posture
military stiff.

"I'd like to find him," Marcus said. "Just to see what he looks like now. He
might think I'm mad at him. I'm not. I'd just like to see him."

The last time Marcus saw his daddy, Eddie Tramble was drawing on a napkin and
sipping a can of beer. Marcus was a little boy, a "shorty," and he begged his
father for a sip. When his mother turned away, his father handed him the can and
Marcus took a big swallow. He felt as close to his father that moment as he ever
has.

But later the beer made Marcus vomit. It was his mother who comforted him -- his
father had gone out. The bitter taste has lingered over all these years of
absence.

Mrs. Tramble, 49 years old and tall and thin like Marcus, says she has reared
her children mostly by herself and "with God's help," not with much from
Marcus's father, even before their divorce.

After her third child was born, she quit her job at the hospital and went on
welfare. Anytime she thought about returning to work she ran into the brick wall
of day care; with so many children and with so little money, she said, child
care was out of reach.

A College Degree

She did enroll in college part time. It took her eight years, but in 1985 Julia
Tramble received a bachelor's degree in business administration from
Northeastern Illinois University. She thought her life had turned a corner. A
college graduate, her youngest child starting school, Mrs. Tramble was finally
ready "to conquer the world."

But she soon found herself having second thoughts about leaving the children.
Besides, she said, none of the jobs she had dreamed about, like being an
administrative assistant in a big corporation, came her way. Then, 13 months
ago, her 10th child, a daughter by her longtime boyfriend, was born.

Now Mrs. Tramble is home for a while longer, presiding over a neat, sparsely
decorated three-bedroom apartment with a piano in the front room and a shifting
population. For now, Marcus shares one of the bedrooms with an older brother.

Most days Marcus stays as close to home as he can, living in a kind of
self-imposed house arrest.

The night after the shooting at the vacant lot, he thought about going to a
poetry reading he had heard about, something he had never done before. It would
get him out of his neighborhood for a few hours. But when he learned the reading
was being held on the Near Northwest Side of the city, he changed his mind. In
all his 19 years he had never been there and was afraid he might be attacked by
Hispanic gang members.

"Up there they think every young black male is a gang member," he said. "If you
want to live, you can't take too many chances."

Marcus remains in many ways a typical teen-ager. He loves cars, especially
Cadillacs, and he has intense, we-will-always-be-together love affairs that last
about a month. He jokes about being a ladies' man. Then he turns serious and
says he wants to settle down someday and have children but only when he can take
care of them "like a man."

He also seems to know the lyrics to every rap song. He cuts hair to pick up a
few dollars and plays basketball, but not very well, he admits when his friends
are not listening.

He spends his summers in the relative safety of a Bible camp in rural Michigan
and his winter evenings volunteering at the nearby John L. Yancey Boys and Girls
Club. The other night he wiped away a little girl's tear and spent the next 30
minutes stringing beads with her. When they finished, the girl hit Marcus on the
arm and ran away laughing, gripping her new necklace.

"Women," Marcus said, shaking his head.

On the Street
Guns Everywhere, And Ghosts, Too

Marcus was 14 years old the first and only time he had a gun of his own, a
.22-caliber pistol. An older boy who had a crush on one of Marcus's sisters gave
it to him because Marcus was getting picked on in school.

But the gun scared Marcus much more than the school thugs did. He gave the
pistol to his mother, who returned it to the older boy with a warning that he
had better not come around again.

Still, he does not want to give the impression that he is soft. He looks a
visitor straight in the eye and deepens his voice as he says: "I could get a gun
in a couple of minutes. And I'd used it if I had to, no question about it."

On a recent afternoon he walked down the stairs of his building, stepped into
the sunshine and found the crack-addicted mother of a young friend. She pulled
on his sleeve and offered him sex for $5.

"If you ain't careful," he said later, "living around here can drive you crazy."


'They Long Gone'

Ghosts are everywhere in the neighborhood. The other day, Marcus and one of his
best living and free friends, Allen Neal, who is 20, were walking past a wall
scrawled with graffiti and nicknames. Allen touched the wall as if he were
caressing the tombstone of a beloved grandmother.

"They long gone," Allen said, reading the nicknames. "If they ain't dead, they
in jail."

Sometimes, Marcus says, he is happy to see his childhood friends locked up
because then they are safe from the violence in the streets at least for a
little while.

One day Marcus and Allen were driving past a huge walled cemetery. Marcus noted
that several boyhood friends were buried there, gunned down in street fights or
drug deals gone bad. Marcus said he was afraid of cemeteries.

Allen replied, "It's living people that scare me."

Much of the violence in the streets comes from the gangs that rule them. Marcus
and Allen, like most young black men, are not in a gang, but they grew up with
boys who are.

Marcus is not sure why a 14-year-old friend joined a gang two years ago. Like
Marcus and Allen, the boy, bright, friendly and a good athlete, had spent much
of his time at the Yancey Boys and Girls Club. But once in the gang the boy
started carrying a pistol and picking fights at the club.

Many of the boys who knew him said he had joined the gang after learning that
his mother was on drugs.

"He was running wild," one friend said. "It hurted his heart so bad."

The boy started selling drugs, another friend said, "but never to his mother."
Others say he did supply his mother with crack so she would stop selling herself
in the street. Then a gang war broke out and the boy was thrust to the front
lines to prove himself. One night there was so much shooting, Marcus said, "it
looked like the sky over Baghdad during the war."

One day, while playing with a friend in Marcus's building, the boy shot himself
in the head with a .357 Magnum pistol. Marcus heard screaming, ran downstairs
and dropped to his knees when he saw the boy's body in a pool of blood.

"I don't like to dwell on it," Marcus said. "I don't want to get haunted."

The Disrespect Outside

Marcus knows the rules of his world well. It's the rules on the outside that he
has trouble understanding.

He doesn't rob or steal, he says, but when he goes shopping he sometimes has
company -- store security guards tracking him through the aisles.

"I let them follow me until they get tired," Marcus said. "I'm used to it by
now. I keep my hands in my pockets so they can see I ain't trying to steal
nothing."

At times, the fear of strangers makes him feel "powerful," he says. He laughs,
remembering a white woman "who was bug-eyed" at the sight of him when he walked
into a store in a small Wisconsin town. All he wanted was some toothpaste.

"I just want to live my life," he said. "I don't want to walk around and have
people afraid of me."

A few Saturdays ago, Marcus and Allen went shopping in a nearby racially mixed
neighborhood. For lunch they stopped at a Mexican restaurant, ordered a couple
of tacos and pumped quarters into the jukebox, picking out songs by Prince.

After the two finished eating, they lingered at their table awhile, bobbing
their heads to the music. Soon the manager appeared and demanded to know if they
had ordered. If not, he said, "you can't be in here."

Marcus and Allen got up without saying a word and left, with Prince's sad voice
trailing them out the door.

"This just wears me out," Allen said outside on the sun-splashed sidewalk. "We
can't go anywhere without being disrespected."

Asked why they had not explained the situation to the manager, Marcus replied,
"Why do we have to?"

Later, they saw two white men, about their age, walking down the street carrying
a large radio. On the other side of the street were four young black men.

"Give me that radio," one of the black men shouted, his voice more tease than
threat.

The white men quickened their pace. The black men smiled at one another and
followed.

"I don't feel no pity for them," Allen said as the white men hurried into the
safety of a store, the black men right behind. "White people mess with us all
the time. Maybe those brothers got treated just like we just did at that
restaurant."

Marcus shook his head.

"I can't let how white people act cloud my judgment," he said. "Just because
they act crazy don't mean I am. My mother raised me to act better than that."

NAME: Marcus Tramble

LOAD-DATE: April 28, 1993

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

SERIES: Children of the Shadows -- The fourth of ten lives in the cities.

GRAPHIC: Photos: Marcus Tramble (Ozier Muhammad/The New York Times) (pg. 1);
Marcus Tramble, center, accompanying a busload of children to an event sponsored
by the John L. Yancey Boys and Girls Club; "You got to watch your back all the
time. There's never no time to rest." - MARCUS TRAMBLE (Photographs by Ozier
Muhammad/The New York Times) (pg. 16)

Chart: "The Children of the Shadows"

Sunday, April 4: Nicholas Whitiker, a Chicago fourth grader growing up fast.

Tuesday, April 6: Ladeeta Smith, a Brooklyn teen-ager orphaned by alcoholism and
AIDS.

Thursday, April 8: Crystal Rossi, a Bensonhurst school girl, losing focus in
class as she is tempted by the streets.

Today: Marcus Tramble, a Chicago youth frustrated by fears.

Tuesday, April 13: Fernando Morales, a Connecticut drug dealer, full of
fatalism.

Thursday, April 15: Jerina Gervais, an Oakland girl coping with teen-age sex.

Sunday, April 18: Freddie Brown, a Bronx youth haunted by the police.

Tuesday, April 20: Asenhat Gomez, a new immigrant isolated in Brooklyn.

Thursday, April 22: Derrick White, a Memphis teen-ager, groping for a road map
out of the projects.

Sunday, April 25: Shawn Hunt, a one-time messenger for Brooklyn drug dealers,
closing in on success. (pg. 16)

TYPE: Biography; Series

                   Copyright 1993 The New York Times Company


                              27 of 312 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                  April 11, 1993, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

An American Now

BYLINE: By Frances McCue;  Frances McCue is the author of a collection of
poetry, "The Stenographer's Breakfast."

SECTION: Section 7; Page 15; Column 1; Book Review Desk

LENGTH: 516 words



CHILD OF WAR, WOMAN OF PEACE
By Le Ly Hayslip with
James Hayslip.
374 pp. New York:
Doubleday. $22.50.

LE LY HAYSLIP emigrated from Vietnam with her new husband, an American
construction engineer, in 1970. "Child of War, Woman of Peace," the sequel to
her powerful 1989 autobiography, "When Heaven and Earth Changed Places," begins
with a harrowing and affecting description of her situation at that time: "I was
20 years old with two sons . . . by different fathers. I didn't speak much
English, and my manners were better suited to peasant villages and Saigon street
corners than a suburb of San Diego."

Ms. Hayslip quickly discovered that in her new life as an American every comfort
was shadowed by pain. Her husband, who "was old enough to be my father," died
just a few years after she arrived in California. Vulnerable to the expectations
of an alien land, Ms. Hayslip was married again, to a man who brutally abused
her. He committed suicide, leaving her in debt and with a third son to support.

Although Ms. Hayslip had escaped the day-to-day physical threats of war, she
found that peacetime living in America was a tricky business indeed. She worked
as a housekeeper, on a factory assembly line and in a restaurant, scrambling to
succeed in a new land.

"Child of War, Woman of Peace" records Ms. Hayslip's transformation from victim
to social activist, from self-conscious immigrant to confident American.
Steadily, diligently, she set about securing a life for her children, for her
extended family -- and then for other Vietnamese. "Now," she writes toward the
end of the book, "I saw that in between was where I belonged. Only when you stop
resisting the forces that shape your life . . . and begin to use them in the
service of your soul, do you find happiness -- no matter which soil lies beneath
your feet or which man walks beside you."

In 1989, Ms. Hayslip founded the East Meets West Foundation, a peace and relief
organization that builds clinics, schools and rehabilitation centers in Vietnam.
The first center, called Peace Village, is being built at China Beach, "the very
spot," Ms. Hayslip reminds us, "where, a quarter-century ago, American marines
first landed to begin our two countries' long march together."

Partly because it is a chronological narrative, "Child of War, Woman of Peace"
does not have the taut suspense of Ms. Hayslip's first book, which alternated
between the story of her first 20 years in war-ravaged Vietnam and journal
entries describing her return to her homeland in 1986. This new volume may also
slip out of pace because Ms. Hayslip did not write it with Jay Wurts, an editor
and writer who was her first collaborator, but instead with her son James
Hayslip.

Nevertheless, this memoir -- as yet another record of the figures who are both
the creators and the offspring of America's always changing cultural heritage --
makes a valuable addition to the historical record. "Child of War, Woman of
Peace" bears witness to a traumatic past, of both East and West, that cannot be
known through formal histories alone.

NAME: LE LY HAYSLIP

LOAD-DATE: April 11, 1993

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Biography; Review

                   Copyright 1993 The New York Times Company


                              28 of 312 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                  April 11, 1993, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

Putting the Poor in Uniform

BYLINE: By Russell F. Weigley;  Russell F. Weigley, the Distinguished University
Professor at Temple University, is the author of "The Age of Battles: The Quest
for Decisive Warfare From Breitenfeld to Waterloo."

SECTION: Section 7; Page 12; Column 1; Book Review Desk

LENGTH: 1037 words



WORKING-CLASS WAR
American Combat Soldiers and Vietnam.
By Christian G. Appy.
365 pp. Chapel Hill:
The University of North Carolina Press.
Cloth, $39.95. Paper, $14.95.

RED THUNDER, TROPIC LIGHTNING
The World of a Combat Division in Vietnam.
By Eric M. Bergerud.
Illustrated. 328 pp. Boulder, Colo.:
Westview Press. $24.95.

HE war in Vietnam corrupted nearly everything American that it touched. Not
least, it sorely injured the equalitarian ideal by imposing its burdens of
combat, wounds and death with gross disproportion upon the underclasses of
American society. Yet this particular toll of the war has not received its due
recognition.

Christian G. Appy, in "Working-Class War," reminds us of the disturbing truth
that some 80 percent of the 2.5 million enlisted men who served in Vietnam --
out of 27 million men who reached draft age during the war -- came from
working-class and impoverished backgrounds. Eric M. Bergerud -- a professor of
military and American history at Lincoln University in San Francisco whose first
book was "The Dynamics of Defeat: The Vietnam War in Hau Nghia Province" -- now
offers a microcosmic view of the fighting that further develops the implications
of the working-class character of the United States Army.

Mr. Bergerud's explicit concern in "Red Thunder, Tropic Lightning" is not with
such class issues but with a detailed recounting of the experiences of the 25th
Infantry Division, the "Tropic Lightning Division," so called because of its
historic base in Hawaii and its taro-leaf and lightning-bolt shoulder patch. But
his book closely complements Mr. Appy's.

Both, for example, emphasize a tactical difference between the Vietnam War and
other American wars that acquires special significance in light of Mr. Appy's
theme. Because, lacking a better strategy, the United States made imposing a
high body count upon the enemy a central purpose of its Vietnam campaigns, and
because the enemy was difficult to find for the purpose of killing him, American
infantry habitually acted as human bait to lure the National Liberation Front
forces, the Vietcong in general and occasionally the North Vietnamese Army out
of hiding, so aircraft and artillery could maul them.

The modern American military has always preferred to substitute firepower for
manpower, to accomplish the killing with large and high-technology weapons. In
Vietnam, however, the substitution was incomplete. Although infantrymen were not
expected to do the main fighting, they had to offer themselves up as sacrifices
to precipitate the fighting, or rather the killing by heavy weapons. Because a
hostile, or at least distrustful, local population severely limited intelligence
of the enemy's whereabouts, the American infantry tended to blunder into
ambushes.

But from the perspective of the American high command, the blundering was not
altogether unintentional. If an ambush drew out the enemy, then it was
worthwhile. Whether this role as sacrificial offering, as bait, would have been
permitted had the troops represented a fuller cross section of American society,
if the educated middle class had been losing more of its sons in the process, is
an especially unpleasant question for the reader of these books to ponder.

Both books also evoke the sense of futility that accompanied the infantry's
mission as bait. The soldiers seemed to "hump the boonies" endlessly, prowl
through jungles, marshes, savannas and mountains, parched by heat. Often in the
drier areas they were so thirsty that when they reached a watercourse they drank
mud filled with insects before bothering to pop their disinfectant pills into
their canteens. All the while they were fighting off leeches; at best, they were
half-sick and dog-tired long before the enemy allowed them to complete their
sacrificial role.

The whereabouts of the enemy was almost always mysterious, but the lay of the
land was not; not least of the reasons for feeling it was all senseless was the
return over the same ground again and again, forever retaking landmarks that had
been visited a week or a month before. The men came to know their area of
operations all too well, but they never securely "owned" any of it. Again, the
question arises: would the United States have supported a war so lacking in
evident strategic purpose had its Army comprised different classes of men?

Mr. Appy, who teaches history at the Massachusetts Institute of Technology,
deals especially well with the apparent paradox that the working-class soldiers'
families back home mainly opposed the antiwar movement, and for that matter so
with few exceptions did the soldiers themselves. Opposing the antiwar movement,
however, was not the same as supporting the war. The middle-class and
upper-class war protesters at home, particularly the college students, fumbled
their chance to forge some sort of unity with the soldiers. They did so by
speaking and behaving in ways that emphasized the social and economic divisions
between them and the fighting men. Mr. Appy acknowledges that in time the
protesters helped reform some of the inequities of the Selective Service System,
but he finds that on the whole their attitudes toward the soldiers were
arrogant, sanctimonious and insensitive to the moral quandaries of those who had
to fight.

All of this retains its pertinence. The present all-volunteer armed forces still
suffer from much of the class skewing of the Vietnam-era draft. The consequent
difficulties could therefore recur. Nevertheless, the United States Government
demonstrated during the Persian Gulf war that it had profited at least in some
degree from the experience of Vietnam, that it can conduct a limited war not
only more purposefully but also, through mobilizing National Guard and Reserve
units, with greater concern for equity. The antiwar movement, in contrast,
re-emerged during the gulf war to show that its members still resided mentally
in the 1960's and had learned nothing. The nation is not where we might wish it
to be either in democratizing the burdens of war or in trying to halt or curtail
it. Mr. Appy and Mr. Bergerud provide information and insights that move one to
reflect on both issues.

LOAD-DATE: April 11, 1993

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo: American soldiers waiting to board helicopters bound for Saigon
on the first day of the Tet offensive in 1968. (Gerry S. Schooler/From "Red
Thunder, Tropic Lightning")

TYPE: Review

                   Copyright 1993 The New York Times Company


                              29 of 312 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                  April 12, 1993, Monday, Late Edition - Final

Files Said to Show Hanoi Lied in '72 On Prisoner Totals

BYLINE: By CELESTINE BOHLEN,  Special to The New York Times

SECTION: Section A; Page 1; Column 1; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 1033 words

DATELINE: MOSCOW, April 11


A document described as a top secret report written by a senior North Vietnamese
general and delivered to the Communist Party Politburo in Hanoi in September
1972 says that North Vietnam was holding 1,205 American prisoners of war when
Hanoi maintained that the number was only 368.

A copy of the report, a Russian translation of the Vietnamese document, was
recently discovered here in the archives of the Soviet Communist Party.

The report has been circulated among United States Government officials. It has
been described as authentic by experts, some of whom have called it a "smoking
gun" that proves Hanoi has been withholding information about the fate of
American prisoners of war in Vietnam.

Discovered in January by a Harvard University researcher, the document gives a
detailed accounting of 1,205 prisoners held in 11 North Vietnamese prisons in
the fall of 1972, at a time when the peace talks were under way in Paris.

The author of the report, General Tran Van Quang, then Deputy Chief of Staff of
the North Vietnamese Army, said in the document: "1,205 American prisoners of
war located in the prisons of North Vietnam -- this is a big number. Officially,
until now, we published a list of only 368 prisoners of war, the rest we have
not revealed. The Government of the U.S.A. knows this well, but it does not know
the exact number of prisoners of war, and can only make guesses based on its
losses. That is why we are keeping the number of prisoners of war secret, in
accordance with the Politburo's instructions."

Several months later, under the peace agreement between North Vietnam and the
United States, 591 P.O.W.'s were released. When the last of those prisoners were
freed on April 1, 1973, Hanoi said that no more American prisoners were left in
Vietnam -- an assertion that it has maintained.

But the Sept. 12, 1972, report suggests that North Vietnam was either
withholding prisoners after the peace agreement was reached or, if the prisoners
were no longer alive, knew about their fate.

More Than 700 Held Back

"On the basis of this, we can conclude that more than 700 Americans had been
held back by the Vietnamese at the time of Operation Homecoming," said Stephen
J. Morris, a 44-year-old researcher for the Harvard Center for International
Affairs and the Russian Research Center at Harvard, who discovered the document.

"This is the biggest hostage-taking in the history of American foreign policy
and we still don't know where the hostages are, what happened to them, if they
are still alive," said Mr. Morris, who is working on his second book about the
Vietnam War.

Members of a American-Russian commission investigating the fate of other
American P.O.W.'s, captured by either the Soviet Union or its allies, say the
document is authentic. The Russian newspaper Izvestia reported Saturday that the
document on the American prisoners in Vietnam, along with other newly
declassified material, was discussed at a recent closed meeting of the
commission.

The document could complicate Hanoi's efforts to establish diplomatic relations
with the United States and have Washington end its 18-year trade embargo. The
White House announced Saturday that John W. Vessey Jr. a retired general, would
visit Vietnam on April 18 and 19 to assess Hanoi's cooperation in accounting for
missing servicemen.

Marked 'Top Secret' in Russian

The document, found in the Communist Party archives, consists of both a Russian
translation of General Quang's full report and a summary prepared by the Soviet
Army Intelligence Agency. It is marked "Top Secret" in Russian, and on the first
page of the summary it shows handwritten instructions for a "brief note . . . on
the prisoners of war" to be dispatched to the Soviet Politburo.

Experts on the issue, which has haunted relatives of servicemen listed as
missing in action and a succession of Washington Administrations, say one
element strongly suggesting that the document is authentic is the reference to
the figure of 368, which was the number of P.O.W.'s given to American
representatives at the Paris peace talks. Furthermore, one Congressional expert,
who spoke on the condition of anonymity, said the number of 1,205 more or less
corresponds to the number of prisoners the United States was expecting to see
returned.

The United States still lists more than 2,200 servicemen from the Vietnam War as
unaccounted for, although more than half were known to have died. The Government
says the fate of the others is not known.

A Senate committee that investigated the issue reported in January that "there
is no proof that United States P.O.W.'s survived, but neither is there proof
that all of those who did not return had died."

Mr. Morris said he first showed the report to top White House officials in
February. According to a person who works for a Senate committee, a report on
the Soviet document was delivered to President Clinton on the eve of his meeting
with President Boris N. Yeltsin of Russia in Vancouver on April 3 and 4. It is
not known whether the subject was raised at the meeting.

No White House Evaluation Yet

A Clinton Administration official said tonight of the report of the document,
"We are pursuing it very seriously but are not in a position to evaluate it."

He also said that the American researcher had informed the Government of his
discovery but that "he would not give us the document."

He added that the former Ambassador to Moscow, Malcolm Toon, had been asked to
follow up the matter in Moscow. As to its impact on United States-Vietnamese
relations, the official said, "I assume it is something Vessey will raise."

Alan C. Ptak, former Department of Defense Deputy Assistant Secretary for
P.O.W./M.I.A. Affairs, said tonight that he had not heard of the document but
that he did not find it surprising. "I always had an inkling that we hadn't been
told everything," he said. "We had suspicions the Russians knew more than they
were telling us."

In his report, General Quang said the prisoners could be freed only as a part of
an overall peace settlement and could be used as leverage to obtain compensation
for the devastation caused by the war.

LOAD-DATE: April 12, 1993

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1993 The New York Times Company


                              30 of 312 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                  April 12, 1993, Monday, Late Edition - Final

NEWS SUMMARY

SECTION: Section A; Page 2; Column 5; Metropolitan Desk

LENGTH: 1002 words



International A3-13

U.N. FOOD DRYING UP IN BOSNIA
United Nations officials are warning that there is virtually no food left in
warehouses in and around Bosnia and that the entire food relief program there
may collapse.  A1

NATO pilots are told to fire only as a last resort over Bosnia.  A8


Russia is seeking further delay on U.N. action against Yugoslavia.  A8

TAIWAN AND CHINA IN TALKS
An envoy from Taiwan concluded five days of talks with mainland China
counterparts, clearing the way for a historic meeting between senior
representatives of each side to attempt to turn four decades of enmity into a
cooperative future.  A1

REPORT CASTS DOUBT ON HANOI
A 1972 document described as a top secret report written by a North Vietnamese
general says Hanoi was holding 1,205 American prisoners of war at a time when
North Vietnamese officials were saying that the number was only 368.  A1

U.S. MET WITH MILITANT EGYPTIANS
Since 1991, officials at the U.S. Embassy in Cairo have met with leaders of the
militant Islamic Group in Egypt. Members said the initial meetings centered on
allegations of human rights abuses by the Egyptian Government.  A3

A senior Egyptian police official was killed in an ambush.  A3

A PALL OVER SOUTH AFRICA
The neighborhood where Chris Hani, South Africa's most popular black militant,
was gunned down defies most stereotypes about the country. It is a racially
mixed middle-class Johannesburg suburb and so tension-free that he often jogged
through it unprotected.  A1

ISRAEL TO KEEP CURBS ON ARABS
The Israeli Government decided to keep the occupied West Bank and Gaza Strip
sealed indefinitely and to reduce sharply the number of Palestinians who
eventually will be allowed back into Israel for work.  A3

Berlin Journal: A ghost of protest past is remembered.  A4

Armenia captured strategic sites in Azerbaijan.  A6

New peace talks on Angola are scheduled in the Ivory Coast.  A13

National A14, B10-11

BANKRUPTCY'S CRITICS
With many major bankruptcy cases mired in the judicial system, complaints that
the courts have become a refuge for incompetent executives are rising.  A1

NO CHANGE IN DRUG STRATEGY
President Clinton's budget for drug enforcement suggests no major change in
philosophy from the Reagan-Bush years and offers no hope of slowing what some
see as the waste of millions of dollars on ineffective law-enforcement measures.
A1

RESULTS FROM A WELFARE CARROT
The success of an Ohio welfare program that uses monetary incentives to
encourage teen-age mothers to stay in school is encouraging supporters of such
plans to apply incentives to other social problems.  A14

SYMPATHY FOR A KILLER
A woman who killed the man accused of molesting her son has become a hero to
many people in the Sierra Nevada foothills around Sonora, Calif., who see the
crime as a symptom of the failings of the judicial system.  A14

OLD CRIME, NEW NOTORIETY
Tourists who in rental cars in Miami are becoming more wary of "bump and rob"
criminals, but the tactic has been around for years.  A14

A serial killer is terrorizing Washington with drive-by shootings.  B11

IN RIOT ZONE, POLICE CONFIDENCE
Police officers in the Los Angeles neighborhood that was the flash point for
rioting last year are anxious about being on the front lines again, but they are
confident in the department's ability to deal with the problem this time.  B11

MISSISSIPPI POLITICS AS USUAL
A Mississippi race between a liberal black and a conservative white for the
House seat vacated by Agriculture Secretary Mike Espy, who had forged a racial
coalition, marks a return to politics as usual.  B10

PRISON MELEE KILLS 5
Five prisoners were killed after a fight among inmates escalated into a melee at
a high-security prison in Lucasville, Ohio. Eight guards were held hostage.  B11

In Waco, Tex., Easter had its own special twists.  B11

Executive Brief: Lloyd Bentsen still knows Capitol Hill.  B10

Astronauts released a spacecraft to study the solar wind.  B10

Metro Digest B1

LIVING THE OLD-FASHIONED WAY
Most people in the Hollow, a small mountain ridge in the Adirondacks, still make
their living as woodsmen and trappers. Few apply for social services. There are
no officials, elected or otherwise.  A1

Sports C1-9

Baseball: Mets lose to Astros.  C1
White Sox stop Yankees.  C5
Royals notch first victory.  C4
Braves pitchers continue to dominate.  C5
Basketball: Knicks trounce Celtics.  C1
Nets still have chance to catch Boston.  C3
Columns: Anderson on the Masters.  C6
Football: Nagle remains confident.  C2
Golf: Langer dons the green jacket.  C1
Hockey: Rangers still alive, mathematically.  C9
Devils fall to Islanders.  C9
Horse Racing: Prairie Bayou goes to front of the class.  C2
Sports People C2
Tennis: Where's Monica?  C7

Obituaries D11

Rakhman N. Nabiyev, former President of Tajikistan.
R.C. Failla, judge and gay rights leader.
Franz Schneider, leader in gas industry.

Business Digest D1

Arts/Entertainment C11-18

A musical on Dietrich's life.  C11
Theater: Two by Caryl Churchill.  C11
Music: "Siegfried" at the Met.  C11
"Anna Bolena" in concert.  C13
Interpreting Schubert.  C13
Peter Serkin with the Guarneri String Quartet.  C13
Ned Rothenberg's music.  C14
Dance: In Review.  C18
Juilliard Dance Ensemble.  C18
Word and Image:
"Particles and Luck," by Louis B. Jones.  C12
"Class of '61," 1861, that is.  C16

Editorials/Op-Ed A16-17

Editorials

Make Congress obey itself.
Women and war.
Preventing violence at school.
Nicaragua aid: Back on track.

Letters

Anthony Lewis: The Clinton challenge.
William Safire: Progress in Ismailiya.
Sadruddin Aga Khan: A fig leaf on Serbian genocide.
David K. Shipler: Jefferson is America -- and America is Jefferson.

LOAD-DATE: April 12, 1993

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Summary

                   Copyright 1993 The New York Times Company


                              31 of 312 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                  April 12, 1993, Monday, Late Edition - Final

Berlin Journal;
Ghost of Protest Past, Red Rudi's Haunting Spirit

BYLINE: By STEPHEN KINZER,  Special to The New York Times

SECTION: Section A; Page 4; Column 3; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 1091 words

DATELINE: BERLIN, April 11


A cast of new and old German leftists gathered today to mark the 25th
anniversary of the shooting of one of their heroes, Rudi Dutschke, and to name a
building in his honor.

At a time when Europeans are reassessing the legacy of the 1968 protest
movement, the midday gathering was an assertion that anti-establishment leaders
like Dutschke, who won international fame as "Red Rudi," changed German society
for the better.

It also suggested that in death, Dutschke has come to personify the radical
protests that shook Europe a quarter of a century ago.

"More than any other leader of that time, Rudi Dutschke stood for the romantic
idea of a better society," said Bernd Rabehl, 55, one of Dutschke's former
comrades in arms. "He was the perfect combination of a charismatic speaker and a
serious intellectual. His death turned him into a mythical figure, and that is
why we're here today."

Radical, for Better or Worse


 Dutschke died in 1979, 11 years after he was wounded in a Berlin street.

About 100 guests turned up today for the ceremony, which was both a memorial
party and a reunion for veterans of old political wars. The hosts were editors
of Berlin's leftist daily newspaper, Tageszeitung, who have decided to name
their building Rudi Dutschke House. It is the first site named for Dutschke in
the city where he once wreaked havoc.

Looking back at the student-led protest movements that peaked in 1968, the
stalwarts who gathered today proclaimed that they had shaken West Germany out of
a moral and political torpor.

"The 1968 protests were one of the very few positive events in the history of
modern Germany," said Michael Sontheimer, Tageszeitung's 37-year-old editor.
"Until then Germany was a very conservative, insular, militaristic place. Only
because of what happened in 1968 is it even possible to live in this country."

Not everyone who is looking back over the period agrees. A number of German
thinkers have said in recent articles and speeches that leaders like Dutschke
were naive, irresponsible, hypocritical and instinctively anti-democratic within
their own movement, often refusing to accept opposing views. Among the sharpest
critics were Mr. Sontheimer's own father, a prominent political scientist.

"On balance, the student revolt had a more negative than positive effect on
Germany," Kurt Sontheimer wrote last week in Die Zeit, the country's leading
intellectual journal. He blamed the "68ers" for popularizing the notion that
West German society was deeply corrupt, an attitude that he says led to the
emergence of terrorism here in the 1970's.

"They had no interest in fairness or tolerance," the elder Mr. Sontheimer
asserted. "It is difficult to see that the 68ers brought anything other than
naive pacifism to the effort to humanize and civilize society."

Shunned the Communist Army

Dutschke was born in 1940 into the family of a postal worker and spent his
adolescence in Communist-ruled East Germany. After refusing to serve in the East
German Army, he was prevented from pursuing university studies. He moved to West
Berlin in 1960 to study sociology and philosophy and remained after the Berlin
wall was built in 1961.

By the mid-1960's, he had emerged as a popular leader of street protests against
the Vietnam War and the West German Government, a radical provocateur who
combined wit with imagination.

The tens of thousands who followed Dutschke onto the streets of Berlin in 1967
and 1968 felt themselves part of a worldwide movement that took inspiration from
Prague and other centers of political turmoil. And they also found much to
criticize in the German political system.

At that time, as Dutschke enjoyed pointing out, West Germany's Chancellor was a
former member of the Nazi party, Kurt Georg Kiesinger.  The President, Heinrich
Lubke, had designed barracks for the German Army as an architect during the Nazi
era. Most of West Berlin's newspapers and magazines were controlled by a single,
highly conservative publisher. West Germany's two major political parties, the
Christian Democrats and the Social Democrats, were joined in a coalition
government. To many young people, the political class seemed isolated and
unresponsive.

Banding together in a group called Extra-Parliamentary Opposition, Dutschke and
his fellow agitators emerged as national figures. Their contempt for cultural
and political convention shocked older generations of Germans who prized order
above all things.

"In those years, Dutschke was something like public enemy No. 1," the German
essayist Andreas Juhnke wrote recently. "He developed a charisma that made him
the symbol of the protest and youth movements of the time and also an object of
hatred for narrow-minded rightists."

On April 11, 1968, Josef Bachmann, a 23-year-old member of a far-right political
party, approached Dutschke on a Berlin street and, after confirming his
identity, shot him in the head and chest. The assailant was arrested and
sentenced to seven years in prison but committed suicide in his cell two years
later.

Dead at 39

Dutschke went through a long and painful rehabilitation after the shooting in
which he struggled to regain his speech and memory. He moved to London in 1968
but was expelled from Britain in 1971 after the newly elected Conservative
Government accused him of subversive activity. Later he settled in Denmark,
where he died in 1979 after suffering a seizure said to have been connected to
his gunshot wounds. He was 39.

Plans were announced at the reception today for publication of a collection of
Dutschke's speeches and writings. His American-born widow, Gretchen, who lives
in Hamburg, said she was working on a biography.

"I can't believe this wave of criticism of Rudi that's coming out," she said
between embraces of old friends.  "Here is a country that has some terrible
traditions, and the man who tried to challenge them is being attacked."

Mrs. Dutschke was accompanied by the couple's 25-year-old son, Hosea Che
Dutschke. Taking advantage of the end of the cold war, the young Mr. Dutschke
has been collecting reports on his father filed by the Stasi, or secret police
of East Germany, and by spies from other nations.

"I am doing my doctoral thesis in Berlin about how Rudi Dutschke was spied on by
different secret services," he said. "I am using Stasi sources and C.I.A.
sources. And the funny thing is, they both wrote exactly the same thing. Both
the capitalist and Communist services wrote that Rudi was a dangerous
revolutionary."


NAME: Rudi Dutschke

LOAD-DATE: April 12, 1993

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photos: "The 1968 protests were one of the very few positive events in
the history of modern Germany," Michael Sontheimer, right, editor of
Tageszeitung (Archie Kent for The New York Times), said yesterday at a ceremony
naming the newspaper building for Rudi Dutschke, above in 1968. Mr. Dutschke,
who was known as "Red Rudi," died in 1979, 11 years after he was wounded in a
demonstration. (Paris Match)

TYPE: Biography

                   Copyright 1993 The New York Times Company


                              32 of 312 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                  April 12, 1993, Monday, Late Edition - Final

R. C. Failla, Justice and Leader On Gay Rights Issues, Dies at 53

BYLINE: By BRUCE LAMBERT

SECTION: Section D; Page 11; Column 1; Metropolitan Desk

LENGTH: 732 words


Richard C. Failla, the first acknowledged homosexual elected to the New York
State Supreme Court and a leader on gay rights and AIDS issues, died yesterday
at St. Luke's-Roosevelt Hospital Center in Manhattan. He was 53 and lived in
Manhattan.

The cause of death was complications from AIDS, said Tony Picard, a family
friend.

Justice Failla was appointed as New York City's first openly gay Criminal Court
judge in 1985 by Mayor Edward I. Koch. In 1988, he won an uncontested election
to the state court with endorsements from the Democratic, Republican and Liberal
parties.

His rise symbolized an era of growing legal, political and social acceptance of
homosexuals, in contrast to the atmosphere when he entered the legal profession
in the 1960's. At that time, homosexual acts were still crimes under state law,
and gay lawyers were silent for fear of being fired or disbarred.

Turning Point

Justice Failla's life reached a turning point when, as a 30-year-old assistant
district attorney, he chastised a lawyer whom he felt was charging exorbitant
fees to gay defendants. In an interview years later, he recounted her
threatening reply: "I know you're a faggot, and I'm going to get you." He
recalled thinking, "I could lose my license, lose my job, lose my ability to
practice law -- something I had worked so hard for."

But instead of being intimidated, he grew determined. "That's when I decided,
come what may, I'm not going to live under this kind of oppression, and I will
come out," he said. "I'm not going to shout it from the rooftops, but I will not
deny it to anybody."

Even as a young man, Justice Failla had felt different from others and made
furtive trips to the library to read about homosexuality. Books of those days
described it as an illness and perversion, so for a time he dated women and
tried to repress his feelings.

Eventually he accepted the feelings, and his career flourished as he gained
influential positions in legal circles, government, and in gay and AIDS
organizations.

When sworn in as a judge, he said, "The symbolism need not be belabored, but it
should be noted," because it signaled to "young gay people that they can be who
they are, and that they can achieve whatever their abilities will allow them to
do."

Born in Queens

Justice Failla (pronounced FAIL-uh) was born in Queens, where as a boy he worked
at his family's grocery store. After graduating from the University of Florida
in 1962, he earned a law degree at Columbia in 1965.

His legal career started in an institution that banned homosexuals, the
military. He served in the Navy from 1964 to 1969 as a lieutenant in the judge
advocate general corps in the Philippines and in Vietnam. When gay sailors were
discharged, he volunteered to defend them.

For the next five years, he worked in the Manhattan District Attorney's office,
becoming a senior trial attorney in the homicide bureau. From 1974 to 1978, he
was the director of a Federal project to upgrade legal representation for
indigents in the Manhattan and Bronx courts.

In 1978, Mayor Koch named him the chief administrative judge of the new Office
of Administrative Trials and Hearings for city government. The Board of
Education put him in charge of hearing misconduct charges against its suspended
chancellor, Anthony J. Alvarado, who resigned early in that proceeding.

In 1984, Mayor Koch appointed William J. Thom as the first openly gay Civil
Court judge, then named Justice Failla to the Criminal Court in 1985.

When the AIDS epidemic arose, Justice Failla joined the newly organized board of
the Gay Men's Health Crisis, the world's first and largest private AIDS agency,
and later was its vice president.

He also served on the State Health Department's AIDS Advisory Council, which
recommends official policy. And he was instrumental in a 1989 City Bar
Association study that found state courts and prisons often violated the legal
rights of people with AIDS and endangered their lives with deficient medical
care.

His efforts won awards from the Lambda Legal Defense and Education Fund, the
Fund for Human Dignity and the Lesbian and Gay Law Association of Greater New
York.

His companion of 20 years, Richard Gross, died last year. The judge's survivors
include his mother, Florence, and a brother, Robert, both of Tampa, Fla., and
his father, Frank, of Safety Harbor, Fla.

NAME: Richard C. Failla

LOAD-DATE: April 12, 1993

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo: Judge Richard C. Failla (The New York Times, 1985)

TYPE: Obituary (Obit); Biography

                   Copyright 1993 The New York Times Company


                              33 of 312 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 April 13, 1993, Tuesday, Late Edition - Final

NEWS SUMMARY

SECTION: Section A; Page 2; Column 5; Metropolitan Desk

LENGTH: 966 words


International A2-11

SERBS BREAK BOSNIA TRUCE
Serbian nationalist forces unleashed intense artillery attacks on Sarajevo and
the besieged Muslim enclave of Srebrenica, shattering a fragile cease-fire that
had prevailed across most of Bosnia for two weeks.  A1

NATO warplanes began enforcing a flight ban over Bosnia.  A8



The Security Council delayed a vote on new sanctions on Belgrade.  A8

Washington supported the delay, citing pressures in Russia.  A9

ANGOLA REBELS WITHIN VICTORY
Nearly six months after elections that were supposed to cement the peace in
Angola, the rebel leader who lost in the vote has resumed the civil war and
scored such huge advances that he might achieve an outright military victory.
A1

WAVES OF ANGER IN SOUTH AFRICA
An angry shudder passed through the townships of South Africa as blacks mourning
the killing of Chris Hani, the charismatic black leader, put up barricades,
burned cars, looted stores and fired on police officers and journalists. No
deaths or serious injuries were reported.  A3

U.S. TO PRESS HANOI ON MISSING
The White House promised that a U.S. envoy would press Vietnam for an
explanation of a previously secret document suggesting that Hanoi held 1,205
United States prisoners of war in 1972, three times more than it admitted then
or later.  A1

SPAIN CALLS FOR EARLY VOTE
Thrown onto the defensive by an economic slump and a corruption scandal in
Spain, Prime Minister Felipe Gonzalez called for general elections on June 6,
hoping to recover the initiative by going to the polls five months earlier than
necessary.  A5

JAPAN REJECTS IMPORTS TARGETS
Despite growing pressure from the U.S. on trade issues, Japan's Prime Minister
rejected the idea of establishing new specific targets for Japanese imports of
American goods and cautioned that trade tensions could not be solved quickly.
A10

AN ENGAGEMENT IS OFFICIAL
In Tokyo, Masako Owada accepted two red fish, six bottles of sake and five bolts
of silk to signify her engagement to Crown Prince Naruhito. June 9 is the
wedding date.  A11

Militant opponents of abortion are not received well in Britain.  A2

Cairo Journal: The Pyramids are attracting New Age tourists.  A4

National A12-18

STRATEGY SHIFTED IN CULT SIEGE
Federal officers are surrounding the compound of an apocalyptic religious cult
near Waco, Tex., with coils of concertina wire, signaling a new phase in the
44-day siege in which the compound is in effect being treated like a prison. A1

PRISON TALKS GO HALTINGLY
Prison officials negotiated intermittently with hundreds of inmates who are
holding eight guards hostage after an uprising that left six prisoners dead,
apparently at the hands of the rioters.  A12

'WAR DRUMS' WORRY LOS ANGELES
The quickening press coverage of the trial of four police officers in the
beating of Rodney King are "just like Indian war drums, drumming up anxiety"
among the city's populace, a psychology professor said.  A14

AT RIOT FLASH POINT, UNCERTAINTY
As the jury deliberates the fate of the police officers, the mood of blacks in
South-Central Los Angeles, where the violence was worst last year, swings from
hope to grim preparedness to resignation.  A14

HEALTH PLAN'S VOLATILE ELEMENT
The idea of uniform health benefits, at the core of President Clinton's
health-care package, could prove to be politically explosive as the Federal
Government moves into areas that are normally the domain of states or private
parties.  A18

LOOKING FOR REPUBLICAN TARGETS
Political Memo: Following the successful Republican filibuster in the Senate
against the President's jobs package, the question then is this: Where can the
Republicans strike next? Only a few proposals stand out as likely targets.  A17

CLINTON PRESSES BATTLE
President Clinton launched a drive to salvage as much as possible of his jobs
package, which is being held up by Republicans in the Senate.  A18

The Clintons were all smiles at their first Easter Egg Roll.  A18

SNOW BURIES COLORADO BOYCOTT
The heavy snow that blanketed Colorado's mountains this winter proved to be an
attraction strong enough to counter calls for a tourist boycott of the state
over its opposition to gay rights laws.  A12

The Energy Secretary was optimistic on atomic waste storage.  A16

Gov. Guy Hunt of Alabama went on trial on ethics charges.  A16

Metro Digest B1

A LIFE OF DRUGS AND GANGS
When Fernando Morales and his relatives try to explain what went wrong in the
young man's life, they see a cycle over two generations. It began with a father
addicted to drugs and alcohol, prone to battering his family. By the time death
came, the son was selling the bundles that destroyed the father.  A1

FEINSTEIN TO STEP DOWN
Ending a 30-year-career as one of New York City's most influential labor
leaders, Barry Feinstein has agreed to a lifetime banishment from all of his
teamsters' union posts, Federal officials said.  A1

Business Digest D1

Science Times C1-11

Russia will help NASA cut the cost of the space station.  C1

Chemists learn why certain vegetables can inhibit cancers.  C1

Fashion Page B9

Arts/Entertainment C13-18

Troubles at Belgian opera.  C13

Sports B10-16

Baseball: Yanks win home opener.  B11

Obituaries B8

Editorials/Op-Ed A20-21

Editorials

Debate force on Bosnia. Now.

Again, the parking bureau.

Saving New York's libraries.

Letters

A. M. Rosenthal: Cruelty and silence.

Russell Baker: Prognosis: Unheavenly dirt.

Jeffrey Rothfeder: What happened to privacy?

Richard Gere: We win no Oscars for Tibet.

LOAD-DATE: April 13, 1993

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Summary

                   Copyright 1993 The New York Times Company


                              34 of 312 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 April 13, 1993, Tuesday, Late Edition - Final

U.S. to Press Hanoi to Explain '72 P.O.W. Report

BYLINE: By R. W. APPLE Jr.,  Special to The New York Times

SECTION: Section A; Page 1; Column 3; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 1311 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, April 12


The White House promised today that a Presidential envoy would press Vietnam
next week for an explanation of a previously secret document suggesting that
Hanoi held 1,205 United States prisoners of war in 1972, three times more than
it admitted then or later.

The document, found in January by an American researcher in the archives of the
Soviet Communist Party in Moscow, could prove politically explosive if it is
authentic, because it suggests that more than 600 American prisoners were
killed, died of natural causes or remain in Vietnamese hands.

Only 591 prisoners were released by Hanoi under the peace agreement with the
United States, the last on April 1, 1973, and Hanoi has denied holding any more.


The Astronaut Question

Some details in the document, a Russian translation of a report by Gen. Tran Van
Quang, the Deputy Chief of Staff of the North Vietnamese Army, appear to call
its authority into question. It speaks, for example, of three prisoners of war
who had undergone astronaut training; available records do not show the loss of
any such men. [Excerpts from the report, page A6.]

But other details seem to match the historical record. For example, the document
says that at the time, Hanoi had admitted to holding only 368 prisoners; that
was the number proffered to American negotiators in 1972.

Zbigniew Brzezinski, who served as national security adviser under President
Carter, was one of the Soviet experts who told the document's discoverer,
Stephen J. Morris, of Harvard University, that he thought it was authentic.

Finding an Echo of 1940

Mr. Brzezinski said in an interview today after studying the document that
although he had no concrete evidence, he believed that "the great likelihood is
that the Vietnamese took hundreds of American officers out and shot them in cold
blood, in a massacre like the one in the Katyn woods."

In the Katyn massacre in 1940, more than 4,500 Polish officers were slain in a
forest near Smolensk. Their bodies were discovered by the Nazi invaders in April
1943, and Mikhail S. Gorbachev admitted in 1990 that the Soviet secret police
had been responsible.

The Clinton Administration received a copy of the document from Moscow only last
Thursday, officials said, and they have not fully analyzed it. Dee Dee Myers,
the White House spokeswoman, said it would be discussed with Vietnamese leaders
by John W. Vessey, a retired Army general who will visit Hanoi next week. Some
officials suggested that General Vessey's trip had been slightly delayed because
of the need to explore the implications of the document.

"There can be no normalization of relations with Vietnam until we're sure that
the Vietnamese are doing all they can," Ms. Myers declared.

Senator John Kerry of Massachusetts, who headed a Senate committee that issued
an inconclusive report on P.O.W.'s in January, said: "If this thing is really
accurate, and really shows that the Vietnamese held that many American
prisoners, it is a very powerful document. It is the smoking gun."

In a telephone interview from his office in Boston, Mr. Kerry questioned whether
all of the 1,205 prisoners mentioned in the document were really Americans, or
whether some of them might have been Lao, Thai or Korean and lumped in with the
Americans because they were allies of the Americans. He also expressed concern
about the ranks attributed to the prisoners.

"In North Vietnam we captured 624 American fliers, including 7 colonels, 85
lieutenant colonels and 183 majors," the report says; Mr. Kerry, a Vietnam
veteran, said those numbers may be too high. But four United States Air Force
colonels shot down over Vietnam were among those released in 1973, and three
others are on the list of those unaccounted for.

Checking the Names

The document contains several names, including those of pilots who supposedly
had 4,000 hours of flight time when shot down. But the names are incomplete or
incomprehensible, having been rendered from English into Vietnamese, then into
Russian, then back into English, a transformation involving three alphabets.

It also mentions "Jim Katlo, captured in the environs of Hanoi," as one of those
who had been trained and certified for future space flights.

No name even remotely resembling Katlo appears on any United States Government
list of those captured or missing. And Adm. Richard H. Truly, the former
astronaut and administrator of the National Aeronautics and Space
Administration, said he had no knowledge of any astronauts who had been shot
down or taken prisoner in Vietnam.

Some may have taken a few astronaut-training courses as part of other programs,
he said, but they were never classified as trainee astronauts.

Washington's Tally

A total of 2,219 American soldiers, sailors, marines and airmen are still
carried on Pentagon rolls as missing in Cambodia, Laos and Vietnam. More than
half are known to have died, but their bodies have not been recovered. The
remains of 323 have been returned to the United States since 1973.

Mr. Brzezinski, a leading Soviet scholar, said he had been struck by three
things in the document: its style, which he said corresponded to other reports
of a similar nature; the number 1,205, which he said "corresponds to about what
the United States government was then expecting to be returned," and what he
termed "the Katyn-like classification system."

"At the Katyn woods, they specially selected members of the Polish aristocracy,"
he said, "and here you have the same kind of ominous pattern, with prisoners
being classified according to their degree of intransigence in refusing to
condemn the war. They say the officers come from rich families, which explains
their attitude."

Fear May Have Been a Motive

Mr. Brzezinski and several others speculated that the Vietnamese may have
concealed the existence of the other prisoners after the peace agreement because
they feared that the United States would re-enter the war, or perhaps because
they planned to seek financial reparations.

At some point, these analysts suggested, Hanoi recognized that the prisoners
were no longer bargaining counters, but it was unwilling to admit that it had
lied for so long.

"I can only speculate," Mr. Brzezinski said, "but I think the chances are very
small that any more than a few might have been kept alive until now."

Mr. Morris, 44, is affiliated with the Russian Research Center at Harvard. A
month after making his discovery, in February, he told Samuel R. Berger, the
deputy national security adviser at the White House, but he did not give Mr.
Berger the text. That arrived only on April 8, after Malcolm Toon, a former
ambassador who has been working with the Russians on the P.O.W. question,
obtained it in Moscow at Washington's request.

In a telephone interview shortly after he arrived at Kennedy Airport from
Moscow, Mr. Morris said he had withheld the text because he feared it would be
leaked and because he thought that would put an end to his research.

"This is the beginning of the story, not the end," he said. "I'm convinced the
answers are there, in Moscow, but will we get them now?"

Mr. Morris said that he had placed dozens of calls to senior Government
officials since his talk with Mr. Berger, hoping for help in his quest, but that
none had been returned. White House officials said they had been unwilling to
cooperate with someone unwilling to show them the document.

The most clear-cut reaction to the document, whose existence was reported
Saturday in Izvestia and today in The New York Times, came from the grassroots.
Liz Flick, a regional coordinator in the Midwest for the National League of
Families, said her reaction was "total devastation."

"We were not happy with the number that came back in 1973," she said.  "To know
that we were right doesn't make it any better."

LOAD-DATE: April 13, 1993

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1993 The New York Times Company


                              35 of 312 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 April 13, 1993, Tuesday, Late Edition - Final

Vietnam's 1972 Statement on P.O.W.'s: Triple the Total Hanoi Acknowledged

BYLINE: Special to The New York Times

SECTION: Section A; Page 6; Column 1; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 1860 words

DATELINE: MOSCOW, April 12


Following are excerpts from a report said to have been written by Gen. Tran Van
Quang of North Vietnam to the Communist Party Politburo, dated Sept. 15, 1972,
saying Hanoi was holding far more American prisoners of war than it had
acknowledged. The English translation was provided by Stephen J. Morris, a
researcher for the Harvard Center for International Affairs and the Russian
Research Center at Harvard, who discovered the report in the archives of the
Soviet Communist Party in Moscow.

Because the report had been translated from the Vietnamese to Russian and then
into English, the spelling of the names of Americans in the report is dubious.

Dear comrades: the question of the American prisoners of war is extremely
complex. All of international public opinion, and even the public opinion of
fraternal socialist countries and our own, wants to know exactly the number of
prisoners located in North Vietnam.

Permit me to report to you concretely on this question. Up until now, since the
U.S.A. brought its war to Vietnam, expanded the running of its air war to North
Vietnam, and also expanded the scope of its aggressive war as a whole,
transferring it to the territory of Laos and Cambodia, we have captured on the
fronts of Indochina a very large number of American prisoners of war.

Earlier the number of American prisoners of war was not very great, and world
public opinion gave it little attention. However, after 5 August 1964, the
imperialists of the U.S.A. began the massive airbombing and bombardment by the
ships of the Seventh Fleet on the territory of North Vietnam, and after
expanding the aggressive war on the territory of Laos and Cambodia, the number
of American prisoners of war in North Vietnam grew from day to day.

The End of a Secret

Until the present time the number of American prisoners of war in the Democratic
Republic of Vietnam has not been published, and we have kept this figure secret.
At today's meeting of the Politburo I present you, comrades, with the exact
number of American prisoners of war.

The complete number of American prisoners of war, captured to this day on the
fronts of Indochina, that is, in North Vietnam, South Vietnam, Laos and
Cambodia, stands at 1,205 men; of those, 671 men were captured in North Vietnam
and 143 fliers in South Vietnam. Thus the general number of fliers and saboteurs
(American advisers on saboteur ships and divers) captured on the territory of
North and South Vietnam stands at 814 men. Besides this, from the other
categories of American servicemen in Indochina, we captured 391 men, including:
in South Vietnam, 283; in Cambodia, 65; in Laos, 43 men; 814 and 391 add up to
1,205 people.

Here are several more facts about the 1,205 prisoners of war:

In North Vietnam we captured 624 American fliers, including 7 colonels, 85
lieutenant colonels, 183 majors; that is, the total number of senior officers in
the Air Force and Naval forces stands at 275 men.

In the number of 624 American fliers are included three cosmonauts, that is,
three people passed the suitable training for future cosmic flights, for
example, Jim Katlo, captured in the environs of Hanoi. In this number is
included also, of the U.S.A.F., with more than 4,000 hours of operations each,
Norman Klarvisto, Karmet, Jim Intist Shasht and others. These are concrete
statistics about the American fliers, captured in North Vietnam.

The 36 'Saboteurs'

Among another 47 prisoners captured in North Vietnam are 36 advisers of saboteur
detachments who gave themselves up in the region of the border between the
D.R.V. and Laos -- individual saboteurs undertaking reconnaissance of our
transport thoroughfares with helicopters, reconnaissance ships -- and several
sailors who had fallen into the sea off ships damaged by us and were picked up.
Thus the number of 624 and 47 comes to 671.

In South Vietnam, from the flying crews of the U.S.A., we captured 143 people,
basically pilots of helicopters, plus some jet-aircraft pilots.

In the number of 391 American armed servicemen captured in South Vietnam, Laos
and Cambodia are 19 colonels, 19 lieutenant colonels and 52 majors. The
remaining are officers from captain and below, and also American soldiers.

Thus, summing up, I recall once again, that the number of 1,205 military
prisoners of the U.S.A. who at the present time are being held in prisons in
North Vietnam, include:

*Fliers captured in North Vietnam, 624.

*Fliers captured in South Vietnam, 143.

*Saboteurs and other American military servicemen captured in North Vietnam, 47.

*American military servicemen of other categories, 391 men, including: captured
in South Vietnam, 283; in Cambodia, 65; in Laos, 43 persons.

They are all now located in prisons in North Vietnam. We have now 11 prisons
where American prisoners of war are being held. Earlier there were four prisons,
but after the attempts of the Americans to liberate their prisoners of war in
Son Tay, we increased the number of prisons to 11. In each of these is held
approximately 100 American prisoners of war.

Seven colonels of the Air Force captured in North Vietnam, and nine colonels of
various kinds of forces captured in South Vietnam, Laos and Cambodia (in all 16
officers), we are holding together and we are working on, in order to
investigate well the conditions developing in the American army, to obtain
necessary materials and information, and to define our attitude toward them.

We are also holding 104 American lieutenant colonels in one place and we are
working with them for the receipt of materials, secret information and the
disposition of forces and information concerning the Ministry of Defense of the
U.S.A.; 235 majors are concentrated in two places.

Thus some senior officers of the American army were separated in special
prisons: one for colonels, one for lieutenant colonels and two for majors. In
the other prisons were marked remaining prisoners of war in rank from captain
and down.

The 368 'Progressives'

Several words about the political positions and orientations of the American
prisoners of war: 368 prisoners of war are of progressive orientation. They
understand well that this war and their side is wrong and unpopular. They
condemn the American Government and express decisive protest against this war.

These 368 prisoners of war we will be able to free in the first instance under
the conditions in which -- as a result of the struggle of the progressive people
of the world, including the American people -- favorable international
circumstances develop, at which time Nixon will be compelled to a decision on
the political question.

In this category of prisoners of war, we are undertaking work for the purpose of
explaining to them the aggressive substance of the war being conducted by the
Nixon Government, the essence of the regime of Nguyen Van Thieu -- but also in
their understanding of the unjust character of this war, which is bringing great
damage to the American people. . . .

The 372 'Neutralists'

Three hundred seventy-two people among the prisoners of war are holding
neutralist views, that is, their political point of view is not fully
progressive, but also not very reactionary. We see well that they still
insufficiently ascribe a clear role for the American Government in the
unleashing of the aggressive war in Indochina.

The remaining hold reactionary views. In spite of our work, spending time with
them for the purpose of explaining to them their real situation, they have not
changed their reactionary views.

In summary, let us put together the following picture:

*368 prisoners of war holding progressive views can be freed in the first
instance.

*372 prisoners of war holding a neutralist position.

*465 prisoners of war holding reactionary views.

All the . . . senior officers hold reactionary views, that is, they do not
condemn Nixon, they do not express protest against his policy and they falsify
our course. We understand that these officers come from rich families. It is
precisely this that explains their reactionary views.

We understand well that the question of the American prisoners of war has great
significance in the resolution of the South Vietnamese problem. We must continue
propaganda and educational work with the American prisoners of war, to get their
understanding not only of the essence of the aggressive war, which brings the
U.S.A. to Vietnam, but also of the senseless obstinacy of Nixon, which is only
delaying the time of the liberation of the prisoners of war and their return to
the motherland.

In the near future we will free several prisoners of war from here, in order to
put pressure on the Nixon Government, to see its reaction and the reaction of
American society, but also for the purpose of demonstrating our good intentions
in this matter.

                                    .  .  .


What the U.S. Must Do

The question of the American prisoners of war, as is well known, we intend to
resolve in the following manner:

1. The Government of the U.S.A. must demonstrate compliance, that is, to a
cease-fire and to remove Nguyen Van Thieu, and then both sides will set about
discussion of the question of the return of the prisoners of war to the Nixon
Government.

2. At this time, until the American side settles the foregoing problem, we will
be able to free only a few of the fliers from the number of progressive
orientation. Nixon cannot stand in the way of the return of these fliers to the
motherland. . . .

3. Nixon must compensate North Vietnam for those enormous losses which the
destructive war caused.

These are the principles on the basis of which we are able to resolve the
question of the American prisoners of war. However, Nixon as usual is stubborn
in the settlement of the Vietnamese question, and hence is dragging out the
resolution of the question.

                                    .  .  .

At this very moment we have managed to obtain data about American weapons, and
also very valuable scientific materials about the army of the U.S.A., for
example, materials about the utilization of various sort of armaments, the
tactical-technical character of aircraft, the instructions of the Air Force, and
also materials about various other sorts of weaponry of the army of the U.S.A.

The 'Correct' Position

We have managed to guess the plans of the U.S.A. in the international arena and
on a series of other questions connected with the war in Indochina. Thus we are
certain that our position on the question of the prisoners of war was and
remains correct.  . . .

One thousand two hundred and five prisoners of war located in the prisons of
North Vietnam -- this is a big number. Officially until now we published a list
of only 368 prisoners of war; the remainder we have not revealed.

The Government of the U.S.A. knows well about this, but does not know the exact
number of prisoners of war, and is able only to surmise approximately about them
on the basis of its losses.

That is why in accordance with the instructions of the politburo we are keeping
secret the numbers of prisoners of war.

LOAD-DATE: April 13, 1993

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo: Stephen J. Morris, a Harvard University researcher, found
documents in Moscow suggesting that the number of United States prisoners of war
held by Hanoi inh 1972 was much higher than Vietnam had ever reported. Yesterday
he called the discovery "the beginning of the story, not the end." (Steve Berman
for The New York Times)

TYPE: Text

                   Copyright 1993 The New York Times Company


                              36 of 312 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 April 13, 1993, Tuesday, Late Edition - Final

Debate Force on Bosnia. Now.

SECTION: Section A; Page 20; Column 1; Editorial Desk

LENGTH: 685 words


A lot of serious and decent people are now urging President Clinton to use
American military force to protect innocent Bosnian populations from further
murderous Serb assaults.

But any such step must take account of political realities in this country.
Neither in the Congress, nor in the population at large, is there now any real
constituency for U.S. military engagement. And the President himself comes from
a tradition, and a generational experience, that says you don't go to war unless
and until that kind of public support exists.

As a member of the Vietnam generation, Mr. Clinton should know almost
intuitively that what was most acutely missing in the Vietnam War was serious
prior public debate over goals, risks and costs. Even the urgency created by a
major new Serb offensive should not be allowed to short-circuit that kind of
debate over Bosnia today. That looming offensive should, however, spur Mr.
Clinton to launch a debate on the use of force without further delay.

It was, therefore, a serious error for the Clinton Administration to have edited
out a recommendation for a form of military intervention from the report drafted
by a team of experts it sent to Bosnia earlier this year. The draft report
originally called for the establishment of "safe havens" protected by
international military force, along with reinforced food convoys and measures to
silence Serb artillery batteries firing on besieged cities.

The Administration used the edited version of the report in closed-door
briefings of Congress last week. What's needed now is publication of the full
report. That would provide the catalyst for a full-scale debate, involving
Congress and the public, on whether Americans will support intervention in the
Balkans.

The case for international intervention to protect Bosnian Muslim civilians from
further ethnic cleansing is emotionally and morally strong. In a little more
than a year of warfare, tens of thousands of innocents have been subjected to
wholesale uprooting, systematic rape and grotesque forms of murder. Thanks to a
U.N. arms embargo that mainly constrains the Bosnian Government, those that have
survived remain all but defenseless. Even the U.N. food relief effort now may be
trickling to a halt for lack of funds.

Last week Slobodan Milosevic, President of Serbia and orchestrator of the
terror, mockingly thanked the United States for not intervening to stop the
slaughter. His Serbian allies in Bosnia are apparently reading the world's
continued inaction as an unexpected green light, and are now gearing up for a
final assault on surrounded cities like Srebrenica and Sarajevo. According to
some military experts, these final assaults could be held off at relatively low
risk by air strikes on artillery positions and related supply lines.

Yet it is reasonable to ask if it will really be possible for any limited form
of intervention to hold off a military offensive by well-equipped forces
committed to total victory. That mismatch of commitments in Vietnam led to a
series of massive but doomed escalations.

If the United States and its allies are to use force, they will need to have a
clear, attainable goal in sight, not just a hope that brushing back Serb forces
in a one-shot operation will make them abandon their long-held goals and
withdraw from the field.

The United States and its allies. Even if a compelling case for international
intervention can be made, shouldn't European forces shoulder the largest risks
in what is, after all, a European war? Plainly, the British and French
Governments prefer not to intervene. If Mr. Clinton thinks they are wrong, as he
sometimes suggests, he will need to change their minds before he resorts to
military action.

None of these objections are unanswerable. But answers must be found before, not
after, American military force is sent into the fray. Deploying American force
as a last measure to head off moral catastrophe may turn out to be the right
policy choice, but only after the means and objectives have been well thought
out and democratically debated.


LOAD-DATE: April 13, 1993

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Editorial

                   Copyright 1993 The New York Times Company


                              37 of 312 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                April 14, 1993, Wednesday, Late Edition - Final

NEWS SUMMARY

SECTION: Section A; Page 2; Column 5; Metropolitan Desk

LENGTH: 1125 words



International A3-13

ARISTIDE ACCEPTS HAITI AMNESTY
Diplomats and advisers to Haiti's exiled President say the Rev. Jean-Bertrand
Aristide has reversed himself and extended an offer of amnesty to his most
bitter opponents among the army leadership.  A1

U.N. ASSAILS SERBIAN SHELLING
After months of restraint in their reaction to Serbian bombardments in Bosnia,
senior United Nations harshly condemned the Serbian shelling on Monday that
killed more than 50 civilians in the besieged Muslim enclave of Srebrenica.  A1


Cyrus R. Vance expressed confidence in his peace plan.  A8

The United Nations appealed for more food aid to Bosnia.  A8

U.S. SAID TO DOUBLE AID TO RUSSIA
President Clinton told Japan's Prime Minister that American contributions to aid
Russia would increase by $2 billion, American officials said, more than doubling
Mr. Clinton's pledge to Russia.  A1

FEAR FOR POLES IN SOUTH AFRICA
The killing of a black Communist leader in South Africa has stirred old
resentments toward an immigrant community that was embraced -- even recruited --
into white South Africa because a Polish immigrant has been arrested in the
attack.  A3

U.S. URGES CAUTION ON P.O.W. FILE
The Pentagon cautioned against putting too much stock in a report that suggests
that Hanoi lied about the number of prisoners it held in 1972. Advocates for the
families of missing Americans embraced the document's findings.  A6

HANOI SEES FRAUD IN REPORT
Vietnam's senior diplomat dealing with American affairs described as a "clear
fabrication" a report suggesting that 1,205 American prisoners of war were being
held in North Vietnamese prisons in 1972.  A6

BRITAIN AND CHINA TO RENEW TALKS
Britain and China said they would resume talks next week on Hong Kong's future,
a decision that suggests a long and bitter impasse may have finally been broken.
A3

EGYPTIAN LEADER MEETS ARAFAT
Egypt's President met with the P.L.O. leader Yasir Arafat and is to see Israel's
Prime Minister as part of Cairo's effort to resume the Middle East peace talks.
A13

A bomb killed three Israeli soldiers in southern Lebanon.  A13

IN RIO, SCANDAL BRINGS RICHES
A first wave of memoirs is renewing the national uproar in Brazil surrounding
the impeachment of President Collor last year by asserting that he tried bribery
and black magic to ward off attempts to remove him from office.  A4

National A14-18, B8

BIG 3 STUDY ELECTRIC CAR
General Motors, Ford and Chrysler are discussing jointly building an electric
car to meet the mandates of the clean air law established in California and
recently adopted by several Northeastern states.  A1

A NEW HIGH-TECH HEADACHE
The computer industry and the Federal Government are collaborating on coping
with a high-tech environmental headache: what to do with millions of obsolete
computers.  A1

ALARM OVER DRUG USE BY YOUNG
After years of decline, the use of marijuana, cocaine and LSD among younger
teen-agers is showing signs of an upturn, researchers said.  A1

CLINTON ALLIANCE ANGERS G.O.P.
President Clinton's participation in a satellite question-and-answer event at
the United States Chamber of Commerce angered conservative House Republicans.
A16

PENALTIES WEIGHED IN HEALTH PLAN
The White House is considering penalties for doctors and hospitals that exceed
the spending targets being considered as part of the Administration's plan for
overhauling the nation's health-care system.  A17

Doctors back the Clinton approach to health reform, a poll showed.  A17

BLOW TO CITIES IN CENSUS BATTLE
A Federal judge in Brooklyn rebuffed a coalition of major cities seeking to
force the Government to adjust the 1990 census to make up for an undercount.
A14

7th DEATH IN PRISON UPRISING
A seventh inmate was found dead in an Ohio prison where about 450 inmates have
been holding eight guards prisoner since Sunday.  A14

TEEN-AGER SLAIN IN CLASSROOM
Students in Dartmouth, Mass., watched as three boys burst into a classroom and
fatally stabbed a 16-year-old boy believed to have been an innocent party in a
dispute.  A14

GOVERNOR'S TRIAL BEGINS
Gov. Lamar Hunt "sold his oath of office," prosecutors said at his trial on
charges of using his office to collect $200,000 for his personal use. But Mr.
Hunt's lawyer said the transactions were a lawful.  A18

FEAR OF RIOTS, FEARS FOR RIGHTS
Civil libertarians say they hope that concern about renewed rioting in Los
Angeles does not lead to a police crackdown that could trample on people's
rights.  B8

ECHOES OF THE BIG BANG?
Studies of microwave radiation from space are providing scientists with clues to
what some say was the almost instantaneous expansion of the infant universe.
A18

The trial of Clark Clifford and Robert Altman resumed.  A16

Education Page B9

Love or harassment? Campuses are banning faculty-student liaisons.

Clinton's budget increase isn't huge, but educators seem to like it.

Metro Digest B1

Business Digest D1

Living Section C1-10

Family tree nurtures a new generation of chefs.  C1
Wine Talk: A feud and a book unplug the cork on the Gallo empire.  C1
At the office with Louis Begley: Inventing a life, then living it.  C1
At Easter, Greece celebrates the fat (and lean) of the land.C3
Eating Well C4
Food Notes C4
Microwave Cooking C6
The high-tech way to grocery
shop.  C10

Health Page C12

How confidential is what you tell a psychotherapist?
Personal Health: Protecting eyes while pursuing sports.

Arts/Entertainment C14-20

Kahlo-Rivera art dispute.  C15
Theater: "3 Men on a Horse." C15
Theater in Review C16
Film: "Joan Mitchell" and "Guerrillas in Our Midst." C14
Music: First Mendelssohn oratorio.  C15
Books: An admiral's life.  C19
Book Notes C19
TV: "The Cabinet of Dr. Ramirez" C15

Sports B10-16

Baseball: With Rockies' help, Mets rally.  B11
Mattingly no longer the Yankee most feared.  B13
Basketball: Kukoc is pursued.  B11
Knicks defeat Bullets.  B14
Column: Berkow on Jesse Jackson and baseball.  B11
Hockey: Messier now finds himself cast as a villian.  B11
Islanders tie Whalers.  B13
Horse Racing: Plan afoot to shift OTB regulation.  B16

Obituaries B22

Samuel R. Walker, a real-estate executive.

Editorials/Op-Ed A20-21

Editorials

New questions on the P.O.W.'s.
Bankruptcy needs reform.
Vegging out.
Angola's killer of the dream.

Letters

Anna Quindlen: Uniquely perilous.
Henry Louis Gates Jr.: A weaving of identities.
Cornel West: How to end the impasse.

LOAD-DATE: April 14, 1993

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Summary

                   Copyright 1993 The New York Times Company


                              38 of 312 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                April 14, 1993, Wednesday, Late Edition - Final

Pentagon Is Wary on Hanoi Text; Families See Proof of Lies

BYLINE: By STEVEN A. HOLMES,  Special to The New York Times

SECTION: Section A; Page 6; Column 3; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 647 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, April 13


Pentagon officials cautioned today against putting too much stock in a newly
unearthed document that suggests that North Vietnam lied about the number of
American prisoners it held in 1972.

But advocates for the families of missing servicemen rushed to embrace the
document's findings.

The authenticity of the seven-page document has become the focus of the
continuing debate over the number of P.O.W.'s at the end of the Vietnam War.

Pentagon officials, noting that the document is an English translation of a
Russian version of what a Soviet-era note described as a Vietnamese report, said
the public should not accept it until a Vietnamese version was found.

"There are a lot of questions we have about it," said Bob Hall, a Department of
Defense spokesman. "But until we get a chance to discuss those with the
Vietnamese and raise them and try to get answers to them, it would be
inappropriate for me to discuss them in public."

The report, supposedly written by Gen. Tran Van Quang, who is described as
deputy chief of staff of the North Vietnamese Army, said Hanoi held 1,205
American prisoners in September 1972. In early 1973, under the terms of a peace
agreement, Hanoi released 591 American prisoners and has maintained ever since
that no more were held.

But Vietnamese officials and representatives of groups who advocate
reconciliation between Washington and Hanoi note a number of discrepancies,
including an assertion that some prisoners were segregated by rank. Freed
prisoners reported that officers and enlisted men were never separated.

"Our own P.O.W.'s said that the Vietnamese did not classify and segregate
officers from enlisted men," said John Terzano, president of the Vietnam
Veterans of America Foundation, which seeks rapprochement between the United
States and Vietnam.

But Stephen J. Morris, the Harvard researcher who found the document, said that
if officers were segregated, men in other jails would not have known about them.
He acknowledged, however, that this contention would hold only if no segregated
officers were ever released.

Differences have also arisen over the status of General Quang. Vietnamese
officials said today that General Quang was not a senior officer at the time of
the report and would not have been in a position to write it.

Biography of a General

But according to Douglas Pike, director of the Indochina Archive at the
University of California at Berkeley, General Quang was Deputy Minister of
National Defense and deputy chief of staff of the Army in 1974. It is not clear
if he was deputy chief of staff in 1972, the date of the document. According to
biographical material Mr. Pike has collected, General Quang had been a member of
North Vietnam's central military party committee since 1961.

Senator Robert C. Smith, a New Hampshire Republican and the ranking member of a
Senate committee on prisoners' issues, said, "It's an authentic document.
There's no question about that."

Mr. Smith's views reflected the sentiments expressed at a news conference on
Capitol Hill by some veterans' organizations and advocates for the families of
missing servicemen, who accepted the document as evidence of Vietnamese perfidy.

Asked why he believed the document was authentic, Mr. Smith cited a passage in
the English translation that said Hanoi would soon "free several prisoners of
war from here, in order to put pressure on the Nixon Government, to see its
reaction and the reaction of American society, but also for the purpose of
demonstrating our good intentions in this matter."

The document was supposedly written on Sept. 15, 1972. On Sept. 25 Hanoi
released three pilots -- Maj. Edward K. Elias of the Air Force and Lieuts.
(j.g.) Norris A. Charles and Markham L. Gartley of the Navy.

"So in other words," Mr. Smith said, "this commitment was made and followed
through."


LOAD-DATE: April 14, 1993

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1993 The New York Times Company


                              39 of 312 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                April 14, 1993, Wednesday, Late Edition - Final

A '72 Report on P.O.W.'s Is a Fake, Vietnam Asserts

BYLINE: By PHILIP SHENON,  Special to The New York Times

SECTION: Section A; Page 6; Column 1; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 764 words

DATELINE: BANGKOK, Thailand, April 13


Vietnam's senior diplomat dealing with United States affairs today described as
a "clear fabrication" a document suggesting that 1,205 American prisoners of war
were in North Vietnamese prisons in 1972, more than double the number eventually
released.

The diplomat, Nguyen Xuan Phong, acting director of the Americas Department at
the Foreign Ministry, said in a telephone interview from Hanoi that "we have
very strong evidence" to prove "this document is not authentic -- a clear
fabrication."

The document, recently discovered in the archives of the Soviet Communist Party
in Moscow, has alarmed former officials in Washington and scholars of the
Vietnam War, who say it may prove that hundreds of prisoners were never
released, and are now almost certainly dead.

Tracing the General

The document is a Russian translation of what is described as a September 1972
report prepared for the Vietnam Politburo by Gen. Tran Van Quang, who is
identified as the deputy chief of staff of the North Vietnamese Army. It
describes Hanoi's efforts to keep secret the number of American prisoners.

The report says that in 1972, even as Vietnam was claiming that it held only 368
American prisoners, there were 1,205 Americans in North Vietnamese prisons.

Mr. Phong said the easiest way to prove that the document was a fabrication was
to review General Quang's career. In 1972, he said, General Quang was not deputy
chief of staff; he was the Army commander in Military Region 4, in central
Vietnam, a post he held from 1966 to 1974.

"Gen. Tran Van Quang had nothing to do with the general staff of the Vietnamese
People's Army," Mr. Phong said. "There would be no reason for Gen. Tran Van
Quang to have prepared this sort of report."

A member of Mr. Phong's staff, Nguyen Ba Hung, said General Quang had never held
been deputy chief of staff of the Army. "That's why it sounded very funny when
we heard this report," he said. "Those who have knowledge about the war and
about the Army would have a better understanding."

Diplomatically Awkward

General Quang, now retired, is the director of an organization of Vietnamese
veterans. Foreign Ministry officials said that, while they had not spoken to
General Quang about the document, his staff had said the document was a forgery.

The document's release comes at a delicate time: Vietnamese officials are
preparing for meetings in Hanoi next week with John W. Vessey Jr., a retired
Army general who has been dispatched by President Clinton to discuss the issue
of missing servicemen.

When the general's visit was announced this month, the Vietnamese took it as a
sign that President Clinton might be prepared to move quickly to relax the
18-year-old United States embargo on trade and loans to Vietnam. Vietnam, one of
the world's poorest nations, has abandoned Marxist economics and is eager for
foreign investment -- specifically American -- in its newly free markets.

But Hanoi's optimism about the outcome of next week's meetings appears to have
faded with the release of the document from the Soviet archives.

An Agenda Changes

Now, it appears, General Vessey's trip will focus largely on the authenticity of
the document, and thus on the possibility that hundreds of prisoners were alive
at the end of the war but were never freed.

The State Department said Monday that General Vessey, a former chairman of the
Joint Chiefs of Staff who has served since 1987 as a Presidential envoy on the
issue of missing Americans, will make the document his "first order of business"
in Hanoi.

"Obviously this document is not favorable for the course of relations between
the two countries," Mr. Phong said. "It will raise suspicions from the American
people. But I don't think the document is able to reverse the belief that
Vietnam has cooperated very well in this humanitarian issue over the fate of the
missing Americans."

Under the 1973 peace settlement between the United States and North Vietnam, 591
American prisoners of war were released from North Vietnam. When the last were
freed, in April 1973, Hanoi said no more prisoners were left -- an assertion it
has maintained ever since.

Mr. Phong said he was optimistic that United States officials would see the
document as a fabrication, and that it should not delay efforts to normalize
diplomatic and trade relations.

"I have worked with United States Government representatives for seven years,"
he said. "I believe that they are careful to distinguish the truth from the
fabrications. I hope the American people can distinguish that, too."


LOAD-DATE: April 14, 1993

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1993 The New York Times Company


                              40 of 312 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                April 14, 1993, Wednesday, Late Edition - Final

Vietnam-Jeep Deal Is Seen

BYLINE: By Bloomberg Business News

SECTION: Section D; Page 20; Column 4; Financial Desk

LENGTH: 182 words

DATELINE: DETROIT, April 13


The Chrysler Corporation is working on a plan to produce its Jeep Cherokee
vehicle in Vietnam once the United States trade embargo is lifted, Automotive
News said this week.

The weekly trade publication quoted La Ngoc Khue, Vice Minister of Transport and
Communications, as saying Chrysler "has been very active" in seeking to
establish Jeep production, most probably in Hanoi.

Mr. Khue, who is also Vietnam's chief auto industry strategist, said that the
General Motors Corporation had also expressed interest in building vehicles in
Vietnam but that Chrysler had been more persistent.

Chrysler played down the possible venture, saying it was nowhere near the
planning stage to build vehicles in Vietnam.

Industry analysts told the trade publication that they doubted Chrysler or any
other major American company would move quickly to establish production in
Vietnam because of the potential protests from veterans and other groups in the
United States.

Several European auto makers, including BMW, Fiat and Peugeot, already assemble
vehicles in Vietnam or have plans to do so.

LOAD-DATE: April 14, 1993

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1993 The New York Times Company


                              41 of 312 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                April 14, 1993, Wednesday, Late Edition - Final

Books of The Times;
A Bush Admiral Tells Why He Helped Clinton

BYLINE: By HERBERT MITGANG

SECTION: Section C; Page 19; Column 1; Cultural Desk

LENGTH: 920 words



The Line of Fire
From Washington to the Gulf, the Politics and Battles of the New Military
By Adm. William J. Crowe Jr. with David Chanoff.
Illustrated. 367 pages. Simon & Schuster. $25.

From midshipman to Chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff, the career of Adm.
William J. Crowe Jr. spanned the cold war and included a few of the hot ones.
Yet after the admiral's 47 years of military service, the present generation
probably remembers him best as the retired admiral who served under Presidents
Ronald Reagan and George Bush at the Pentagon, then broke ranks and came out for
Gov. Bill Clinton in last year's Presidential contest.

His autobiography, "The Line of Fire," written with David Chanoff, is not
outspoken about the Commanders in Chief he worked for. (By being discreet, he
may be making a silent statement of faint praise.) He does, however, call Dan
Quayle "a creditable Vice President" but does not say why. By contrast, he is
candid on his judgment of Mr. Clinton and why he decided to become his military
adviser during the campaign.

"While I had had some occasional disagreements with the Bush Administration on
specific national security issues (particularly the plan to abandon sanctions
against Iraq and rush to military action before laying out long-term regional
objectives)," he writes, "on the whole I was more than satisfied with the
direction it had taken."

Once out of uniform, Admiral Crowe, who has a doctorate in politics from
Princeton and is professor of geopolitics at the University of Oklahoma, found
himself thinking more and more about the nation's economic and social problems.
He writes:

"I was dismayed by our lack of a sensible industrial policy, by our educational
failings and by the terrible divisiveness isolating so many citizens from the
great American community that makes us a people rather than an assortment of
factions. I found myself increasingly disturbed by the Republican Party's
tendency to exclude certain groups from the mainstream of American life and
exploit antagonisms within the society. It seemed to me that our economic and
industrial deterioration had replaced superpower confrontation as the greatest
threat to our national security."

In this respect, Admiral Crowe's position echoes what the independent Center for
Defense Information, founded by Rear Adm. Gene R. La Rocque, retired, has been
advocating in its publication, The Defense Monitor, for two decades: strong
social, economic, political and military components and a healthy environment
all contribute to American security.

Admiral Crowe was the senior adviser to the South Vietnamese Riverine Force in
the Vietnam War. In one of the boldest statements in "The Line of Fire," he now
writes that Vietnam was "a war in which neither America's survival nor its
future was at stake." He deplored what he calls the Republican effort to shift
the country's attention away from its pressing problems with "peripheral
concerns, such as Bill Clinton's leanings during the Vietnam War some 25 years
earlier."


So he decided to get involved in a political race for the first time. He writes
that Governor Clinton struck him as the candidate best able to shake off "the
inertia of cold war habits" and address the challenges of a vastly different
world. During military briefings, he says, he found that Governor Clinton had a
powerful and retentive mind and that contrary to some views, he was not
antimilitary. As he got to know him more intimately during the campaign, he
said, he found Governor Clinton's feeling for people obviously genuine: "I would
call him a humanist."

Disappointingly, Admiral Crowe ducks any comment on the current ethnic,
religious, political and historical war in the Balkans. He doesn't discuss what
role, if any, he and high-ranking Pentagon officers think the United States
should play there. His views about the new-old Balkan tinderbox would be
valuable. As chairman of President Clinton's Foreign Intelligence Advisory
Board, the author obviously knows a great deal more than he is willing to commit
to paper about that volatile situation.

The most revealing sections in "The Line of Fire" concern Admiral Crowe's
encounters with his Russian counterpart, Marshall Sergei F. Akhromeyev, who was
Chief of Staff of the Soviet armed forces under Mikhail S. Gorbachev. The gruff
Soviet World War II commander and the polished American admiral and their wives
became good friends. Both men had seen enough of shooting wars and sought
treaties to avoid a nuclear conflict.


On his own, Admiral Crowe decided to open a military-to-military dialogue with
the Soviets. Ignoring some official opposition, he showed Marshall Akhromeyev
the Pentagon's nerve center and the latest American aircraft carrier, followed
by a warm visit to Oklahoma, Admiral Crowe's home state. Thereafter, Admiral
Crowe inspected Soviet military installations. Later, disillusioned with the
state of affairs in the former Soviet Union, Marshall Akhromeyev killed himself.
"I admired him," Admiral Crowe writes. "He was a significant figure in creating
the breakthrough that ended the cold war. But like Gorbachev himself, he never
had in mind the final denouement."

Admiral Crowe rightfully considers the American-Soviet military exchanges that
he initiated to be his major contribution to spiking the guns; his inside
details make for interesting reading. In "The Line of Fire," he emerges as an
admirable diplomat in uniform, a peacetime warrior in the Pentagon.

LOAD-DATE: April 14, 1993

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo: Adm. William J. Crowe Jr. (Andrea Mohin/The New York Times)

TYPE: Review

                   Copyright 1993 The New York Times Company


                              42 of 312 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                April 14, 1993, Wednesday, Late Edition - Final

New Questions on the P.O.W.'s

SECTION: Section A; Page 20; Column 1; Editorial Desk

LENGTH: 520 words


The long smoldering issue of unaccounted-for American prisoners from the Vietnam
War has flared anew. Hanoi has only its long history of duplicity on the P.O.W.
issue to blame for this latest ambushing of its hopes for more normal ties.

If the latest document to emerge from Soviet archives proves accurate, the
process of normalization will have to be postponed yet again. No American
interest in Vietnam ranks higher than keeping faith with the families of these
missing servicemen.

In January, a Harvard researcher studying archives of the Soviet Communist Party
in Moscow came upon a document that purports to be a 1972 report from a senior
North Vietnamese general. It declares that Hanoi actually held 1,205 American
P.O.W.'s then, more than three times as many as the 368 it acknowledged.

A year later, following the Paris peace agreements, North Vietnam released 591
P.O.W.'s. Both Hanoi and the Nixon Administration declared that no Americans had
been left behind. But there's always been room for doubt. The Pentagon still
lists some 2,200 servicemen as formally unaccounted for, though it presumes that
more than half of these actually died during the war.

It is possible that Hanoi held hundreds of additional undisclosed Americans --
even possible that, as Zbigniew Brzezinski, the former national security
adviser, now hypothesizes, most of these were summarily executed sometime in the
1970's.

But there are sound reasons to investigate the new document carefully before
jumping to such conclusions. Communist archives are notorious for disinformation
and forgeries. Details about the names, background and treatment of some of
those listed don't match other, authenticated information, although some of this
could be the result of successive translations. And a careful Senate
investigation last year narrowed the number of cases still in serious doubt to
between 100 and 200. That makes 600 additional prisoners seem dubious.

Washington now must try to determine the accuracy of the new document. The
purported author is alive and accessible in Hanoi, where he heads an official
veterans group. As it happens, President Clinton's special envoy, retired Gen.
John Vessey, was already planning to travel to Hanoi in the next few days to
evaluate current Vietnamese cooperation on the P.O.W. issue.

Given Hanoi's past duplicity and concealment, its explanations can't be accepted
unchallenged. But in recent months, Vietnam has shown a new cooperation toward
American investigators, opening up archives whose very existence it had
previously denied.

The Vietnam War saw cruelties committed by both sides. But America long ago
subjected its behavior to public scrutiny, and has benefited from the results.
Vietnam retains a closed political system whose rulers wrap their deeds in
secrecy, inviting skepticism and ambush by chance documentary finds, accurate or
not. Before normalization can proceed, Hanoi will have to provide a satisfactory
explanation of the new document. Only when Hanoi opens up politically will
outsiders be able to trust its word without demanding proof.


LOAD-DATE: April 14, 1993

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Editorial

                   Copyright 1993 The New York Times Company


                              43 of 312 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                April 14, 1993, Wednesday, Late Edition - Final
                              Correction Appended

Winners of the 1993 Pulitzer Prizes for Journalism, Literature and the Arts

SECTION: Section B; Page 6; Column 1; National Desk

LENGTH: 2382 words


GENERAL NONFICTION
Garry Wills
"Lincoln at Gettysburg:
The Words That Remade America"

In "Lincoln at Gettysburg," a scholarly study of oratory, Garry Wills argues
that Abraham Lincoln, in the mere 272 words of the Gettysburg Address, was able
to recast the tradition of oration, the Civil War, and the history of American
political thought in a new and clearer light. In offering new ideas about the
structure and context of the speech, Mr. Wills maintains that Lincoln used his
words to win the war in ideological as well as military terms. The 58-year-old
Mr. Wills, a classical scholar, Presidential historian and political scientist,
is an adjunct professor of history at Northwestern University in Evanston, Ill.,
where he lives.

FICTION
Robert Olen Butler
"A Good Scent
From a Strange Mountain"

In Robert Olen Butler's first collection of short stories, "A Good Scent from a
Strange Mountain," each of the 15 intricate tales is told in the first person,
from the viewpoint of different Vietnamese transplanted from the Mekong Delta to
the Louisiana bayou. Haunted by the past, and highly ambivalent about their
American hosts, these fictional immigrants seek truces in their various personal
wars, and their stories raise the literature of the Vietnam conflict to an
original and highly personal new level. Mr. Butler, 48, served as an Army
linguist in Vietnam, which was the setting for three of his six previous novels.
His first novel to be published, "The Alleys of Eden," was printed by Horizon
Press after the manuscript was turned down 21 times. Mr. Butler teaches fiction
writing and film theory at McNeese State University in Lake Charles, La.


POETRY
Louise Gluck
"The Wild Iris"

Louise Gluck's sixth poetry collection is a sequence of poems on the ordeal of
living, explored through the metaphor of the garden, which encompasses the
natural, human and spiritual realms. In her earliest collections, "Firstborn,"
"The House on Marshland" and "Descending Figure," Ms. Gluck (pronounced Glick)
established herself as a questioning voice speaking in a tightly controlled,
polished language. Hers was the speech, said one critic, that one employs before
starting to scream. Ms. Gluck lives in Plainfield, Vt., and teaches at Williams
College.

BIOGRAPHY
David McCullough
"Truman"

David McCullough's warm, affectionate personal study examined the President
whose forthright style made him an icon for both Republicans and Democrats in
the last Presidential election. Mr. McCullough made no secret of his admiration
for the man he called "a figure of world stature, both a great and good man, and
a great American President." Mr. McCullough, who lives in West Tisbury, Mass.,
also serves as host for the PBS series "The American Experience" and narrated
the documentary series "The Civil War."

DRAMA
Tony Kushner
"Angels in America:
Millennium Approaches"

For Mr. Kushner, a 36-year-old playwright who lives in Brooklyn, the award is as
timely as can be. His winning play had its first preview last night at the
Walter Kerr Theater on Broadway, where it is scheduled to open on April 29.
"Angels in America: Millennium Approaches" is a strident, vividly theatrical
piece on homosexual themes. Set largely in New York in the mid-1980's, it uses
fictional characters, historical personages, ghosts, hallucinations, disembodied
voices and an actual angel to place the AIDS epidemic as the central symbol of
the nation's spiritual hypocrisy.

Mr. Kushner actually won for half a play. "Angels in America: A Gay Fantasia on
National Themes" is, all told, a 7-hour epic divided into two parts: "Millennium
Approaches" and "Perestroika." Part 1 has been mounted at the Eureka Theater in
San Francisco and the Royal National Theater in London, and both parts were
performed last fall at the Mark Taper Forum in Los Angeles. Mr. Kushner is now
rewriting "Perestroika," and the plan is to put it in repertory with "Millennium
Approaches" on Broadway in the fall.

HISTORY
Gordon S. Wood
"The Radicalism
Of the American Revolution"

It was not as bloody or destructive as most, but if the American Revolution is
measured by the standard of the degree of social change it produced, then it was
"as radical and as revolutionary as any in history." So wrote Mr. Wood, 59, a
professor of history at Brown University, in this landmark study. In a
front-page review for the New York Times Sunday Book Review last year, another
specialist in early American history called Mr. Wood's work "the most important
study of the Revolution to appear in over 20 years."

MUSIC
Christopher Rouse
Trombone Concerto

Christopher Rouse, a 44-year-old composer who lives in Fairport, N.Y., won for
his Trombone Concerto, a three-movement work that was commissioned by the New
York Philharmonic and given its premiere by the orchestra and its principal
trombonist, Joseph Alessi, on Dec. 29. Like many of his works, the Trombone
Concerto has currents of both despair and celebration: slow, mournful outer
movements surround a loud, colorfully virtuosic middle section. Reviewing its
premiere in The New York Times, Edward Rothstein described it as "distinctive,
unsettling, yet structurally clear."

PUBLIC SERVICE
The Miami Herald

When Hurricane Andrew pummeled the Miami area last August, laying waste to
entire communities and leaving 50,000 southern Dade County residents homeless,
the newsroom staff of The Miami Herald found itself in the middle of the story.
Dozens of editors and reporters were among those who lost homes in the storm,
the costliest natural disaster in American history. In December, The Herald
published an 18-page special section, "What Went Wrong?" which concluded, among
other things, that lax building codes had worsened the scope of the devastation.

Pete Weitzel, the Herald's senior managing editor, said he believed the
newspaper's most important work may have come in the days after the storm, when
it published basic survival information and provided a column for residents
looking for friends and relatives with whom they had lost contact. "I think the
greatest public service was in providing people with all that kind of
information that the traditional journalist would say is average, everyday
stuff," he said. "It's all the necessities of life."

INVESTIGATIVE REPORTING
Jeff Brazil and Steve Berry
The Orlando Sentinel

Jeff Brazil and Steve Berry reported that the Volusia County (Fla.) Sheriff had
seized $8 million in cash from motorists on Interstate 95 as part of a anti-drug
effort. Ninety percent of those whose money was confiscated were black or
Hispanic drivers stopped for minor traffic violations. A governor's task force
is investigating the sheriff's squad. Mr. Berry, 45, has a master's degree in
history from the University of North Carolina at Greensboro. Mr. Brazil, 31,
graduated from the University of Santa Clara in California.

SPOT NEWS REPORTING
The Los Angeles Times

For what the Pulitzer board described as its "balanced, comprehensive,
penetrating coverage" of the second day of the riots in South Central Los
Angeles, the staff of The Los Angeles Times was awarded the prize for spot news
reporting. The stories, covering the second day of the rioting that swept the
city after four policeman were acquitted of beating Rodney G. King, a black
motorist, varied from the revenge beating of Reginald O. Denny, a white truck
driver, to the ways in which everyday life in the city were shattered by the
violence.

C. Shelby Coffey 3d, The Times's editor, compared the mobilization of the
newsroom for the riots to the paper's coverage of the war in the Persian Gulf,
except that "this was literally right in our backyard." The story was in the
paper's front yard, too: on the first night of the violence, rioters attacked
the Times building in downtown Los Angeles, causing about $500,000 in damage.

INTERNATIONAL REPORTING
John F. Burns of The New York Times
Roy Gutman of Newsday

Two Pulitzer Prizes were awarded for international reporting, both to veteran
foreign correspondents for their coverage of the violent conflict and human
suffering in the Balkans. John F. Burns of The New York Times was cited for his
"courageous and thorough coverage of the destruction of Sarajevo and the
barbarous killings in the war in Bosnia-Herzegovina." He began his assignment in
the region in early 1992 after months of treatment for lymphoma. In one 275-day
period he wrote 163 articles, 103 datelined from the perilous city of Sarajevo.
Roy W. Gutman of Newsday was cited for his "courageous and persistent reporting
that disclosed atrocities and other human rights violations in Croatia and
Bosnia-Herzegovina." His articles included the first lengthy account of what
Newsday described as death camps in Bosnia. Mr. Burns, 48, a native of
Nottingham, England, joined The Times in 1975. Mr. Gutman, 49, joined Newsday in
1982.

NATIONAL REPORTING
David Maraniss
The Washington Post

The life and political record of Bill Clinton were the subject of the series of
articles that won the national reporting prize for David Maraniss of The
Washington Post. Mr. Maraniss, 43, said of Mr. Clinton: "He's deeply complex,
both a representative and unique figure of his generation. He is endlessly
fascinating." Working for newspapers runs in the Maraniss family: he is the
grandson of a printer and the son of two editors.

BEAT REPORTING
Paul Ingrassia and Joseph B. White
The Wall Street Journal

In their coverage of the tumultuous management changes in 1992 at the General
Motors Corporation, in which a former chairman and chief executive, Robert C.
Stemple, was forced from office, Paul Ingrassia and Joseph B. White of The Wall
Street Journal provided an unusually detailed account of the inner workings of a
corporate board of directors. "This was a board at the cutting edge of corporate
governance activism," said Mr. Ingrassia. "It rose up against management." Mr.
Ingrassia, 42, a Mississippi native, received a master's degree in journalism
from the University of Wisconsin at Madison. Mr. White, 34, who was born in New
York City, graduated from Harvard University.

FEATURE WRITING
George Lardner Jr.
The Washington Post

George Lardner Jr. won for an investigation of the murder of his own daughter by
a former boyfriend. While journalists are often reluctant to write about a
subject to which they have a personal tie, Mr. Lardner brought a powerful sense
of urgency to his analysis of faults in the criminal justice system. Mr.
Lardner, 58, said yesterday that winning a Pulitzer Prize for such a topic was
bittersweet: "I'm stunned, elated and sad all at once." Mr. Lardner, whose
great-uncle, Ring Lardner, was also an author and journalist, has been a
reporter and columnist at The Post since 1963. He graduated from Marquette
University.

COMMENTARY
Liz Balmaseda
The Miami Herald

Liz Balmaseda was cited for her articles from Haiti on the deteriorating
political and social conditions there, and for her columns on the lives of
Cuban-Americans in Miami. The 34-year-old journalist was born in Cuba 17 days
after Castro took power in the 1959 revolution and left with her family for
Miami at the age of 10 months. She said yesterday: "I try with the column to
reflect the real Miami. It is ever-changing, multi-ethnic and multi-racial. I
also want to show the Cuban exile community to be the politically and culturally
diverse community that it is."

EXPLANATORY JOURNALISM
Mike Toner
The Atlanta Journal-Constitution

Mr. Toner's series, "When Bugs Bite Back," had its roots in a five-year-old
Federal report on drug-resistant strains of venereal disease. "We began thinking
about how 'Better Living Through Chemistry' has changed our lives and the world
in ways that give us pause," said Mr. Toner's editor, Mike King. The result was
15 articles that explored the dimishing effectiveness and the overuse of
antibiotics and pesticides.Mr. Toner, 48, is a graduate of the University of
Iowa and received a master's degree from Northwestern University.

CRITICISM
Michael Dirda
The Washington Post

Michael Dirda, who describes himself as "a writer and appreciator of books," won
for his book reviews, covering a wide variety of subjects, including biblical
studies, children's literature, thrillers and translations of the classics. For
the past 15 years, Mr. Dirda, 44, has been an assistant editor and writer for
The Washington Post Book World. Until recently he was a board member of the
National Book Critics Circle. Son of a steelworker, he grew up in the steel town
of Lorain, Ohio. He says of his literary criticism: "I like to convey my
enthusiasm for reading and remind people how good the classics are."

EDITORIAL WRITING
No award

EDITORIAL CARTOONING
Stephen R. Benson
The Arizona Republic

Stephen R. Benson says he believes that editorial cartoons "should take a point
of view and be acidic, passionate and hard-hitting." He won for his work on a
wide spectrum of themes, including starvation in Somalia and the United States
economy. Mr. Benson, a 39-year-old graduate of Brigham Young University, has
been editorial cartoonist at The Republic for 11 years. "It's better than
sitting there and screaming at Peter Jennings on television," he said.

FEATURE PHOTOGRAPHY
The Associated Press

For the third straight year, The Associated Press won a photography award, this
time in the feature category for 20 images documenting Bill Clinton's
Presidential campaign. The photographs were made by 10 staff members based
around the country.

SPOT NEWS PHOTOGRAPHY
William Snyder and Ken Geiger
The Dallas Morning News

Two graduates of the Rochester Institute of Technology, William Snyder and Ken
Geiger of The Dallas Morning News, won the spot news photography award for
images of the Summer Olympics in Barcelona. It was the third Pulitzer for Mr.
Snyder, 33, who began his photography career at age 14 shooting football games
for his hometown newspaper in Henderson, Ky. Mr. Geiger, a 35-year-old native of
Bremerton, Wash., became a photojournalist because job prospects seemed dim in
forestry, which he had planned to study in college.

LOAD-DATE: April 14, 1993

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

CORRECTION-DATE: April 15, 1993, Thursday

CORRECTION:

An article yesterday about the Pulitzer Prizes, and a picture caption in some
copies, misidentified the category for which The Dallas Morning News won. It was
spot news photography, not feature photography. Because of an editing error, the
article also misstated the title of a series of reports in The Atlanta
Journal-Constitution, honored for explanatory journalism. It was "When Bugs
Fight Back."


GRAPHIC: Drawing

                   Copyright 1993 The New York Times Company


                              44 of 312 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                April 14, 1993, Wednesday, Late Edition - Final
                              Correction Appended

Winners of the 1993 Pulitzer Prizes for Journalism, Literature and the Arts

SECTION: Section B; Page 6; Column 1; National Desk

LENGTH: 2382 words


GENERAL NONFICTION
Garry Wills
"Lincoln at Gettysburg:
The Words That Remade America"

In "Lincoln at Gettysburg," a scholarly study of oratory, Garry Wills argues
that Abraham Lincoln, in the mere 272 words of the Gettysburg Address, was able
to recast the tradition of oration, the Civil War, and the history of American
political thought in a new and clearer light. In offering new ideas about the
structure and context of the speech, Mr. Wills maintains that Lincoln used his
words to win the war in ideological as well as military terms. The 58-year-old
Mr. Wills, a classical scholar, Presidential historian and political scientist,
is an adjunct professor of history at Northwestern University in Evanston, Ill.,
where he lives.

FICTION
Robert Olen Butler
"A Good Scent
From a Strange Mountain"

In Robert Olen Butler's first collection of short stories, "A Good Scent from a
Strange Mountain," each of the 15 intricate tales is told in the first person,
from the viewpoint of different Vietnamese transplanted from the Mekong Delta to
the Louisiana bayou. Haunted by the past, and highly ambivalent about their
American hosts, these fictional immigrants seek truces in their various personal
wars, and their stories raise the literature of the Vietnam conflict to an
original and highly personal new level. Mr. Butler, 48, served as an Army
linguist in Vietnam, which was the setting for three of his six previous novels.
His first novel to be published, "The Alleys of Eden," was printed by Horizon
Press after the manuscript was turned down 21 times. Mr. Butler teaches fiction
writing and film theory at McNeese State University in Lake Charles, La.


POETRY
Louise Gluck
"The Wild Iris"

Louise Gluck's sixth poetry collection is a sequence of poems on the ordeal of
living, explored through the metaphor of the garden, which encompasses the
natural, human and spiritual realms. In her earliest collections, "Firstborn,"
"The House on Marshland" and "Descending Figure," Ms. Gluck (pronounced Glick)
established herself as a questioning voice speaking in a tightly controlled,
polished language. Hers was the speech, said one critic, that one employs before
starting to scream. Ms. Gluck lives in Plainfield, Vt., and teaches at Williams
College.

BIOGRAPHY
David McCullough
"Truman"

David McCullough's warm, affectionate personal study examined the President
whose forthright style made him an icon for both Republicans and Democrats in
the last Presidential election. Mr. McCullough made no secret of his admiration
for the man he called "a figure of world stature, both a great and good man, and
a great American President." Mr. McCullough, who lives in West Tisbury, Mass.,
also serves as host for the PBS series "The American Experience" and narrated
the documentary series "The Civil War."

DRAMA
Tony Kushner
"Angels in America:
Millennium Approaches"

For Mr. Kushner, a 36-year-old playwright who lives in Brooklyn, the award is as
timely as can be. His winning play had its first preview last night at the
Walter Kerr Theater on Broadway, where it is scheduled to open on April 29.
"Angels in America: Millennium Approaches" is a strident, vividly theatrical
piece on homosexual themes. Set largely in New York in the mid-1980's, it uses
fictional characters, historical personages, ghosts, hallucinations, disembodied
voices and an actual angel to place the AIDS epidemic as the central symbol of
the nation's spiritual hypocrisy.

Mr. Kushner actually won for half a play. "Angels in America: A Gay Fantasia on
National Themes" is, all told, a 7-hour epic divided into two parts: "Millennium
Approaches" and "Perestroika." Part 1 has been mounted at the Eureka Theater in
San Francisco and the Royal National Theater in London, and both parts were
performed last fall at the Mark Taper Forum in Los Angeles. Mr. Kushner is now
rewriting "Perestroika," and the plan is to put it in repertory with "Millennium
Approaches" on Broadway in the fall.

HISTORY
Gordon S. Wood
"The Radicalism
Of the American Revolution"

It was not as bloody or destructive as most, but if the American Revolution is
measured by the standard of the degree of social change it produced, then it was
"as radical and as revolutionary as any in history." So wrote Mr. Wood, 59, a
professor of history at Brown University, in this landmark study. In a
front-page review for the New York Times Sunday Book Review last year, another
specialist in early American history called Mr. Wood's work "the most important
study of the Revolution to appear in over 20 years."

MUSIC
Christopher Rouse
Trombone Concerto

Christopher Rouse, a 44-year-old composer who lives in Fairport, N.Y., won for
his Trombone Concerto, a three-movement work that was commissioned by the New
York Philharmonic and given its premiere by the orchestra and its principal
trombonist, Joseph Alessi, on Dec. 29. Like many of his works, the Trombone
Concerto has currents of both despair and celebration: slow, mournful outer
movements surround a loud, colorfully virtuosic middle section. Reviewing its
premiere in The New York Times, Edward Rothstein described it as "distinctive,
unsettling, yet structurally clear."

PUBLIC SERVICE
The Miami Herald

When Hurricane Andrew pummeled the Miami area last August, laying waste to
entire communities and leaving 50,000 southern Dade County residents homeless,
the newsroom staff of The Miami Herald found itself in the middle of the story.
Dozens of editors and reporters were among those who lost homes in the storm,
the costliest natural disaster in American history. In December, The Herald
published an 18-page special section, "What Went Wrong?" which concluded, among
other things, that lax building codes had worsened the scope of the devastation.

Pete Weitzel, the Herald's senior managing editor, said he believed the
newspaper's most important work may have come in the days after the storm, when
it published basic survival information and provided a column for residents
looking for friends and relatives with whom they had lost contact. "I think the
greatest public service was in providing people with all that kind of
information that the traditional journalist would say is average, everyday
stuff," he said. "It's all the necessities of life."

INVESTIGATIVE REPORTING
Jeff Brazil and Steve Berry
The Orlando Sentinel

Jeff Brazil and Steve Berry reported that the Volusia County (Fla.) Sheriff had
seized $8 million in cash from motorists on Interstate 95 as part of a anti-drug
effort. Ninety percent of those whose money was confiscated were black or
Hispanic drivers stopped for minor traffic violations. A governor's task force
is investigating the sheriff's squad. Mr. Berry, 45, has a master's degree in
history from the University of North Carolina at Greensboro. Mr. Brazil, 31,
graduated from the University of Santa Clara in California.

SPOT NEWS REPORTING
The Los Angeles Times

For what the Pulitzer board described as its "balanced, comprehensive,
penetrating coverage" of the second day of the riots in South Central Los
Angeles, the staff of The Los Angeles Times was awarded the prize for spot news
reporting. The stories, covering the second day of the rioting that swept the
city after four policeman were acquitted of beating Rodney G. King, a black
motorist, varied from the revenge beating of Reginald O. Denny, a white truck
driver, to the ways in which everyday life in the city were shattered by the
violence.

C. Shelby Coffey 3d, The Times's editor, compared the mobilization of the
newsroom for the riots to the paper's coverage of the war in the Persian Gulf,
except that "this was literally right in our backyard." The story was in the
paper's front yard, too: on the first night of the violence, rioters attacked
the Times building in downtown Los Angeles, causing about $500,000 in damage.

INTERNATIONAL REPORTING
John F. Burns of The New York Times
Roy Gutman of Newsday

Two Pulitzer Prizes were awarded for international reporting, both to veteran
foreign correspondents for their coverage of the violent conflict and human
suffering in the Balkans. John F. Burns of The New York Times was cited for his
"courageous and thorough coverage of the destruction of Sarajevo and the
barbarous killings in the war in Bosnia-Herzegovina." He began his assignment in
the region in early 1992 after months of treatment for lymphoma. In one 275-day
period he wrote 163 articles, 103 datelined from the perilous city of Sarajevo.
Roy W. Gutman of Newsday was cited for his "courageous and persistent reporting
that disclosed atrocities and other human rights violations in Croatia and
Bosnia-Herzegovina." His articles included the first lengthy account of what
Newsday described as death camps in Bosnia. Mr. Burns, 48, a native of
Nottingham, England, joined The Times in 1975. Mr. Gutman, 49, joined Newsday in
1982.

NATIONAL REPORTING
David Maraniss
The Washington Post

The life and political record of Bill Clinton were the subject of the series of
articles that won the national reporting prize for David Maraniss of The
Washington Post. Mr. Maraniss, 43, said of Mr. Clinton: "He's deeply complex,
both a representative and unique figure of his generation. He is endlessly
fascinating." Working for newspapers runs in the Maraniss family: he is the
grandson of a printer and the son of two editors.

BEAT REPORTING
Paul Ingrassia and Joseph B. White
The Wall Street Journal

In their coverage of the tumultuous management changes in 1992 at the General
Motors Corporation, in which a former chairman and chief executive, Robert C.
Stemple, was forced from office, Paul Ingrassia and Joseph B. White of The Wall
Street Journal provided an unusually detailed account of the inner workings of a
corporate board of directors. "This was a board at the cutting edge of corporate
governance activism," said Mr. Ingrassia. "It rose up against management." Mr.
Ingrassia, 42, a Mississippi native, received a master's degree in journalism
from the University of Wisconsin at Madison. Mr. White, 34, who was born in New
York City, graduated from Harvard University.

FEATURE WRITING
George Lardner Jr.
The Washington Post

George Lardner Jr. won for an investigation of the murder of his own daughter by
a former boyfriend. While journalists are often reluctant to write about a
subject to which they have a personal tie, Mr. Lardner brought a powerful sense
of urgency to his analysis of faults in the criminal justice system. Mr.
Lardner, 58, said yesterday that winning a Pulitzer Prize for such a topic was
bittersweet: "I'm stunned, elated and sad all at once." Mr. Lardner, whose
great-uncle, Ring Lardner, was also an author and journalist, has been a
reporter and columnist at The Post since 1963. He graduated from Marquette
University.

COMMENTARY
Liz Balmaseda
The Miami Herald

Liz Balmaseda was cited for her articles from Haiti on the deteriorating
political and social conditions there, and for her columns on the lives of
Cuban-Americans in Miami. The 34-year-old journalist was born in Cuba 17 days
after Castro took power in the 1959 revolution and left with her family for
Miami at the age of 10 months. She said yesterday: "I try with the column to
reflect the real Miami. It is ever-changing, multi-ethnic and multi-racial. I
also want to show the Cuban exile community to be the politically and culturally
diverse community that it is."

EXPLANATORY JOURNALISM
Mike Toner
The Atlanta Journal-Constitution

Mr. Toner's series, "When Bugs Bite Back," had its roots in a five-year-old
Federal report on drug-resistant strains of venereal disease. "We began thinking
about how 'Better Living Through Chemistry' has changed our lives and the world
in ways that give us pause," said Mr. Toner's editor, Mike King. The result was
15 articles that explored the dimishing effectiveness and the overuse of
antibiotics and pesticides.Mr. Toner, 48, is a graduate of the University of
Iowa and received a master's degree from Northwestern University.

CRITICISM
Michael Dirda
The Washington Post

Michael Dirda, who describes himself as "a writer and appreciator of books," won
for his book reviews, covering a wide variety of subjects, including biblical
studies, children's literature, thrillers and translations of the classics. For
the past 15 years, Mr. Dirda, 44, has been an assistant editor and writer for
The Washington Post Book World. Until recently he was a board member of the
National Book Critics Circle. Son of a steelworker, he grew up in the steel town
of Lorain, Ohio. He says of his literary criticism: "I like to convey my
enthusiasm for reading and remind people how good the classics are."

EDITORIAL WRITING
No award

EDITORIAL CARTOONING
Stephen R. Benson
The Arizona Republic

Stephen R. Benson says he believes that editorial cartoons "should take a point
of view and be acidic, passionate and hard-hitting." He won for his work on a
wide spectrum of themes, including starvation in Somalia and the United States
economy. Mr. Benson, a 39-year-old graduate of Brigham Young University, has
been editorial cartoonist at The Republic for 11 years. "It's better than
sitting there and screaming at Peter Jennings on television," he said.

FEATURE PHOTOGRAPHY
The Associated Press

For the third straight year, The Associated Press won a photography award, this
time in the feature category for 20 images documenting Bill Clinton's
Presidential campaign. The photographs were made by 10 staff members based
around the country.

SPOT NEWS PHOTOGRAPHY
William Snyder and Ken Geiger
The Dallas Morning News

Two graduates of the Rochester Institute of Technology, William Snyder and Ken
Geiger of The Dallas Morning News, won the spot news photography award for
images of the Summer Olympics in Barcelona. It was the third Pulitzer for Mr.
Snyder, 33, who began his photography career at age 14 shooting football games
for his hometown newspaper in Henderson, Ky. Mr. Geiger, a 35-year-old native of
Bremerton, Wash., became a photojournalist because job prospects seemed dim in
forestry, which he had planned to study in college.

LOAD-DATE: April 14, 1993

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

CORRECTION-DATE: April 16, 1993, Friday

CORRECTION:

An article on Wednesday about the announcement of the Pulitzer Prizes misstated
the age of John F. Burns of The New York Times, who won an award for
international reporting. He is 48.


GRAPHIC: Drawing

                   Copyright 1993 The New York Times Company


                              45 of 312 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 April 15, 1993, Thursday, Late Edition - Final

China Confirms Deaths of U.S. Fliers in '67

BYLINE: AP

SECTION: Section A; Page 12; Column 5; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 179 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, April 14


China has confirmed the deaths of two United States Navy pilots who were shot
down by Chinese forces in 1967 after flying into China's airspace, the State
Department said today.

The identities of the pilots, who were involved in the war effort in Vietnam,
were not disclosed. The incident occurred on Aug. 21, 1967.

Photos of the pilots turned over to the United States clearly show that the
pilots were dead and appear to have been taken at the time of their deaths, said
the State Department spokesman, Richard A. Boucher. Photos of their ID cards
were also given to United States officials.

China had informed the United States earlier of the pilots' deaths but the
photos were the first evidence they had provided, Mr. Boucher added. He said
eight American servicemen were unaccounted for in China as a result of the
Vietnam War. None are believed to have survived.

The information was turned over to the United States in Hawaii. Mr. Boucher said
Beijing's assistance reflected improved cooperation between the two countries in
accounting for the missing.


LOAD-DATE: April 16, 1993

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1993 The New York Times Company


                              46 of 312 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 April 15, 1993, Thursday, Late Edition - Final

Radar Deal in Vietnam

BYLINE: Reuters

SECTION: Section D; Page 2; Column 6; Financial Desk

LENGTH: 76 words

DATELINE: HANOI, April 14


Thomson-CSF S.A. of France will build an air radar system covering south and
central Vietnam under an $11 million contract signed here on Monday. The
network, to be built over 20 months, will be based at Tan Son Nhut International
Airport in Ho Chi Minh City and will cover airports at Qui Nhon and Danang.
Thomson-CSF is already providing a radar system for the approaches to Tan Son
Nhut and landing communications systems for Tan Son Nhut and Danang.

LOAD-DATE: April 16, 1993

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1993 The New York Times Company


                              47 of 312 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 April 15, 1993, Thursday, Late Edition - Final

Home Video

BYLINE: By Peter M. Nichols

SECTION: Section C; Page 20; Column 5; Cultural Desk

LENGTH: 1248 words



John Wayne Dust-Up

John Wayne still kicks up a stir in the video business. In stores, he's a
priority. "Of all the movies not yet out on video, three Waynes -- 'McLintock!,'
'Hondo' and 'The High and the Mighty' -- are the most asked for," said Ed Weiss,
general manager of Movies Unlimited, a Philadelphia-based chain and one of the
country's largest video mail-order companies.

Now "McLintock!," a 1963 Wayne western with a comedic twist, has been released.
It co-stars Maureen O'Hara. The movie is such a hot property that a range war
has broken out between two distributors over who has rights to the film.

On one side is MPI Home Video of Oak Forest, Ill., which issued its "McLintock!"
on Monday. MPI has an agreement with Batjac Productions, which is run by Wayne's
son Michael, who, MPI says, signed over rights for the release. Opposed is Good
Times Home Video of New York, which had already put out its own "McLintock!"

This month MPI went to court in Los Angeles seeking an injunction to stop the
Good Times release. But Andrew Baum of the law firm Darby & Darby, which is
representing Good Times, said that Batjac failed to renew the movie's copyright
in 1991, which put "McLintock!" in the public domain and made it fair game for
other distributors.

The outcome, both parties say, could ride on the question of who controls the
music used in the film, which is a separate rights issue. A ruling is expected
in the next few weeks.

Mr. Wayne acknowledged that he had not renewed the film copyright and that there
is a legitimate dispute. In the past, he said, he has had to prevent people from
selling bootleg tapes of "McLintock!" and other films that his father starred
in. Then the action was simpler. "Usually just a letter from a lawyer would do
it," he said.

Finding Tapes

Has there been a change in the kinds of movies coming out on tape? "There are
signs the well is running dry," said Milos Stehlik, the general manager of
Facets International of Chicago, which has just published a catalogue of 17,000
titles. Information: (800) 331-6197.

Mr. Stehlik said that a dwindling supply of marketable titles in film libraries
has brought about a broader range of movies on tape.

"There's a new emphasis on films by directors who got known through small
theatrical releases, then got established on video," he said.

As examples in that category, he mentioned the movies of Peter Greenaway ("The
Cook, the Thief, His Wife and Her Lover"), Agnieszka Holland ("Europa, Europa")
and Stephen Frears ("The Grifters").

Studios, he said, are also discovering the worth of lesser-known films by
big-name directors. In this classification are movies like "Tragedy of a
Ridiculous Man," by Bernardo Bertolucci, "Roseland," by James Ivory, and
"Maitresse," by Barbet Schroeder.

"Somebody woke up and said, why can't we do a Barbet Schroeder package," he said
of the director of "Reversal of Fortune."

NEW VIDEO RELEASES

Hero
1992. Columbia Tri-Star. $94.95. Laser disk, $34.95. 116 minutes. Closed
captioned. PG-13.

The hapless con artist Bernie Laplante (Dustin Hoffman) happens on the flaming
wreckage of an airliner and overcoming a conviction that it's not his problem,
rescues the passengers and disappears. Among the survivors is Gale Gayley (Geena
Davis), a television reporter. With Bernie vanished and without a hero for her
crash story, Gale accepts the claim of John Bubber (Andy Garcia), a down-and-out
Vietnam veteran, that he is the rescuer and turns him into a media celebrity.
From there Stephen Frears's film plods along, but good performances, Vincent
Canby wrote in The New York Times, shore up "a quite harmelss Hollywood comedy
that is finally far more enjoyable than it has any right to be."

Passenger 57
1992. Warner. $94.99. Laser disk, $29.98. 84 minutes. Closed captioned. R.

Emerging from the toilet, an airlines security man (Wesley Snipes) finds the
flight he is on has fallen into the hands of a terrorist (Bruce Payne) and
practically an entire planeload of accomplices who managed to troop on board
undetected. Time for a Steven Seagal-style hijacker-busting routine, but with a
racial twist when the craft is forced to land at a tiny Louisiana airstrip. Mr.
Snipes stays cool, strolling through the role "with a glint in his eye that
seems to acknowledge that the movie is really a live-action cartoon" (Stephen
Holden).

Sarafina!
1992. Hollywood. $94.95. 98 minutes. Closed captioned. PG-13.

The stark South African setting of Darrell James Roodt's film undermines the
upbeat vibrance of its story. With the support of a wise teacher (Whoopi
Goldberg), Sarafina (Leleti Khumalo) sets out to become a performer of enough
stature to change the world of hate around her. On travels through the towns and
countryside, the girl's rising anger vies with her almost blind determination
and self-centeredness in a film that eventually is "at war with itself as it
tries to reconcile 'Fame'-style high spirits with the misery of its characters'
lives" (Janet Maslin).

The Public Eye
1992. MCA/Universal. $94.98. Laser disk, $39.98. 99 minutes. Closed captioned.
R.

Joe Pesci is Leon Bernstein, a freelance news photographer with a talent for
catching the underside of city life with striking force and poignance. Bernzy,
it evolves, also has artistic ambitions and is so eager recognition and the big
moment to portray in black and white that he even tries to control events to set
up his shots. Complicating matters is his semi-liaison with a fancy woman and
potential patron (Barbara Hershey), an awkward element in a film that "never
quite takes off, either as romantic melodrama or as a consideration of one very
eccentric man's means of self-expression" (Canby).

FROM YEARS PAST

The Longtime Best Sellers:
Often Musical or Biblical

Of the dozen feature films on current best-seller lists, only one, "J. F. K.:
The Director's Cut," with 17 minutes of added material, costs more than $24.
Above that price, longtime best sellers tend to be musical or biblical and often
star Charlton Heston. Here are some best-selling films in the higher-priced
category, as ranked by Variety.

THE SOUND OF MUSIC. The hills are still alive. 1965. CBS/Fox. $24.99. Laser
disk, $54.98. 173 minutes. Closed captioned. G.

MY FAIR LADY. Rex Harrison and Audrey Hepburn roll on in George Cukor's classic.
1964. CBS/Fox. $29.98. Laser disk, $44.98. 170 minutes. Closed captioned. G.

ANNE OF GREEN GABLES. The television adaptation of L. M. Montgomery's story
stars Colleen Dewhurst, with Megan Follows as the young orphan in the Canadian
wilderness. 1985. Disney. $29.98. Laser disk, $39.99. 202 minutes. Closed
captioned. No rating.

THE TEN COMMANDMENTS. The Red Sea parts for Charlton Heston and Cecil B.
DeMille. 1956. Paramount. $29.98. Laser disk, $39.95. 220 minutes. G.

BEN HUR. The Romans play hard ball in the Holy Land, with swords, sandals, Mr.
Heston, Stephen Boyd and Jack Hawkins. 1959. MGM/ UA. $29.98. Laser disk,
$39.98. 212 minutes. Closed captioned. No rating.

THE GREATEST STORY EVER TOLD. Max von Sydow is Christ in George Stevens's film,
which also stars Mr. Heston and Roddy McDowall. 1965. Paramount. $29.98. Laser
disk, $39.98. 199 minutes. Closed captioned. G.

THE BIBLE. There is no Heston, but George C. Scott, Peter O'Toole and Ava
Gardner fill the bill in John Huston's retelling of the Book of Genesis. 1966.
CBS/Fox. $29.98. 171 minutes. No rating.

LOAD-DATE: April 16, 1993

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photos: John Wayne and Yvonne DeCarlo in the 1963-film "McLintock!" Two
distributors are fighting over who has video rights to the film. (United
Artists); Geena Davis and Andy Garcia in "Hero," a new video release. (Columbia
Pictures Industries, Inc.)

                   Copyright 1993 The New York Times Company


                              48 of 312 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 April 15, 1993, Thursday, Late Edition - Final

Foreign Affairs;
When to Forgive and Forget

BYLINE: By LESLIE H. GELB

SECTION: Section A; Page 21; Column 1; Editorial Desk

LENGTH: 710 words


Let's say it's authentic -- the document found in old Soviet archives in which a
North Vietnamese general says Hanoi held three times the number of U.S.
prisoners of war it had acknowledged to Washington. Suppose, further, that Hanoi
killed the P.O.W.'s to destroy the evidence.

It would be a nightmare. It would confirm all our worst fears about North
Vietnamese brutality and malice. Yet it would still leave open the wrenching
question of what U.S. policy toward Vietnam should be now, 18 years this month
after Marine helicopters swooped down onto U.S. Embassy rooftops in Saigon to
rescue the last American diplomats from advancing Communist troops.

The question applies not only to Vietnam but to a host of other "outlaw" states,
terrorist or dying Communist regimes whose cardinal sins lie in a steadily
receding past and some of which now profess good behavior. Namely, Iraq, Iran,
Libya, North Korea and Cuba.

There are no good answers. There are only gut feelings, risks, political
pressures and imperfect guidelines.

Washington's policy has been to pressure, punish, isolate and even oust outlaw
leaders. But increasingly, other nations are refusing to join these enterprises.
Increasingly they are forgiving and forgetting and getting on with the business
of making money. They argue that the best way to transform bad guys into
tolerable guys is not to isolate them but to deal with them.

The U.S. itself has used just such "conversion" arguments to justify exceptions
to its own policy. Washington stroked Janos Kadar, who held power in Budapest by
pulling out fingernails, and thus helped bring Hungary around to mild "goulash
socialism." By refusing to break with the "butchers of Tiananmen," President
Bush aided some Chinese economic reformers. Most notably, Washington never gave
up trying to create common interests with a hostile and dangerous Soviet Union.

Today, the Clinton Administration courts President Assad, terrorist and mass
killer, hoping to coax Syria toward moderation. Even Israel, ever aware of
Jewish blood spilled by Damascus, now eagerly seeks peace with its sworn enemy.

How to decide when to engage and when to stiff-arm an old adversary?

Size and power count, but not always. The U.S. talked arms control and commerce
with Moscow throughout the cold war, but tried to isolate Beijing for over 20
years.

Hard-headed balance-of-power considerations are not always decisive either. The
U.S. now sees Iran as a greater threat in the Persian Gulf than Iraq. Yet it
won't build up Baghdad as a counterweight as long as Saddam Hussein hangs
around. But is Saddam a badder guy than Assad?Washington won't open the door to
Vietnam either, though it could help balance off future Chinese power.

Even powerful business interests have been largely unsuccessful over the years
in persuading Washington to go easier on outlaws. Other nations have been
stealing the march on markets in Iran, Libya and Vietnam -- and still Washington
won't budge on trade restrictions.

Most often, the decision to spurn an outlaw state comes down to U.S. politics.
For many reasons, including many good reasons, most Americans want no part of
Fidel Castro, Saddam Hussein, Iranian ayatollahs, Muammar Qaddafi or any North
Vietnamese leaders who fought against the U.S. The feelings are too raw and too
bitter. These guys harmed Americans. And few politicians will risk moving
counter to these feelings -- even when U.S. strategic interests call for direct
contacts and deals.

There are generally only two ways around this problem. One is for the bad guys
to die. Americans would then be willing to work with successors. The other is
for the bad guys to admit their misdeeds.

Public confession sounds silly to foreigners. But it isn't, especially not to
Americans. It's very hard to trust anyone tomorrow who denies yesterday's proven
sins. Confession isn't everything -- and maybe Washington needs to do a little
of its own. But honesty can start the process of reconciliation.

In the case of Vietnam, U.S. economic and strategic interests will eventually
dictate a new relationship. Whether this happens sooner or later depends on
Vietnamese leaders, on their willingness finally to clear the air over American
P.O.W.'s.

LOAD-DATE: April 16, 1993

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Op-Ed

                   Copyright 1993 The New York Times Company


                              49 of 312 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                  April 16, 1993, Friday, Late Edition - Final

NEWS SUMMARY

SECTION: Section A; Page 2; Column 5; Metropolitan Desk

LENGTH: 1087 words



International A3-11

$28 BILLION IS PLEDGED TO RUSSIA
Seeking to lift the political fortunes of Boris Yeltsin, the leading
industrialized nations committed themselves to $28 billion in aid for Russia
this year, but much of it was contingent on austerity steps that Moscow may find
difficult to adopt.  A1

Countries pledging aid to Russia also stand to benefit.  A10



YELTSIN GOES ON THE ATTACK
Campaigning hard for Russia's referendum on his rule on April 25, Boris Yeltsin
lashed out at his Vice President, the legislature and the chairmen of the
Central Bank and the Constitutional Court.  A10

Mikhail Gorbachev, visiting the U.S., promoted the environment.  A10

BOSNIANS MAY YIELD ENCLAVE
Bosnian defenders were reported to be negotiating a surrender to Serbian forces
of the besieged Muslim enclave at Srebrenica and guarantees for the safe
evacuation of the 60,000 civilians there and the beleaguered garrison.  A1

If Srebrenica falls, the U.N. is likely to weigh new sanctions.  A6

The debate over a peacekeeping role is heating up in Germany.  A6

A U.S. report recommending safe havens in Bosnia was released.  A5

CAR BOMB KILLS 15 IN BOGOTA
A powerful car bomb ripped apart a Bogota shopping center, killing at least 15
people and wounding more than 100. The Government blamed the fugitive drug
trafficker Pablo Escobar Gaviria for the attack.  A3

MORE DOUBT ON HANOI REPORT
Some historians and researchers doubt the validity of a report that says North
Vietnam held more American prisoners than it has acknowledged.  A3

WHAT LIES AHEAD FOR MANDELA?
News analysis: Nelson Mandela told his followers that the African National
Congress is a government in waiting. But the lesson of recent days is that even
if the waiting has been painfully hard, the governing will be harder.  A11

RIGHTS GROUPS ASSAIL HAITI PLAN
On the eve of an expected settlement of the 18-month political stalemate in
Haiti, a dispute has broken out over a proposed amnesty for military leaders
that human rights groups have condemned as illegal.  A11

Palestinian factional strife claimed its 11th victim of the year. A8

Jerusalem Journal: A simple meal is sometimes not so simple.  A4

National A12-20

AGREEMENT ON WOODPECKER
The Clinton Administration said it had approved a plan by the Georgia Pacific
Corporation to protect the red cockaded woodpecker, a forest bird whose numbers
are declining in much of its range in the South, and renew logging operations.
A1

NEW STANDARD OF PRIVACY
The Clinton Administration will soon announce a technology standard to insure
privacy in all electronic communications, including telephone calls and
electronic mail, while also preserving the Government's right to eavesdrop for
law enforcement and national security reasons.  A1

NEW HEALTH-CARE PROBLEM
The President's Task Force on National Health Care Reform is faced with the
quandary of how to treat workers' compensation and automobile insurance, which
pay more than $40 billion in health care bills each year.  A1

YALE CHOOSES ONE OF ITS OWN
After a nine-month nationwide search, Richard C. Levin, a 46-year-old economist
who has spent nearly half his life at Yale university, was named the
university's president.  A1

Man in the News: A sharp mind minus the rough edges.  A16

FUNGI AND ANIMALS LINKED
Scientists studying the genetic makeup of plants and animals said fungi are more
closely related to animals than plants, from which both branched away more than
a billion years ago.  A18

GUARD DIES IN PRISON SIEGE
Prison officials in Ohio recovered the body of one of eight guards seized as
hostages by rebellious inmates on Sunday. Later, another hostage was freed when
officials allowed one inmate speak on radio.  A12

PENTAGON DEADLINE ON GAY BAN
The Pentagon is hurrying to prepare an executive order to lift the ban on
homosexuals in the military and to agree on the practical steps to carry it out.
A20

President Clinton will not appear at a gay rights march on April 25.  A20

A survey reignited debate over the number of gay people.  A20

News analysis: A look at the health reform financing debate.  A14

The Clintons earned $290,000 in 1992, their highest income ever.  A12

SUBURBAN SETTING, URBAN CARES
Just like their neighbors in Los Angeles, residents of suburban Huntington Park
are worrying and planning as a Federal jury continues its deliberations in the
civil rights case against four officers in the beating of Rodney King.  A19

CATHOLIC FEMINISTS DIVIDED
Deep differences among Catholic feminists are appearing over the direction of
their movement and whether it is on the verge of ceasing to be Catholic.  A19

A debate over prayer at a high school has revived the subject.  A12
The Justice Department won't prosecute over an Iraq document.  A20

Milwaukee's water system was pronounced free of a parasite.  A16

Law Page B7

Metro Digest B1

CATHOLICS AND SCHOOL POLITICS
The Roman Catholic Archdiocese of New York, forging a tactical alliance with a
group run by the Rev. Pat Robertson, is preparing to distribute to each of its
213 parishes a guide designed by Mr. Robertson's organization to help voters in
the upcoming school board elections pick candidates who are conservative on
social issues.  A1

MALT LIQUOR LURING YOUTHS
Malt liquor in 40-ounce bottles, introduced in the late 1980's with aggressive
marketing aimed at minority drinkers, is fast becoming the intoxicant of choice
for black and Hispanic youths in New York and other American cities.  A1

Business Digest D1

Weekend C1-31

Favorite versions of "The Ring." C1

Learning amid leisure.C1

City Opera chairman resigns.  C3

Theater: On Stage, and Off C2

"One Shoe Off." C3

Art: The Art Market C1

Sports B8-14

Baseball: Yanks fall to Royals.  B9

Rockies stop Mets.  B9

Basketball: Nets lose to Celtics.  B9

Column: Vecsey on Bonilla.  B9

Obituaries B6

Editorials/Op-Ed A30-31

Editorials

Swift, needed aid for Russia.

A skewed census endures.

The ghost called Tibet.

Topics: Zapping delinquents.

Letters

A. M. Rosenthal: "Muslims broke the truce."

Anthony Lewis: "Where reason is free."

Hamas: The Hamas way of death.

Fred R. Shapiro: Last words on taxes.

LOAD-DATE: April 16, 1993

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Summary

                   Copyright 1993 The New York Times Company


                              50 of 312 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                  April 16, 1993, Friday, Late Edition - Final

INSIDE

SECTION: Section A; Page 1; Column 1; Metropolitan Desk

LENGTH: 121 words



South Africa's Perilous Road

The latest deaths and disorders in South Africa have reminded the country of
dangers that will not disappear quickly, even when white rule is gone. News
analysis, page A11.

A.T.& T. Fights With British

A.T.& T. moved to block Britain's top phone company from expanding in the United
States until A.T.& T. can compete in Britain. Page D1.

More Doubt on Hanoi Report

Some historians and researchers doubt the validity of a report that says Hanoi
held more Americans than it has acknowledged. Page A3.

Fungusi, Man's Relatives

Very, very distant relative, that is. A new genetic analysis has found that
fungi are more closely related to animals than to plants. Page A18.

LOAD-DATE: April 16, 1993

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Summary

                   Copyright 1993 The New York Times Company


                              51 of 312 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                  April 16, 1993, Friday, Late Edition - Final

Debate Rises on Hanoi P.O.W. Report

BYLINE: By STEVEN A. HOLMES,  Special to The New York Times

SECTION: Section A; Page 3; Column 1; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 951 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, April 15


A United States envoy left today on a mission to Vietnam, but President Clinton
instructed him that new questions about American prisoners of war must be
resolved before there can be any thaw in relations with Hanoi.

The questions were raised by a 1972 report that suggests that Hanoi held more
American prisoners than it has acknowledged. In turn, however, questions have
also been raised about the document itself. The researcher who discovered it in
the archives of the Soviet Communist Party in Moscow has also come under
criticism as a partisan who ardently opposes normalizing relations with Vietnam.

Some historians and researchers involved in the issue of American prisoners in
Southeast Asia say the document contains inaccuracies that call its validity
into question. Some call the document an outright fabrication, echoing terms
that the Hanoi Government has used to describe it.

"It's a clumsy fabrication," said H. Bruce Franklin, a professor of English and
American Studies at Rutgers University who has written a book in which he
asserts that the Vietnamese do not still hold American prisoners of war. "There
is just about no fact in the document that correlates with the historical
reality."

'Fullest Possible Accounting'

The White House envoy, John W. Vessey Jr., a retired Army general and former
Chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff who served in Vietnam as a major in the
field artillery, has been negotiating with Hanoi for information on the fate of
the 2,260 Americans still listed as missing in action.

He will now check into the validity of the 1972 report, which suggests that
Hanoi was holding 1,205 American prisoners in 1972, when it said it only held
368. The Vietnamese released 591 Americans as part of Operation Homecoming in
early 1973, and since then they have consistently said they did not hold any
more.

"The President stressed that he wanted the fullest possible accounting and said
that only when we have that can we even consider any changes in our policy
toward Vietnam," George Stephanopoulos, the White House spokesman, said today.

Vietnamese officials are hoping that the U.S. will ease its trade embargo, or,
more important, not try to block new loans from the International Monetary Fund.

The report, a Russian translation of a Vietnamese document, was unearthed by
Stephen J. Morris, a fellow at Harvard University's Russian Research Center. Mr.
Morris, an Australian who came to the United States to study in 1976, is not on
the faculty but uses the center for research supported by grants.

His research in the Russian archives was sponsored by the Cold War History
Project, at the Woodrow Wilson International Center in Washington. Officials of
the project said Mr. Morris is to be paid for producing a report on his work.

Some Experts Believe Report

Several Soviet experts, including a former national security adviser, Zbigniew
Brzezinski, have said they believe the report is genuine.

But skeptics, including Dr. Franklin, cite inaccuracies. For example, he and
other experts cited a reference to the dispersal of American P.O.W.'s from 4
prisons to 11 after the abortive American raid on the Son Tay prison, 20 miles
northwest of Hanoi, in September 1970. Each of the 11 prisons held about 100
prisoners, the report said. But the critics say that after the Son Tay raid, the
Vietnamese consolidated -- rather than dispersed -- American prisoners to keep a
closer eye on them.

In addition, Kenneth L. Coskey, executive director of the Naval Historical
Foundation and a former inmate at the Hoa Lo Prison -- the infamous "Hanoi
Hilton" -- said at least 350 prisoners were held there. Mr. Coskey did not offer
an opinion on the document's authenticity.

"The idea they had 100 in Hoa Lo is inaccurate," said a Congressional
investigator who has worked on the M.I.A. issue and who insisted on anonymity.

Defining a Prison

Reached in Boston, Mr. Morris said the apparent discrepancy may relate to how
the Vietnamese defined a prison. "There may have been separate compounds in Hoa
Lo," Mr. Morris said. "I don't know how they're defining it. There might be
subdivisons."

The Vietnamese have said the main evidence to refute the document was that Gen.
Tran Van Quang, the report's original author, was not Deputy to the North
Vietnamese Army General Staff in 1972, as the Russian version indicates. But
United States intelligence officials said today that he did hold that position.

One explanation offered by a former intelligence analyst to account for the
large number of Americans listed by the Vietnamese as prisoners was that the
Vietnamese may have included several hundred captured Asian civilians who were
working for the Americans.

Sedgewick Tourison, who worked as an investigator for the Senate Select
Committee on P.O.W./M.I.A. Affairs, said between 350 and 500 Asians, mainly
Vietnamese, who were used on intelligence-gathering and sabatoge missions in
North Vietnam between 1960 and 1968, had been captured.

Mr. Tourison and another former Congressional investigator say the commandos
were often referred to in terms that could confuse their identity. "The
commandos were referred to by Radio Hanoi in domestic broadcasts during the war
as American spy commandos or American spy saboteurs," Mr. Tourison said.

But Mr. Morris said it was "preposterous" to think that the Russian translation
of the document might have misidentified American prisoners.

"Anybody who has read Communist documents knows that they don't refer to South
Vietnamese as American forces," he said. "They always call them puppet forces.
Anyone who says that is just not familiar with Communist documents."


LOAD-DATE: April 16, 1993

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1993 The New York Times Company


                              52 of 312 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                  April 16, 1993, Friday, Late Edition - Final

When State Officials Seize Schools;
Education Idea Has Taken Root in New Jersey Since 1986

BYLINE: By CHARLES STRUM,  Special to The New York Times

SECTION: Section B; Page 1; Column 2; Metropolitan Desk

LENGTH: 1032 words

DATELINE: NEWARK, April 15


Dr. Saul Cooperman says he was standing in his backyard when the idea came to
him. "I remember the exact moment," said the former New Jersey Education
Commissioner. "I had been thinking for almost two years: 'How do you improve
schools that just don't seem to be able to get it right?' "

"Then it hit me," he said. "My God, they declare bankruptcy and go into
receivership in the private sector. If what I'm supposed to do as commissioner
is stand up for the children, then I've got to create a series of steps to do
the same for schools."

That was in 1986, and Gov. Thomas H. Kean adopted the idea eagerly, advancing
the proposal in his State of the State address even before Dr. Cooperman had
worked out the details. Two years later it was law: the state became the first
in the country authorized to take control of any school district that failed to
meet minimum standards in education, management, finances and other crucial
categories.

Since then, the state's second- and third-largest districts, Jersey City and
Paterson, have come under state control. And now Newark, the largest district in
the state (almost 50,000 students) and a perennial takeover target, is entering
the final stages of a review process to determine if its problems are so
entrenched that only state intervention can solve them.

The exercise of such sweeping state powers is at odds with New Jersey's deeply
held and long established belief in local control. But despite vociferous
opposition in the Legislature and from groups representing teachers,
administrators and school boards, the weight of a four-word phrase in the State
Constitution won out. The phrase is "thorough and efficient education," which
the Constitution says is the state's responsibility and the right of every child
in the state.

Dr. Elena Scambio, an assistant education commissioner who was the first
state-appointed superintendent in Jersey City, said the law is clear on what
must be done in systems where Trenton decides to intervene. The superintendent
and the locally elected school board are removed, as are the senior managers in
charge of curriculum, business, personnel and finance. The commissioner then
empanels a 15-member advisory board drawn from local residents, with two members
appointed by the community's governing body.

For the first 18 months at least, she said, the new superintendent by law must
attend to procedural and administrative matters, what she called the
"underpinnings of education," before education itself becomes the full-time
focus.

"Once you get that house in order, you then have to move to the groundwork of a
sound educational system," she said. "By the time you get into years two and
three when you're defining your curriculum and evaluating staff and starting to
institutionalize change, all the literature in the field of education says you
can't institute real educational change in just two or three years."

In both Jersey City and Paterson, education officials say, it is too early to
assess accurately how state actions have affected what gets done in classrooms.
And in fact in Jersey City, run by the state since October 1989, Trenton has
already asked for an extension of at least two years beyond the statutory
five-year takeover period.

Dr. Jeffrey Graber, executive assistant to the current state superintendent in
Jersey City, described Trenton's intervention as a hostile takeover in a
district that was unable to achieve such basic goals as having a certified
teacher in each classroom on the opening day of school.

Since then, 15 of the system's 36 principals have been replaced and 36 teachers,
many of them accused of excessive absenteeism, have been formally charged with
neglecting their work. Eleven were dismissed, 18 resigned and others were denied
pay increases, Dr. Graber said. In all, he said, 58 teachers were denied salary
increases.

The new administration also dealt with maintenance. In the first 100 days, he
said, an emergency housekeeping program took effect to make the schools
habitable and safe. In some cases, he said, years of debris, including piles of
old furniture, had to be removed from school swimming pools.

Reorganizing the central office was another immediate and difficult task,
particularly in a system that the state said was rife with political patronage
and cronyism. In Jersey City, court action by local elected officials blocked
any takeover attempt for 18 months.

In Paterson, which yielded more gracefully to state authority in August 1991,
administrators are just now beginning to get beyond the assessment, clean-up and
reorganization stage, which an interim report described as dealing with
everything from the establishment of school libraries to acquiring functioning
photocopying machines for each building.

"The state says we've got an obligation," Dr. Scambio said of the takeover law.
"We know what effective programs and strategies are. People in my profession
know what works with kids. It's a matter of having the will. It's not a matter
of ameliorating the effects of poverty, but a matter of mobilizing and
channeling effective programs."

Dr. Cooperman said that wresting control from local officials was the furthest
thing from his mind when he arrived in the commissioner's office in 1982.

Although the state monitored school proficiency, it had no method to enforce
improvements, other than taking the role of the stern parent, as Dr. Cooperman
put it.

It remains unclear whether invading a city school system is an educational
Vietnam, where local suspicion never vanishes and decisive victory remains
elusive.

"Anyone who says it's easy to run urban schools and get results -- it's just not
that simple," said Dr. Cooperman, who now oversees the Ready Foundation in
Morristown, which supports programs to help young people in Newark.

Then he recalled a woman in Jersey City who came up to him, kissed him and said:
"I hope you're right, but I think you're wrong. We were here before you came and
we'll be here after you've gone."

After five years, he said, "I would hope to create a little positive momentum.
If that's not enough time, then I guess I become a little cynical."

LOAD-DATE: April 16, 1993

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1993 The New York Times Company


                              53 of 312 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 April 17, 1993, Saturday, Late Edition - Final

Observer;
Sexwise It's the Pits

BYLINE: By RUSSELL BAKER

SECTION: Section 1; Page 21; Column 1; Editorial Desk

LENGTH: 684 words


Maybe it's time to rethink the American boys concept. What, for instance, do
people really mean when they say, "Boys will be boys"?

A couple of exceedingly squalid stories in the recent sex news have evoked this
old philosophical expression. "Boys will be boys," some said when a group of New
Jersey lads were tried recently for sexually abusing a young mentally retarded
woman with broom handle and baseball bat.

Defenders of the "Spur Posse," a California association of male youth dedicated
to sexually using, abusing and terrifying high school girls, speak the same
wisdom: "Boys will be boys."

What ever happened to the Boy Scouts? What ever happened to boys helping old
ladies to cross the street?

For that matter, what ever happened to the boys in the back room? They may have
been tough, dangerous and even criminal, but wouldn't they have joined a posse
to catch the kind of boys who have been dominating our sex news lately?

What they might have done after catching them, I won't guess, but I doubt they
would have said, "Boys will be boys." It was the boys in the back room, after
all, whom Marlene Dietrich felt comfortable drinking with.

Athletes both professional and collegiate have done their share lately to ruin
the image of boyhood. A frequent sex-news item has become a story of athletes
holding group sexual exercises in which some dopey adolescent girl substitutes
for a gymnasium mat.

Suggest that this is a rotten way for physically gifted males to carry on, and
somebody will say, "Boys will be boys."

What ever happened to Frank Merriwell? To Dink Stover at Yale? What ever
happened to athletes rescuing beautiful teen-age girls from runaway horses?

Then there is Mike Tyson. Nobody defended Tyson with the exculpatory "Boys will"
etcetera, though he seemed, at a mental age of maybe 5, to be the ultimate in
boyness. Still, even 5-year-olds can be spared from the spoiling that corrupts
so many physically gifted American boy kids.

For instance, what ever happened to Joe Louis saying hello to his mother when
each fight was over? What ever happened to Muhammad Ali, who declined to join
Sports World's Vietnam War draft dodgers and, like a man, stood up at the
induction center, said no and took the consequences?

There were men in those days, and some of them were even athletes. Of course
there are still plenty of men left in the sports industry. The little-boy-man
athlete exposing himself to the female reporter in the locker room is not acting
for the whole profession, just for the worst of its spoiled brats.

"Boys will be boys" doesn't explain behavior on this level. I'm not sure what
does, but part of it is certainly the coarsening and trivialization of sex which
we see everywhere now that all the old taboos have been removed.

Enlightenment was supposed to result from lifting these repressions, and maybe
it has, but it looks surprisingly like a shameless wallow in moral corruption.

Not long ago, mindlessly flicking on a TV switch to forestall thought while
brewing a cup of coffee, I was amazed to find myself looking at a talk-show host
encouraging several people to dilate on the joys and techniques of oral sex.

Robert Redford is now starring in a movie about a billionaire who for $1 million
buys the services of another man's wife for a single night. Yes, Robert Redford,
friend of the great American outdoors! What ever happened to the environment,
Bob?

So I flick on the TV switch to prevent the onset of thought while brewing a cup
of coffee, and what to my wondering eyes doth appear but Oprah with an
auditorium full of people confronting the moral dilemma of the day:

Would you sell your "mate" for a night for $1 million? As a "mate," would you
agree to the sale?

Moral rot seems well nigh universal in Oprah World. By the time I fled with the
coffee, opinion seemed unanimous that only a prig would balk at prostitution and
pimping when the price is right.

With the national moral code in this state, it's no wonder so many say, "Boys
will be boys." What they mean, of course, is, "Louts will be louts."

LOAD-DATE: April 17, 1993

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Op-Ed

                   Copyright 1993 The New York Times Company


                              54 of 312 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                  April 18, 1993, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

BEST SELLERS: April 18, 1993

SECTION: Section 7; Page 34; Column 2; Book Review Desk

LENGTH: 1347 words



          Weeks
This Last    On
Week Week  List Fiction

 1      2  36   THE BRIDGES OF MADISON COUNTY, by Robert James Waller. (Warner,
                $14.95.) A photographer and a lonely farmer's wife in Iowa.

 2      1   5   THE CLIENT, by John Grisham. (Doubleday, $23.50.) A deadly
                secret, revealed by a lawyer just before he commits suicide,
                presents serious problems for an 11-year-old boy.

 3          1   "J" IS FOR JUDGMENT, by Sue Grafton. (Holt, $21.95.) Kinsey
                Millhone investigates the case of a man who apparently
                committed suicide -- but may have returned to life to reap
                benefits.

 4      3   3   AMERICAN STAR, by Jackie Collins. (Simon & Schuster, $23.) The
                romance of two teen-agers, one who grows up to be a movie star,
                the other a model.

 5      4   8   THE TALISMANS OF SHANNARA, by Terry Brooks. (Del
                Rey/Ballantine, $22.) The fourth and concluding volume in a
                series about a fantasy land.

 6      5   9   EINSTEIN'S DREAMS, by Alan Lightman. (Pantheon, $17.) Fantasies
                said to be dreamed by Albert Einstein in 1905, when he was a
                patent clerk.

 7      9   2   FORWARD THE FOUNDATION, by Isaac Asimov. (Foundation/Doubleday,
                $23.50.) The final volume of a science fiction series about the
                fall of the Galactic Empire and the birth of a new order.

 8          1   WINTER PREY, by John Sandford. (Putnam, $21.95.) Lucas
                Davenport in pursuit of a new kind of criminal in Wisconsin's
                cold woods.

 9     10   4   THE DEVIL'S HEART, by Carmen Carter. (Pocket, $20.) A new "Star
                Trek" tale.

10 *        1   LIKE WATER FOR CHOCOLATE, by Laura Esquivel. (Doubleday,
                $17.50.) Frustration, love, hope -- and recipes -- sampled by a
                woman coming of age on a Mexican ranch.

11 *   12  33   GRIFFIN & SABINE, by Nick Bantock. (Chronicle Books, $17.95.)
                The romance of an artist and a secret admirer, told through
                cards and letters.

12 *    7   6   NOVEMBER OF THE HEART, by LaVyrle Spencer. (Putnam, $22.95.) In
                Victorian-era Minnesota, a servant hopes to win an heiress's
                heart by helping her family win a yacht race.

13     13  21   ALL THE PRETTY HORSES, by Cormac McCarthy. (Knopf, $21.) The
                adventures of a 16-year-old vaquero from Texas in the Mexico of
                1950.

14     15   6   DISNEY'S ALADDIN, adapted by Don Ferguson. (Mouse Works/Penguin
                USA, $6.98.) An illustrated retelling of the story of a street
                boy and a genie.

15     11   6   THE CHILDREN OF MEN, by P. D. James. (Knopf, $22.) In 2021,
                when Britain is a police state and the human race is
                approaching its end, an Oxford historian struggles with his
                fate.

          Weeks
This Last    On
Week Week  List Nonfiction



 1      1   9   HEALING AND THE MIND, by Bill Moyers. (Doubleday, $25.) The
                relationship of sickness to thoughts and emotions.

 2      2  36   WOMEN WHO RUN WITH THE WOLVES, by Clarissa Pinkola Estes.
                (Ballantine, $20.) A Jungian analyst reinterprets myths and
                folk tales.

 3      3  31   THE WAY THINGS OUGHT TO BE, by Rush H. Limbaugh 3d. (Pocket,
                $22.) Anecdotes and opinions offered by the talk show host.

 4      4  22   BANKRUPTCY 1995, by Harry E. Figgie Jr. with Gerald J. Swanson.
                (Little, Brown, $19.95.) The collapse of America under
                Government debt.

 5      8  18   CARE OF THE SOUL, by Thomas Moore. (HarperCollins, $22.50.)
                Spirituality and daily life.

 6 *    7  44   THE SILENT PASSAGE, by Gail Sheehy. (Random House, $16.) The
                psychological and social significance of menopause for today's
                women.

 7      5   7   OFFICIAL AND CONFIDENTIAL, by Anthony Summers. (Putnam,
                $25.95.) J. Edgar Hoover's life.

 8      9   6   ASSEMBLING CALIFORNIA, by John McPhee. (Farrar, Straus &
                Giroux, $21.) Geological history.

 9      6   5   PREPARING FOR THE TWENTY-FIRST CENTURY, by Paul Kennedy.
                (Random House, $25.) A historian assays social and political
                forces.

10 *        1   A WORLD WAITING TO BE BORN, by M. Scott Peck. (Bantam, $22.95.)
                A call for individuals and institutions to make civility part
                of their lives and functions.

11     10  30   THE TE OF PIGLET, by Benjamin Hoff. (Dutton, $16.) Aspects of
                Taoist philosophy.

12     12  13   NOBODY NOWHERE, by Donna Williams. (Times Books/Random House,
                $21.) The autobiography of an autistic woman.

13          1   MARILYN MONROE, by Donald Spoto. (HarperCollins, $25.) The life
                of the movie star.

14     13   8   MARLENE DIETRICH, by Maria Riva. (Knopf, $27.50.) The actress
                remembered by her daughter.

15         10   MAKING THE MUMMIES DANCE, by Thomas Hoving. (Simon & Schuster,
                $25.) The reminiscences of the former museum director.

16 *   15  41   TRUMAN, by David McCullough. (Simon & Schuster, $30.) A
                biography of the 33d President.

17 *       17   GENIUS, by James Gleick. (Pantheon, $27.50.) The life of the
                physicist Richard Feynman.

18 *   11   8   AROUND THE CRAGGED HILL, by George F. Kennan. (Norton, $22.95.)
                Philosophical meditations on the world and its future.

          Weeks
This Last    On
Week Week  List Advice, How-to and Miscellaneous

 1      1   5   BEATING THE STREET, by Peter Lynch with John Rothchild. (Simon
                & Schuster, $23.) Advice about investing in stocks and mutual
                funds.

 2      2  40   HARVEY PENICK'S LITTLE RED BOOK, by Harvey Penick with Bud
                Shrake. (Simon & Schuster, $19.) Anecdotes and tips about
                playing golf from a legendary teacher.

 3      4  57   MORE WEALTH WITHOUT RISK, by Charles J. Givens. (Simon &
                Schuster, $23.) An updated and expanded volume of financial
                advice.

 4          1   MEN ARE FROM MARS, WOMEN ARE FROM VENUS, by John Gray.
                (HarperCollins, $20.) Ways to improve communication and
                relationships between the sexes.

 5      3  58   HOW TO SATISFY A WOMAN EVERY TIME, by Naura Hayden. (Bibli
                O'Phile/Dutton, $15.95.) Sexual counsel for married couples.


These listings are based on computer-processed sales figures from 3,050
bookstores and from representative wholesalers with more than 28,000 other
retail outlets, including variety stores and supermarkets. The figures are
statistically adjusted to represent sales in all such outlets across the United
States.

*An asterisk before a book's title indicates that its sales, weighted to reflect
the book-selling industry nationally, are barely distinguishable from those of
the book above.

LP indicates that a book is available in large print.


And Bear in Mind

(Editors' choices of other recent books of particular interest)

CULTURE OF COMPLAINT: The Fraying of America, by Robert Hughes. (New York Public
Library/Oxford University, $19.95.) Mr. Hughes turns a cruel eye on the
political-cultural debates of the 1980's, the pressure to recognize cultural
diversity and the politicization of the contemporary art scene.

ATGET'S SEVEN ALBUMS, by Molly Nesbit. (Yale University, $55.) A scholar's
large-bore analytical powers find political commitment and self-conscious
intentions in the work of the Paris photographer who has been interpreted as a
brilliant primitive.

FOR LOVE, by Sue Miller. (HarperCollins, $23.) A vivid, fine-grained, realistic
and honest novel whose characters are mainly over 40 and in love for far from
the first time.

SACRED COUNTRY, by Rose Tremain. (Atheneum, $21.) A large novel, Ms. Tremain's
sixth, in which three generations of Britons try to sort out who they are and
how they might be happy.

CHARMS FOR THE EASY LIFE, by Kaye Gibbons. (Putnam, $19.95.) Like all Ms.
Gibbons's fiction, this novel concerns itself with strong women: a bookish
narrator, her mother, her grandmother, all of them prevailing through fierce
survival instincts and folk wisdom handed down from prior generations.

CRY ME A RIVER, by T. R. Pearson. (Holt, $22.) A crime story, narrated by a cop
and loser whose comrade's death brings us, eventually, into contact with a
gallery of driven figures.

WORKING-CLASS WAR: American Combat Soldiers and Vietnam, by Christian G. Appy.
(University of North Carolina, cloth, $39.95; paper, $14.95.) An examination of
the war's demographics -- 80 percent of American enlisted men were working-class
or poor -- and how that makeup may have influenced the war.

LOAD-DATE: April 19, 1993

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: List

                   Copyright 1993 The New York Times Company


                              55 of 312 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                  April 18, 1993, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

Unwelcome Aboard

BYLINE: By William H. Honan;  William H. Honan, the chief cultural correspondent
of The New York Times, is the editor of "Fire When Ready, Gridley! Great Naval
Stories From Manila Bay to Vietnam."

SECTION: Section 7; Page 21; Column 5; Book Review Desk

LENGTH: 757 words



THE GOLDEN THIRTEEN
Recollections of
the First Black Naval Officers.
Edited by Paul Stillwell.
Foreword by Colin L. Powell.
Illustrated. 304 pp.
Annapolis, Md.:
Naval Institute Press. $21.95.

IN 1943 the Secretary of the Navy, Frank Knox, sniffed at the idea of having
blacks serve as naval officers. They are perfectly happy being cooks, steward's
mates and mess attendants, he said. But pressure from the National Association
for the Advancement of Colored People, from Eleanor Roosevelt and from Adlai
Stevenson, then one of Knox's young assistants, persuaded the Secretary to allow
13 young men to become the first black American naval officers.

None of them saw combat. Only one made a career of the Navy. But together they
made history. In "The Golden Thirteen," Paul Stillwell, the director of the
history division of the United States Naval Institute, has stitched together a
fascinating and moving collection of oral histories from the eight survivors of
the group. The book also includes recollections from three of the white officers
who trained and supervised the black men; they heighten the differing
perceptions of various participants.

The Navy of World War II, like virtually all American social institutions of the
time, was a reflection of the racist society that produced it. One of the 13,
James E. Hair, recalled having witnessed the lynching of his brother-in-law in
1935 in Fort Pierce, Fla. The society that could countenance that horror didn't
evaporate when 13 young black men were made naval officers. After their
commissioning, they encountered white sailors who haughtily refused to salute
them, and others who were blithely insulting. And they were given low-grade
assignments that precluded winning honors for valor or distinguished service.

But the men also met whites who went out of their way to be supportive. For
example, Graham E. Martin, one of the black officers, tells how he was spared a
career disaster while an officer candidate at the Great Lakes Naval Training
Station near Chicago. A white chief petty officer whom he was assisting at an
inspection found a cigarette in the jumper pocket of a black recruit. That was
against regulations. The chief petty officer told Mr. Martin to make the recruit
eat it.

Mr. Martin, a graduate of Indiana University, refused on the ground that it
would be harmful to the recruit's health. Vindictively, the chief petty officer
filed a report. Mr. Martin thought he was washed up.

The white officer in charge of the unit was called on the carpet by the base
commander for tolerating insubordination. But Mr. Martin escaped punishment and
certain loss of his rank when his unit commander, an Annapolis man, amused the
base commander with a story about how Lord Nelson got away with violating an
order by deliberately holding a telescope to his blind eye when reading a
signal.

The black officers were also supported by white officers like Steve Belichick,
who helped Samuel E. Barnes desegregate the officers' club on Okinawa, and E.
Hall Downes, who dealt with a pugnaciously racist white officer at the training
school attended by the blacks by arranging for his transfer to Alaska.

TO be sure, the program was tokenism. But, in the words of one of the men, "The
Navy as an institution was making a good-faith effort in our training." With
such small steps profound changes are begun. One of the blacks, John W. Reagan,
now a successful California real estate investor and manager, recalls his
commissioning as "possibly the outstanding event of my life." And William S.
White, who retired in 1991 as a judge of the Illinois Appellate Court, says, "I
still think, on the whole, that the Navy is more democratic than the country it
serves."

One merit of this book is purely fortuitous. The striving of blacks for
acceptance in the military services a generation ago may not be strictly
parallel to present-day efforts by homosexuals, yet there are enough
similarities to make "The Golden Thirteen" especially pertinent. One wonders how
these similarities escaped the notice of Gen. Colin L. Powell, Chairman of the
Joint Chiefs of Staff, who has contributed a foreword to this book. His
outspoken opposition to gay people in the military is well known. It is strange
that he cannot detect at least some commonality shared by these two groups in
the population when he writes that the first 13 black naval officers helped open
"the blind moral eye" of America, and inspired "a skinny 7-year-old kid in the
Bronx named Colin Powell."

LOAD-DATE: April 19, 1993

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Review

                   Copyright 1993 The New York Times Company


                              56 of 312 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                  April 18, 1993, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

TOURS

SECTION: Section 14; Page 10; Column 1; Spring Times Supplement

LENGTH: 2814 words


Here is a sampling of tours by bus, van, boat and foot that are scheduled during
the spring in New York City. Nature tours are listed on page 4. Dates and times
are subject to change.

Today

"SPANNING THE PARK," Central Park. A tour and discussion about the bridges in
the park, led by Urban Park Rangers. Meets at 10 A.M. at 59th Street and Central
Park West. Free. Information: (212) 427-4040.

"THE COLONIAL REVIVAL MOVEMENT," Manhattan. A lecture and walking tour of the
Upper East Side that will explore the impact of the neo-classical style of
Duncan Phyfe, the 18th-century furniture maker, on interior and exterior designs
in the neighborhood; offered in conjunction with the exhibition "Is It Phyfe?"
at the Museum of the City of New York; tour led by Justin Ferate, an
architectural historian. 1 P.M. Fee: $15; $10 for museum members. Registration
and meeting place: (212) 534-1672, extension 205.

"THE GARDEN CITY OF THE DEAD," Green-Wood Cemetery, Fort Hamilton Parkway and
McDonald Avenue, Kensington, Brooklyn. Raven Hall, a historian, will lead a tour
of the mausoleums for celebrities like Lola Montez, a singer and actress of the
1800's, and Walter G. Hunt, the inventor of the safety pin. Noon. Meets at the
Fort Hamilton gate near the corner of McDonald Avenue. Also May 2, May 16 and
June 6. Fee: $5. Information and meeting place: (212) 779-3051.

"THE STREETS WHERE WE LIVED," Lower East Side. A walking tour of Chinatown and
Little Italy. Sponsored by the Lower East Side Tenement Museum. 2 P.M. Also May
2, 9, 16, 23 and June 6, 13 and 20. Fee: $12; $10 for students and the elderly.
Information and meeting place: (212) 431-0233.

"PEDDLER'S PACK: A JEWISH HERITAGE TOUR," Lower East Side. A walking tour
through the turn-of-the-century Lower East Side, led by a costumed actor. Noon.
Every Sunday through June 20. Sponsored by the Lower East Side Tenement Museum.
Fee: $12; $10 for students and the elderly. Information and meeting place: (212)
431-0233.

"A TOUR NAMED JACKIE," Manhattan. A tour of Upper East Side spots made famous by
Jacqueline Kennedy Onassis. Sponsored by Sidewalks of New York. 2 P.M. Fee: $10.
Information and meeting place: (212) 517-0201.

"WHERE THE SAINTS HAVE TROD," Manhattan. A bus tour of religious shrines and
landmarks associated with such saints as Elizabeth Seton and Pierre Toussaint.
Sponsored by Sidewalks of New York. 1 P.M. Fee: $25 Information and meeting
place: (212) 388-2286.

"NOHO: A NEW FRONTIER." A walking tour of cast-iron, Romanesque and Federal
buildings; trendy restaurants, and artist hangouts. Sponsored by Bernie's Tours.
2 P.M. Fee: $5. Information and meeting place: (212) 655-1883.

"PRESERVATION WEEK WALKING TOUR," Roosevelt Island. A spring walking tour of the
new parks, tennis courts, soccer and baseball fields on the island, led by
Eugenie Martin, director of Roosevelt Island Tours Inc. Sponsored by the
Roosevelt Island Operating Corporation of the State of New York. Meets at 2 P.M.
on the tram platform on the island. Fee: $15. Information: (212) 832-4540,
extension 385.

Tuesday

"ROCKEFELLER CENTER TOUR." A tour of the garden, skating rink and sculptures,
led by Francis Morrone, an architectural writer.  Sponsored by the Municipal Art
Society. 11 A.M. Meets at the Urban Center, 457 Madison Avenue, at 51st Street.
Also May 5, May 18, June 1 and June 15. Fee: $10, $8 for students and the
elderly. Information: (212) 439-1049.

Wednesday

"GRAND CENTRAL TERMINAL TOUR." A tour that focuses on the terminal's design and
construction, with a stop in the whispering gallery, on the lower level.
Sponsored by the Municipal Art Society. Meets at 12:30 P.M. on the main
concourse. Every Wednesday through June 16. Information: (212) 439-1049.

"TIMES SQUARE TOUR." A tour through the theater district, led by Beth Maguire,
an actress and teacher. Sponsored by the Municipal Art Society. Meets at 11 A.M.
in front of the Edison Hotel, 228 West 47th Street. Every Wednesday through June
16. Fee: $10; $8 for students and the elderly. Information: (212) 439-1049.

Friday

"SOHO TOUR." A tour of buildings, art galleries and restaurants led by Matt
Postal, an architectural historian. Sponsored by the Municipal Art Society.
Meets at 11 A.M. at Canal Street Post Office, southwest corner of Canal and
Church Streets. Also May 7 and 21 and June 4 and 18. Fee: $10, $8 for students
and the elderly. Information: (212) 439-1049.

"BARS OF THE STARS," Manhattan. A bus tour of the watering holes of the rich and
famous, like Robert De Niro's TriBeCa Grill, Patrick Swayze's Mulholland Drive,
and Zachary's, a bar frequented by some Lincoln Center celebrities. Sponsored by
Sidewalks of New York. 6:30 P.M. Also on April 30. Fee: $25, excluding drinks.
Reservations and information: (212) 388-2286.

Saturday

"I'LL NEVER GO THERE ANYMORE: THE BOWERY," Manhattan. A walk along one of the
city's most infamous streets with stops at the sites of P. T. Barnum's Circus;
McGuirk's suicide hall, where six aging prostitues took their lives, and Big Tim
Sullivan's headquarters, where the politically corrupt Sullivan championed
rights for the poor, as well as dance halls, saloons and criminal hangouts.
Sponsored by Big Onion Walking Tours. 2 P.M. Fee: $9; $7 for students and the
elderly. Information and meeting place: (212) 439-1090.

"GHOSTS AFTER SUNSET," Greenwich Village. A walking tour past sites of public
executions and Manhattan's largest cemetery. Sponsored by Sidewalks of New York.
6 P.M. Fee: $10. Information (212) 517-0201.

"FAMOUS MURDER SITES," Manhattan. A tour of infamous spots. Sponsored by
Sidewalks of New York. 2 P.M. Fee: $10. Information: (212) 517-0201.

April 25

"BLACK WOMEN'S HISTORY TOUR," Lower Manhattan. A tour that covers the
contributions of black women to business and civil rights in the 18th and 19th
centuries. Sponsored by Black History Tours of Old New York. Also May 8. 1 P.M.
Fee: $12, $5 for students. Information and meeting place: (212) 299-7011.

"ELDRIDGE STREET SYNAGOGUE TOUR," Lower East Side. A tour of this historic
synagogue, built in 1887; includes a slide presentation and gallery visit.
Sponsored by the Eldridge Street Project. Meets hourly at 1, 2, 3 and 4 P.M.
Every Sunday. Fee: $5; $2.50 for students and the elderly. Information and
meeting place: (212) 219-0888.

"ALL IN THE FAMILY: A MAFIA WALKING TOUR," Little Italy. A tour of hangouts,
from Umberto's Clam House to the Ravenite Social Club. Sponsored by Sidewalks of
New York. 2 P.M. Fee: $10. Information: (212) 517-0201.

April 26

"NOSHING IN NEW YORK CITY," Lower East Side, Chinatown and the East Village. A
culinary bus tour through lower Manhattan, led by Lou Singer Tours. 10 A.M. Fee:
$25, excluding food. Reservations required: (718) 875-0984.

"MIDTOWN LOBBIES," Manhattan. A walking tour past classic and contemporary
lobbies, led by Judy Meighan, an architectural historian. Sponsored by the
Municipal Art Society. 11 A.M. Meets at the Urban Center, 457 Madison Avenue, at
51st Street. Fee: $10; $8 for students and the elderly. Also May 10, May 24 and
June 7. Information: (212) 439-1049.

May 1

"THE WEB," Inwood Hill Park, Manhattan. A walking tour and discussion of
environmental issues in honor of the 30th anniversary of the publication of
Rachel Carson's "Silent Spring, " led by the Urban Park Rangers. Meets at 2 P.M.
at the Seaman Avenue and Isham Street park entrance. Free. Information: (212)
427-4040.

"RIOT AND REBELLION," Manhattan. A walking tour past sites of political
rebellions, like the Draft Riots of 1863, spurred by the conscription of the
Irish and the poor during the Civil War. Sponsored by Big Onion Tours. 1 P.M.
Fee: $9; $7 for students and the elderly. Information and meeting place: (212)
439-1090.

"WHITMAN'S BOHEMIA," NoHo. Arthur Marks, an urban historian, will describe the
New York of Walt Whitman's time, with a visit to the Old Merchants House.
Sponsored by the Museum of the City of New York. 1 P.M. Fee: $15; $10 for museum
members. Also May 2 and 15. Registration and meeting place: (212) 534-1672,
extension 205.

"MILLIONAIRES MILE," Upper East Side. A walking tour that focuses on the
architecture, history and landmarks of wealthy neighborhoods in Manhattan, led
by Alfred Pommer, a historian. 2 P.M. Also May 9, 23 and 30. Sponsored by New
York City Cultural Walking Tour. Fee: $10. Registration and meeting place: (212)
979-2388.

"FROM ELLIS TO ELDRIDGE," Ellis Island and the Lower East Side. A daylong
excursion by foot and by boat that follows the steps of many Eastern European
Jews from port of entry to settlement; includes stops at the National Museum of
Immigration at Ellis Island and a tour of the Eldridge Street Synagogue.
Sponsored by the Eldridge Street Project.  Meets at 9 A.M. at Castle Clinton
National Monument in Battery Park. Fee: $36; includes museum admissions, ferry
and lunch. Also June 6. Information: (212) 219-0888.

"SUBWAY CERAMICS," Brooklyn. A tour of the mosaic signs designed between 1900
and 1920, led by Lee Stookey, author of "Subway Ceramics." Sponsored by the
Brooklyn Center for the Urban Environment. 1 P.M. Fee: $6; $3 for students and
the elderly (plus a subway token for each participant). Information and meeting
place: (718) 788-8500.

"HARLEM HIGHLIGHTS." A walking tour through the cultural highlights of Harlem,
with stops at the Apollo Theater and Black Fashion Museum. Sponsored by Black
History Tours of Old New York. Noon. Also May 23. Fee: $15.50. Information:
(212) 299-7011.

May 4

"BROOKLYN HOUSE TOURS." A bus tour past three historic houses dating from 1651
to 1901. Sponsored by Lou Singer Tours. 10 A.M. Fee: $25. Reservations and
meeting place: (718) 875-9084.

May 8

"OF LIBERTY AND LIBATIONS," lower Manhattan. A tour of the taverns and coffee
houses that played a role in 18th-century New York society. Sponsored by the
Fraunces Tavern Museum. 2 P.M. Fee: $10. Information and meeting place: (212)
425-1778.

May 11

"SUNSET WALKING TOUR," Roosevelt Island. A tour past landmarks of the island,
including the Good Shepherd Chapel (1889), the Blackwell Farmhouse (1796), and
the Octagon Park and Tower (1839). Led by Eugenie Martin, director of Roosevelt
Island Tours. Meets at 5:30 P.M. on the tram platform on the island. Sponsored
by the Roosevelt Island Operating Corporation of the State of New York. Fee:
$15, plus $1.40 each way tram fare. Information: (212) 832-4540, extension 385.

May 15

"FAMOUS ARTISTS OF GREENWICH VILLAGE." A tour that will focus on the studios,
galleries and clubs inhabited by painters and sculptors who lived in the
Village, including Edward Hopper and Marcel Duchamp. It includes a stop at the
former studio of Gertrude Vanderbilt Whitney. Sponsored by the Greenwich Village
Society for Historic Preservation. Meets at 1 P.M. at the arch in Washington
Square. Fee: $12. Reservations: (212) 924-3895.

May 16

" 'ROUND ABOUT THE RESERVOIR," Central Park. A 1.6-mile walk around the city's
oldest municipal water source, led by the Urban Park Rangers. Meets at 2 P.M. at
90th Street and Fifth Avenue. Free. Information: (212) 427-4040.

"WALL STREET." A walking tour of the area, with stops at Alexander Hamilton's
grave, the Old Merchants' Exchange and the Custom House; offered in conjunction
with "Shared Perspectives," a photography exhibition at the Museum of the City
of New York that traces the transformation of the New York in the first half of
this century; led by Marvin Gelfand, an economics historian. Sponsored by the
Museum of the City of New York. 1 P.M. Fee: $15; $10 for museum members.
Registration and meeting place: (212) 534-1672, extension 205.

May 18

"BROOKLYN: TRAIL OF TIFFANY." A bus tour of churches and clubs that hold Louis
Comfort Tiffany stained glass. Sponsored by Lou Singer Tours. 10 A.M. Fee: $25.
Reservations and meeting place: (718) 875-9084.

May 23

"EDITH WHARTON'S NEW YORK," Gramercy Park. A walking tour past Wharton's
birthplace, the church where she was married and more; led by Joyce Mendelsohn,
an urban historian. 11 A.M. Sponsored by the 92d Street Y. Fee: $17. Tickets:
(212) 996-1100.

May 29

"LITTLE RED LIGHTHOUSE," Fort Washington Park, Manhattan. A tour of the
lighthouse of storybook fame on the Hudson River, which was recently renovated;
led by the Urban Park Rangers. Free. Information and meeting place: (212)
427-4040.

May 30

"LILLIAN WALD'S NEW YORK," Lower East Side. A tour with stops ranging from the
Henry Street Settlement, home to Wald, a national leader for health care reform,
to the Episcopal church where she was married, to the Seward Park Public
Library, where she studied; led by Joyce Mendelsohn, an urban historian.
Sponsored by the 92d Street Y. 1 P.M. Fee: $15. Information and meeting place:
(212) 996-1100.

May 31

"NEW YORK IN WAR AND PEACE," lower Manhattan. A walking tour past New York's own
versions of the Boston Tea Party and Boston Massacre (known as the battle of
Golden Hill, 1770); includes New York's Vietnam Memorial. 1 P.M. Fee: $9; $7 for
students and the elderly. Sponsored by Big Onion Walking Tours. Information and
meeting place: (212) 439-1090.

All Season

GRAY LINE BUS TOURS, 900 Eighth Avenue, at 53d Street, Manhattan. Bus tours of
Manhattan, from Harlem to Battery Park, including sights like Lincoln Center,
Central Park, Striver's Row, the Apollo Theater and the Cathedral of St. John
the Divine. Other tours are geared to holiday sightseeing. Tours last two to
eight hours. Bus, boat and helicopter tours are available. Tickets: $17 to $86.
Information: (212) 397-2600.

CIRCLE LINE CRUISES, leaving from Pier 83, Hudson River at 43d Street,
Manhattan. Three-hour, 35-mile cruises around Manhattan, passing landmarks
including the Statue of Liberty, Ellis Island and the United Nations. Sailings
today through May 7, daily at 10 and 11 A.M. and 1:30 and 2:30 P.M.; on Saturday
and Sundays there are additional trips at noon and 3:30 and 7 P.M.; From May 8
to June 18, daily sailings are available every hour from 9:30 A.M. to 3:30 P.M.
(except 12:30 P.M.) and at 7 P.M. with additional cruises on Saturday and
Sunday. Tickets: $18 for all cruises ($9 for children under 12). Information:
(212) 563-3200.

PETREL, operated by Bring Sailing Back Inc., Battery Park. The Petrel, built in
New York in 1938, is a 70-foot yacht, formerly owned by the Coast Guard and a
favorite sailboat of President John F. Kennedy. Hourlong or evening sails in New
York Harbor and around the Statue of Liberty are available. Season runs through
October. Sailings begin at noon, Mondays through Fridays and at 1 P.M. on
Saturdays and Sundays; fees range from $8 to $20. Information: (212) 825-1976.

THE PIONEER, leaving from the South Street Seaport Museum and Marketplace, Pier
16, at the East River, is a two-masted schooner from 1885. Sailings begin May 1,
with daily departures at 12:30, 3:30 and 7 P.M. Admission: $15; $5 for children
2 to 12; $11 for other students; $12 for the elderly. Reservations and
information: (212) 669-9416.

THE SEAPORT LINE, offering rides on the Andrew Fletcher, a replica of a paddle
boat, from Pier 16 and the East River. Now through May 2, 90-minute sightseeing
cruise leaves daily 11 A.M. and 1 and 3 P.M. From May 3 to June 25, there is an
additional cruise at 5 P.M.  One-hour cocktail cruises are Wednesdays and
Sundays at 7 and 8:30 P.M. Sightseeing and cocktail cruises are $12 each ($11
for the elderly; $10 for students; $6 for children 2 to 12). Cruises with
dancing to recorded music and a disk jockey are Thursdays, Fridays and Saturdays
at 7 and 9:30 P.M.; tickets are $18 and $20. Information: (212) 385-0791 or
233-4800.

WORLD YACHT, leaving from Pier 81, 41st Street at the Hudson River, Manhattan.
Daily dinner cruises year-round along the West Side of Manhattan from 7 to 10
P.M., boarding at 6 P.M. Sunday through Thursday, $62; Friday and Saturday,
$69.50. Lunch cruises from noon to 2 P.M., boarding Mondays to Saturdays at 11
A.M.; $27.50 ($16 for children under 12). Sunday brunch cruises from 12:30 to
2:30 P.M., boarding at 11:30 A.M.; $39.95 ($25 under 12). Reservations and
information: (212) 630-8100.

ISLAND HELICOPTER, East River at 34th Street, Kips Bay. Tours of Manhattan, 5 to
22 minutes long, leaving continuously from 9 A.M. to 9 P.M., weather permitting.
Tickets: $47 to $119. Tickets are available at hotels and sightseeing bureaus;
those purchased at the heliport cost $5 extra. Reservations are not necessary.
Information: (212) 683-4575.

LIBERTY HELICOPTER TOURS, 12th Avenue at 30th Street, Manhattan. Tours averaging
5 to 17 minutes above Manhattan's skyscrapers, other sights in and around
Manhattan, and the Statue of Liberty run continuously from 9:30 A.M. to 9 P.M.
daily. Reservations are recommended for groups of 10 or more. Tickets: $41 to
$119. Information: (212) 967-6464.

LOAD-DATE: April 19, 1993

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Schedule

                   Copyright 1993 The New York Times Company


                              57 of 312 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                  April 18, 1993, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

ARTS AND ENTERTAINMENT;
FILM

BYLINE: By CARYN JAMES

SECTION: Section 14; Page 22; Column 4; Spring Times Supplement

LENGTH: 527 words



May

"MUCH ADO ABOUT NOTHING." Kenneth Branagh and Emma Thompson play Benedick and
Beatrice -- one of the greatest battling, made-for-each-other couples of all
time -- in this version of Shakespeare's comedy. Mr. Branagh also directs an
intriguing cast, which includes Denzel Washington, Keanu Reeves, Robert Sean
Leonard and Michael Keaton. Opens May 7.

"POSSE." "Unforgiven" may make intelligent westerns chic. In this one, Mario Van
Peebles (the director of "New Jack City") directs and stars as a cowboy who
avenges his father's death and saves an all-black town called Freemanville from
destruction. Opens May 14.

"HOT SHOTS! PART DEUX." Charlie Sheen as the ace pilot Topper Harley, Lloyd
Bridges and Valeria Golino return in this sequel to the hilarious movie spoof
"Hot Shots!" (the film that will never let you watch "Top Gun" with a straight
face again). Opens May 21.

"SLIVER." The return of Sharon Stone in an erotic murder mystery (deja vu)
written by Joe Eszterhas ("Basic Instinct") from Ira Levin's novel. She plays a
woman stalked by a voyeur. The obvious question: Does she mind? Directed by
Phillip Noyce ("Patriot Games"). Opens May 21.

"CLIFFHANGER." Sylvester Stallone comes out of the ring and out of Vietnam to
become a mountain-climber in this action-adventure directed by Renny Harlin
("Die Hard 2"). His character has been traumatized by a climbing accident, but
it couldn't have been more traumatic than the precipitous decline in the former
Rocky's career. Opens May 28.

"SUPER MARIO BROTHERS." Bob Hoskins plays Mario Mario and John Leguizamo is his
brother, Luigi, in this feature inspired by the Nintendo video game. Dennis
Hopper is their archenemy, Koopa. There's probably plenty of action here, but
not much room for Method acting. Opens May 28.

"DAVE." Kevin Kline plays a regular guy who happens to be a dead ringer for the
President of the United States. When the President dies, Dave takes over, much
to the surprise of the First Lady (Sigourney Weaver) in this political satire
directed by Ivan Reitman ("Ghostbusters"). Opens May 7.

"MADE IN AMERICA." Whoopi Goldberg and Ted Danson star in the movie that
launched 1,000 tabloid headlines. Ms. Goldberg, as the owner of a black
bookstore, is the victim of a mix-up at the sperm bank. The father of her grown
daughter is an obnoxious used-car salesman played by Mr. Danson. Opens May 28.

June

"JURASSIC PARK." Dinosaurs run amok in the season's most anticipated and
publicized movie: Steven Spielberg's version of Michael Crichton's best seller
(with the novel's grislier scenes reportedly tamed down). Genetically engineered
to be theme-park pets, the dinosaurs break loose in a frenzy of bad temper,
special effects and marketing tie-ins. Sam Neil, Laura Dern, Jeff Goldblum and
Richard Attenborough are the human stars. Opens June 11.

"ORLANDO." Sally Potter's stylized and stylish adaptation of Virginia Woolf's
novel about a man who lives for 400 youthful years and, halfway through, wakes
up as a woman, giving new meaning to the term midlife crisis. This film was the
hit of the Sundance and New Directors/New Films festivals. Opens June 11.

LOAD-DATE: April 19, 1993

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Schedule

                   Copyright 1993 The New York Times Company


                              58 of 312 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                  April 18, 1993, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

ARTS AND ENTERTAINMENT;
Television

BYLINE: By BILL CARTER

SECTION: Section 14; Page 23; Column 1; Spring Times Supplement

LENGTH: 690 words



April

"JOHN FORD." An episode of the "Biography" series about the director of classic
American westerns. The documentary by Lindsay Anderson, the British director and
Ford admirer, includes comments from Ford and stars like John Wayne, James
Stewart and Henry Fonda. Arts & Entertainment, Tuesday at 8 P.M.

"CALL OF THE WILD." An adaptation of the Jack London story about the adventurer
John Thornton and the Yukon gold rush in 1896. Rick Schroder, still trying to
complete his metamorphosis to adult star, plays Thornton. CBS, April 25 at 9
P.M.

May

"BLIND SPOT." A not-quite-so-classic entry in the "Hallmark Hall of Fame," this
contemporary story deals with an ambitious Congresswoman (Joanne Woodward) who
has missed a growing crisis of drug abuse in her own family. CBS, May 2 at 9
P.M.

"MURDER IN THE HEARTLAND." A new retelling of the Charles Starkweather murder
rampage in Nebraska in 1958, with the emphasis as much on the courtroom drama
after the spree as on the violence itself. Did his 14-year-old girlfriend, Caril
Ann Fugate, participate, or was she dragged along unwillingly? That's the angle
here. ABC, May 3 and 4, both nights at 9 P.M.

"MONSTER: A PORTRAIT OF STALIN IN BLOOD." A four-part documentary using recently
released film from Soviet archives and interviews with survivors of his reign.
The series looks at his conduct of World War II, his use of the secret police to
enforce his policy of terror, his reliance on mind-control techniques and
episodes from his private life. An interesting counterpoint to last November's
HBO film biography. Discovery Channel, beginning May 4 at 10 P.M.

"ROD STEWART: UNPLUGGED." The "Unplugged" series, which has become something of
a phenomenon in the music industry, reunites the gravel-voiced British rocker
with the guitarist Ron Wood for an acoustic version of hits like "Stay With Me,"
"Hot Legs" and "Maggie May." MTV, May 5 at 9:30 P.M.

"THE TOMMYKNOCKERS." Horror from Stephen King is becoming something of a spring
tradition. This one casts Jimmy Smits as an alcoholic poet who is the only
resident of a small Maine town not undone by the weird power of the
Tommyknockers, who emerge from a long-buried, mysterious object that a writer of
children's books finds in the woods. ABC, May 9 and 10, both nights at 9.

"THE 25TH ANNIVERSARY OF 1968." Any year could be commemorated 25 years later,
but 1968 did have more impact than most, with assassinations, riots, the Tet
offensive in Vietnam and the election of Richard Nixon as President. There is
lots of emphasis on cultural developments as well. Fox, May 11 at 9 P.M.

"THE SIMPSONS." The season finale finds young Bart distraught over the
cancellation of his favorite show, "Krusty the Clown." Once again, the show is a
star parade if you can identify the voices, including Johnny Carson (in his
first post-"Tonight" appearance) Bette Midler and Hugh Hefner (who knows what he
sounds like?). Fox, May 13 at 8 P.M.

"WILD PALMS." Surely destined to the the most talked-about show of the spring,
this six-part limited run is being called an "event series" by ABC. Set in the
near future, it is an ominous, murky, mysterious and downright weird mix of what
the network describes as "horrifying drama" and "hallucinatory soap opera." The
story unfolds at a television network run by a power-mad senator and involves
characters moving in and out of virtual reality. The cast includes James
Belushi, Dana Delany and Angie Dickinson. Oliver Stone put it all together. ABC,
beginning May 16 at 9 P.M.

"CHEERS." The finale to what has arguably been the most successful comedy in
television history is an all-night extravaganza on May 20. First, at 8 P.M.,
comes the season finale to "Seinfeld," the heir to "Cheers" as the hottest
comedy on television. At 9 there is a half-hour of "Cheers" highlights. Then at
9:30, it's the final episode itself, with Sam (Ted Danson) finally reunited with
his lost love, Diane Chambers (Shelley Long). If that's not enough, Jay Leno
will broadcast the "Tonight" show at 11:35 from the Bull and Finch bar in
Boston, the real-life model, with the entire cast. May 20.

LOAD-DATE: April 19, 1993

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Schedule

                   Copyright 1993 The New York Times Company


                              59 of 312 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                  April 18, 1993, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

The Odd Place of Homosexuality in the Military

BYLINE: By CATHERINE S. MANEGOLD

SECTION: Section 4; Page 1; Column 1; Week in Review Desk

LENGTH: 2222 words


UNTIL 1942, no specific proviso barred homosexuals from serving in the military.
That year, military psychiatrists, new to the ranks, warned of the "psychopathic
personality disorders" that would make homosexuals unfit to fight. Then they
devised supposedly foolproof guides to ferret them out: an effeminate flip of
hand or a certain nervousness when standing naked before an officer.

It never really worked. Homosexuals served throughout World War II and after. In
the repressive atmosphere of the 1950's, discharges for homosexuality soared; at
the height of the Vietnam War, when recruitment drives were at their peak,
enforcement was lax.

That military tradition of keeping out homosexuals could end on July 15, when
President Clinton has said he will lift the ban. Pentagon officials, who had
been notably recalcitrant in cooperating with the plan, said last week that they
are rushing through several studies to address key matters like housing.

As things have stood, homosexuals could serve so long as they could hide. In the
1940's, if something untoward occurred, it was ascribed to "emergency" or
"deprivation" homosexuality, according to John Costello in "Virtue Under Fire,"
a 1985 study of changing sexual mores brought about by World War II. Homosexual
interludes were discounted as sparked by frustration. The armed forces thus
maintained the facade of sexual purity (read: heterosexuality).

With President Clinton's announcement in January that the ban on homosexuals in
the military would be lifted, a military tradition became harder to keep. Gay
advocacy groups like the Campaign for Military Service saw the issue rapidly
expand into a national debate on the worthiness of homosexuals. They have spent
millions of dollars on a neatly packaged, well-advertised battle, underscored by
a march on Washington next Sunday, to win inclusion in the ranks as blacks and
women did before them.

Polls show that the nation remains divided, working its way through a subject as
fiery as abortion yet imbued with more primal fears and deep social and
religious constraints. The result has often been the rhetorical equivalent to
the fog of battle, a fog in which women have been peculiarly absent, the ghosts
of the debate.

Sex and Puritanical Roots

The argument has many voices. Some say it's a question of civil rights. Others
say combat effectiveness. Or fear. Or homophobia and a surge in gay bashing that
would devastate unit cohesiveness. Perhaps it is really about control and what
would happen to one of the last bastions of American traditionalism if its
defining social order were tampered with.

The argument is also, inevitably, about sex. That may be why keeping the subject
hidden has always had a certain intrinsic appeal in a country with puritanical
roots.

Military leaders who reject the civil rights analogy say the controversy is not
about sex or even equal rights, but the agenda of a special interest group. They
fear that complying with President Clinton's orders would set a precedent,
inviting demands for inclusion by everyone from the mentally handicapped to
other sexual minorities like transsexuals. They also argue that it is a
privilege to serve in the fighting forces, not a right. "It's a nightmare as far
as the military is concerned," said Bernard E. Trainor, a retired Marine
lieutenant general. "It threatens the strong, conservative, moralistic tradition
of the troops."

Not everyone in the military agrees. Adm. William J. Crowe Jr., a former
Chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff, told The Washington Post recently that
the argument was fueled "more by emotion than by reason." He said that the armed
forces' culture of strict discipline is, in fact, uniquely suited to control the
behavior of both homosexuals and the heterosexuals who might bash them -- more
so than civilian society.

Randy Shilts, the author of "Conduct Unbecoming," a new history of homosexuality
in the military, points to the armed forces' policies on AIDS to illustrate how
well the four services can cope with thorny problems when they must. "The armed
forces has some of the most enlightened policies on H.I.V. in the country," he
said. Discounting fears that wounded AIDS-infected soldiers might bleed on their
buddies, he cited as an example the fact that regulations already prevent those
soldiers from going into combat.

But even if the military can manage the transition, that does not necessarily
mean the controversy will fade. There is a deeper source of discontent: "They
want us to move faster than the country," said a former general who did not wish
to be identified. Sodomy laws based on religious proscriptions against sex for
sex's sake are still on the books in 24 states. The District of Columbia
recently moved to drop its sodomy law, but Congress, which has final say,
blocked a similar attempt in 1981.

The Supreme Court, too, was disinclined to undo a taboo that it says dates to
biblical times. In its 1986 decision Bowers v. Hardwick, the Court upheld
Georgia's sodomy law.

So for months now, Americans have been watching ominous shower shots on the
nightly news and wrestling with their fears. Women soldiers have voiced support
for the policy change and do not express the fear of being attacked by same-sex
predators that preoccupies some men. Many of their male comrades, some of whom
still believe that women are ancillary to the fighting troops, have made macho
threats about just what they would do if they found a gay man in their midst.

Another widespread objection is that it would feminize a male club. Enduring
images of homosexual men depict them as effeminate, therefore weak, therefore a
drain upon a mighty fighting force. Yet that ignores the role of a dominant
participant in homosexual sex, a partner who takes the aggressive "male" role.
The argument also raises the question whether anything could have feminized the
force more than women. And women are already there.

Yet some soldiers are so perturbed by the prospect of including gay men in the
ranks that they are willing to break the rules by assaulting fellow soldiers.
Their explanation is that they fear attack or unwanted sexual advances -- sexual
harassment -- as if they really don't believe that no means no. It is likely,
too, that some fear their own reactions and the prospect that they might respond
sexually. "Hatred of gay men," Ken Corbett, a psychologist, wrote in an Op-Ed
article for The New York
Times in February, "is based on fear of the self, not of an alien other." For
decades, psychologists have said that at the core of homophobia is repressed
fear and latent homosexuality.

Psychologists point to a rich history of songs, drag shows and jokes in the
military that serve to neutralize powerful feelings. As early as 1941, the
psychiatrist William Menninger described the typical soldier's wartime
relationship as one of "disguised and sublimated homosexuality," a theme given
voice in the popular war song, "My Buddy": "I miss your voice and the touch of
your hand, my buddy."

That intense companionships were both so common and so acceptable in pop culture
must have alleviated some soldiers' fears about unexpected longings. With those
fears neutralized and the relationships the cause of celebration, the military
became a safe place for the emotional intimacy so compelling to men and women
facing the chaos and terror of war.

Seen from a distance, the logic of the military's denial of homosexuality in the
ranks was simple: as long as no homosexuals were enlisted, soldiers could play
at being lovers (and even consummate the roles) without ever having to
acknowledge those feelings. Whatever happened, happened. There was a war on.

The implied double standard was made official in 1982. The Department of Defense
regulations adopted that year allow a heterosexual to have homosexual sex and to
be exonerated -- so long as he or she states that the incident was a lapse. Gay
and lesbian soldiers, by contrast, are discharged just for identifying
themselves as such.

Women More Vulnerable

Col. Margarethe Cammermeyer, a much-decorated nurse in the Army National Guard
who was discharged last May for her sexual orientation, says the ban has left
women particularly vulnerable. "There is a tremendous amount of lesbian-baiting
in the service," she said. "Any straight man who propositions a woman and she's
not interested, well, it can't be because he's not attractive. So it must be
because she's a lesbian. It's used as a threat all the time."

Because homosexuals now have to hide, anyone in the armed forces, she says, can
sabotage the career of another by making allegations about their sexuality. If
homosexuals were allowed to be open, that disruption would disappear. Though men
are equally susceptible to such accusations, they are less likely than women to
be dismissed because of their orientation. Lesbians are discharged at a rate
from two to six times higher than gay men, depending on the branch of the
service.

Several books, but most notably Allan Berube's "Coming Out Under Fire," trace
the start of a gay rights movement in America to the military itself. They argue
that the relative openness of gay and lesbian relationships in the military in
World War II eventually led to those veterans settling in port cities like San
Francisco and New York where, for the first time, they established identifiable
subcultures.

Depending on its own convenience, the military operated with a double standard:
while there were purges and discharges during that war, scores of written
accounts show an easy acceptance among the Allied forces (German S.S. officers,
in contrast, faced death by firing squad). Women in particular were likely to
escape punishment. The Women's Army Corps actually dealt with lesbianism as a
normal part of life. "A lecture to WAC officer candidates on homosexuality,
prepared by the Surgeon General's Office and revised by WAC officials," wrote
Mr. Berube, included the observation that "every person is born with a bisexual
nature." In that corps, discharge was used only as a last resort in cases that
disrupted a unit.

Men, too, often seemed to accept their gay comrades. Ben Small, a gay Army Air
Corpsman stationed near New Guinea, once wrote away for a pile of dresses for a
drag show. When the dresses arrived, he recounted in Mr. Berube's study, "Well,
here's everybody in the office from the lieutenant on down trying on dresses!
Everybody suddenly becomes a drag queen!"

Such tolerance would not last through the cold war. By the 1950's, Senator
Joseph McCarthy was well into a civilian witch hunt that would quickly bleach
the military's ranks as well. At the time, Senator McCarthy's right-hand man,
Roy Cohn, and J. Edgar Hoover of the Federal Bureau of Investigation, both
closeted themselves, presented the argument that homosexuals were the agents of
communism. "One homosexual can pollute a Government office," concluded a report
authorized by the Senate in 1950. Military discharges based on sexual
orientation doubled in the 1950's and then increased by half again in the
1960's.

When recruitment demands were high during the Vietnam War, the situation
loosened. Cal Anderson, an Army court reporter who would later join the
Washington State Assembly, recalled in "My Country, My Right to Serve," that he
was once caught in the act. The commander's reprimand was short and mild: "Now,
I don't care what people do in their own time," he told the terrified young
soldier. "But the Army doesn't feel that way, so in the future, be more
discreet."

Klinger in Drag

By 1972, the popular television show "M*A*S*H" featured a soldier who almost
always appeared in drag: Corporal Klinger, played by Jamie Farr. Though the show
stopped short of explicitly dealing with his sexuality -- always leaving open
the question that he was merely trying to get a discharge -- the character
became one of the most beloved in the series.

Today, many senior officers see the issue in a long historical perspective.
Steeped in military lore that traces homosexuality to pre-Christian history,
they point to tales of homosexuality on the front lines from the Sacred Band of
Thebes in 338 B.C. (where each soldier was said to be a lover of another) to
such military giants as Alexander the Great, Richard the Lion-Hearted and T. E.
Lawrence (popularly known as Lawrence of Arabia). Seen in that context, said a
retired general, the issue becomes more a matter of management than revolution.

In an open letter to his soldiers printed in the Marine magazine "Leatherneck"
last month, Gen. Carl E. Mundy Jr., the Marine Corps Commandant, advised: "We
are made up not of individuals who seek self-identity, but of selfless men and
women who place country and corps ahead of self . . . whatever their privately
held preferences or belief may be." He urged tolerance: "We treat all marines
with firmness, fairness and dignity."

Those comments were supportive, but typically oblique. General Trainor, who now
directs the national security program at Harvard's Kennedy School of Government,
may have encapsulated the military's gut reaction best. Given half a choice, he
said, the military would have looked long and hard at the matter and then
decided: "Listen, I'd rather not deal with it."

LOAD-DATE: April 19, 1993

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1993 The New York Times Company


                              60 of 312 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                  April 18, 1993, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

APRIL 11-17;
Clashing Claims, Reopened Wounds

BYLINE: By STEVEN A. HOLMES

SECTION: Section 4; Page 2; Column 4; Week in Review Desk

LENGTH: 247 words


Particularly for those American business executives who hope the 18-year
estrangement between the United States and Vietnam is coming to end, the report
could not have come at a worse moment: four days before a special United States
envoy was to travel to Hanoi to ascertain whether the Vietnamese were
cooperating in the search for missing Americans, a stunning document surfaced
suggesting that Hanoi has misled the United States about the number of prisoners
it has held.

The report, dug up in Moscow by Stephen J. Morris, a Harvard-based researcher
who opposes rapprochement with the communist regime in Vietnam, states that in
September 1972, Hanoi held 1,205 American prisoners. If accurate, the figure is
twice the 591 American P.O.W.s that North Vietnam released in 1973. It would
also suggest that Hanoi either killed the rest or, as some claim, is still
holding them.

While some experts have said the document -- a Russian-language translation of a
Vietnamese report -- is authentic, others have sought to debunk some of its
assertions.

But the report has been accepted as gospel by the group of hard-line advocates
of the notion that Hanoi has not been forthcoming about the fate of the 2,260
Americans still listed as missing. It has also opened old divisons surrounding
the only war the United States has ever lost and created another headache for
President Clinton, who, the M.I.A. advocates like to point out, avoided military
service during the war.

LOAD-DATE: April 19, 1993

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo: The supposed remains of an American soldier released by Vietnam
this month. (Reuters)

                   Copyright 1993 The New York Times Company


                              61 of 312 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                  April 18, 1993, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

NEWS SUMMARY

SECTION: Section 1; Page 2; Column 5; Metropolitan Desk

LENGTH: 674 words



International 3-21

TIGHTER NOOSE ON BELGRADE


The Security Council, after winning a promise that Russia would abstain, voted
for much tighter sanctions against Belgrade for its role in backing the
aggressive Serbian forces in Bosnia.  1

SERBIAN VICTORY IN BOSNIA

U.N. officials in Sarajevo said Bosnian and Serbian military commanders had
agreed to a cease-fire in Srebrenica, apparently assuring that the Serbian
forces can occupy the Muslim town.  16

The U.S. says it can prove Belgrade helped shell Srebrinica.  17

SEPARATIST VIOLENCE IN KASHMIR

The Kashmir Valley, a mostly Muslim region seeking independence from
predominantly Hindu India, has been engulfed by a storm of violence between the
two groups, and large sections of the city of Srinagar have been burned.  1

COLOMBIA HITS REBELS IN PURSE

With guerrillas waging war on Colombia's oil industry, the authorities are
fighting back with a new strategy that relies on economic tools like setting
bounty for rebels and freezing assets of extortion targets.  12

Egypt calls a spring fainting epidemic mass hysteria.  6

Violence has halted famine aid deliveries in Sudan.  7

Conservative leader held in South Africa leader's killing.  9

Rocket attack on Red Cross hospital kills 3 in Kabul.  18

Democracy struggles with old problems in Nepal.  19

A new document renews an old theory about Vietnam POWs.  20

National 22-36

2 POLICE OFFICERS GUILTY

A jury convicted a police sergeant and the officer who delivered the most blows
to Rodney King and acquitted two other officers.  1

WELCOME CALM IN LOS ANGELES

In neighborhoods throughout the city, a cloud of gloom lifted with the verdict
in the beating trial.  1

IN THE END, A CRIMINAL CASE

News analysis: After all the political pressures, the rioting and continuing
social tensions, the trial became a simple criminal case.  33

REMEMBERING THE HOLOCAUST

The architecture of the new Holocaust Memorial Museum in Washington is intended
to evoke the destruction of European Jewry.  22

NEW CHIEF, OLD PROBLEMS, AT YALE

Richard Levin, Yale University's 22d president, faces a $22 million deficit and
worries on campus about academic restructuring.  23

TERROR ON RESERVATIONS

Killings on an Indian reservations in Washington State have raised alarm and
prompted accusations that the F.B.I. has not done enough.  24

DIVISION OVER GAY MARCH

A week before a gay march on Washington, leaders of gay and lesbian
organizations are rallying behind the President.  24

G.O.P. COUNTERS CLINTON PLAN

Congressional Republicans held town meetings in 13 states to criticize the
President's economic stimulus package.  26

Metro 37-47

MORE WORK BUT FEWER JOBS

Scores of New York City employers are producing ever more work with ever fewer
people, an innovation that could help rejuvenate the city's economy. But it is a
disaster in terms of producing jobs.  1

LIVING UNDER AN ARMY IN BLUE

Despite all the hubris he displays against constant threats in his tough Hunts
Point, Bronx, neighborhood, Freddie Cherokee Brown says that he is unsettled by
a larger, tougher, crew: the New York City Police Department.  1

POOR HIT HARD BY SANITATION CUTS

The sharp cuts in New York City's sanitation budget during the fiscal crises of
1990-91 have hit poor minority residents far harder than wealthier ones,
scarring once-orderly blocks in Harlem, Bedford-Stuyvesant and the South Bronx.
37

An audit of New York's largest insurer is critical of management.  37

Little noticed in years past, a school board races in the spotlight.  39

Obituaries 46-47

Turgut Ozal, President of Turkey.  46

Peter F. Fleischmann, ex-president of The New Yorker magazine.  46

Nikita Khrushchev's son wants to be an American resident.  22

Officials try to arrange another broadcast by Ohio inmates.  30

LOAD-DATE: April 19, 1993

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Summary

                   Copyright 1993 The New York Times Company


                              62 of 312 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                  April 18, 1993, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

Old M.I.A. Theory Is Given a New Life

BYLINE: By STEPHEN ENGELBERG,  Special to The New York Times

SECTION: Section 1; Page 20; Column 4; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 1670 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, April 17


A document recently unearthed in Moscow has breathed new life into one of this
city's most enduring conspiracy theories: that the Reagan and Bush
Administrations covered up attempts by Vietnam to trade American prisoners of
war for cash.

The theory, which remains unproved, holds that Vietnam held back hundreds of
P.O.W.s to make sure Washington paid war reparations, and then kept them as
bargaining chips when no aid was forthcoming.

Proponents of this view see two new pieces of supporting evidence in the Sept.
15, 1972, document, whose authenticity is still in dispute. In it, a
high-ranking Vietnamese military officer, identified as Gen. Tran Van Quang,
wrote that Hanoi was holding 1,205 American prisoners, 837 more than it publicly
acknowledged.

The officer explicitly linked the captives' release to economic aid and other
concessions from the United States, saying, "Nixon must compensate North Vietnam
for those enormous losses which the destructive war caused." Hanoi denies the
authenticity of the document.

Only 591 Released

Eleven days later, at the Paris peace talks, Le Duc Tho, the Vietnamese
negotiator, told American negotiators that the issue of prisoners was tied to
"the question of reparations," according to transcripts since made public.

When the war ended, Hanoi released only 591 prisoners. That was 400 to 600 fewer
than American military officials had estimated were still alive. Eugene Tighe, a
retired lieutenant general who once headed the Defense Intelligence Agency, said
in an interview this week that he had helped draw up a list of 900 to 1,000
names of men presumed to be prisoners in 1973.

Relatively little was done to resolve this discrepancy in the Nixon, Ford and
Carter Administrations. A Senate report released in January said that from 1975
to 1983, intelligence agencies had assigned a very low priority to collecting
data on troops missing in action.

Congress repeatedly refused to authorize any money for rebuilding Vietnam and by
the 1980's rumors were circulating in Washington and Asia that Vietnam was
seeking discreetly to trade live P.O.W.'s for cash.

No Conclusive Proof Found

Those reports were repeatedly denied by officials in both the Reagan and Bush
Administrations, and a recent inquiry by a Senate select committee failed to
find conclusive proof either of such offers or a conspiracy to conceal them.

But the suspicions of Government wrongdoing persist, fueled by a stream of
first-hand accounts from refugees and others that Americans are imprisoned in
Southeast Asia. Those who believe the Vietnamese are holding Americans point to
Vietnam's record in its war with France.

An expert formerly involved in investigations of Americans missing in Vietnam
said that when the French withdrew in 1954, the Government agreed to pay an
annual fee to Vietnam to maintain graves and continue resolution of casualties.

In 1986, rather than pay a yearly charge, France agreed to an unspecified lump
sum, which was said by some to be about $360 million worth of grants and credits
to buy French goods. Whatever the sum, Vietnam suddenly released 25,000 French
remains in six months in 1986.

After that, some Vietnamese working on that program were transferred to American
searches.

"This is our country's greatest state secret," insisted J. Thomas Burch Jr.,
chairman of the National Vietnam Veterans Coalition. "They've known these men
were there and they've covered it up."

Mr. Burch is a lawyer for the source of one of the most tantalizing stories, an
account by a Secret Service agent of a 1981 conversation he says he overheard
between President Reagan and his senior aides. According to the agent, the
Government of Vietnam was offering to sell live P.O.W.s for $4.5 billion.

Senator Robert C. Smith, the New Hampshire Republican who was vice chairman of
the Senate select committee, said in an interview that he learned of the agent's
story in the mid-1980's. Mr. Smith, a member of the House of Representatives at
the time, demanded a meeting with President Reagan and Vice President Bush and
confronted them with the allegation in the Oval Office. Both denied it.

In 1992, when the Senate committee was investigating the matter further, the
Secret Service agent refused to testify unless he was subpoenaed, saying he
feared losing his job. The Treasury Department said Congressional testimony by a
Secret Service agent would set a bad precedent, and a majority of the committee
agreed.

When Richard Allen, Mr. Reagan's national security adviser at the time of the
supposed offer, was questioned by the committee in 1992, he initially recalled
an offer of $4 billion. Later, he said he had been mistaken, and that his
recollection was of being asked about the issue years later. In an interview,
Mr. Allen said that if the question had arisen during his tenure, he would have
supported looking into it further.

Senator Smith said that Max Hugel, who was head of operations for the Central
Intelligence Agency at the time, told him recently that the offer was well known
to senior intelligence officials, and that the P.O.W.'s were to come out through
Laos on Jan. 26, 1981. During his deposition to the committee, however, Mr.
Hugel denied any knowledge of the issue or of having said anything about it to
the Senator.

Senator Smith himself says he no longer believes the story told by the Secret
Service agent. "If I sit in the Oval Office and ask a straightforward question
-- and they tell me the answer is "No" -- and then we have a guy that won't come
forward, where does that leave you?" he asked. "I'm siding with the President."

Proponents of the conspiracy theory suggest that the Reagan Administration was
ignoring reports about the P.O.W.'s because it was afraid of being trapped into
the sort of hostage crisis that crippled the Carter Presidency.

The Reagan Administration's actions cast doubt on that hypothesis. In early
1981, when it received intelligence reports on a possible prison camp in Laos,
the Administration sent Laotian operatives into the jungle to search for
confirmation. The search proved inconclusive; the team was permitted to look
into the compound's buildings only from a distance.

Another opportunity arose in 1984, when a person with contacts in Southeast
Asia, identified in the Senate report as I. Irving Davidson, was told by a
general in Indonesia that the Vietnamese were willing to discuss with Washington
the sale of both remains and live P.O.W.s. In this instance, a Government paper
trail exists. Paul Wolfowitz, at the time a senior State Department official,
wrote a memo to Secretary of State George P. Shultz that referred to the offer
of "possible live P.O.W.s."

Richard Childress, the National Security Council's senior expert on Asia,
traveled to Hanoi, met with a member of the Politburo and was told that the only
thing the Vietnamese were ready to discuss was the return of remains.

The committee sent investigators to Indonesia to try to trace the report
further, and even that led to conflicting testimony. The general said his
original offer mentioned only remains; the general's brother, who was also
involved, said the Vietnamese had included live P.O.W.s.

A final incident that has fueled speculation in Washington surrounds a February
1977 C.I.A. report. In it, Senator Smith said an Indonesian diplomat quoted the
Vietnamese Vice Foreign Minister, Min Phan Hien, as saying that his country was
holding P.O.W.s who would be released only if the United States provided aid.

A declassified version of the document, which does not identify the name of the
Vietnamese official who is speaking, says that data on M.I.A.s were "a trump
card" for Vietnam in coming talks with the United States.

William Hendon, a former Republican Congressman from North Carolina who is one
of the most vocal advocates of the conspiracy theory, said he saw the complete
version of the document while working for the Pentagon in 1983 as a consultant
on P.O.W. issues. Although the document does not specifically identify a source,
Mr. Hendon said he believed the Indonesian diplomat's account of the
conversation had been picked up by a listening device secretly planted in
Indonesia by the C.I.A.

A C.I.A. spokesman said Friday the agency now views the report as a
"fabrication."

In 1986, a Pentagon panel headed by General Tighe reviewed the existing
intelligence files and concluded that there was a "strong possibility" that
Americans were still being held in Vietnam.

According to Mr. Hendon, William J. Casey, Director of Central Intelligence at
the time, told several members of Congress in October 1986 that he had the same
opinion, but could not take any action unless the Americans were seen by "two of
my men." Mr. Hendon later prepared a sworn affidavit that quoted Mr. Casey as
telling the group, "What do you want, another hostage crisis?" Mr. Casey died in
1987.

In its 585-page report, in January, the Senate Committee quoted sworn testimony
from most of the major figures in American policy that a conspiracy of silence
would have been impossible to carry out. Several noted that such an effort would
require the support of thousands of people scattered through the military and
intelligence agencies for a period of 20 years.

"The isolated bits of information out of which some have constructed whole
labyrinths of intrigue and deception have not withostood the tests of objective
investigation," the report said. "The vast archives of secret U.S. documents
that some felt contained incriminating evidence have been thoroughly examined by
the committee only to find that the conspiracy cupboard is bare."

                             --------------------


U.S. ENVOY DUE IN HANOI

HANOI, Vietnam, April 17 (AP) -- Gen. John W. Vessey Jr., retired, President
Clinton's envoy, is scheduled to arrive in Hanoi on Sunday to assess Vietnamese
cooperation as part of a fresh search for Americans missing in action from the
Vietnam War.

LOAD-DATE: April 19, 1993

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo: Gen. Tran Van Quang, identified as the author of a 1972 document
that suggests Hanoi was holding 837 more American prisoners than it had
acknowledged. (Reuters, 1992)

                   Copyright 1993 The New York Times Company


                              63 of 312 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                  April 18, 1993, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

30-Something Get-Together: A Scorecard

BYLINE: By ANITA GATES

SECTION: Section 2; Page 11; Column 1; Arts & Leisure Desk

LENGTH: 833 words


They were young together; now they're older. Something has brought them to the
same house for just a few days. They eat, drink, make love, revert to past
behaviors and talk their pet issues to death. In 1990, when John Sayles created
seven former student radicals who had once been arrested together in Secaucus,
N.J., this was a new idea. Now it's a genre. But never let it be said that all
reunion movies are exactly alike. Times change but the plots barely do, as is
evident int he latest entry, "Indian Summer," which opens on Friday. Here are
some of the elements that have made the four films memorable.

The Return of the Secaucus Seven (1980)
*THE SETUP
Seven old college and Vista (Volunteers in Service to America) friends reunite
for a weekend at a nondescript house in New England.
*THE CAST
Jeff (Mark Arnott), Chip (Gordon Clapp), Frances (Maggie Counsineau), J.T. (Adam
Lefevre), Mike (Bruce MacDonald), Irene (Jean Passanante), Katie (Maggie Renzi),
Ron (David Strathaim), Maura (Karen Trott)
*REQUISITE OUTSIDERS
Two: Chip, Irene's preppy boyfriend, and Ron, a local mechanic
*THESIS IN A LINE
"What's a reunion without a little drama?"
*RELEVANT DEATHS
One deer ("Bambicide")
*DINNER CONVERSATION
Political and professional idealism
*SUBSTANCE ABUSE
Marijuana, alcohol
*OVERT FAILED SEDUCTIONS BY WOMEN WITH TICKING BIOLOGICAL CLOCKS
None, perhaps because of the characters' attitude toward children ("There but
for the grace of Ovulin 21 go I.")
*DISEASES MENTIONED
A passing reference to Legionnaries' disease
*FINEST MUSICAL MOMENTS
A barside discussion of progressive rock ("Even the back beat is full of
nuances"); J.T. on acoustic guitar
*SPORTS OF CHOICE
Volleyball, basketball (men only), sunbathing, skinny-dipping (men only)

The Big Chill (1983)
*THE SETUP
Seven old college friends reunite for a weekend at a beautiful rambling house in
the South.
*THE CAST
Sam (Tom Berenger), Sarah (Glenn Close), Michael (Jeff Goldblum), Nick (William
Hurt), Harold (Kevin Kline), Meg (Mary Kay Place), Chloe (Meg Tilly), Karen
(JoBeth Williams), Richard (Don Galloway)
*REQUISITE OUTSIDERS
Two: Richard, Karen's husband, and Chloe, the girlfriencd of Alex (who has just
committed suicide)
*THESIS IN A LINE
"How much sex, fun, friendship can one man take?"
*RELEVANT DEATHS
Alex (suicide)
*DINNER CONVERSATION
Political idealism and career disillusionment
*SUBSTANCE ABUSE
Marijuana, cocaine, Quaaludes, a variety of unidentified capsules
*OVERT FAILED SEDUCTIONS BY WOMEN WITH TICKING BIOLOGICAL CLOCKS
Two: Meg's play for Sam and for Nick, who responds: "Did I ever tell you what
happened to me in Vietnam?"
*DISEASES MENTIONED
Herpes
*FINEST MUSICAL MOMENTS
The Rolling Stones' "You Can't Always Get What You Want," played on the church
organ at Alex's funeral; a baby singing the line "Jeremiah was a bullfrog" from
Three Dog Night's "Joy to the World"
*SPORTS OF CHOICE
Jogging, football, stretch-and-tone workouts

Peter's Friends (1992)
*THE SETUP
Six old college friends reunite for a weekend at an English country house the
size of Brideshead.
*THE CAST
Roger (Hugh Laurie), Mary (Imelda Staunton), Peter (Stephen Fry), Maggie (Emma
Thompson), Andrew (Kenneth Branagh), Sara (Alphonsia Emmanuel), Carol (Rita
Rudner), Brian (Tony Slattery)
*REQUISITE OUTSIDERS
Two: Carol, Andrew's American wife, and Brian Sarah's latest amour
*THESIS IN A LINE
"I didn't say I had my life figured out. I have your life figured out."
*RELEVANT DEATHS
Peter's father, Roger and Mary's child
*DINNER CONVERSATION
G.K. Chesterton
*SUBSTANCE ABUSE
Alcohol, food
*OVERT FAILED SEDUCTIONS BY WOMEN WITH TICKING BIOLOGICAL CLOCKS
One: Maggie's play for Peter, who responds: "No, no, no, by all things godly,
no."
*DISEASES MENTIONED
AIDS
*FINEST MUSICAL MOMENTS
Tina Turner's "What's Love Got to Do With It?" as accompaniment to a midnight
food binge
*SPORTS OF CHOICE
Thighmaster and step workouts

Indian Summer (April 1993)
*THE SETUP
Seven old friends reunite for a weekend at their childhood summer camp in
Ontario.
*THE CAST
Unca Lou(Alan Arkin), Matthew (Vincent Spano), Kelly (Julia Warner), Jennifer
(Elizabeth Perkins), Brad (Kevin Pollak), Beth (Diane Lane), Jack (Bill Paxton),
Jamie (Matt Craven), Gwen (Kimberly Williams), Stick (Sam Raimi)
*REQUISITE OUTSIDERS
Two: Gwen, Jamie's fiancee, and Stick, the former camp caretaker's son
*THESIS IN A LINE
Beth's husband
*DINNER CONVERSATION
The munchies
*SUBSTANCE ABUSE
Mariguana, alochol
*OVERT FAILED SEDUCTIONS BY WOMEN WITH TICKING BIOLOGICAL CLOCKS
None, but one 21-year-old character describes her biological clock as already
ticking
*DISEASES MENTIONED
Many, indirectly, in a discussion of safe sex ("There's germs out there the size
of sea lions.")
*FINEST MUSICAL MOMENTS
Tommy James and the Shondells' "Crimson and Clover" at the dance party
*SPORTS OF CHOICE
Swimming, sailing, running, canoe racing and coed boxing

LOAD-DATE: May 14, 1993

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photos of scenes from the films "The Return of the Secaucus Seven",
"The Big Chill", "Peter's Friends" and "Indian Summer"

                   Copyright 1993 The New York Times Company


                              64 of 312 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                  April 18, 1993, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

POP MUSIC;
Israeli Pop Finds a Harder Edge for Its Voice

BYLINE: By CARA GREENBERG;  Cara Greenberg writes frequently about popular
culture.

SECTION: Section 2; Page 26; Column 1; Arts & Leisure Desk

LENGTH: 1387 words

DATELINE: TEL AVIV


Aviv Geffen, a 19-year-old Israeli rock star, says his record company, Hed Arzi,
would like him to tone down his anger just a little. His second album, now being
recorded, contains a cut called "I Hate." In the litany of things Mr. Geffen
hates are "Hatikva" (the Israeli national anthem), religious people ("I tell
them to go study with the monkeys") and Adam and Eve ("Adam was horny, and Eve
was a nymphomaniac").

"The company doesn't like that I go so far," he says. "It wants me to be a
little bit nice. I could be selling even more if I wore a tie and a big smile
and said, 'Hi, everybody.' "

But the singer and songwriter has no intention of toning down. Mr. Geffen, who
says he received a psychiatric exemption from army duty, has used his
antimilitary views to become the first Israeli musician to build a career on
sheer iconoclasm. When his band plays Roxanne, a warehouse club here with all
the intimacy of an airplane hangar, some 2,000 mostly teen-age fans routinely
show up, and they know all the words.

Mr. Geffen is perhaps the crest of a gathering wave of Israeli songwriters who,
tired of hostilities surrounding their country's occupation of the West Bank and
Gaza Strip, are confronting touchy subjects like politics and social issues.

Ehud Banai, the leader of the Refugees, draws on his experiences as a laborer in
songs about inequities he sees between Arabs and Jews in Israel. His three
albums have sold at least 20,000 copies each. (In Israel's tiny market, that
means they've gone gold; 40,000 is platinum.) Similarly, Friends of Natasha has
become highly regarded by critics; the band came to public attention several
years ago with "Daddy's and Mommie's Punching Bags," a song about child abuse,
an issue that had not been openly acknowledged in Israeli society. Other protest
singers include Si Hi-Man and Nurit Galron, both of whom have condemned the
Israeli Army's crackdown on Palestinians and been publicly vilified for it.

For Israel, this is heady stuff. The new outspokenness is in sharp contrast to
the longtime staples of Israeli popular music -- Mediterranean-style love songs
and sentimental ballads that extol the "beautiful land of Israel." Until
recently, Mr. Banai says, "Israeli music was opium for the people.  There was no
connection between popular music and the tensions we felt. Writers and film
makers dealt with it, but songwriters did not."

MTV Europe, which was introduced in Israel in 1990, has helped change the
musical landscape, in part by encouraging an indigenous rock-and-roll. "Five
years ago, there were 10 Israeli rock bands," says Yoav Kutner, a disk jockey on
Israeli Army Radio and a rock critic for the newspaper Yediot Aharanot. "Now
there are 500."

Israeli musicians are coming late to the protest genre. During the height of the
Vietnam era, the heyday of American antiwar music, Israelis were exulting over
their victory in the Six-Day War. In a country where compulsory military service
for men and women is almost universally accepted as necessary, rebelliousness
has never been marketable. "In America, you can be on the fringe and still make
a nice living," Mr. Kutner says. "But in Israel, where the most successful
albums sell 50,000 copies, nobody can survive if he's not a consensus artist."

Sharon Dery, an executive at NMC Records in Tel Aviv, whose roster includes Mr.
Banai and Ms. Galron, says many Israeli musicians avoid political involvement
because they are concerned about repercussions from listeners who disagree with
their views. "They're afraid of rocks being thrown through their windows," she
says.

Another problem for would-be protest singers is getting airplay for songs
critical of Israeli society. There are only four radio stations in Israel, and
they are controlled by either the Government or the army. Paradoxically, the
most sympathetic disk jockey is Mr. Kutner, who is heard daily on the army
station Galei Zahal. "I was the only one who played Aviv Geffen's album for the
first six months," he says, adding that there have been only two or three
occasions in 10 years on which he has been forbidden to play a song.

Batya Shoshany, spokeswoman for Galei Zahal, says there are no strict guidelines
on what gets played. "Every song is considered individually," she says.
"Problems only arise when you play a song and people call in because they don't
like the words." She points out that Ms. Hi-Man's "Shooting and Weeping" was
taken off the air after listeners complained that the song was sympathetic to
the Palestinian cause.

A 1989 song by Ms. Galron, "Apres Nous le Deluge," about a young Palestinian
girl losing an eye to an Israeli soldier's bullet, was not actually banned, but
Mr. Kutner contends that it was a victim of red tape. "Every time I wanted to
play it," he recalls, "I had to get special permission, which took a long time."

The song was a departure from the love songs Ms. Galron had sung for much of her
15-year career, which has produced 12 albums and something of an American
following. She says she received threatening calls after the song was played on
radio. "I wanted to make people uncomfortable, and it worked," she says. "I knew
I was going to get flak. But they painted me as a traitor and that was very
painful."

With her new album, "Within the Storms," Ms. Galron returns to familiar terrain.
"I'm not sitting here in a bubble," she says. "But I've learned that by singing
protest songs, you're not going to convince the unconvinced."

Younger, less established musicians feel freer. Mr. Geffen's angry-young-man
persona is serving him well. His first album, "It's Only the Light of the Moon,"
released a year ago, made him an instant pariah. But the album's hard-rocking
"General" became a hit. With a chorus that translates, "General! The army's in
shell shock! Can't you see?," the song antagonizes some concertgoers.

"They buy my tickets just to heckle me," Mr. Geffen says. "It reminds me of the
reaction to Sinead O'Connor's tearing up the picture of the Pope."

Chaim Shemesh, an official of Hed Arzi, says that because of the provocative
lyrics of "I Hate," the label plans to limit the song's distribution.  Rather
than release it as a single for radio play, "I Hate" will be available only on
Mr. Geffen's album. "What Aviv's saying is very strong," he says. "We want it
only for those who choose to buy it."

Mr. Banai's latest album, "The Third," released last fall, features a song
called "All the Time in the Air," a soldier's confession to an army psychiatrist
of his doubts about following orders. A member of a well-known family of
artists, Mr. Banai discovered protest music while in the army during the early
1970's. "I remember this feeling that I had to be a war hero, and listening to
Bob Dylan and John Lennon saying completely the opposite," he says. Mr. Banai's
experience working in unskilled construction jobs alongside Arabs from the
occupied territories is reflected in songs like "Mix the Plaster, Ahmed," a
doleful ballad about the travails of Gazans. Another song, "Hard Black Labor,"
speaks of the hardships and indignities suffered by Ethiopian immigrants to
Israel and asks, "Who can say that Abraham wasn't black?"

Mr. Banai, whose music ranges from straightforward folk-rock narratives to
traditional Middle-Eastern styles, believes his low-key approach has helped him
avoid controversy. "I give a feeling in my songs that I'm not criticizing
Israeli society as much as wondering out loud," he says. "I'm not here to
educate you. I'm here with you."

Friends of Natasha also addresses its political concerns indirectly.  "We're not
singing the news," says Micha Shitrit, a singer and guitarist in the group. "If
you want to say something, you go to the backs of people's heads, to the
subconscious -- not between the eyes."

The lyrics of the songs he co-writes with Arkadi Duchin are surrealistic and
subversive in a quiet way. "The Idiot" is an allegory that pokes fun at military
men, kings and power grabbers, while "Keep Moving" urges listeners to maintain
their individuality while remaining sensitive to the welfare of others.

"First, we have to open people's feelings," Mr. Shitrit says. "We have to be the
pumice that wears down the callus. After that, we can talk about everything
directly."

LOAD-DATE: April 19, 1993

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photos: Aviv Geffen -- A rock star who has built a career on sheer
iconoclasm. (Rina Castelnuovo for The New York Times)(pg. 26); Ehud Banai, the
leader of the Refugees -- The singer believes that his low-key approach has
helped him avoid controversy. (Gadi Dagon)(pg. 29)

                   Copyright 1993 The New York Times Company


                              65 of 312 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                  April 19, 1993, Monday, Late Edition - Final

NEWS SUMMARY

SECTION: Section A; Page 2; Column 5; Metropolitan Desk

LENGTH: 1160 words



International A2-14

SERBIA FACES TOUGH ACTION
The draconian economic blockade approved by the United Nations Security Council
threatens to plunge Serbia into an isolation as deep as Iraq's unless its
President convinces the leader of Bosnia's Serbs to make peace.  A1

PEACEKEEPERS ENTER SREBRENICA
A contingent of United Nations soldiers from Canada entered the Muslim enclave
of Srebrenica to create a United Nations-monitored "safe area," one of the
points in an accord signed before dawn by leaders of Muslim and Bosnian Serbs.
A14


SERB LEADER HOLDS OUT ON PLAN
Radovan Karadzic, the Bosnian Serb leader, stood firm against signing the United
Nations peace plan for Bosnia despite a vote for new sanctions in the United
Nations Security Council.  A14

NO JOY IN YELTSIN'S HOMETOWN
A week before a crucial referendum for support of Boris Yeltsin's pol icies, the
people of his home base of Yekaterinburg say they are tired and increasingly
unenthusiastic about his program of economic reforms.  A3

POLAND CONFRONTS ITS PAST
Preparing for the 50th anniversary of the Warsaw Ghetto, Poland is confronting
the history and consequences of the killing of three million Polish Jews by the
Nazis.  A8

Warsaw Ghetto anniversary brings back the horror in Israel.  A8

ITALY VOTING ON A CLEAN SLATE
Italy's 47.5 million voters began two days of voting on eight referendums on
whether to make major changes in their government, which has been flooded with
corruption charges over the past year.  A8

PAKISTAN GOVERNMENT DISMISSED
After months of political turmoil, Pakistan's President, Ghulam Ishaq Khan,
dismissed Prime Minister Nawaz Sharif, accusing him of corruption and
mismanagement, and dissolved Parliament.  A3

U.S. PLANE FIRES ON IRAQI SITE
An American warplane fired on and was thought to have destroyed an Iraqi radar
site outside the no-flight zone in northern Iraq when the radar threatened an
Air Force monitoring patrol by electronically locking onto it, the Pentagon
said.  A2

17 SLAIN IN SOUTH AFRICA
Gunmen killed 17 people in a series of attacks in Sebokeng, a township near
Johannesburg, the police said. Twelve others were wounded.  A5

NUCLEAR WASTE FEAR IN TIBET
A Tibetan organization has accused China of conducting nuclear-weapons research
in Tibet and dumping radioactive waste there.  A13

San Luis Potosi Journal: An opponent's legacy pales.  A4

Palestinians kill an Israeli lawyer in the Gaza Strip.  A6

Vietnam offers evidence that document on P.O.W.'s is a fraud.  A13

National A16-17, B10-12

HEALTH REFORM'S RISKS EMERGE
Attention is turning to the costs of the new benefits being considered in
President Clinton's health reform package, and as the options for raising the
money also come into focus, so do the political risks that may accompany such
proposals.  A1

DOLE IS HITTING HIS STRIDE
After eight years of trying to serve the competing interests of two Republican
Presidents and a few dozen Republican senators as the party's leader in the
Senate, Bob Dole is in a role that is more suited to his personality: the
scrappy underdog challenging a popular President.  A1

POLLUTION BATTLE IS GROWING
Vice President Gore's proposal to commit the United States to holding the amount
of global-warming pollutants at 1990 levels is drawing fire from two Cabinet
members, aides said.  A17

STILL BLEAK IN LOS ANGELES
In the year since the riots in Los Angeles, $500 million in pledges from
businesses have done little to revive the bleak economy that persists in the
inner city.  A1

RELIEF MASKS CONCERNS
As Los Angeles breathed easier with the calm that followed the verdict in the
civil rights trial of four police officers, some public figures pointed out that
the convictions did not solve the city's problems.  B11

THE DEFENDANT AS VICTIM
Parishioners and priests at Sgt. Stacey Koon's church viewed him as the victim
in a case that has left him at the point of financial ruin, his marriage
stressed and his children having seen his name dragged through the mud.  B11

THE NANCY DREW LEGACY
For many young women, the detective adventures of Nancy Drew, the teen-age
heroine of more than 100 books since 1930, is a legacy, a spiritual treasure
passed on from one generation to the next.  A1

WHERE HILL VS. THOMAS RAGES ON
The testimony of Anita Hill against Clarence Thomas remains a divisive issue in
her home state of Oklahoma, where a plan to honor her with an endowed chair in
her name at her law school has produced rancorous protest.  A1

NEW YORK ON THE WILAMETTE
The World Trade Center and the accents were easy to replicate, but the big
challenge of filming "Terror in the Towers" in Portland, Ore., was doing
something about the green vistas and the quiet.  A16

SCALLOPERS AND THE LAW
Scallopers in New Bedford, Mass., have found themselves locked in a battle with
Federal agents who are enforcing regulations that make the fishermen feel and
sometimes behave, like criminals.  A16

The standoff at an Ohio prison entered its seventh day.  A16

Gunman opens fire at at Sacramento's main library, killing two.  A17

Metro Digest B1

A SURVIVOR, 50 YEARS LATER
Lillian Lazar is tiny, and it is hard to imagine her attacking a German soldier
with scissors 50 years ago. Yesterday, she was one of the Holocaust survivors at
a service in memory of the Warsaw ghetto uprising.  A1

Sports C1-10

Baseball: Mets fall to Reds.  C1
Rangers thump Yanks.  C7
Phillies outslug Cubs.  C6
Viola shuts out White Sox.  C7
Basketball: Doc Rivers dodges trouble.  C4
Nets' remarkable comeback.  C4
Magic still in playoff running.  C4
Columns: Anderson on Montana C8
Football: Montana reconsiders decision.  C8
Jets consider draft prospects.  C8
Hockey: Penguins beat Devils.  C1
Capitals defeat Islanders.  C2
Blues one up on Blackhawks.  C3
Horse Racing: Derby field depleted.  C3
Marathon: Boston legends cutting corners.  C8

Editorials/Op-Ed A18-19

Editorials

Ever more money for intelligence.
Tax balloons and common sense.
Casual justice in the Iraq case.
Wicks Law reform can't wait.

Letters

Anthony Lewis: Waiting for Clinton.
William Safire: The case for "compellance."
Robin W. Winks: National parks aren't Disneylands.
Wallace Stegner: Temporary survival.

Business Digest D1

Obituaries B13

Edmund C. Horman, search for missing child inspired film.

Arts/Entertainment C11-18

Farrakhan plays Mendelssohn.  C16
Theater: "Ain't Broadway Grand." C11
"Seconds Out." C14
Music: Met completes a "Ring." C11
Nigerian singer.  C14
Dance: In review. C12
Word and Image:
"Old Times" and "Look Back in Anger," on Bravo.  C11
A literary study of Shylock.  C18
Replacement for David Letterman?  C18

LOAD-DATE: April 19, 1993

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Summary

                   Copyright 1993 The New York Times Company


                              66 of 312 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                  April 19, 1993, Monday, Late Edition - Final

Hanoi Offers Documents on P.O.W.'s

BYLINE: By PHILIP SHENON,  Special to The New York Times

SECTION: Section A; Page 13; Column 1; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 841 words

DATELINE: HANOI, Vietnam, April 18


Vietnam provided American investigators with documents today that it says prove
the fraudulence of a report found in Russia which suggests that hundreds of
American prisoners of war were never freed.

John W. Vessey Jr., a retired Army general who is President Clinton's envoy to
Vietnam, said it was too early to assess the Vietnamese documents. But at a
meeting with Hanoi officials, he warned that the report, a Russian translation
of a 1972 Vietnamese document, appeared to be authentic and had "created very
serious questions" about the fate of missing Americans.

Hanoi said the documents presented to General Vessey today included a Defense
Ministry census prepared in the early 1970's that showed 386 Americans had been
captured by North Vietnam -- less than a third of the number indicated in the
Russian translation of the September 1972 report by Gen. Tran Van Quang, listed
as a Deputy Chief of Staff of the North Vietnamese Army. That report, discovered
in January in the archives of the Soviet Communist Party by a Harvard University
researcher, indicated that Hanoi held 1,205 American prisoners.

That figure has alarmed United States officials and the families of Americans
still listed as missing in action. Under the 1973 peace settlement with the
United States, North Vietnam released only 591 American P.O.W.'s. Since then,
Vietnam has insisted that no more remain alive in its custody, and that it has
sent home the remains of dead Americans whenever they have been discovered.

'Based on Nothing'

Vietnam's Deputy Foreign Minister, Le Mai, told General Vessey that the Russian
document was "fabricated completely, based on nothing." He suggested that it was
the work of someone opposed "to the process of normalization of relations
between our two countries."

Asked who was responsible for the fabrication, Mr. Le Mai said, "It depends on
your interpretation -- either the Americans or the Russians."

Vietnamese officials are clearly alarmed at the possibility that the Russian
document and the debate will lead the United States to retain an 18-year
economic embargo on Vietnam.

The Clinton Administration, which last month signaled its willingness to improve
relations with Hanoi, has said it will not lift the embargo until questions are
answered about the fate of more than 2,000 Americans listed as missing from the
Vietnam War.

Hanoi Searched for Evidence

Vietnamese officials said today that after news reports last week revealed the
existence of the document in the Russian archives, the Vietnamese Defense
Ministry searched its archives for evidence to refute it.

"We wanted to find evidence to prove it was fabricated," said Ho Xuan Dich, the
senior Foreign Ministry official handling the issue of missing Americans. In
Vietnamese archives, he said, the Defense Ministry found the census from the
early 1970's that listed all American prisoners captured from April 5, 1964, to
February 18, 1972. There were, he said, only 386 names on the list, which was
turned over to General Vessey today.

The Vietnamese have claimed for years that they have cooperated fully with the
United States in the search for information about missing Americans.

Asked during a meeting with reporters why the census was being turned over only
now, Mr. Dich gave two answers. First, he said that turning over the census had
been unnecessary because all American prisoners had been released to the United
States in 1973 and their names had been known to Washington for years. But he
corrected himself a few minutes later, saying that the census had not been
turned over earlier because "we just found it this week."

Five Other Documents

Vietnamese officials said five other documents presented to American
investigators today included hospital and air defense reports prepared during
the war that had recently been turned over to the Hanoi Government by provincial
authorities.

It was not clear how those documents could be useful in proving the Russian
report was a fabrication, and American and Vietnamese officials would not
discuss their contents.

General Vessey, a former Chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff who has been a
Presidential envoy to Vietnam since the Reagan Administration, is scheduled to
meet with General Quang on Monday. General Quang, who is retired from the army
and is now the leader of a veterans' group, has denied through Government
spokesmen that he is the author of the 1972 report.

General Vessey told the Vietnamese today that he had consulted last week with a
Russian historian, Gen. Dimitri Volkoganov, chairman of a Russian-American
committee on prisoners of war, and that General Volkoganov had "verified that
this is an authentic Russian document."

Members of General Vessey's 18-member party in Hanoi said that the question was
not whether the translation was a genuine Russian document -- they believed that
it is -- but whether the Russian translation was prepared by a competent
translator, and whether it had been based on an authentic Vietnamese document.

LOAD-DATE: April 19, 1993

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1993 The New York Times Company


                              67 of 312 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                  April 19, 1993, Monday, Late Edition - Final

CHRONICLE

BYLINE: By MARVINE HOWE

SECTION: Section B; Page 12; Column 5; Metropolitan Desk

LENGTH: 105 words


Marking a quarter of a century since he led the anti-Vietnam War movement in the
Democratic Presidential primaries, EUGENE J. MCCARTHY said in an interview last
month, "Somebody said something about holding an anniversary celebration, but I
told them I'd rather hold a rally."

Though he is not quite holding a rally, the former Minnesota senator is still
speaking out, and tonight he will be attend a community meeting at the Good
Shepherd Church in Manhattan. He will speak on one of his -- and now almost
everybody's -- favorite topic: "Reviving the Economy -- the Deficit, Taxes and
Spending and the Trade Balance."

LOAD-DATE: April 19, 1993

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1993 The New York Times Company


                              68 of 312 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                  April 19, 1993, Monday, Late Edition - Final

Essay;
The Case for 'Compellance'

BYLINE: By WILLIAM SAFIRE

SECTION: Section A; Page 19; Column 1; Editorial Desk

LENGTH: 723 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON


"Damn the torpedoes," barked David Farragut at Mobile Bay in 1864, "full speed
ahead!" The Confederate mines, then called torpedoes, proved defective, and the
Union admiral sailed to victory.

I am reminded of this gutsy leadership as I look out my window at The Times's
Washington bureau on Farragut Square, with a statue of the naval hero looking
sternly toward the White House, a pigeon atop his head.

There in the basement, behind a shiny brass plaque proclaiming "White House
Situation Room," the Clinton Corollary to the Farragut Doctrine is being shaped:
"Go slow, make sure all our allies are aboard, catch the prevailing breeze of
public opinion and above all -- watch out for the damn torpedoes."

Is this the way for the Commander in Chief of the world's only superpower to
respond to the sustained slaughter in Bosnia and the mocking gratitude of the
Serbian war criminals? No. Unless he is prepared to be branded a weak President
-- to bear the consequences of the same irresolution in the Balkans that he was
so ready to criticize in his predecessor -- Mr. Clinton must be ready to strike
decisively on April 26.

That's the day after the Russian referendum. This month's White House reason for
inaction in the face of perfidy is that he does not want to give Boris Yeltsin's
enemies, who express solidarity with the Serbs, a leg up in the election. The
Serbian forces have been making the most of this gift of time to escalate their
war.

But that's just a matter of timing; beyond the romantic wish to be a domestic
President, what are the real reasons for the Clinton reluctance to send American
power to the rescue?

First is that he keeps poor company. George Bush had the benefit of Margaret
Thatcher's rent-a-spine agency; Bill Clinton is afflicted with the umbrella
diplomacy of Mr. Wobbly himself, Britain's John Major, who is taking the
"special" out of "special relationship."

Next, he is a prisoner of the polls (who wants to die for Danzig or Sarajevo?)
and of the Chairman of the Joint Chiefs, an Army general who thinks primarily in
terms of ground troops to be used with overwhelming force, and only if the
policy is backed with universal patriotic fervor.

Finally, he is the captive of his post-Vietnam multilateral rhetoric, so taken
with fear of "going it alone" that he is incapable of going first and pushing
and shaming others into going along.

As a result, we have meaningless sanctions, useless no-fly zones,
publicity-stunt airdrops and U.N. relief convoys turned back while the Serbs go
about talking while killing.

Here's why that's about to end: because television pictures of blinded children
bring the atrocities into American living rooms; because the weight of editorial
opinion is swinging behind action; because Republicans are pledging bipartisan
support for action and planning to assign the blame for the consequences of
weakness; because Mr. Clinton realizes that public revulsion at U.N. failure is
beginning to stick to him.

Thus is our leader being led. This week, we will hear talk of arming the
Bosnians and the use of air power against artillery shelling civilians.

But it will take three months to get modern firepower into Bosnian hands, and
more time for training; Clinton should have already signed a finding directing
the C.I.A. to transfer arms.

Our "no-fly" pilots, under NATO command and festooned with U.N. limitations, are
in reality laying out grids on photographic missions; they are certain their
smart bombs can take out artillery pieces soon after the guns fire.

But that tactical response will not force an end to the fighting. Needed also is
strategic coercion: "compellance" is the word now being heard in the Pentagon.
It means the use of air power to persuade by punishment.

Compellance is not obliteration; it does not promise to win a war from on high.
Rather, its sudden infliction of national pain -- shutting down electric power,
fuel supplies and communications in a capital, putting a missile in a war
ministry -- is intended to encourage negotiation by leveling more than playing
fields.

We can hope that Mr. Clinton will jog over to Farragut Square for inspiration.
One thing Bosnia presages: the next Chairman of the Joint Chiefs, to be
appointed this summer, will be wearing a uniform not of army khaki but of air
force blue.

LOAD-DATE: April 19, 1993

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Op-Ed

                   Copyright 1993 The New York Times Company


                              69 of 312 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 April 20, 1993, Tuesday, Late Edition - Final

NEWS SUMMARY

SECTION: Section A; Page 2; Column 5; Metropolitan Desk

LENGTH: 786 words



International A2-11

HANOI CHALLENGES P.O.W. REPORT
The Vietnamese general who reportedly wrote in 1972 that Hanoi held more than
twice as many American prisoners as it released denied he had made such a
report.  A1

ITALY VOTES FOR CHANGE
After months of scandal, recession and Government paralysis, Italians voted
overwhelmingly for political change. But the vote left the future clouded.  A1



WARSAW GHETTO REMEMBERED
At a solemn outdoor ceremony where Jews battled Nazis 50 years ago, the leaders
of Poland and Israel hailed the valor of the uprising and called for a new
relationship between Jews and Poles.  A3

MUSLIM EVACUATION HALTED
Bosnian Army commanders halted an overland evacuation of thousands of Muslim
civilians trapped in Srebrenica, but for a second day, helicopters airlifted
wounded Muslims from the town.  A11

NEW FIGHTING NEAR SARAJEVO
Fighting exploded between the Croatian and Muslim forces near Sarajevo,
diminishing further the prospects for peace.  A10
In war-torn Sarajevo, people try to carry on.  A10

U.S. CONTINUES BOSNIA DEBATE
As pressure mounted on Capitol Hill for immediate military action in Bosnia, the
Administration continued its debate on what it can do without getting the United
States too deeply involved.  A9

DELAY FOR THE CHANNEL TUNNEL
The British-French company that will operate the rail link beneath the English
Channel said the tunnel's opening would almost certainly be delayed until next
year because of a dispute with the contractors.  A7

SOUTH AFRICAN LEADER BURIED
South Africa turned the burial of an assassinated black leader into the largest
political rite since Nelson Mandela's release from prison in 1990.  A8

Victoria Journal: A clean, green city's dirty secret.  A4

National A12-23

CULT STANDOFF ENDS IN FLAMES
David Koresh, dozens of his followers and at least 17 youngsters apparently died
when their compound erupted into flames, 51 days into the cult's standoff with
the Federal authorities near Waco, Tex.  A1

RAID A MISTAKE, RENO SAYS
Attorney General Janet Reno conceded that in hindsight the Government's plan to
assault the heavily armed cult had been a mistake.  A1

CULT'S END: CONFLAGRATION
As tear gas was fired, combat construction vehicles tore at the cult's compound
throughout the morning, and by noon the first signs of fire were seen, soon
whipped by wind into a billowing funeral pyre.  A21

BROUGHT TOGETHER BY 'THE BOOK'
The scores who died near Waco were followers of self-proclaimed messiah with a
penchant for rock music and Bible lectures.  A20

AN ELECTION WITH A YAWN
Los Angeles votes for a new mayor today in a campaign overshadowed by the trial
of four policemen who beat Rodney King.  A12

ARREST IN WASHINGTON SHOOTINGS
A suspect was arrested in the drive-by shootings that have left three people
dead and terrorized Washington neighborhoods.  A12

HATE LAWS BEFORE HIGH COURT
Arguments over laws that allow for tougher sentences for crimes resulting from
racial and religious bigotry take center stage at the Supreme Court this week.
A14

ANOTHER TEST FOR DEATH PENALTY
The Supreme Court accepted a challenge to laws that make it easier for
prosecutors to seek death for those who kill in the course of committing other
crimes.  A15

ABORTION RIGHTS' NEW PROBLEMS
Political Memo: Proponents of abortion rights find themselves with new problems
now that they have influence both in the White House and on Capitol Hill.  A18

A study suggests that programs like Head Start pay off later.  A23

Metro Digest B1

A HARD LIFE IN A NEW LAND
Children of the Shadows: Asenhat Gomez, an 18-year-old immigrant from the
Domican Republic, ventures tentatively into a future that beckons with equal
measures of promise and fear.  A1

$60 MILLION GIFT TO COLUMBIA
John W. Kluge, the chairman of the Metromedia Company, presented Columbia
University with $60 million for minority scholarships, the largest gift the
university has ever received.  A1

Business Digest D1

Fashion Page B9

Science Times C1-10

Fossil renews debate about the evolution of flight.  C1

Arts/Entertainment C12-17

Sports B10-15

Obituaries B7-8

George Mickelson, Governor of South Dakota.  B7

Editorials/Op-Ed A28-29

Editorials

Apocalypse in Waco.

Mr. Clinton, meet Mr. Gore.

Smart steps on peddling.

Letters

A. M. Rosenthal: A day at City College.

Russell Baker: Exploitation piece.

Ephraim Sneh: Nostalgia for Shamir doesn't help.

P. Roy Vagelos: A shot in the (wrong) arm.

LOAD-DATE: April 20, 1993

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Summary

                   Copyright 1993 The New York Times Company


                              70 of 312 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 April 20, 1993, Tuesday, Late Edition - Final

Vietnam Report on Prisoners A Fake, Reputed Author Says

BYLINE: By PHILIP SHENON,  Special to The New York Times

SECTION: Section A; Page 1; Column 2; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 1319 words

DATELINE: HANOI, Vietnam, April 19


A Vietnamese general denied today that he had written in 1972 that Hanoi held
more than twice as many American prisoners as it ultimately released. Any such
report attributed to Hanoi is a forgery, he declared.

And a special envoy, sent by President Clinton to tell the Vietnamese that
relations could not improve until the matter was cleared up, said he saw no
reason to disbelieve the Vietnamese denial.

Nearly two weeks ago, Russian archivists turned over to the United States a
Russian translation of what was said to be a secret report to Hanoi's Politburo
given by Gen. Tran Van Quang, described in the document as Deputy Chief of Staff
of the Vietnamese armed forces at the time. The document said Hanoi held 1,205
American prisoners of war in September 1972.

591 Released in 1973

Because Vietnam released only 591 prisoners in 1973 and has maintained
repeatedly that there were no other prisoners, the Russian translation raised
the recurring question of whether Hanoi had kept some prisoners back, and if so,
what happened to them. An alternative explanation offered by some experts was
that Hanoi might have killed hundreds of prisoners.

Hanoi immediately denied the accuracy of the Russian document, saying it was a
"fabrication."

In a meeting today, General Quang told President Clinton's special envoy, Gen.
John W. Vessey Jr., that he did not write the 1972 report on which the Russian
translation was supposedly based. If the Vietnamese report exists, General Quang
said, it is a forgery that may have been prepared by someone interested "in
undermining advances in relations between Vietnam and the United States."

At a news conference today after meeting with General Vessey, General Quang said
of the 1972 report: "I did not write it. I tell you, never in my life have I
made such a report, because it was not in my area of responsibility."

He stressed that although he was Deputy Chief of Staff on two occasions, he was
not serving in that post in September 1972 as the document states.

General Vessey, after meeting with General Quang and other senior Vietnamese
officials, said he had new doubts about the accuracy of the Russian translation.

The general, a retired Chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff, said at his own
news conference in Hanoi: "I don't think that one can draw conclusions about the
document simply based on General Quang's statements, but I would say that what
General Quang has told us is not inconsistent with what we know about General
Quang. I have no reason to disbelieve General Quang."

Asked whether he had new doubts about the accuracy of the document, General
Vessey replied simply, "Yes."

[But the Harvard-based researcher who discovered the Russian document said in a
telephone interview from Watertown, Mass., that he thought General Quang was
lying.]

Given 'Important' Documents

General Vessey said Vietnamese officials provided him with "important" documents
this week "that may well shed light on the Russian document, at least they
appear to, first blush."

The general and American investigators in Hanoi do not question the authenticity
of the Russian translation, saying they believe that it is a genuine Russian
archival document. Instead, they question whether it was prepared by a competent
Russian-Vietnamese translator, and whether the Vietnamese document on which it
was based was authentic.

Vietnamese officials have said this week that they are concerned that the
documents and the dispute over their authenticity will prevent the Clinton
Administration from lifting an 18-year-old economic embargo on Vietnam and will
further delay billions of dollars in development loans for Hanoi from the World
Bank and other international lending agencies.

Issue Linked to Relations

Mr. Clinton, who is expected to meet with General Vessey when the general
returns to Washington on Wednesday, has said he will not move to normalize
diplomatic and economic ties with Vietnam until he is convinced that Hanoi is
cooperating fully in determining the fate of more than 600 missing Americans.

In a joint statement, General Vessey and Hanoi officials said the Vietnamese
documents turned over to American investigators include "archives listing
American prisoners of war held during the war, as well as American servicemen
who died in captivity in southern and central Vietnam."

On Sunday, the Vietnamese said they had given General Vessey an official
Vietnamese Defense Ministry census prepared in the early 1970's stating that
only 386 American prisoners had been captured by North Vietnam between April
1964 and February 1972.

American officials traveling with General Vessey said it might never be possible
to prove or disprove the accuracy of the Russian translation and the
authenticity of the 1972 Vietnamese report. But they said they were struck by
discrepancies between information in the Russian translation and what is known
about General Quang and his military career.

The Russian archives did not include a copy of the original Vietnamese document
on which the translation was supposedly based, but the Russian translation lists
General Quang as the Deputy Chief of Staff in September 1972.

According to official biographies published in Vietnam last year, before the
Russian document became public, General Quang served in 1972 as a regional
military commander in provinces in central Vietnam. He did serve as Deputy Chief
of Staff twice, from 1959 to 1960 and from 1974 to 1978, but not in 1972.

"I was not in Hanoi at that time," said General Quang, who is now the director
of a Vietnamese veterans' association. "I was never in charge of American
prisoners of war. It's that simple and plain."

Asked who might have been responsible for fabricating the document, he replied,
"You can ask the Russian intelligence services."

Researcher Attacked

At the news conference with General Vessey, Foreign Minister Nguyen Manh Cam
attacked the Harvard-based researcher, Stephen J. Morris, who found the Russian
document during a search of the Communist Party archives in January.

"I would like to say something about Stephen Morris, the person who publicized
this," Mr. Cam said. "He has a long history of opposing Vietnam, since the time
he was an Australian student." Mr. Morris, he said, had taken part in "anti-
Vietnam groups" in the United States.

The Foreign Minister said he believed that Mr. Morris, a researcher for the
Harvard Center for International Affairs who is now working on a book about the
Vietnam War, "had certain intentions when he chose the timing" of releasing the
Russian document. The translation became public in the United States only days
after news reports suggested that Mr. Clinton was prepared to move quickly to
improve ties with Vietnam.

                             --------------------


A Liar, Researcher Says

WASHINGTON, April 19 (Special to The New York Times) -- Mr. Morris, the
researcher who discovered the Russian document, challenged General Quang's
truthfulness as well as the Vietnamese Foreign Minister's comments.

"I think he's lying," he said of General Quang in a telephone interview from
Watertown, Mass. "I think there's a Vietnamese copy in Moscow in the files of
the G.R.U. I've got the only Russian-language copy, which is copy No. 6, which
means there are five other copies floating around somewhere, and the original."

Told of Foreign Minister Cam's comments about him, Mr. Morris, an Australian,
said: "I have a history of opposing the Communist Party of Vietnam, but not the
people of Vietnam. I've always believed that South Vietnam would be better off
under a non-Communist government."

He added that he does not oppose normalization of relations with Hanoi but
believes that it should occur after a full accounting of missing Americans and
after Vietnam stops what he called its interference in Cambodian affairs.


LOAD-DATE: April 20, 1993

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1993 The New York Times Company


                              71 of 312 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 April 20, 1993, Tuesday, Late Edition - Final

NO NEW INFLATION SEEN BY FED CHIEF

BYLINE: By STEVEN GREENHOUSE

SECTION: Section A; Page 15; Column 1; National Desk

LENGTH: 667 words


Vowing that he would remain vigilant in fighting inflation, the Federal
Reserve's chairman, Alan Greenspan, told the financial markets last night not to
expect inflationary pressures to re-emerge soon.

In a speech to the Economic Club of New York, Mr. Greenspan said it was
"difficult to imagine inflationary pressures intensifying" when the banking
system remained weak and bank lending remained "exceptionally subdued."

He gave several other reasons for believing that inflation would remain low,
among them a surplus of people looking for work and labor costs remaining under
control. He also predicted that the recent run-up in the price of some raw
materials would soon slow significantly.

Mr. Greenspan appeared to address his remarks to the bond markets, voicing
frustration that long-term interest rates remained relatively high even though
the underlying inflation rate was at its lowest level in two decades.

Mr. Greenspan, who has been criticized by conservatives for cozying up to the
Clinton Administration, took the opportunity in last night's speech to indicate
that he did not plan to bend with the political winds to adopt an expansionary
monetary policy.

He vowed not to repeat the mistakes of the 1970's, when the Federal Reserve
pumped up the money supply to fuel economic growth, only to produce high
inflation. The Federal Reserve pushed up interest rates in the late 1970's and
early 1980's to squeeze down inflation, creating a deep recession and surge in
unemployment.

"It would be irresponsible for us to dismiss the experience of the post-Vietnam
War years and once again allow the destabilizing forces of inflation to undercut
economic growth and employment," he said.

Growth Seen Slowing

In another sign that inflation would remain under control, Alan Blinder, a
member-designate of the President's Council of Economic Advisers, expressed
fears that growth was slowing. In a speech in Washington, he defended President
Clinton's $19.5 billion stimulus package, saying the Administration believed
that growth had slowed significantly from the fourth quarter. He said
first-quarter growth might be just 2 to 2.5 percent, well below the 3 percent
the Administration has forecast for all of 1993.

During his speech, Mr. Greenspan often sought to reassure the markets about some
recent signs of inflation. He said the increase in wages that the Labor
Department reported in March "may reflect nothing more than excess overtime
costs of cleanup following the late winter storms."

As for the recent climb of raw material prices, including lumber, he said this
probably had "more to do with improving demand" and restoring profit margins to
normal levels "than to early signals of sustained inflationary pressures."

In emphasizing the importance of holding down inflation, Mr. Greenspan said low
inflation played a pivotal role in the recent upsurge in productivity. He said
that when inflation was running at a moderate pace, corporations could easily
increase profits by raising their prices, but when inflation was low,
"businesses seeking to increase their profit margins perceive that they can do
so only by enhancing efficiency."

He said that low inflation -- by helping concentrate the minds of business
executives on the need to increase productivity -- might have caused a jump in
productivity that is not just cyclical, but perhaps the beginning of a long-term
trend.

Mr. Greenspan said the nation had "made very substantial progress" toward
achieving price stability over the last decade. He adding that "at current
inflation rates, we are quite close to attaining this goal."

He signaled that the central bank would not shrink from its responsibility of
protecting the value of the dollar from inflation and from erosion against
foreign currencies.

"A society's central bank is rarely popular," he said, adding that it was
required "at times to take difficult steps to preserve the value of the currency
both domestically and abroad."

LOAD-DATE: April 20, 1993

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1993 The New York Times Company


                              72 of 312 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 April 20, 1993, Tuesday, Late Edition - Final

An Author Catapulted Into the Foreground

BYLINE: By PETER APPLEBOME,  Special to The New York Times

SECTION: Section C; Page 13; Column 1; Cultural Desk

LENGTH: 1464 words

DATELINE: LAKE CHARLES, La., April 15


"Are you sitting down?" Robert Olen Butler asked his 19-year-old son, who had
just called in from Prague. "I need you to brace yourself. I just won the
Pulitzer Prize. You're the last person in America to know."

The word on Wednesday that Mr. Butler had won the Pulitzer Prize for fiction did
indeed go out three days before his thoroughly nonplussed son, Joshua, heard
about it. But the more fundamental question remains not who won, but just who in
the world is Robert Olen Butler?

The short answer is that he is a 48-year-old author who served as an Army
translator in Vietnam and won the prize for "A Good Scent From a Strange
Mountain," a collection of 15 startling, dreamlike stories told in the first
person by Vietnamese emigres living in Louisiana.

The longer answer can be found in this refinery town in the bayous of
southwestern Louisiana where he teaches creative writing at McNeese State
University, lives in an antic frame house he shares with one wife, Maureen, five
parrots, one canary and four rabbits, and writes in a high-ceilinged study
filled with pictures, mementos and literature from Vietnam, where Mr. Butler's
unlikely writing career took form.

But if his Pulitzer designation was one of the biggest literary surprises in
many years, no one was more shocked than he was when a reporter called him on
Tuesday with the news.

"I had no warning, zero," said Mr. Butler. "It came as a total surprise,
something remarkable and wonderful that hit with the abruptness of a bolt of
bayou lightning."

The book was entered by his publisher, Henry Holt & Company, and reviewed by a
three-member jury, which sent it along with two other finalists to the 18-member
Pulitzer board, which made the final decision.

In serious literary circles, Mr. Butler is not unknown. He published six novels
prior to "A Good Scent From a Strange Mountain," which has recently brought him
a Guggenheim Fellowship and a nomination for the PEN/Faulkner Award. The
collection has also just won the Rosenthal Foundation Award, given by the
American Academy of Arts and Letters, which typically goes to works that are
literary but not commercial successes by writers in the early stages of their
careers.

"Butler is getting the recognition that he richly deserves," said the author
Larry Heinemann, who has also written about Vietnam. "Bob writes about Vietnam
in a way that no one else has. I haven't encountered a book this powerful in a
long time."

His books are still not widely reviewed, however, and do not sell in big
numbers. His novels all sold fewer than 5,000 copies, and there are only 10,000
copies of "A Good Scent From a Strange Mountain" in print.

Set Out to Be an Actor

Mr. Butler, who is balding and has piercing blue eyes and the precise, alert
conversational style of a man whose every thought seems poised to dart off in
five different directions, grew up just outside St. Louis in Granite City, Ill.
A photograph of the St. Louis skyline and a vintage baseball card of a former
Cardinals outfielder, Wally Moon, in his small, scrupulously neat office at
McNeese State are a reminder of where home is.

The son of a theater professor at the University of St. Louis, he first planned
to become an actor and enrolled at Northwestern University to study theater. But
he soon decided he would rather create the lines than recite them and turned to
playwriting. On the verge of being drafted in 1969, he enlisted in the Army. He
thought he was signing up to become a counterintelligence officer doing
background investigations on people seeking security clearances.

Instead, he spent a year learning Vietnamese and in 1971 went to Vietnam as the
administrative assistant for the Foreign Service officer advising the Mayor of
Saigon. The experience changed his life.

"I lived in an old French hotel," he said over crawfish etouffee at the Crab
Palace, a quintessentially South Louisiana mixture of no-frills Formica decor
and celestial Cajun cooking. "My greatest pleasure in life was at 2 in the
morning to wander out into the steamy back alleys of Saigon, where nobody ever
seemed to sleep, and just walk the alleys and crouch in the doorways with the
people. The Vietnamese were the warmest, most open and welcoming people I've
ever met, and they just invited me into their homes and into their culture and
into their lives."

He wrote one play there, but upon returning to the United States he turned to
fiction to capture what he calls "the ravishing sensuality" of Vietnam. He wrote
his first books in longhand on legal pads supported by a Masonite lapboard as he
commuted on the Long Island Rail Road from his home in Sea Cliff, L.I., to his
job in Manhattan as editor of a business newspaper called Energy User News.
After eight years of writing fiction, Mr. Butler finally sold a novel, "The
Alleys of Eden," in 1981, after 21 publishers had turned it down. The book,
about the love affair of a G.I. and a Vietnamese prostitute, garnered some
impressive reviews.

Five more novels, most of them not about Vietnam, followed. The use of the
first-person voice in his most recent novel, "The Deuce," and an invitation to
submit a short story for reading on National Public Radio produced a story
called "Crickets" and an idea that eventually produced "A Good Scent From a
Strange Mountain."

"I started with a little bit of Vietnamese folkway," he said, "that had to do
with Vietnamese boys who capture crickets, get them riled up, put them at
opposite ends of a paper tunnel and watch them fight, usually to the death."

The idea led to a story about a Vietnamese man trying to come to terms with his
totally Americanized son by trying unsuccessfully to get him interested in
cricket fighting.

"Seven hours later I had a short story," he said. "Twenty-four hours after that,
I had ideas for two dozen more stories. The first-person voice and being
compelled to write that little story somehow unlocked something, and I suddenly
had access to all these voices. Suddenly dozens of voices flooded into my head,
and I told Allen Peacock, my editor, about it, and he said: "Great. Let's do a
book.' "

Translating Cultures

The result is an intensely felt series of stories told with the perfect pitch of
a translator of cultures as well as words that take place mostly in the
communities of Versailles and Gretna near New Orleans. There's Mr. Green, an
ornery, aging parrot who longs for his old master in Vietnam; Miss Noi, a Saigon
bar girl now plying her trade on Bourbon Street; Mr. Khanh, a Vietnamese
businessman in Lake Charles forced to confront all he has lost when his wife is
reunited with the grandfather who neither remembers nor cares anything about
her.

To the extent that so much of his work is rooted in Vietnam, Mr. Butler has been
characterized with other writers on Vietnam. But while most Vietnam fiction has
essentially been about America, his is essentially about the Vietnamese. Still,
in an artful sort of literary switchback, "A Strange Scent" finds those
Vietnamese in Louisiana, a steamy environment of bayous, fables and myths with a
culture deeply influenced by the French that is at once rich and endangered like
the one his characters are trying to maintain.

"The irony of it, the thing that's fitting about it, is that this book that
seems to be fully and completely about the Vietnamese, is every bit as much
about American culture as it is about the Vietnamese," he said.

At the beginning of the story called "Fairy Tale," Miss Noi muses, "I like the
way fairy tales start in America." For Mr. Butler, last week indeed had the
quality of a fairy tale. Everywhere he went it seemed he was greeted by people
who were as taken by his good fortune as he was. There was an artist friend,
clambering excitedly from a Cadillac with a hammer in her hand, who hugged him
and seemed genuinely near tears. And the table full of colleagues who greeted
him with a round of raucous applause when he wandered into the Crab Palace.

Mr. Butler, who is given neither to bravado nor false modesty, did his best to
keep it all in perspective.

"I've been publishing books since 1981," he said after talking to his son, who
is traveling in Europe. "I've had a loyal, important but very small following
who've really listened to me, but I haven't had many sales, and I still don't
get reviewed very widely.

"So a long time ago I learned that the only way to avoid madness was to just
turn on the computer every morning and do my work and not think about the
prizes, the critics, how many readers there are. So then I'm in a position when
this sort of thing happens, it comes as an absolute shock, on the one hand, and
then on the other hand, to my deepest self it seems like the most natural thing
in the world."

NAME: Robert Olen Butler

LOAD-DATE: April 20, 1993

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo: Robert Olen Butler, the 1993 Pulitzer Prize winner in fiction,
lives in Lake Charles, La., with his wife, Maureen, and an array of birds and
animals. He said the award "came as a total surprise, something remarkable and
wonderful that hit with the abruptness of a bolt of bayou lightning." (Matt
Anderson for The New York Times)

TYPE: Biography

                   Copyright 1993 The New York Times Company


                              73 of 312 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 April 20, 1993, Tuesday, Late Edition - Final

Crash Kills George S. Mickelson; South Dakota's Governor Was 52

SECTION: Section B; Page 7; Column 4; National Desk

LENGTH: 412 words


Gov. George S. Mickelson of South Dakota, who followed his father's career path
from a rural law practice to the state's highest office, died in a plane crash
in Iowa yesterday, a spokesman for his office said. He was 52.

Governor Mickelson was one of eight people killed in the crash about 15 miles
southwest of Dubuque as they were returning from a trip to Cincinnati to promote
economic development in the state, the spokesman said.

A Republican, Mr. Mickelson was first elected in 1986 and won another four-year
term in 1990. He also served six years in the South Dakota House, where he was
Speaker in 1979-80.

Lieut. Gov. Walter Dale Miller will succeed him as Governor.

Mr. Mickelson was the son of George T. Mickelson, who served as South Dakota's
Governor from 1947 to 1951.

The younger Mr. Mickelson had a home-grown style, often driving a pick-up truck
to work. He was a popular member of the South Dakota House for six years,
quitting in 1980.

In 1989, Mr. Mickelson's teen-age son, David, was charged with a sexual offense
after a 16-year-old girl said she had been raped during a party at the
Governor's Mansion. The Governor and Mrs. Mickelson were out of town at the
time. David Mickelson was acquitted of the sex charge but was placed on
probation for underage consumption of alcohol. He and another boy at the party
were ordered to pay the girl's medical bills.

Served in Vietnam

Mr. Mickelson was born in Mobridge, S.D., and lived in the eastern South Dakota
city of Brookings and the state capital, Pierre. He received a bachelor's degree
in business administration and a law degree from the University of South Dakota.

After two years in the Army in Vietnam, he practiced law in Brookings, S.D.,
then served as Brookings County state's attorney and assistant state attorney
general.

In addition to his son, Mr. Mickelson is survived by his wife, the former Linda
McCahren; a son, Mark, and a daughter, Amy.

An obituary on Tuesday, and in some editions on Monday, reported the death of
South Dakota's Governor, George S. Mickelson, in an airplane crash.

The obituary included an account of a 1989 arrest of the Mickelsons' teen-age
son after an incident during a party at the Governor's Mansion while the elder
Mickelsons were out of town.

While the incident was newsworthy at the time, there was no indication of any
lasting relevance to the Governor's career. It should not have been reiterated
in his obituary.

NAME: George S. Mickelson

LOAD-DATE: April 23, 1993

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo: Gov. George S. Mickelson (The New York Times, 1990)

TYPE: Obituary (Obit); Biography

                   Copyright 1993 The New York Times Company


                              74 of 312 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                April 21, 1993, Wednesday, Late Edition - Final

George Mickelson, 52, Governor Of South Dakota, Dies in a Crash

BYLINE: Special to The New York Times

SECTION: Section D; Page 23; Column 1; National Desk

LENGTH: 462 words

DATELINE: PIERRE, S.D., April 20


Gov. George S. Mickelson of South Dakota, who followed his father's career path
from a rural law practice to the state's highest office, died in a plane crash
in Iowa on Monday night, a spokesman for his office said. He was 52.

Governor Mickelson was one of eight people killed in the crash about 15 miles
southwest of Dubuque as they were returning from a trip to Cincinnati to promote
economic development in the state, the spokesman said. Engine trouble was
suspected.

Mr. Mickelson was co-chairman of the National Governors Association's task force
on health care.

A Republican, Mr. Mickelson was first elected in 1986 and won another four-year
term in 1990. He also served six years in the South Dakota House, where he was
Speaker in 1979-80.

Lieut. Gov. Walter Dale Miller, who succeeded Governor Mickelson today, vowed to
try "to accomplish all he wanted to accomplish for us."

A Home-Grown Style

Mr. Mickelson was the son of George T. Mickelson, who served as South Dakota's
Governor from 1947 to 1951.

When he followed his father into the Governor's mansion, he focused on economic
development, encouraging manufacturing growth in a state that is more dependent
on agriculture than any other sector.

He sought to raise teachers' salaries, among the lowest in the nation, and in
1989 made two record increases in state aid to school districts by setting aside
56 percent of the state's sales tax revenue.

Mr. Mickelson tried to improve relations between Indians and non-Indians in
South Dakota, naming 1990 the Year of Reconciliation. Several times he sat with
Sioux leaders and smoked the sacred pipe.

He had a home-grown style, often driving a pick-up truck to work. He was a
popular member of the South Dakota House for six years, quitting in 1980.

In 1989, Mr. Mickelson's teen-age son, David, was charged with a sexual offense
after a 16-year-old girl said she had been raped during a party at the
Governor's Mansion. The Governor and Mrs. Mickelson were out of town at the
time. David Mickelson was acquitted of the sex charge but was placed on
probation for under-age consumption of alcohol. He and another boy at the party
were ordered to pay the girl's medical bills.

Served in Vietnam

Mr. Mickelson was born in Mobridge, S.D., and lived in the eastern South Dakota
city of Brookings and the state capital, Pierre. He received a bachelor's degree
in business administration and a law degree from the University of South Dakota.

After two years in the Army in Vietnam, he practiced law in Brookings, then
served as Brookings County state's attorney and assistant state attorney
general.

In addition to his son, Mr. Mickelson is survived by his wife, the former Linda
McCahren; another son, Mark, and a daughter, Amy.

NAME: George S. Mickelson

LOAD-DATE: April 21, 1993

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo: Gov. George S. Mickelson (Chris Hippie, 1990)

TYPE: Obituary (Obit); Biography

                   Copyright 1993 The New York Times Company


                              75 of 312 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                April 21, 1993, Wednesday, Late Edition - Final

Books of The Times;
Gay Life in the Military: A Record of Success

BYLINE: By HERBERT MITGANG

SECTION: Section C; Page 20; Column 5; Cultural Desk

LENGTH: 1062 words



Conduct Unbecoming
Lesbians and Gays in the U.S. Military, Vietnam to the Persian Gulf
By Randy Shilts
784 pages. St. Martin's Press. $27.95.

Nearly everybody who has ever served in uniform knows the facts. But secrecy and
hypocrisy are often in command and sometimes even wear stars. The official
position is that homosexuals and lesbians are barred from the United States
armed forces. No problem avoiding service; just check the box on the application
form asking whether you have "homosexual tendencies" and the Army, Air Force,
Navy and Marines won't allow you to join the ranks of the red, white and blue
heterosexual servicemen and -women. That permits the services to praise the
Lord, pass the ammunition and tolerate only the official military way.

Randy Shilts, the author of "Conduct Unbecoming," knows otherwise. He has
written a convincing and readable narrative on gay life in uniform, from Vietnam
to the Persian Gulf. Mr. Shilts, a national correspondent for The San Francisco
Chronicle and the author of "And the Band Played On: Politics, People and the
AIDS Epidemic," supports his new book with interviews of more than a thousand
people, including military personnel (150 still in uniform, their identities
shielded), their families and lawyers. Under the Freedom of Information Act, he
gained access to nearly 15,000 pages of material about investigations,
courts-martial and policy-making concerning homosexuals in the armed forces. So
he delivers some surprising information. He writes:

"Today, gay soldiers jump with the 101st Airborne, wear the Green Beret of the
Special Forces and perform top-level jobs in the 'black world' of covert
operations. Gay Air Force personnel have staffed missile silos in North Dakota,
flown the nuclear-armed bombers of the Strategic Air Command and navigated Air
Force One. Gay sailors dive with the Navy Seals, tend the nuclear reactors on
submarines and teach at the Naval War College. A gay admiral commanded the fleet
assigned to one of the highest-profile military operations of the past
generation. The homosexual presence on aircraft carriers is so pervasive that
social life on the huge ships for the past 15 years has included gay newsletters
and clandestine gay discos. Gay Marines guard the President in the White House
honor guard and protect U.S. embassies around the world."

"Conduct Unbecoming" is equally revealing about the difficulties encountered by
lesbians in uniform. We learn that women face even greater discrimination than
men. When accused of homosexuality, some women "prove" themselves not to be
lesbians by having sex with men. Those who will not acquiesce to sexual
advances, often by superior officers, are routinely accused of being lesbian and
are liable to discharge. Anti-gay regulations have encouraged sexual harassment,
the author reports. The records and interviews with lesbians indicate that
military commands are far more inclined to investigate homosexuals than to
investigate sexual harassment of women.

Mr. Shilts shows the military attitudes by citing the language of Army
regulations: "Homosexuality is a manifestation of a severe personality defect,
which appreciably limits the ability of such individuals to function effectively
in a military environment." Navy regulations: "Homosexuals and other sexual
deviates are military liabilities who cannot be tolerated in a military
organization." And the Air Force: "Participation in a homosexual act, or
proposing or attempting to do so, is considered a very serious misbehavior."

The official language invites a reader to think about such misbehavior as the
Tailhook scandal last year, when airmen assaulted servicewomen. That case was
first covered up and excused as merely a boys-will-be-boys incident until the
women pressed charges and the details were exposed in The San Diego
Union-Tribune.

The fact is that especially in wartime the military has routinely winked at
homosexuality and looked the other way. Figures supplied by Mr. Shilts show that
discharges for homosexuality drop under combat conditions, when danger was
equally shared and sexual orientation was the least of the military's problems.
From World War II to Desert Storm, regulations banning homosexuals were
sidestepped. A vast gay subculture existed within the American military
stationed in Vietnam; gay bars on what was Tu Do Street when the city was called
Saigon were well known to soldiers on leave. Just as the heterosexual G.I.'s
quest for diversion was institutionalized into a circuit of bars and brothels,
so was the homosexual's search for a good time.


Mr. Shilts's study also covers attitudes about homosexuality in other countries.
He notes that 64 nations have legalized homosexuality, with the trend most
pronounced in industrialized nations. In 1967 the British Parliament legalized
sexual activity between consenting adults, but the armed forces continued their
ban. As in the United States, efforts are being made to revise the military ban
in Britain. Denmark and Sweden both dropped their exclusion of homosexuals in
the military. In Austria, they can serve in the army but can be punished for
having sex with a subordinate or in a military barracks. In Germany, homosexuals
are allowed to serve as draftees but not as professional soldiers. They can
serve in the Israeli Defense Forces, though homosexuality can be a factor in
denying a security clearance.

It is clear where the author stands; he sees the subject not only as a military
issue but also as a national one. Mr. Shilts says that the military's policies
have had a sinister effect on the entire nation. He says:

"Such policies make it known to everyone serving in the military that lesbians
and gay men are dangerous to the well-being of other Americans; that they are
undeserving of even the most basic civil rights. Such policies also create an
ambiance in which discrimination, harassment and even violence against lesbians
and gays is tolerated and to some degree encouraged. Especially for lesbians,
the issues are far more complex than simple homophobia, because they also
involve significant features of sex-based discrimination."

By maintaining that the present policy is unbecoming for a mature nation,
"Conduct Unbecoming" expands the boundaries of the debate and makes a strong
contribution to our knowledge.

LOAD-DATE: April 21, 1993

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo: Randy Shilts (James D. Wilson/St. Martin's Press)

TYPE: Review

                   Copyright 1993 The New York Times Company


                              76 of 312 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 April 22, 1993, Thursday, Late Edition - Final

NEWS SUMMARY

SECTION: Section A; Page 2; Column 5; Metropolitan Desk

LENGTH: 1076 words



International A3-15

CLINTON'S ENVIRONMENT POLICY
Repudiating two principal Bush Administration policies, President Clinton
pledged to follow a specific timetable to reduce the threat of global warming,
and said he would sign an international treaty protecting endangered species.
A1

MEXICO DRAWS U.S. INVESTORS
Lured by eye-catching interest rates of 16 percent or more, Americans are
investing billions of dollars in Mexican Treasury securities, thus helping to
finance Mexico's move to an industrial economy.  A1



SERBS ANGRY AND UNREPENTANT
Bosnian Serbs, in whose name the Bosnia conflict is waged, are confused and
angry, but unrepentant. They do not seem to be cowed by the threat of tighter
sanctions against Yugoslavia, though they are dependent on Belgrade for
everything from food to ammunition.  A14

U.N. DISARMS MUSLIMS
The United Nations said it had completed the disarming of Muslim defenders of
Srebrenica, a battered enclave that is the last Muslim foothold in eastern
Bosnia.  A14

U.S. and Europe differ on arming of Muslims.  A15

THE VIETNAM MISSING: MORE DATA
A U.S. envoy to Vietnam presented President Clinton with evidence that he said
undermined a Russian document that suggested that Hanoi lied to Washington about
the number of prisoners it held toward the end of the Vietnam war.  A3

YELTSIN WINS A POINT
Russia's Constitutional Court ruled that in Sunday's referendum, President
Yeltsin can claim a vote of confidence if he wins more than 50 percent of the
turnout. At first he was going to be required to win 50 percent of all
registered voters.  A3

VIOLENCE AT ISRAELI BORDERS
As a new round of Middle East peace talks was formally announced for next week,
serious violence erupted on Israel's northern border and in the occupied Gaza
Strip.  A6

The Palestinians will end their boycott of the talks.  A7

BRAZIL REJECTS MONARCHY
Rejecting appeals to restore the country's 19th-century monarchy, Brazilians
voted to retain the system they borrowed from the United States 104 years ago --
a presidential republic.  A9

Five more whites arrested in South African black's slaying.  A11

Italian Defense Minister accused of Mafia link.  A5

Trials plunge eastern Germans into a review of the past.  A12

Church is victorious over compulsory teaching in Poland.  A13

Ago Bay Journal: Famous pearls are again much in fashion.  A4

National A16-23, B10-13

G.O.P. KILLS CLINTON JOBS PLAN
Senate Democrats gave up their struggle to end a Republican filibuster and save
President Clinton's economic stimulus plan. The defeat of the program was the
President's first major legislative defeat.  A1

News analysis: Miscalculations cost the President dearly.  A18

DOUBTS ON VACCINE PLAN
Many experts say President Clinton's immunization plan, in focusing on vaccine
costs, ignores the chief cause of the failure of poor children to be vaccinated:
disorganized, or even neglectful, parents.  A1

The Administration unveiled its plan to improve public schools.  A20

A BRIGHT FUTURE DEFERRED
Children of the Shadows: Derrick White finished third in his high school class
and was king of his school's senior prom, but the difficulties of staying in
college are threatening to nip his career prospects in the bud.  A1

U.S. MISREAD KORESH'S MESSAGES
Federal agents picked up messages apparently written by David Koresh, but their
contents were interpreted as threats to the authorities and not to himself or
his followers in the event of an assault against the Branch Davidian compound.
A1

BODIES FOUND; SOME WERE SHOT
About 40 bodies, some with bullet wounds, were found in the ashes of the sect's
compound near Waco, raising speculation that some of the cult members committed
suicide or were shot by others.  B12

Families await word on members' remains or children.  B12

The Justice Department began an effort to justify the assault.  B13

FUROR AT HOLOCAUST MUSEUM
Holocaust survivors and historians criticized an invitation to the Croat
President, Franjo Tudjman, to attend the opening of the Holocaust Museum, saying
he has written anti-Semitic passages.  A1

STANDOFF ENDS AT OHIO PRISON
About 450 rebellious prisoners in southern Ohio freed all five of their hostages
and began leaving the cellblock where they had been for 11 days after a riot and
standoff that left seven inmates and one guard dead.  A16

COURT APPEARS TO BACK BIAS LAWS
Supreme Court justices appeared sympathetic to arguments in favor of laws that
impose longer sentences for criminals who choose their victims on the basis of
race, religion or personal traits.  B11

Justices affirmed a route of appeal for state inmates.  B11

The ethics case of Alabama's Governor went to the jury.  A23

Metro Digest B1

Business Digest D1

Home Section C1-14

In emergencies, these children commute to work.  C1

At home with Randy Shilts: Writing against time, valiantly.  C1

Elegance of the 40's rescued
for the 90's.  C1

Gee, that sofa looks familiar: How TV creates a home.  C6

Parent & Child C12

Arts/Entertainment C17-24

The art of "Ring" casting.  C17

Former head of the Federal arts endowment writes a book.  C17

Theater: "Wilder, Wilder,
Wilder." C18

Music: "Jacob's Room." C17

Music from the Holocaust.  C18

Television: John Thaw's Inspector Morse.  C17

"Earth and the American Dream," on HBO.  C22

Books: David McClintick's "Swordfish," on the drug war.  C21

Sports B14-19

Baseball: Mets pound the Giants.  B15

Basketball: Knicks trounce the Nets.  B15

Columns: Anderson on modern ball parks.  B15

Football: Giants look for defense in draft.  B18

Hockey: Islanders enjoyed midnight in Landover.B15

Devils look for ways to beat the Penguins.  B17

Obituaries D26

Cantinflas, Mexican comic actor.

Editorials/Op-Ed A24-25

Editorials

Mr. Clinton's invisible drug policy.

Welfare reform that works.

Bringing discipline to Albany debt.

Topics: Romantic coincidences.

Letters

William Safire: MEGO of the year.

Leslie H. Gelb: Italian upheaval?

Zbigniew Brzezinski: "Never again" -- except for Bosnia.

Winston S. Churchill: A truce, or else.

LOAD-DATE: April 22, 1993

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Summary

                   Copyright 1993 The New York Times Company


                              77 of 312 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 April 22, 1993, Thursday, Late Edition - Final

Envoy Says P.O.W. Evidence Undermines Old Russian Report

BYLINE: By STEVEN A. HOLMES,  Special to The New York Times

SECTION: Section A; Page 3; Column 1; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 596 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, April 21


A special Presidential envoy to Vietnam presented President Clinton today with
evidence that he said undermined a recently found Russian document suggesting
that Hanoi lied to Washington about the number of American prisoners it held in
1972.

Even as the envoy, John W. Vessey Jr., raised his questions, Clinton
Administration officials said there had been no decision on moving toward
recognition of the Hanoi Government or easing the 18-year-old trade embargo
against Vietnam. "No decisions have been made by the President in terms of what
are the next steps to be made, and no recommendations have been made to him,"
said a senior Administration official who insisted on anonymity.

At a news conference at the Pentagon, Mr. Vessey, a retired Army general, also
said Hanoi appeared to be cooperating with United States authorities to
determine the fates of the 2,260 American service members and civilians who have
yet to be accounted for nearly 18 years after the last American troops left
Vietnam.

Signs of Cooperation

"The Vietnamese are at least bending over backward to appear to be cooperative,"
said Mr. Vessey, who returned on Tuesday from a trip to Hanoi. "Now, in the long
run, only the facts will show whether or not that cooperation is real."

Cooperation on helping to resolve what happened to the missing Americans, about
half of whom have been listed by United States authorities as having died in the
war, is a major factor in the decision on the trade embargo.

Clinton Administration officials said even if the evidence brought back by Mr.
Vessey completely refuted the Russian document, the Administration would still
have to evaluate Vietnam's continued help in finding and identifying remains of
service members, gaining access to additional archives in Hanoi and securing the
cooperation of Laos in accounting for missing Americans there.

The dispute over the fate of P.O.W.'s in Vietnam arose over a document that a
Harvard University researcher said he had found in Russian archives. The
document, supposedly written by Lieut. Gen. Tran Van Quang, whom it describes as
deputy chief of the North Vietnamese general staff, states that in September
1972 Hanoi held 1,205 American prisoners, a figure far higher than the number of
Americans Hanoi has ever acknowledged holding.

In February 1973, North Vietnam released 591 American prisoners and has
contended ever since that it held no more. Mr. Quang has denied writing the
document, and the Vietnamese have called it a fake.

At his news conference, Mr. Vessey produced a photocopy of a Vietnamese ledger
known as the "blue book" that names 381 American aviators listed in
chronological order of their captures, beginning with Everett Alvarez, the
first, who was captured in August 1964, and ending in February 1972.

Of those listed by Hanoi, Mr. Vessey said, he had been told that 14 had died in
captivity and that Hanoi released 8 in 1968 and 1969, leaving a total of 359 in
captivity. He added that between February and September 1972 an additional 108
American aviators were shot down by North Vietnam, of whom 63 were captured and
later released.

Using that arithmetic 422 American aviators were held by Hanoi in September
1972. According to the Russian document, found by Stephen J. Morris, an
Australian who has been a strong critic of the Vietnamese Communists, 624
American aviators were prisoners then. Mr. Vessey discounted the possibility
that the Vietnamese had another set of books and had imprisoned Americans in a
second, secret prison system.

LOAD-DATE: April 22, 1993

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1993 The New York Times Company


                              78 of 312 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 April 22, 1993, Thursday, Late Edition - Final

Distinct Choice in Los Angeles Race

BYLINE: By ROBERT REINHOLD,  Special to The New York Times

SECTION: Section A; Page 16; Column 4; National Desk

LENGTH: 915 words

DATELINE: LOS ANGELES, April 21


The two victors of Round 1 in the Los Angeles mayoral race are expected to
present Angelenos with the clearest clash of political ideals and approaches
seen in modern memory here, a memory dominated by the pacifying aura of the
sphinx-like Tom Bradley for 20 years.

In Tuesday's nonpartisan election a tough-talking Republican businessman and
veteran power broker, Richard Riordan, ran a strikingly strong first in this
liberal city, getting 33 percent of the vote in a field of two dozen candidates.
The runner-up was City Councilman Mike Woo, a polished liberal Democrat who is
heir to Mayor Bradley's multiethnic coalition, with 24 percent.

Since neither got more than half the vote, the two men will face each other in a
runoff on June 8, with the winner taking office on July 1. The election comes
after two years of turmoil in the nation's second-largest city that began with
the videotaped beating of Rodney G. King by police officers and seems to have
come to an end on Saturday with the conviction of two officers on Federal civil
rights charges.

Despite widespread demands for better police protection, voters failed to
approve a ballot measure that would have financed the hiring of 1,000 police
officers with a surcharge on property taxes. The measure received 58 percent of
the vote, short of the two-thirds required to increase taxes in California. They
did approve a limit of two terms for mayor, council members and other top
elected city officials.

Few Similarities

The Riordan-Woo face-off brings a sharply defined clash over how to rebuild this
ethnically riven and economically depressed metropolis.

"They are both men, but I cannot think of a lot of other similarities," said
Joseph R. Cerrell, a political consultant here affiliated with neither camp. He
predicted a "very nasty campaign."

The 62-year-old New York-born Mr. Riordan (pronounced REAR-dihn), a lawyer and
entrepreneur, calls himself a fiscal conservative and a social moderate. His
largely self-financed campaign calls for shrinking city government and leasing
the operations of Los Angeles International Airport to raise money to hire 3,000
additional police officers. Given widespread fears over racial disorders, his
tough-on-crime stance has earned him considerable support among white and older
voters, though he denies making a racial appeal.

By contrast, the boyish-looking 42-year-old Mr. Woo, a former Vietnam war
protester and an urban planner who has represented the Hollywood district for
eight years, has a stronger faith in the government's ability to solve problems.
He promises $100 million in city-backed loans to businesses in South-Central Los
Angeles and hopes to hold together the fraying coalition of blacks, liberals,
Jews and business leaders that kept Mr. Bradley in office for so long. Mr. Woo
has also promised to place a homosexual on the Police Commission.

Ideological Swipes

In his comments on Tuesday night, Mr. Woo signaled his plan to paint Mr. Riordan
as a defender of the privileged and a right-wing Republican. "Dick Riordan gets
his marching orders from Ronald Reagan and his economic ideas from Michael
Milken," he said, referring to the junk-bond dealer who went to jail on
security-fraud charges.

In an interview today, Mr. Riordan said the race was not about class but
personal safety and jobs. "Mr. Woo is trying to define me as something I am
really not," he said. "This race is not about race, party or class; it's about
leadership, about which of us can face the issues of safety and jobs."

The unusual demographic facts of life in Los Angeles are such that Mr. Riordan
has a fairly good chance of being elected Mayor of this heavily minority and
liberal city even though only 30 percent of the voters are Republican. Though
about two-thirds of the population of 3.6 million is made up of Mexicans,
Mexican-Americans, Asians, blacks and other minorities, the electorate is still
two-thirds Anglo, as non-Hispanic whites are called here. The city's huge
immigrant population is largely disenfranchised because many of them are not
citizens.

Only 32 percent of registered voters turned out Tuesday, meaning that Mr.
Riordan led the race with only 1 in 10 voters. If turnout in the runoff is
similar, the new mayor will be chosen by as few as 226,300 people, or 16 percent
of registered voters or 6 percent of the population.

Candidates Eliminated

On Tuesday, the other leading candidates were far behind. They were City
Councilman Joel Wachs with 11 percent; state Assemblyman Richard Katz with 10
percent; Linda Griego, a former Deputy Mayor with 7 percent; Stan Sanders, a
prominent black lawyer with 4 percent; and Councilman Nate Holden with 4
percent.

Mindful that he won only minimal support in minority communities, Mr. Riordan
today tried to broaden his appeal, having breakfast with black and Hispanic
business leaders in South-Central Los Angeles.

In a survey of voters leaving polling places on Tuesday, voters told The Los
Angeles Times that the top issues in the race were jobs and the economy, crime
and gangs, education and improving the Police Department. Of those voting for
Mr. Riordan, more than two-thirds cited his record as a businessman as their
reason for voting for him, while a good majority of Woo voters cited his
reaching out to minorities and his early call for the ouster of the former chief
of police, Daryl F. Gates.

The battle lines for the June 8 runoff, then, are clearly drawn.

LOAD-DATE: April 22, 1993

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo: Mayoral candidates, City Councilman Mike Woo, left, and Richard
Riordan, will face each other in a runoff in Los Angeles on June 8. (Photographs
by Associated Press)

                   Copyright 1993 The New York Times Company


                              79 of 312 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 April 22, 1993, Thursday, Late Edition - Final

U.S. and Allies Differ on Arms for Bosnia Muslims

BYLINE: By ROGER COHEN

SECTION: Section A; Page 15; Column 1; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 663 words

DATELINE: PARIS, April 21


Differences emerged between the United States and its European allies today on
the issue of allowing Bosnian Muslims to import arms, with France declaring that
such a move would increase the conflict and mean an end to its relief role in
the Balkans.

France's Foreign Minister, Alain Juppe, said lifting the United Nations arms
embargo to help equip the outgunned Muslim-led Bosnian Government would "mean
the internationalization of the conflict and a general conflagration in the
Balkans."

Mr. Juppe, who was named this month to France's new center-right Government,
said in Parliament that if the arms embargo was lifted, the more than 4,000
French soldiers involved in United Nations relief and peacemaking efforts in
Bosnia and Croatia would immediately be withdrawn.

His statement amounted to the most emphatic rejection to date by a European
government of the idea of allowing arms imports to reach Bosnia's Muslims so
they can defend themselves against attack by the vastly better equipped Serbian
forces.

The British Foreign Secretary, Douglas Hurd, had already suggested this month
that lifting the arms embargo would create "a level killing field" rather than
the parity in weapons envisioned by some officials in the Clinton
Administration. Like France and unlike the United States, Britain has several
thousand troops in the former Yugoslavia engaged in delivering relief aid.

President Clinton and Secretary of State Warren Christopher have recently raised
the idea of lifting the arms embargo, a move that might limit the growing
accusations that the United States is acting as a remote bystander as the
slaughter continues in Bosnia.

But Mr. Juppe said giving the Bosnian Muslims arms "would tempt the Serbs, who
are the best armed today, and the Croats, who have resumed their offensive in
recent days, to liquidate the Muslim resistance before it gets better armed than
it is at present."

Rather than tampering with the arms embargo, Mr. Juppe said, the only course now
open to Western powers is possible air strikes against ground targets. Military
intervention on the ground would lead to another Vietnam or Afghanistan, he
suggested.

"That leaves the idea of air strikes against ground targets, which also poses
many questions," he said. "We are in the process of studying them." He added
that any air strike would require a United Nations resolution.

He did not specify which ground targets were under study, but Western planning
for an air assault is believed to have centered on Serbian artillery positions
in Bosnia and on bridges connecting Serbia and eastern Bosnia.

                             --------------------


U.S. Weighs Tuzla Move

WASHINGTON, April 21 (Special to The New York Times) -- President Clinton is
considering an initiative to open the Serbian-besieged airport in Tuzla, an
Eastern Bosnian town that has been swamped by 200,000 refugees and is running
out of food, Administration officials said today.

Tuzla, one of the few remaining areas of Bosnia-Herzegovina still in Muslim
hands, has been virtually cut off from food deliveries by the surge of fighting
in central Bosnia between Croatian and Muslim forces. The main road to the city
winds through what is now a battlefield.

A senior Administration official said today that the Pentagon has studied what
would be needed to repair the runways of the Tuzla airport and bring in radar
and other equipment needed to handle landings by C-230 cargo planes.

The airport has been used in recent weeks by United Nations helicopters.  United
Nations forces say it is shelled every day by the Serbs, and repaired each
evening by Bosnian forces.

Nearly 200,000 refugees are in Tuzla, which now needs an estimated 120 tons of
food a day. A United Nations aid official said that Tuzla's warehouses had two
to three days supply of food, and that for the moment the city was dependent on
truck convoys that originate in Belgrade and pass through Serb-held territory.

LOAD-DATE: April 22, 1993

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1993 The New York Times Company


                              80 of 312 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 April 22, 1993, Thursday, Late Edition - Final

AT HOME WITH: Randy Shilts;
Writing Against Time, Valiantly

BYLINE: By JEFFREY SCHMALZ

SECTION: Section C; Page 1; Column 1; Home Desk

LENGTH: 1571 words

DATELINE: SAN FRANCISCO


THESE should be the best of times for Randy Shilts. His new book, "Conduct
Unbecoming," is hitting stores now, a portrait of homosexuals in the military
coming as the issue seizes the country's conscience. A movie based on his first
book, "The Mayor of Castro Street," published in 1982, is about to go into
production. An HBO film of his second book, "And the Band Played On," just
finished shooting. He has a 23-year-old boyfriend (Barry Barbieri), a 10-acre
retreat in the country, even a trusty dog (Dashiel).

But Mr. Shilts, 41, who was made famous by his writing on AIDS, has himself
developed AIDS, and it is wearing him down. He comes to the door of his
apartment here tethered to an oxygen tank, the legacy of a collapsed lung not
yet healed. One minute he is the old Randy Shilts, a blur of energy and issues
and passion, musing over the possibility of a new book, railing against the
abuse of gay and lesbian Americans in the military. The next, he isn't Randy
Shilts at all. He's just another gay man with AIDS, scared and tired, trading
gossip about the newest drugs and monitoring the declining level of white blood
cells that support his immune system -- his T-cell count.

"H.I.V. is certainly character-building," he says, easing his breathing by
reclining on the sofa. "It's made me see all of the shallow things we cling to,
like ego and vanity." Not missing a beat, he adds, "Of course, I'd rather have a
few more T-cells and a little less character."

There will be no book tour, no trip to Washington for the big gay march on
Sunday. His health won't allow it. And that means no testimony before the
Congressional committee reviewing the military's ban on homosexuals, which is
just as well. Mr. Shilts, a sometime reporter for The San Francisco Chronicle,
who considers

himself a journalist and not an advocate, isn't comfortable with a reporter's
testifying anyway.

Still, Randy Shilts is hardly a recluse. As he sits in his two-bedroom apartment
turned salon, the world comes to him -- Sam Donaldson and the morning-news
anchors and newspaper and magazine reporters and Charlie Rose and a satellite
crew for a link-up with Larry King. When "Band," his account of the early days
of the AIDS epidemic, came out in 1987, he had to beg for media attention. Now,
after the runaway success of the book, he is a star, treated as the pre-eminent
chronicler of gay life and spokesman on gay issues.

Yet, in gay circles he gets a mixed reception. He is worshiped by many. But to
some young radicals, he is as Establishment as they come, a panderer to fame and
fortune. To some others, especially in San Francisco, he is a traitor who
abandoned his gay brothers by endorsing the closing of bath houses here and
opposing the outing of prominent closeted homosexuals. Some of the most negative
reviews of "Band" were in the gay press, which was outraged that the book
charged gay organizations with initially pretending AIDS didn't exist.

"If I criticize the gay community," he says, "then I'm part of the
Establishment. I sold out, rather than just having a different opinion. There's
no room in the gay community for people of good intention having different
opinions. Either you have the opinion or you're nothing. Yeah, it bothers me.
People tell me, 'Oh, you must love being controversial because you've done so
many things that are.' I hate it. My feelings get hurt."

Gay groups are likely to find little to criticize in the 784 pages of "Conduct
Unbecoming," which, like his other two books, is published by St. Martin's
Press. It often seems to be the story of two completely different militaries.
One is a world where homosexuality is almost commonplace, an accepted part of
life more open than not, a world of lovers and drag. In the Vietnam War years,
homosexual sex was rampant, Mr. Shilts says, particularly among supposedly
straight personnel, who claimed that they were "real men" because they had wives
back home.

The other is a post-Vietnam world of persecution, of imprisoning gay and lesbian
soldiers for having sex off base in the privacy of their bedrooms, of forcing
confessions by threatening to take away children or to humiliate parents.

"It's very Stalinesque," Mr. Shilts says. "I think even people who support the
ban would be flabbergasted if they knew what was being done to enforce it."

Because of the closeness of male relationships in the military, Mr. Shilts says,
the Pentagon is all the more driven to cracking down.

"The policy has never been to take on all gays," he continues. "The policy has
been to make it so they can say they don't tolerate homosexuality. If they say
they tolerate it, then it reflects on themselves. There's an appreciation of
male-male relationships in the military that's much greater than in society as a
whole. I think that's why they have to reject homosexuality. Because so much of
what they do is homosexual that they have to make it a point."

Mr. Shilts says one reason for undertaking "Conduct," whose writing and thousand
interviews have taken up the last four and a half years, began to gel when he
was on a book tour for "Band."

"It struck me that straight people are in tremendous denial about the existence
of prejudice against gay people," he says. "Even those supportive of gay rights
don't get it. They don't realize what a despised minority we are in America. The
military issue is a way of showing the extent to which prejudice shapes the
lives of gay people."

One room in his apartment is stuffed with boxes and 12,000 index cards -- the
remnants of the book research. He was helped by researchers but estimates he did
about two-thirds of the interviews. The book was mostly written in his home
about an hour's drive north, a cabin in the woods.

Mr. Shilts knew when he started the book that he was infected with H.I.V., which
was diagnosed on the day he finished "Band" in 1987. He had told his doctor in
1986 that it was all right to test him but that he didn't want to know the
results for fear it would influence his reporting on the book, something that in
retrospect he doesn't believe would have happened.  "Facts are facts," he says.

"I literally pulled the last page out of the typewriter and went to the doctor,"
Mr. Shilts recalls. "I said, 'O.K., now you can test me.' He said, 'I already
have.' "

At first, Mr. Shilts found it difficult to commit to long-term projects, fearful
that he wouldn't live to complete them. But he became frustrated. Writing books
is his love. "Doing this book," he says, "was my commitment that I was going to
be alive for a couple of years. Even if it cuts six months off my life, I'd
rather be doing something meaningful."

In the end, writing the book almost killed him. He started research in 1988 --
unsure of whether there would be any broad interest in such a book -- but wrote
most of it last year. He was supposed to have inhaled aerosolized pentamidine to
protect against pneumonia. But he got so caught up in his writing that he didn't
want to leave the cabin and come to San Francisco once a month for the
relatively simple treatment. "I should have known better," he says.

Sure enough, last August, he contracted pneumocystis carinii pneumonia, crossing
the threshold from being H.I.V. positive to having full-blown AIDS. He got
pneumocystis again in December. On Christmas Eve, a lung collapsed. What
followed was a seven-week life-and-death battle -- surgery, even a ventilator.
"I almost gave up and died six weeks ago," he says. The last paragraphs of
"Conduct Unbecoming" were dictated from his hospital bed. A chapter on the Gulf
War was left undone, to be added in the next printing.

Mr. Shilts, who took AZT for five years until it lost its effectiveness and is
now not on any antiviral medication, walks slowly as he gives a tour of the
apartment. At times short of breath, at other times strong, he often seems just
plain weary. "Straight people," he says, "should be giving awards to those of us
with AIDS who go on being productive members of society."

Just the day before, he had been found to have kaposi's sarcoma, the
AIDS-releated cancer that causes purplish lesions. He got the diagnosis from
Marcus Conant, the very doctor whom Mr. Shilts had followed in "Band" as he
diagnosed K.S. in one patient after another. Randy Shilts has become one of the
people he wrote about.

It is raining on this raw afternoon, the drops clicking against the window. The
apartment is in a large complex, but the view makes it seem isolated, lost in an
idyll of shrubs and ponds and mini-bridges. Ollie, the cockatoo, rustles in his
cage. Mr. Shilts pauses in front of a portrait of Saint Anthony of Padua, over
the fireplace. "The patron saint of healing," he says.

He is reminded that there is much to be thankful for: He is alive. He has
friends. The world is beating a path to his door. A big star, Robin Williams, is
expected to play the lead in "The Mayor of Castro Street," about Harvey Milk,
the slain gay-rights leader. Other big stars like Anjelica Huston and Richard
Gere are featured in "Band." But Mr. Shilts doesn't seem excited by all that. He
is distracted, speaking almost to himself.

"I have to take care of myself," he says. "Another thing could knock me out. I
can't get pneumonia again." Then he comes back to the conversation: "Yeah, I
have a good life. I'd be happier if I didn't have to worry about dying."

NAME: Randy Shilts

LOAD-DATE: April 22, 1993

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo: The author Randy Shilts and his dog, Dashiel, at his San
Francisco apartment. (Terrence McCarthy for The New York Times)

TYPE: Biography

                   Copyright 1993 The New York Times Company


                              81 of 312 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 April 22, 1993, Thursday, Late Edition - Final

A Russian Assessment

BYLINE: By CELESTINE BOHLEN,  Special to The New York Times

SECTION: Section A; Page 3; Column 3; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 247 words

DATELINE: MOSCOW, April 21


The Russian chairman of a joint United States-Russian commission on American
P.O.W.'s said today that he was convinced that a report that counted 1,205
American prisoners of war in Vietnam in 1972 was a genuine document from the
archives of the Soviet Communist Party.

But he added that he could not vouch for the veracity of the information in the
report.

The chairman, Gen. Dmitri A. Volkogonov, who is also a historian, said he
learned of the document this month, several months after Stephen J. Morris had
obtained it. Identified as a report to the Communist Party Politburo in Hanoi on
Sept. 15, 1972 by a North Vietnamese general, the document has raised questions
about Hanoi's sincerity on the P.O.W. issue and threatened to impede any rapid
improvement in United States-Vietnamese relations.

"My opinion is that the document is completely authentic," said General
Volkogonov, who returned here on Tuesday after a trip to the United States.
"Whether the information is accurate I cannot say."

According to General Volkogonov, the director of the archives center where the
document had been held was dismissed on Tuesday for allowing it to fall into the
hands of an independent researcher before it had been made known to the P.O.W.
commission. A spokesman for the Russian State Archives confirmed that the
director of the Center of Contemporary Archives, Rem A. Usikov, had been
dismissed for violating rules that govern access to top secret archives.

LOAD-DATE: April 22, 1993

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1993 The New York Times Company


                              82 of 312 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                  April 23, 1993, Friday, Late Edition - Final

Review/Theater: Tommy;
Capturing Rock-and-Roll and the Passions of 1969

BYLINE: By FRANK RICH

SECTION: Section C; Page 1; Column 1; Weekend Desk

LENGTH: 1648 words


THE Broadway musical has never been the same since rock-and-roll stole its
audience and threw it into an identity crisis. For three decades, from the
moment "Meet the Beatles" usurped the supremacy of such Broadway pop as "Hello,
Dolly!," the commercial theater has desperately tried to win back the Young
(without alienating their elders) by watering down rock music, simulating rock
music and ripping off rock music. A result has been a few scattered hits over
the years, typified by "Hair" and "Jesus Christ, Superstar," most of which have
tamed the rock-and-roll revolution rather than spread it throughout Times
Square.

Until now.

"Tommy," the stunning new stage adaptation of the 1969 rock opera by the British
group the Who, is at long last the authentic rock musical that has eluded
Broadway for two generations. A collaboration of its original principal author,
Pete Townshend, and the director, Des McAnuff, this show is not merely an
entertainment juggernaut, riding at full tilt on the visual and musical highs of
its legendary pinball iconography and irresistible tunes, but also a
surprisingly moving resuscitation of the disturbing passions that made "Tommy"
an emblem of its era. In the apocalyptic year of 1969, "Tommy" was the unwitting
background music for the revelation of the My Lai massacre, the Chicago Seven
trial, the Charles Manson murders. Those cataclysmic associations still
reverberate within the piece, there to be tapped for the Who's generation, even
as the show at the St. James is so theatrically fresh and emotionally raw that
newcomers to "Tommy" will think it was born yesterday.

In a way, it was. Though the voices and pit band of this "Tommy" faithfully
reproduce the 1969 double album, adding merely one song ("I Believe My Own
Eyes"), a few snippets of dialogue and some extended passages of underscoring,
the production bears no resemblance to the Who's own concert performances of the
opera (which culminated in an appearance at the Metropolitan Opera House in
1970) or to Ken Russell's pious, gag-infested 1975 film adaptation. Instead of
merely performing the songs or exploiting them as cues for general riffs of
dance and psychedelia, the evening's creators, who also include the
choreographer Wayne Cilento and some extraordinary multi-media artists led by
the brilliant set designer John Arnone, use their singing actors to flesh out
the drama of "Tommy." Better still, they excavate the fable's meaning until
finally the opera's revised conclusion spreads catharsis like wildfire through
the cheering house.

Both the story and its point are as simple as "Peter Pan" (with which "Tommy"
shares its London setting and some flying stunts by Foy). The show's eponymous
hero is a boy who is stricken deaf, dumb and blind at the age of 4 after
watching his father return from a World War II prisoners' camp to shoot his
mother's lover. Tommy's only form of communication proves to be his latent
wizardry at pinballs, a talent that soon turns him into a media sensation. As
played by Michael Cerveris with the sleek white outfit, dark shades and
narcissistic attitude of a rock star, the grown-up Tommy is nearly every modern
child's revenge fantasy come true: the untouchable icon who gets the uncritical
adulation from roaring crowds that his despised parents never gave him at home.

In this telling, Tommy is often played simultaneously by two child actors
(representing him at ages 4 and 10) in addition to Mr. Cerveris. The isolated
young Tommy's totemic, recurring cry of yearning -- "See me, feel me, touch me,
heal me" -- flows repeatedly between inner child and grown man, giving piercing
voice to the eternal childhood psychic aches of loneliness and lovelessness. It
is this primal theme, expressed with devastating simplicity in Mr. Townshend's
score and lyrics, that has made "Tommy" timeless, outlasting the Who itself
(which disbanded in 1982). Yet it is the evil of the authority figures the hero
must overcome -- a distant father (Jonathan Dokuchitz), a dismissive mother
(Marcia Mitzman), a sexually abusive Uncle Ernie (Paul Kandel) and various
fascistic thugs -- that also makes "Tommy" a poster-simple political statement
reflecting the stark rage of the Vietnam era.

As staged by Mr. McAnuff, that anger is present but the story is kept firmly
rooted in its own time, from the 40's to the early 60's. The slide projections
that drive the production design at first recreate in black-and-white the London
of the blitz, then spill into the vibrant Pop Art imagery of pinball machines,
early Carnaby Street and Andy Warhol paintings before returning to
black-and-white for televised crowd images that recall the early British rock
explosion as witnessed on "The Ed Sullivan Show." Mr. Cilento's compact dances
similarly advance from wartime jitterbugging to the 50's sock-hopping of early
rock-and-roll movies to evocations of the mod antics of "A Hard Day's Night" and
its imitators in the 60's.

But the highly sophisticated theatrical style of this "Tommy," which coalesces
as a continuous wave of song, scenes, kaleidoscopic design and dance, owes
everything to musical-theater innovations unknown until the mid-1970's. Mr.
McAnuff, whose past Broadway works include the relatively stodgy "Big River" and
"A Walk in the Woods," shrewdly turns to examples set by such directors as
Harold Prince, Michael Bennett and Robert Wilson. Here and there are echoes of
the mock-documentary superstar sequences of "Evita" and "Dreamgirls," in which
abstract scaffolding and bridges suggest a show-biz firmament and a surging mob.
As in those cinematic Prince and Bennett shows, the entire company becomes an
undulating organism that defines the stage space and is always on the fly.

From Mr. Wilson, whose theater experiments have sometimes involved autistic boys
eerily resembling the fictive Tommy, Mr. McAnuff and his designers take the
notion of threading a few repeated images abstractly through the action:
floating chairs, mirrors, the Union Jack, airplane propellers and disembodied
Man Ray eyes, not to mention doors and windows reminiscent of 60's rock-album
cover art and the hallucinogenic mythology such art canonized. (Sometimes the
new incidental scoring takes some hints from Mr. Wilson's musical collaborator,
Philip Glass.) These dreamy visual touchstones are constantly reshuffled and
distorted throughout "Tommy" for subliminal effect, reaching their apotheosis in
an inevitable (and superbly executed) set piece in which the entire theater
becomes a gyrating pinball machine celebrating the rebellious hero's "amazing
journey" to new-found freedom.

Even in that blowout sequence, "Tommy" eschews the heavy visual spectacle of
recent West End rock operas (and Broadway musicals) to keep its effects lithe
and to the point. Often the most evocative sequences are spare and intimate: a
candlelit Christmas dinner haunted by the ghosts of family horrors past, an
abandoned urban lot in which the Acid Queen (Cheryl Freeman, paying persuasive
vocal homage to Tina Turner) is more a feral junkie than a phantasmagoric gypsy.
Dominating the stage instead of being usurped by hardware, the performers can
shine as well, from the dazzling Mr. Cerveris, who grows from melancholy youth
to strutting pop belter, to Ms. Mitzman's powerfully sung mother, Mr. Kandel's
sinister Uncle Ernie and the tireless ensemble, its youngest members included.

When the time comes for the entire company to advance on the audience to sing
the soaring final incantation -- "Listening to you I get the music/ Gazing at
you I get the heat" -- "Tommy" has done what rock-and-roll can do but almost
never does in the theater: reawaken an audience's adolescent feelings of
rebellion and allow them open-throated release. But reflecting the passage of
time and Mr. Townshend's own mature age of 47, this version takes a brave step
further, concluding with a powerful tableau of reconciliation that lifts an
audience of the 1990's out of its seats.

"Hope I die before I get old," sang the Who in "My Generation," its early hit
single. A quarter-century or so later, Mr. Townshend hasn't got old so much as
grown up, into a deeper view of humanity unthinkable in the late 1960's. Far
from being another of Broadway's excursions into nostalgia, "Tommy" is the first
musical in years to feel completely alive in its own moment. No wonder that for
two hours it makes the world seem young.


Tommy

Music and lyrics by Pete Townshend; book by Mr. Townshend and Des McAnuff;
additional music and lyrics by John Entwistle and Keith Moon; directed by Mr.
McAnuff; choreographed by Wayne Cilento; sets by John Amone; costumes by David
C. Woolard; lighting by Chris Parry; projections by Wendall K. Harrington; sound
by Steve Canyon Kennedy; video by Batwin & Robin Productions Inc.; orchestration
by Steve Margoshes; music supervision and direction by Joseph Church; musical
coordinator, John Miller; special effects by Gregory Meeh; flying by Foy; flight
direction by Steve Rankin; production stage manager, Frank Hartenstein;
technical supervision, Gene O'Donovan. Presented by Pace Theatrical Group and
Dodger Productions with Kardana Productions Inc. At the St. James Theater, 246
West 44th Street, Manhattan.

Mrs. Walker . . . Marcia Mitzman
Captain Walker . . . Jonathan Dokuchitz
Uncle Ernie . . . Paul Kandel
Tommy . . . Michael Cerveris
Tommy, Age 10 . . . Buddy Smith
Cousin Kevin . . . Anthony Barrile
The Gypsy . . . Cheryl Freeman
WITH: Michael Arnold, Bill Buell, Maria Calabrese, Victoria Lecta Cave, Tracy
Nicole Chapman, Paul Dobie, Tom Flynn, Romain Fruge, Jody Gelb, Christian Hoff,
Todd Hunter, Donnie Kehr, Pam Klinger, Tracey Langran, Lisa Leguillou, Norm
Lewis, Crysta Macalush, Michael McElroy, Lee Morgan, Alice Ripley, Sherie Scott,
Carly Jane Steinborn, Ari Vernon, Timothy Warmen.

LOAD-DATE: April 23, 1993

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photos: Michael Cerveris, center, and the company of the new musical.
(pg. C1); Tom Flynn, left, and Buddy Smith in "Tommy." (Marcus/Bryan-Brown) (pg.
C23)

TYPE: Review

                   Copyright 1993 The New York Times Company


                              83 of 312 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 April 24, 1993, Saturday, Late Edition - Final

Excerpts From Clinton News Conference: 'The U.S. Should Lead' on Bosnia

BYLINE: AP

SECTION: Section 1; Page 7; Column 1; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 3470 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, April 23


Following are excerpts from President Clinton's news conference today, as
transcribed by The Associated Press:

Q. Mr. President, there's a growing feeling that the Western response to the
bloodshed in Bosnia has been woefully inadequate. A holocaust survivor, Elie
Wiesel, asked you yesterday to do something, anything, to stop the fighting. Is
the United States considering taking unilateral action such as air strikes
against Serb artillery sites?

A. Well first, let me say, as you know, for more than a week now we have been
seriously reviewing our options for further action.

And I want to say, too, let's look at the last three months. Since I became
President, I have worked with our allies and we have tried to move forward,
first on the no-fly zone, on enforcement of it; on the humanitarian airdrops; on
the war crimes investigation; on getting the Bosnian Muslims involved in the
peace process.

We have made some progress and now we have a very much tougher sanctions
resolution. . . .

I think we should act. We should lead. The United States should lead. We have
led for the last three months. We have moved the coalition. And to be fair, our
allies in Europe have been willing to do their part, and they have troops on the
ground there.

But I do not think we should act alone, unilaterally, nor do I think we will
have to.


                                    .  .  .

Q. Do you see any parallel between the ethnic cleansing in Bosnia and the
Holocaust?

A. I think the Holocaust is on a whole different level. I think it is without
precedent or peer in human history.

Holocaust 'to the Nth Degree'

On the other hand, ethnic cleansing is the kind of inhumanity that the Holocaust
took to the nth degree. The idea of moving people around and abusing them and
often killing them, solely because of their ethnicity, is an abhorrent thing,
and it is especially troublesome in that area where people of different ethnic
groups lived side by side for so long together. And I think you have to stand up
against it. I think it's wrong.


                                    .  .  .

Q. Mr. President, by any count, you have not had a good week in your presidency
-- the tragedy in Waco, defeat of your stimulus bill, the standoff in Bosnia.
What did you do wrong and what are you going to do differently?


                                    .  .  .

A. You know, I don't really believe that the situation in Bosnia -- it's not
been a good week for the world, but I don't know that the Administration could
have made it different. On the stimulus package, I think -- I'd like to put it
into the larger context and remind you that in this hundred days we have already
fundamentally changed the direction of an American Government.

We have abandoned trickle-down economics. We have abandoned the policies that
brought the debt of this country from one trillion to four trillion dollars in
only a decade.

The budget plan which passed the Congress which will reduce the deficit and
increase investment has led to a 20-year low in mortgage rates, dramatically
lower interest rates. There are probably people in this room who have refinanced
their home mortgages in the last three months or who have had access to cheaper
credit.

That's going to put tens of billions of dollars coursing throughout this economy
in ways that are very, very good for the country. And so we are moving in the
right direction economically.

Regret on Stimulus Package

I regret that the stimulus did not pass, and I have begun to ask and will
continue to ask not only people in the Administration but the people in the
Congress whether there is something I could have done differently to pass that.
Part of the reason it didn't pass was politics, part of it was the difference in
ideas.


                                    .  .  .

Q. (inaudible) -- Waco, Texas?

A. Well, with regard to Waco, I don't have much to add to what I've already
said.

I think the -- I think it is a -- I want the situation looked into. I want us to
bring in people who have any insights to bear on that. I think it's very
important that the whole thing be thoroughly gone over. But I still maintain
what I said from the beginning, that the offender there was David Koresh. And I
do not think the United States Government is responsible for the fact that a
bunch of fanatics decided to kill themselves. And I'm sorry that they killed
their children.

Q. Mr. President, to follow up partly on Helen on your stimulus package and on
your political approach to Capitol Hill, Ross Perot said today that you're
playing games with the American people in your tax policy. He was strongly
critical of your stimulus package. He said he's going to launch an advertising
campaign against the North American Free Trade Agreement. How are you going to
handle his political criticisms? Will it complicate your efforts on the Hill
with your economic plan? And do you plan to repackage some of the things that
have been in your stimulus program and try to resubmit them to the Hill?

A. Well, let me answer that question first. We're going to revisit all of that
over the next few days. I'm going to be talking to members of Congress and the
others to see what we can do about that.

With regard to the economic plan, I must say I found that rather amazing. I
don't want to get into an argument with Mr. Perot. I'll be interested to hear
what his specifics are, but I would -- go back and read his book and his plan.
There's a remarkable convergence except that we have more specific budget cuts.
We raise taxes less on the middle class and more on the wealthy. But, otherwise,
the plans are remarkably similar.


                                    .  .  .

Q. Mr. President, to go back to Bosnia for a minute. You continue to insist that
this has to be multilateral action, criteria that seems to have hamstrung us
when it comes to many options thus far and makes it look as if this is a state
of paralysis. The United States is the last remaining superpower. Why is it not
appropriate in this situation for the United States to act unilaterally?

A. Well, the United States -- surely you would agree that the United States,
even as the last remaining superpower, has to act consistent with international
law under some mandate of the United Nations.

Q. Well, many people think that you have a mandate --

A. They do, and that is one of the things that we have under review. I wouldn't
-- I haven't ruled out any option for action. I would remind all of you, I have
not ruled out any option, except that we have not discussed and we are not
considering the introduction of American forces into continuing hostilities
there. We are not. So we are reviewing other options.

But I also would remind you that, to be fair, our allies have had -- the French,
the British and the Canadians -- have had troops on the ground there. They have
been justifiably worried about those. But they have supported the airdrops, the
toughening of the sanctions, they welcomed the American delegation now in Europe
working on how to make these sanctions really work and really bite against
Serbia.

So I'm not -- and I can tell you that the other nations involved are also
genuinely reassessing their position. And I would not rule out the fact that we
can reach an agreement for concerted action that goes beyond where we have been.
I don't -- I don't have any criticism of the British, the French and others on
that.


                                    .  .  .

Q. Mr. President, a week ago a group of gay and lesbian representatives came out
of a meeting with you and expressed in the most ringing terms their confidence
in your understanding of them and their political aspirations and their belief
that you would fulfill those aspirations. Do you feel now that you will be able
to meet their now-enhanced expectations?

A. Well, I don't know about that, and I don't know what their -- it depends on
what the expectations are.

But I'll tell you this. I believe that this country's policies should be heavily
biased in favor of non-discrimination. I believe when you tell people they can't
do certain things in this country that other people can do, there ought to be an
overwhelming and compelling reason for it.

Views on the Gay Issue

I believe we need the services of all of our people, and I have said that
consistently, and not as a political proposition. The first time this issue came
up was in 1991 when I was in Boston. I was just asked a question about it.

And I might add that it's interesting that I have been attacked -- obviously,
those who disagree with me here are primarily coming from the political right in
America. When I was Governor I was attacked from the other direction for
sticking up for the rights of religious fundamentalists to run their child care
centers and to practice home schooling under appropriate safeguards.


                                    .  .  .

Q. Mr. President, getting back to the situation in Bosnia. We understand you
haven't made any final decisions on new options previously considered
unacceptable. But the two most commonly heard options would be lifting the arms
embargo to enable the Bosnian Muslims to defend themselves, and to initiate some
limited air strikes, perhaps to cut off supply lines.

Without telling us your decision -- presumably you haven't made any final
decisions -- on those two options, what are the pros and cons that are going
through your mind -- right now and will weigh heavily on your final decision?

A. I'm reluctant to get into this. There are -- those are two of the options.
There are some other options that have been considered.

All have pluses and minuses. All have supporters and opponents within the
Administration and in the Congress, where, I would remind you, heavy
consultations will be required to embark on any new policy.

I do believe that on the airstrike issue, the pronouncements that General Powell
has made generally about military action apply there. If you take action, if the
United States takes action, we must have a clearly defined objective that can be
met, we must be able to understand it, and its limitations must be clear. The
United States is not -- is not, should not become involved as a partisan in a
war.

With regard to the lifting of the arms embargo, the question obviously there is
the -- if you widen the capacity of people to fight, will that help to get a
settlement and bring about peace or will it lead to more bloodshed, and what
kind of reaction can others have that would -- that would undermine the
effectiveness of the policy? But I think both of them deserve some serious
consideration along with some other options we have.


                                    .  .  .

Q. Sir, do you think that these people who are trying to get into war in Bosnia
are really remembering that we haven't taken care of hundreds of thousands of
veterans from the last war, and we have -- we couldn't take care of our
prisoners and get them all home from Vietnam, and now many of them are coming up
with bills on the treatment of Agent Orange. How could we afford to go to any
more of these wars?

A. Well, I think that's a good argument against the United States itself
becoming involved as a belligerent in a war there. But we are, after all, the
world's only superpower. We do have to lead the world.


                                    .  .  .

Q. Did you make any kind of agreement with Boris Yeltsin to hold off either on
airstrikes or any other kind of aggressive action against the Serbs until after
Sunday, and in general how has his political situation affected your
deliberations on Bosnia?

A. No. I have not made any agreement, and he did not ask for that. We never even
discussed that, interestingly enough. The Russians, I would remind you, in the
middle of President Yeltsin's campaign, abstained from our attempt to get
tougher sanctions through the United Nations in what I thought was the proper
decision for them and one that the United States, and I'm sure the rest of the
free world, very much appreciated.


                                    .  .  .

Q. Mr. President, since you said that one side in the Bosnian conflict
represents inhumanity that the holocaust carried to the nth degree, why do you
then tell us that the United States cannot take a partisan view in this war?

Stand Against Ethnic Cleansing

A. Well, I said that the principle of ethnic cleansing is something we ought to
stand up against. That does not mean that the United States or the United
Nations can enter a war in effect to redraw the lines, geographical lines of
republics within what was Yugoslavia, or that that would ultimately be
successful.

I think what the United States has to do is to try to figure out whether there
is some way, consistent with forcing the people to resolve their own
difficulties, we can stand up to and stop ethnic cleansing. And that is the --
obviously, the difficulty we are wrestling with. This is, clearly, the most
difficult foreign policy problem we face and that all of our allies face.


                                    .  .  .

Q. Mr. President, would you care to make your assessment of the first 100 days
before we make one for you?

A. Well, I'll say if -- I believe, first of all, we passed the budget resolution
in record time. That was the biggest issue. That confirmed the direction of the
Administration and confirmed the commitments of the campaign that we could both
bring the deficit down and increase investment and that we could do it by
specific spending cuts and by raising taxes, almost all of which come from the
highest income people in the society, reversing a 12-year trend in which most of
the tax burdens were borne by the middle class whose incomes were going down
while their taxes were going up, while the deficit went from $1 trillion to $4
trillion. The total national debt and the deficit continue to go up.

We have a 20-year low in interest rates for home mortgages. We have lower
interest rates across the board. We have tens of billions of dollars flooding
back into this economy as people refinance their debt.

We have established a new environmental policy, which is dramatically different.

The Secretary of Education has worked with me and with others and with the
Governors to establish a new approach in education that focuses on tough
standards as well as increasing opportunity.

We have done an enormous amount of work on political reform, on campaign
finance, and lobbying reform.

And I have imposed tough ethics requirements on my own Administration's
officials.

These things are consistent with not only what I said I'd do in the campaign,
but with turning the country around. The Vice President is heading a task force
which will literally change the way the Federal Government operates and make it
much more responsive to the citizens of this country.

We are working on a whole range of other things. The welfare reform initiative
to move people from welfare to work. And, of course, a massive amount of work
has been done on the health care issue, which is a huge economic and personal
security problem for millions of Americans. So, I think it's amazing how much
has been done. More will be done.


                                    .  .  .

Q. Mr. President, the Tailhook Report came out this morning documenting
horrendous and, you know, nearly criminal conduct on the part of the Navy. How
much did you discuss the incident and what might be done about it with your
nominee to be the Secretary of the Navy?

A. First let me comment a little on that. The inspector general's report details
conduct which is wrong, and which has no place in the armed services. And I
expect the report to be acted on in the appropriate way.


                                    .  .  .


Aid to Russia

Q. Mr. President, to go back to Russia for just a minute, the latest polls show
that Mr. Yeltsin will probably win his vote of confidence, but there seems to be
a real toss-up on whether or not voters are going to endorse his economic
reforms. Can you live -- well, can you live with a split decision, though, or do
you need both passed in order to then build support for Russian aid.

A. I believe -- the answer to your question is that for the United States, the
key question should be that which is posed to any democracy, which is who wins
the election. If he wins the election, if he is ratified by the Russian people
to continue as their president, then I think we should do our best to work with
him toward reform.


                                    .  .  .

Q. Mr. President, Mr. Perot has come out strongly and put his prestige on the
line against the free trade agreement, N.A.F.T.A. How hard are you going to
fight for this free trade agreement, and when do you expect to see it
accomplished?

A. I think we'll have the agreement ready in the fairly near future. You know,
our people are still working with the Mexican Government and with the Canadians
on the side agreements. We're trying to work out what the environmental
agreement will say, what the labor agreement will say, and then what the fairest
way to deal with enforcement is.

Q. Mr. President, there was a tremendous flurry of interest earlier this month
in the Russian document that purported to show that the Vietnamese had held back
American prisoners. General Vessey has now said publicly that while the document
itself was authentic, he believes that it was incorrect. Do you have a personal
view at this point about that issue? And more broadly, do you believe that in
fact the Vietnamese did return all the American prisoners at the time of the
Paris peace accords?

A. . . . As to whether the document had any basis in fact, let me say that the
Government of Vietnam was more forthcoming than it had been in the past and gave
us some documents that would tend to undermine the validity of the Russian
document's claim.

I do not know whether that is right or wrong, but we are having it basically
evaluated at this time. And when we complete the evaluation, we'll tell you,
and, of course, we want to tell the families of those who were missing in action
or who were P.O.W.'s.

Q. If I could follow up on that, before the U.S. normalizes relations, allows
trade to go forward, do you have to be personally sure that every case has been
resolved, or would you be willing to go forward on the basis that, well, it may
take years to resolve these cases, the Vietnamese have made sufficient offerings
to us to confirm good faith?

A. Well, a lot of experts say you can never resolve every case, you know, every
one, that we couldn't resolve all the cases for them, and that there are still
some cases that have not been factually resolved going back to the Second World
War. But what I would have to be convinced of is that we had gone a long way
toward resolving every case that could be resolved at this moment in time and
that there was a complete, open, and unrestricted commitment to continue to do
everything that could be done always to keep resolving those cases.

A Clarification on Bosnia


                                    .  .  .

Q. Mr. President, could I ask you for a clarification on Bosnia? You said that
you were not considering introduction of American forces. Does that include any
air forces as well as ground forces, sir?

A. Well, I said ground forces.

Q. You said ground forces?

A. Correct.

Q. Could I ask you, sir, if you fear that using U.S. air strikes might draw the
United States into a ground war there?

A. I just don't want to discuss our evaluation of the options anymore. I've told
you that there's never been a serious discussion in this country about the
introduction of ground forces into an ongoing conflict there.

Q. Mr. President, with hundreds of thousands of gays in Washington this weekend
for the march, did you ever reconsider your decision to leave town for this
weekend? Did you ever consider in any way participating in some of the
activities?

A. No. I -- because I -- and basically, I wouldn't do -- participate in other
marches. I think once you become President, on balance, except under unusual
circumstances, that is not what should be done.

But more importantly, I'm going to the American Society of Newspaper Editors, a
position -- a trip that presumably most of you would want me to make, to try to
focus anew on what I think are the fundamental issues at stake for our country
right now.

And I expect that I will say something about the fact that a lot of Americans
have come here asking for a climate that is free of discrimination, asking
basically to be able to work hard and live by the rules and be treated like
other American citizens if they do that and just that. And that's always been my
position, not only for the gays who will be here but for others as well.

Thank you very much.

LOAD-DATE: April 24, 1993

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo: President Clinton during a White House news conference yesterday
that was dominated by questions on the United States role in the war in Bosnia
and Herzegovina. (Jose R. Lopez/The New York Times)

TYPE: Text

                   Copyright 1993 The New York Times Company


                              84 of 312 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 April 24, 1993, Saturday, Late Edition - Final

Observer;
Could Be A Long Season

BYLINE: By RUSSELL BAKER

SECTION: Section 1; Page 23; Column 1; Editorial Desk

LENGTH: 711 words


President Clinton's bad week at the Capitol brings to mind Casey Stengel,
Franklin Roosevelt and Lyndon Johnson. "Can't anybody here play this game?"
asked Stengel when he was put in charge of a major league baseball team on which
nobody could.

It was the New York Mets, a brand-new expansion team, that provoked Stengel's
cry of anguish. The Clinton Administration is also brand-new. What's worse, it
is beginning to look like a typical baseball expansion team.

That means, in case baseball is not your dish, a comical bunch of greenhorns and
tired old-timers who don't win very often. Thus: Because the President couldn't
change four votes in the Senate, he lost his economic stimulus program
Wednesday.

The three television reporters I happened to catch pronounced it a "major
defeat," and even The New York Times called it "serious." What makes it serious,
and possibly even major, is that new Presidents shouldn't lose showdowns like
this during their first hundred days.

This is when a new President ought to be proving he is a winner, somebody you
mess with only if you don't mind getting your block knocked off. In the fight
over the economic stimulus program, it was the President who got his block
knocked off.

The reason: He couldn't buy four senators. He had 56, which is a majority, but
he needed 60 because a Republican filibuster was preventing the Senate from
voting, and the quaint Senate rule says a majority isn't enough to squelch a
filibuster. It takes 60.

Which is why Lyndon Johnson comes to mind. Johnson's demonizers have done such a
good job blackening his name that people have forgotten he was the last
President who understood the science of domestic politics. It is inconceivable
that L.B.J. would have accepted a Senate defeat for lack of four votes.

Without cataloguing Johnson's full line of equipment for changing senatorial
minds, I merely point out that the most formidable part of it was knowledge: he
knew what every senator most needed, and what every senator most desired.

And every senator, like every other politician, is a mass of needs and desires,
some of which are of absolute urgency, and most of which Presidents can happily
fulfill. Or frustrate.

In "The Best and the Brightest" David Halberstam tells of Frank Church, Senator
from Idaho and critic of Johnson's Vietnam policy, meeting with L.B.J., and
Johnson asking where Church was getting material for his powerful anti-war
speeches. Getting it from Walter Lippmann, the newspaper columnist, said Church.

And L.B.J. said: Next time you want a new dam out in Idaho, Frank, just ask
Walter Lippmann for it.

Such is a President's power to sway senators' minds once he understands what
makes them swayable. Cynics, who are often right anyhow, say that almost
everything in politics has its price, including senators.

It is a graceless way to state the matter, but a President who can't buy a few
senators when a few mean the difference between triumph and embarrassment
probably didn't do his homework in President's school.

Which is why Franklin Roosevelt comes to mind, and a story I heard told at a
long-ago Washington dinner by Thomas (Tommy the Cork) Corcoran, once one of
Roosevelt's bright young men:

Counting votes on an important bill, F.D.R. was astonished when an adviser
warned him that he would have to do a large favor for a distinguished Senator
from the cactus belt or lose his vote. Roosevelt observed that he had just
recently granted this statesman a considerable boon.

"How often do we have to buy him?" he asked. And was told: "Every time, Mr.
President. Every time."

What efforts more persuasive than collegial discourse President Clinton may have
made to win four crucial senators have not been publicly disclosed. One
hesitates to assume there was an attempt to buy a few. The mere suggestion
sounds brutally uncouth for an Administration rich in young Ivy League lawyers
come to Washington to do good.

Which brings Franklin Roosevelt again to mind, for he too was surrounded by
brilliant young lawyers who, as the old Washington wheeze has it, "came to do
good, and stayed to do well." The present crop will do neither unless they learn
that senators, even the Republican kind, are as human as the rest of us.

LOAD-DATE: April 24, 1993

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Op-Ed

                   Copyright 1993 The New York Times Company


                              85 of 312 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 April 24, 1993, Saturday, Late Edition - Final
                              Correction Appended

Washington at Work;
Gay Official Has the Look of Apple Pie and the Outlook of a Revolutionary

BYLINE: By KAREN DE WITT,  Special to The New York Times

SECTION: Section 1; Page 10; Column 1; National Desk

LENGTH: 1470 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, April 23


She looks a bit like Doris Day, the relentlessly upbeat, freckle-faced blonde of
1950's happy-talk movies. But Torie Osborn, the executive director of the
National Gay and Lesbian Task Force, is closer to tougher cinematic heroines,
like those played by Sigourney Weaver.

Intensely committed to the cause of gay and lesbian rights, the 42-year-old Ms.
Osborn is flying high after brokering a meeting between President Clinton and
leaders of national gay and lesbian groups. At one point during the meeting, Ms.
Osborn welcomed Mr. Clinton to the "Gay 90's."

The meeting epitomizes Ms. Osborn's method, organizing pressure from gay groups
and enlisting the help of any other group or individual sympathetic to her
agenda. To pave the way for the White House meeting, she pressed John Sculley, a
friend who is chief executive of Apple Computer Inc., to write his friend, Mr.
Clinton, about the importance of meeting with the group before the national gay
rights march on Sunday in Washington.

"Her grass-roots background and her ability to pick up on what people out there
are feeling, her organizational background and her outside-of-the-Beltway
perspective, is coming just at the right time," said Mario Cooper, who was the
floor manager at the Democratic National Convention and helped organize the
meeting.

2 Decades as Organizer

Few leaders of gay groups will criticize Ms. Osborn on the record, but some
disgruntled ones say she is a maverick, an outsider and a publicity-conscious
interloper who is moving too fast for a newcomer and making a grab for the
limelight.

In many ways, when Ms. Osborn addresses the crowd during the gay march on
Sunday, it will be the culmination of 20 years as an organizer. It has been a
journey not just about campaigning for causes like feminism and the antiwar
movement, but toward understanding of self and sexuality that parallels the
lives of many homosexuals around the country.

Ms. Osborn also reflects the increasing presence of lesbians in the gay movement
as many of the male leaders have become sick and died of AIDS. With the
ascendance of lesbians in the movement, the gay agenda has expanded to address
the special concerns of black homosexuals, women and gay youths.

At the moment, Ms. Osborn is feeling heady with the power of the gay movement
and particularly the gathering of homosexuals from around the nation.

'We're in Hyperspeed'

"We're on the cusp of a different era," she told 150 women at the Lesbian Power
Breakfast before the march. Ms. Osborn, who was introduced by Kate Clinton, a
lesbian comedian, as "a folk heroine to queers everywhere," told the women:
'We're in collapsed time; we're in hyperspeed. This is our moment in the media,
but that is not going to last forever. It's going to be tough, but we're going
to make it by being inclusive of the concerns of women of color, of
working-class women, by showing the links between all oppressions."

It is a reflection of her vision for her own group, which she hopes is anchored
and built upon a network of strong local gay organizations.

To that end, she has been crisscrossing the country speaking at the grass roots.
She said that homosexuals in the military, AIDS and equal protection for gay men
and lesbians were among her main concerns, but that she was also interested in
issues regarding gay and lesbian youths and health care. Ms. Osborn said she was
not daunted by the opposition of the religious right or messages and acts of
hate against homosexuals.

"There is great promise of pluralism and democracy that is the best of America,"
she said. And with a glint in her Doris Day eyes worthy of Sigourney Weaver
facing the Alien, she said, "We will eventually win."

As head of the Los Angeles Gay and Lesbian Community Services Center for the
last four years, and financial director for the previous four, Ms. Osborn took a
moribund group and turned it into the nation's largest gay social services
organization. As the first woman to head the center, she tripled the size of the
staff to more than 150 people, increasing the number of women and minorities.
She doubled the annual budget to $7.4 million, and the group left cramped,
shabby quarters for a stunning glass and steel building in Hollywood.

"When we opened that building last year, it was a great gift to me," Ms. Osborn
said. "We as a community, the gay and lesbian community, had come of age."

Her own coming of age was a journey as well. She said that as a teen-ager she
knew she was a lesbian but fought it. And she is determined to insure that young
homosexuals do not have to make the same tortuous journey.

"When I was 15, I had an unexpected sexual encounter with a classmate," she said
in a recent interview.  "It scared the hell out of me. I was overwhelmed with
shame, the first time I felt sexual desire. I promptly went out and got a
boyfriend. I ran shrieking from this experience."

And through her years at Barnard College, she had a boyfriend.

"I tried to be heterosexual," Ms. Osborn said. But she was frustrated.

Time of Disillusionment


 Beyond that, Ms. Osborn was seeking to learn how to be a political organizer,
she said, but the student antiwar groups that had formed during the Vietnam War
had begun fighting among themselves by the late 1960's and early 1970's.

"I wanted to be organized and there was no one who wanted to organize me," Ms.
Osborn said.

After being raped on a date, Ms. Osborn said, she discovered that she was
pregnant and had an illegal abortion. That experience and disillusionment with
the student antiwar movement prompted her to transfer from Barnard to Middlebury
College in Vermont.

"I thought it was like Swarthmore," recounted Ms. Osborn, who was born in
Copenhagen, the daughter of a Foreign Service officer, and grew up on the
exclusive Main Line of Philadelphia. "But it turned out to be very preppy, very
WASPy, just like the prep school I had gone to. And it turned out to be the best
thing that happened to me, because there was only one other person who was an
antiwar organizer there, a guy named Steve Early. I told him, 'You've got to
help me become an organizer,' and he did. He also became my boyfriend."

The next several years found Ms. Osborn organizing students to go to the 1971
May Day demonstration against the Vietnam War in Washington, living in a women's
commune, organizing the first feminist group at Middlebury College, evolving
into an ardent feminist.

Her personal growth and confidence made her think more about her long-repressed
sexuality, which remained a conflict.

"I could discredit the very movement I was trying to build," said Ms. Osborn.
"It was not cool to be gay in 1971 and 1972."

But in 1972, Ms. Osborn said she was ready to come out of the closet.

"It was a gradual process that took several months, " she said. "But I can
remember writing in my journal: I'm a lesbian and I can no longer deny it."

She told her parents. Her father was supportive, but her mother did not speak to
her for the next six years.

Ms. Osborn continued to campaign for causes, shifting from the antiwar movement
to issues of feminism and increasingly gay and lesbian issues.

"She is one of the most talented, skillful people to emerge in the lesbian-gay
community in years," said David Mixner, a founder of an influential Los Angeles
gay political action committee and the force behind Campaign for Military, an
effort to lift the ban against homosexuals in the military. It was Mr. Mixner
and other influential homosexuals in the Los Angeles area who raised nearly $1
million for Mr. Clinton's Presidential campaign.

A Special Ability

Sheila Kuehl, a lawyer with the California Women's Law Center in Los Angeles,
said that Ms. Osborn's strength was in being able to bring people together while
remaining adamant about the direction and agenda that she believed was
necessary.

"She is the best combination of advocacy for our community," said Ms. Kuehl, who
until last fall was Ms. Osborn's companion.

Mr. Mixner added: "She'll shake up the community. No doubt she'll push the edge,
but she has the uncanny ability to deliver a tough message with personable
skills."

Torie Osborn


Born: Copenhagen, Denmark, July 27, 1950

Hometown: Philadelphia, Pa.

Education: Graduate of The Shipley School, Bryn Mawr, Pa. 1968; B.A. in English,
Middlebury College 1972; M.B.A., University of California at Los Angeles, 1984.


Career Highlights: Financial director of the Los Angeles Gay and Lesbian
Community Services Center, 1984-1988; Executive director of the Los Angeles Gay
and Lesbian Community Services Center, 1988-1992; executive director of the
National Gay and Lesbian Task Force, 1988-1992.


Hobbies: Work, movies, mystery books and "horrible sexist spy novels"

NAME: Torie Osborn

LOAD-DATE: April 24, 1993

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

CORRECTION-DATE: April 28, 1993, Wednesday

CORRECTION:

A Washington at Work article on Saturday about Torie Osborn, executive director
of the National Gay and Lesbian Task Force, referred incorrectly to the role of
Mario Cooper at the Democratic National Convention in New York last year. He was
the convention manager, not the floor manager.


GRAPHIC: Photo: "When we opened that building last year, it was a great gift to
me," Torie Osborn, executive director of the National Gay and Lesbian Task
Force, said of the Los Angeles Gay and Lesbian Community Services Center. "We as
a community, the gay and lesbian community, had come of age." (Stephen
Crowley/The New York Times)

TYPE: Biography

                   Copyright 1993 The New York Times Company


                              86 of 312 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                  April 25, 1993, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

Spies & Thrillers

BYLINE: By Newgate Callendar

SECTION: Section 7; Page 22; Column 4; Book Review Desk

LENGTH: 779 words


Reading Gerald Seymour's new book, THE JOURNEYMAN TAILOR (Edward Burlingame/
HarperCollins, $20), one inevitably thinks back to John Ford's great 1935 film,
"The Informer." Even though almost 60 years separates movie and novel, there is
much the same tension and power, the same pity for the human condition and the
same close look at an unhappy, fear-ridden Dublin.

This comparison, of course, is a tribute to Mr. Seymour's skill. He has taken on
a formidable job in his novel, detailing the never-ending fight between the
Irish Republican Army and the British forces opposing it. The plot is fairly
complicated, there are many characters, and the author uses a kind of cinema
verite technique, with constantly shifting frames. But the book never falters.

Mr. Seymour does not see the issue as a contest between good and evil. On the
one side is an Irish terrorist, tops in his field, whose work often entails the
sacrifice of innocents. On the other side is a woman from the British secret
services, also tops in her field, who runs an informer high up in the I.R.A. In
her way she is as amoral as the terrorist. She will do anything to insure the
safety of her informer, no matter who is sacrificed.

The woman and the terrorist each have a set of principles with its own built-in
logic. That is what the so-called normal people in this book have trouble
comprehending. As it turns out, an agent assigned to work with the woman cannot
come to grips with her monomania and ends up having to find his own way out of
the quandary.

Right? Wrong? Who knows? Mr. Seymour, ever the objective reporter, takes no
sides. But he tells a riveting story that will immediately capture the reader.

Elleston Trevor has been turning out books for some 40 years. Under the pen name
Adam Hall, he started the Quiller series in 1964 with "The Berlin Memorandum"
(in the United States it was published as "The Quiller Memorandum" and got him
an Edgar Award). Quiller is a British secret agent of the James Bond variety,
working for a very hush-hush outfit, licensed to kill, called in where all
others fear to tread.

Now comes QUILLER MERIDIAN (Morrow, $22), in which Quiller outdoes himself in
the post-cold war era. Sent to Bucharest to salvage a botched mission, he finds
himself following a Russian agent to Moscow and then to Vladivostok on the
Trans-Siberian Express. Working alone, as he always does, he ferrets out a plot
that will alter the course of nations if allowed to come to fruition. So Quiller
derails the plot. This is not one of the better Quiller capers; it demands too
much suspension of disbelief. Quiller may be the best there is, but really!

Up to now, Alan Lewrie, the hero of Dewey Lambdin's sea going series, has been a
figure whose libido governs his behavior. So what is he doing at the beginning
of THE GUN KETCH (Donald I. Fine, $21.95)? Getting married, that's what. Can so
notorious a young rakehell find happiness with just one woman?

The period is the late 1780's, and Lieutenant Lewrie has taken command of H.M.S.
Alacrity, a ketch assigned to the Bahamas squadron. His major job will be to
hunt down pirates. So off to the Bahamas he sails, his new wife on board.

Mr. Lambdin follows the Horatio Hornblower tradition of C. S. Forester. There is
detailed knowledge of the British Navy, the age of sail, warfare at sea and even
the customs of the gentry. Of course the dialogue abounds in naval talk: "Take a
second reef in the gaff courses, now we've unbalanced her by taking in the
flying jib. Trim her until you're satisfied. Hank on a storm trys'l and bare the
tack corner for a balance on her head. Able seamen only out on the sprit
tonight, mind."

And while Lewrie is not so complicated a figure as Horn blower, he is an
agreeable young man, highly competent, brave and imaginative. There are sections
where the author is laying the foundation for a Lewrie legend. It may be that
the action in "The Gun Ketch" is predictable. But it is also lively and amusing.

Layne Heath, in THE BLUE DEEP (Morrow, $20), takes us to Vietnam just as the
Americans are getting involved. That is, in May 1954, when the French forces are
still under siege at Dienbienphu and a contingent of American troops arrives to
train French helicopter pilots.

But there is relatively little flying in "The Blue Deep." More on the author's
mind is the mess that France has got itself into, the pervading corruption in
Hanoi and the future of the Americans there. It may be a case of 20-20
hindsight, but Mr. Heath, who served as a helicopter pilot in Vietnam, makes it
clear how the United States was going to be slowly, irrevocably dragged into the
morass.

LOAD-DATE: April 25, 1993

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Review

                   Copyright 1993 The New York Times Company


                              87 of 312 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                  April 25, 1993, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

THEATER;
Lighting a Candle for 'Hair' at 25

BYLINE: By DAVID RICHARDS

SECTION: Section 2; Page 1; Column 1; Arts & Leisure Desk

LENGTH: 693 words


It was only a quarter of a century ago, but sometimes it seems light years.

On April 29, 1968, a date judged astrologically propitious, "Hair" opened at the
Biltmore Theater, bringing to Broadway love beads, polymorphous sex,
full-frontal nudity, bare feet, anti-Vietnam War protests, dope and the
conviction that a new world -- free, fearless and unfettered -- was dawning.

It was more than a musical. It was a landmark, a litmus test, a temptation, a
tourist attraction, an eyeful, a kick. And for a while the country couldn't get
enough of it.

The musical focused on the loves and antics of a tribe of hippies on the night
before one of them is to be inducted into the Army and shipped to Vietnam. It
had been hatched at the Public Theater, then revamped at a Broadway discotheque
called the Cheetah. Neither production, however, suggested the magnitude of the
success to come. "Hair" ran 1,750 performances, spawned seven road companies in
the United States alone and grossed $80 million dollars. Its creators -- the
composer Galt MacDermot, and the writers Gerome Ragni and James Rado -- were
seen as blazing a bold new trail on Broadway. For the run of the show, the
marquee of the Biltmore Theater was festooned with flowers.

A scant nine years later -- but who was counting? -- the 10th-anniversary
production of "Hair" opened, also at the Biltmore, with the blessing of the
woman who was by then the official astrologer of the "Hair" companies. Noted The
Times: "It is too far gone to be timely; too recently gone to be history or even
nostalgia." The run lasted a month.

What was billed as the 20th-anniversary production was staged in a dance club in
Chicago. The director felt it advisable to use the club's 64 video monitors to
usher the audience back in time as the show began, thereby establishing a
context for what might otherwise seem unduly quaint or merely baffling. The cast
members, talented young professionals eager to get on with their careers, didn't
smoke cigarettes, let alone pot, and opted not to take off their clothes.

No 25th-anniversary production has been announced.

Go by the Biltmore on West 47th Street, in fact. Vacant since 1988, it is a
shell, decaying a little more each day. While a few of the musical's original
cast members (Melba Moore, Diane Keaton) reached stardom, more of the
performers, literally drafted off the streets, have disappeared from show
business. Some died of drugs or AIDS, scourges that "Hair" did not see coming.
Cancer felled Mr. Ragni in 1991.

The musical helped effect changes in the country's political thinking, its
social mores and its way of dressing, although Broadway would never be so
receptive to a rock musical again. But then the conservative tide rolled back
in. These days, "flower power" is a florist's slogan, not a generational
rallying cry.

And yet for anyone who saw it back then, "Hair" remains an indelible reference
point, a heady memory of unbridled youth, when youth still thought it could turn
the world around with a song and a stance. The show was sassy and opinionated
and almost insistently good-natured in its proselytizing. If the cast members
who appeared nude in the half-light at the end of Act I were making a political
statement, they were also making a few extra dollars each time they shed their
clothes. That could help get an actor through the week.

" 'Hair' isn't really a political show," says Mr. MacDermot nowadays. "It's
about kids having fun and making fun of things. The Vietnam War was part of it.
But they were also making fun of love, drugs, peace, the older generation. It
was like the 'Hellza poppin' of its generation."

Maybe it was. Maybe "Hair" embodies all that is foolhardy and naive and fleeting
about youth itself. Maybe that irrepressible sense of irreverence is also what
distances the musical from us today. We are too aware of consequences, costs and
the piper who invariably must be paid.

Still, no one can say "Hair" didn't count. Three of those who participated in
the exhilarating explosion -- the producer, the director and an actress --
reflect on what it meant to them then and what it means now.

LOAD-DATE: April 25, 1993

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1993 The New York Times Company


                              88 of 312 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                  April 25, 1993, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

Hanoi Two Decades After the War

BYLINE: By PHILIP SHENON;  PHILIP SHENON is the Bangkok bureau chief of The
Times.

SECTION: Section 5; Page 15; Column 1; Travel Desk

LENGTH: 2859 words


UNCLE HO never stops smiling as the bicycles whiz past him hour after hour in
the middle of the busiest intersection in Hanoi. The bikes converge there
beneath a giant billboard that shows a youthful, grinning Ho Chi Minh -- Uncle
Ho, or Bach Ho, as he is still affectionately known in north Vietnam -- with a
young child held tight in his thin arms.

The Vietnamese bicyclists rarely look up at the billboard, but that is no sign
of disrespect for the founder of the Socialist Republic of Vietnam. It is a
matter of simple survival.

The intersection of Trang Tien and Hoang Streets is a ceaseless blur of rubber
and chrome -- there are relatively few private cars in the Vietnamese capital,
so it is mostly bicycle and motorbike traffic -- and to lift your eyes from the
road at this midtown crossing is to risk catastrophe.

The bicyclists pay no attention to a white-gloved, olive-uniformed traffic cop
who stands on a small metal platform in the middle of the intersection. His
directions, given with precise blasts of a whistle clenched between his front
teeth, are ignored.

I tried to gaze up at Ho as I maneuvered my handsome new Vietnamese two-wheeler
beneath the billboard and nearly collided with a farmer on the wrong side of the
road, carting his potatoes to market.

Miraculously, I did not see a single serious bike collision during a week spent
peddling my way through the streets of Hanoi and, apart from that one chaotic
intersection, the traffic was remarkably civil.

The North Vietnamese are a determined, practical people -- they tend to win
their wars, as they will diplomatically remind you -- and a bicycle is much too
valuable a piece of property to allow to be damaged in a foolish accident.

"We are very, very careful if we see a foreigner on a bike," said Mr. Van, the
young English-language student from Hanoi University who would prove himself an
invaluable companion on my first bicycling tour of the city. "It would be very
bad if we ran over an American," he said in the deadly serious tone typical of
Northerners, who are also an earnest bunch. "It would be bad for foreign
policy." (While the Vietnamese are not prohibited from having contact with
foreigners, it can bring them under suspicion from the police, and for that
reason I use only one of Mr. Van's three names.)

From a distance Hanoi seems to many foreign travelers a gray, hostile, even
frightening place. Certainly for many Americans, the city is inseparable from
the ugly headlines of the Vietnam War.

I've met several Americans who, planning a trip to Hanoi, gird themselves for
what they assume will be a Southeast Asian Dresden, a bombed-out shell of a
city. In fact, the city survived the war largely intact. It is arguably the most
beautiful capital in Southeast Asia, a city of quiet, dignified, dilapidated
charm borne of 1,000 years of history and struggle. The streets are lined with
the architectural legacy of the French colonizers of Vietnam: crumbling but
still elegant 19th-century ocher-colored villas and storefronts.

Despite still-primitive tourist facilities, Hanoi is also among the friendliest,
most inviting capitals of Asia. The Vietnamese are unfailingly polite to
travelers, especially to Americans, whose help they want to revive an economy
that is only now beginning to recover from that long-ago war.

That Hanoi retains so much such Old Asian charm is a mixed blessing for the
Vietnamese. The colonial-era architecture and greenery have survived not so much
because of far-sighted urban planners; they reflect rather Vietnam's long
economic stagnation.

After decades of war and disastrous Soviet-style central planning, Vietnam is
one of the world's poorest countries, and progress -- as measured in much of the
rest of Asia by skyscrapers and shopping malls and dirty air -- has yet to
arrive for the three million people of Hanoi.

The question for the Vietnamese is how long Hanoi will remain this impoverished,
and also this tranquil. The Vietnamese would never admit it, but they have been
inspired by the recent economic model offered by their great rivals, the
Chinese. In 1986 the Hanoi Government announced a Chinese-style policy of
renovation -- doi moi, in Vietnamese -- intended to introduce a free market to
Vietnam without dislodging the authoritarian government.

IT seems to be working. The Vietnamese economy is growing quickly, even with an
American trade embargo in place, and visiting foreign investors and economists
say it is only a matter of time before Hanoi begins to resemble its
overdeveloped sister cities elsewhere in Southeast Asia.

Already the old South Vietnamese capital of Saigon, now Ho Chi Minh City, has
taken on the appearance of a Bangkok suburb, complete with trendy restaurants
and traffic congestion.

Hanoi may be the last major city of Southeast Asia best toured by bicycle -- a
gentle breeze rustling through the tamarind and milkwood trees that line the
narrow streets, the only other sound that of the tinkling of the handlebar bells
on bicycles.

A bicycle tour of Hanoi begins with the search for a bike. The advice I had been
given by Vietnamese friends -- and I'm glad I listened to it -- was to buy a new
bicycle at the central government emporium on Trang Tien Street, across from the
billboard of Uncle Ho. A new bicycle in Vietnam costs a small fraction of what
it would in the West, $25 to $45. That guarantees you new wheels and new brakes,
no small considerations. And while Vietnamese bicycles are not especially
sturdy, they will doubtless survive several days on the capital's pancake-flat
streets. Among the rows and rows of bicycles, I was immediately drawn to a sleek
model with the brand name of Hanel. It had a price tag of 400,000 Vietnamese
dong, or about $40.

It really was handsome, forest green with blue trim, and several wide-eyed
children watched enviously as the saleslady pumped up the tires, dusted off the
handlebars and raised the seat to accommodate a six-foot American. In her broken
English, she thanked me, offering the most memorable line of my trip to Vietnam
-- "Happy bike, mister America" -- as I waltzed my two-wheeled treasure to the
street.

On my first day of touring, I chose a route that would take me from my hotel,
the newly restored colonial-era Pullman Metropole on Ly Thai To Street, past
some of the city's most memorable sites and picturesque neighborhoods, and on to
its most important landmark, the Ho Chi Minh Mausoleum.

I set off alone but I was quickly joined by a friendly Vietnamese student in his
early 20's, Mr. Van, who wanted to test his English, the foreign language that
many Vietnamese consider their ticket to prosperity. I welcomed the company.

"Where are you from? Are you from America?" Mr. Van asked as his bicycle pulled
alongside mine. "I would be honored to speak English with you." I readily
agreed, so long as he would be my tour guide.

We first turned left down Trang Tien Street, in the heart of Hanoi's commercial
district, toward the splendid Opera House, built in 1911 by the French as a
replica of the Paris Opera. It is now used as a government meeting hall.

Little did the French know that three decades after its construction Vietnamese
nationalists would rush to the balcony of the gingerbread Opera House and
declare independence from their occupiers.

Most of the city's largest shops and galleries are found at the other end of
Trang Tien Street. Mr. Van and I parked outside the Foreign Language Bookshop at
61 Trang Tien Street. Only a year and a half earlier, on my first visit to
Hanoi, the shop had been stacked high with Russian-language books. Now, the
Russian books had been relegated to a dusty corner, replaced by stacks of
English-language texts and the Vietnamese translations of popular modern
American novels.

At the end of the block, Mr. Van and I turned right onto the busy thoroughfare
that is Hoang Street, which runs along the tree-shaded Hoan Kiem Lake, or the
Lake of the Restored Sword. The lake is the heart of the city.

Legend has it, and some variation of the legend is known by all Vietnamese
schoolchildren, that this is the home of the magic tortoise that provided the
Vietnamese hero Le Loi with a sword he used to liberate Vietnam from the Chinese
in the 15th century.

The lake is at its most enchanting in the early evening, when lovers sit beneath
delicate willows on its grassy banks. The tiny Tortoise Pagoda in the middle of
the lake is the city's emblem.

A few blocks along Hoang Street, past the central post office, the road branches
in several directions, all of them leading into the Old Quarter. A tricky place
for a bicycle because of the narrow, rutted streets, the Old Quarter is the best
place to glimpse colonial-era Hanoi.

We turned left down Hang Bong Street, full of Parisian-style row houses and tiny
shops, the most interesting of which were the pharmacies selling traditional
medicines.

As Mr. Van explained it to me, the dark-brown juice made from pulverized geckos,
the small lizards found throughout the tropics, is thought to be a magic elixir
for impotence and respiratory ailments. "You do not think about the taste," he
said.

AT 53 Hang Bong is the The Duc The Thao Shop, where a family makes many of the
gold-and-red cloth banners that are strung between street lamps during Communist
Party celebrations. They take custom orders, as well, and for very little money
they will sew together a grand banner that meets the requirements of a foreign
tourist. I had one eight-foot-long banner made to welcome the birth of a niece
in Northern California: Vietnam Welcomes Birth of Glorious Child! The price was
about $5, and it took only a day to make.

We headed a few blocks south, turning right on Hai Ba Trung Street, where we
encountered the grim Hoa Lo Prison. It is perhaps the only structure in Hanoi
that large numbers of Americans know, if only by the nickname given it by
American prisoners of war: the Hanoi Hilton. Many Americans were imprisoned, and
tortured, at Hoa Lo during the Vietnam war.

The prison, which for obvious reasons is not included in tours organized by the
government tourist agency, was built in the earlier part of the century by the
French and is still used as a prison.

There are only a few windows in the blocklong building, and they are covered by
rusting metal grills. Across the top of the 20-foot walls are both electrified
barbed wire and shards of glass.

As I reached for my camera, Mr. Van whispered anxiously, "No pictures, no
pictures." There was indeed an unsmiling, armed soldier watching my every move
from across the street. The prison may soon be no more. The land is now so
valuable that Singaporean developers are planning to pull it down to make way
for an office complex.

We pedaled on toward Dienbienphu Street, named in honor of the momentous 1954
battle that ended a century of French rule.

Dienbienphu Street is a fitting address for the Army Museum celebrating
Vietnam's military victories over the French, the Americans and, most recently,
the Chinese, who were driven out of northern border areas of Vietnam after a
1979 invasion.

The museum was in the headlines in the United States last year after the
announcement that Vietnam had turned over thousands of artifacts, including
photographs, from the museum archives that could be useful in determining the
fate of more than 2,000 American troops still missing from the war.

When Mr. Van and I stopped at the museum, a team of American investigators from
the Defense Department could be seen on the patio on the second floor,
photographing artifacts including pilot helmets and flight suits.

Many Americans, especially veterans, find the museum jarring, especially with
its unsubtle outdoor display of a Soviet-built MIG-21 jet fighter perched over
the charred debris of a downed American B-52 bomber. Across from the museum is
Chi Long Park, which serves as a stark reminder that, while the economy of
Vietnam is undergoing something of a revolution, the political system is not.
Vietnam is one of the last of the satellites of the former Soviet Union to hold
on tight to the trappings of Communism, and Chi Long Park is dedicated to the
memory of Lenin. There is an enormous, heroic statue of the Russian leader set
in well-tended gardens.

I was eager to go down the road toward the Ho Chi Minh Mausoleum, but pulled
over to the sidewalk when I heard a distinctive hiss. I turned to look. My rear
tire was flat -- my brand-new rear tire.

"Your bike, no problem," Mr. Van said, pointing a block away to a group of young
men sitting on the street corner with bicycle pumps and small plastic buckets.
Bicycle mechanics are found on most large street corners in Hanoi.

A small bidding war erupted among the mechanics for the chance to fix my tire.
The winner was a smiling fellow who had bid 10,000 dong, or about $1.

As he worked away I watched the stream of bikes down Dienbienphu Street, wide
and lined with shade trees.

The women bicyclists are an enchanting sight not only for their grace, but for
their determined efforts to prevent their skin from having a moment's contact
with the sun. It is serious business, for fair skin is much prized among
Vietnamese women, who consider a tan evidence of field work. Many pull their
bikes off the road every few blocks to readjust their conical bamboo hats.

My bike repaired, we set off on the final few blocks to the resting place of Ho
Chi Minh, the imposing, gray-marble mausoleum set in the center of a complex of
museums and other monuments.

WHATEVER his eventual place in history, Ho Chi Minh will be remembered as the
Vietnamese leader who faced down two Western nations -- the United States and
France -- in a dream of uniting his country. He never married and lived a modest
life in a small house near the opulent colonial-era Presidential Palace, in
which he refused to live.

His house, made of dark hardwood and supposedly preserved by Vietnamese curators
just as Ho left it, is a short walk from the mausoleum and borders a pond in
which he raised carp.

Mr. Van and I parked our bikes beneath banyan and frangipani trees outside the
One Pillar Pagoda. The miniature pagoda was rebuilt in the mid- 1950's after the
original, dating from the 11th century, was burned by vengeful French soldiers
as they retreated.

Ho's mausoleum is, it would seem, exactly what he did not want. In his
handwritten will, which is available in English translation at bookshops
throughout Hanoi, Ho asked that his body be cremated, and the ashes divided
between three sites, in north, south and central Vietnam. He asked that at each
site there be a simple wooden memorial with plenty of shade for visitors.

Instead, after his death in 1969, Ho's successors in the Communist Party
released a falsified version of his will and built him the hulking stone
memorial. They did not cremate his body but instead put it on display,
Lenin-like, under glass in a refrigerated chamber. (Once a year, Ho's embalmed
corpse is shipped to Moscow for maintenance by the same technicians who tend to
Lenin's body.)

Mr. Van stopped suddenly, remembering where he was. "I hope you can forgive me,"
he said. "I must leave because the police will watch you very carefully here,"
motioning to the many guard stations around the memorial, which is as heavily
fortified as any place in the city. "Maybe I will go home now."

I thanked Mr. Van, and we parted with a promise that he would serve as my guide
on my next visit to Hanoi. As I turned down Hung Vuong Street, I was met by one
of the blank-faced honor guards who accompany all visitors in the final 100
yards or so toward the mausoleum.

The guard walked slowly alongside me until we reached the entrance, and he
pointed me toward a long red carpet leading inside. Over the entrance was a sign
bearing Ho's most famous slogan: "Nothing is more precious than independence and
freedom."

Up a separate staircase within the structure, I found myself in a cavernous room
bathed in a ghostly, pinkish light. At the center of the room, beneath a
Vietnamese flag, was the glass sarcophagus bearing Ho's frail body. Ho's wispy
white beard had been carefully groomed and set on a stiff gray shirt. His hands
had a waxy sheen and were crossed over his chest.

In each corner of the room was a guard in a chocolate-colored uniform,
apparently to insure that guests walk single file past the body and not linger.
I stopped for a moment, and a guard approached me and nudged my elbow,
indicating I should move on.

With the knowledge that Ho did not want to be remembered with this sort of
bleak, even ghoulish monument, I found myself unmoved by the sight of his
corpse.

The reaction of Vietnamese visitors was different, and I was met outside the
mausoleum by several old men and women who appeared by their dark-colored,
modest clothing to be from the countryside. They had just come from inside the
mausoleum and all brushed tears from their eyes. Looking me up and down, they
seemed perplexed that a visitor to the city of Ho Chi Minh could be so little
affected by the sight of his earthly remains.

LOAD-DATE: April 25, 1993

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photos: The Opera House, built in 1911 by the French and now used for
meetings, and a woman in the traditional au dai, right. A photographer sits
waiting for customers by Hoan Kiem Lake. (Photographs by Johanna Sherry)(pg.
15); Woman selling lottery tickets and, at the Army Museum, MIG-21 perched over
debris of American B-52. (Jacques Langevin/Sygma)(pg. 16)

                   Copyright 1993 The New York Times Company


                              89 of 312 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                  April 25, 1993, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

A sampling of American-run tours and cruises to Indochina

BYLINE: BY SUSANNAH HUNNEWELL

SECTION: Section 5; Page 16; Column 1; Travel Desk

LENGTH: 733 words


American tour and cruise operators are responding to the growing tourist
industry in Vietnam with a slew of new offerings. Despite current interest by
some American veterans of the Vietnam War in returning to the country, the tours
do not focus in particular on the war, although many include the Cu Chi tunnels
outside Ho Chi Minh City used by the Viet Cong. Most companies will tailor tours
to the customers' needs. Many also offer broader tours that include the
bordering countries of Laos and Cambodia, although the State Department has
recently issued an advisory on Cambodia warning of banditry and sporadic
military fighting outside Phnompenh. And the capital itself has seen some
violence in the last few weeks. Prices are based on two people sharing a room or
cabin. A selective sampling follows.

Absolute Asia, 155 West 68th Street, New York, N.Y. 10023, (800) 736-8187,
offers a variety of tours of Vietnam, from the four-day Ho Chi Minh City
Stopover, departing daily from Bangkok, which includes two days in Ho Chi Minh
City and a day trip to the Cu Chi tunnels in the outlying hills known as the
Iron Triangle, because they were so strongly fortified during the war, to the
12-day Vietnam Explorer tour. Departing every day except Monday from Bangkok, it
begins in Hanoi and continues on to Danang, Hue, Nahtrang and Dalat, ending in
Ho Chi Minh City. The first class Ho Chi Minh City Stopover package price a
person is $1,080 to $1,355. The Vietnam Explorer package price is $2,955 to
$3,365. Both include air fare from Bangkok. More unusual tours include a 10-day
trekking and sailing safari through the central highlands and on the South China
Sea ($1,850 a person, air fare from Bangkok not included).

InnerAsia Expeditions, 2627 Lombard Street, San Francisco, Calif. 94123, (800)
777-8183, organizes a trekking trip through the highlands of northern Vietnam
leaving the United States Nov. 1 that includes Cuc Phuong National Park. Without
international air fare, the cost a person starts at $2,390, depending on the
number of participants. Also offered throughout the year is an eight-day trip,
Highlights of Vietnam, with stops in Ho Chi Minh City, Danang, Hue and Hanoi for
$1,390 a person and an 11-day trip, Vietnam South to North, with additional
stops in Dalat and Nhatrang for $2,090 a person. Neither price includes air
fare.

Diva Worldwide, 1131 Shotwell Street, San Francisco, Calif. 94110, (415)
777-5351, has several tours of Vietnam with accommodations in small family-run
hotels, from a three-day tour of Ho Chi Minh City and its environs for $448 a
person to a 10-day trip starting in Ho Chi Minh City and ending in Hanoi with
visits to Nhatrang, Hue and Danang for $1,102. Prices cover internal air fare
only. Alhough most groups fly from city to city, Diva will arrange for visitors
to take the train, an interesting and less expensive though far from luxurious
experience, or, more expensively, drive them along the coast.

New Asia Tours, 187 Centre Street, New York, N.Y. 10013, (800) 433-7881, offers
four tours of varying length to Vietnam, from a four-day visit to Ho Chi Minh
City, Cholon and Mytho for $450 a person to a nine-day trip, starting with an
overland ride from Ho Chi Minh City to Dalat and Nhatrang in the highlands of
Vietnam and continuing by train and by air to Danang, Hue and Hanoi for $1,580 a
person. The price includes domestic air fare only.

Abercrombie & Kent, 1520 Kensington Road, Oak Brook, Ill. 60521, (800) 323-7308,
has a 14-day Expedition to Vietnam cruise departing from San Francisco on June 9
with stops in Singapore, Ho Chi Minh City, Nhatrang, Quinhon, Danang, Hue,
Haiphong and Hanoi, ending in Hong Kong. The tour includes cruises in the Gulf
of Tonkin, Halong Bay, and the Strait of Hainan. The price is from $5,095 a
person for double occupancy, not including air fare from San Francisco, which
runs approximately $1,425.

Seaquest Cruises, 600 Corporate Drive, Suite 410, Fort Lauderdale, Fla. 33334,
(800) 223-5688, offers an 18-day Ancient Vietnam land and cruise tour along the
Vietnamese coast sailing from Hong Kong on June 5 and Oct. 22 with stops in
Haiphong, Hue, Danang, Quinhon, Nhatrang and Ho Chi Minh City. The price ranges
from $5,800 to $10,200 a person and includes all shore excursions, two nights in
Hong Kong, one night in Singapore and round-trip air fare from the West Coast.

LOAD-DATE: April 25, 1993

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1993 The New York Times Company


                              90 of 312 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                  April 25, 1993, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

Getting around the country

BYLINE: By PHILIP SHENON

SECTION: Section 5; Page 15; Column 2; Travel Desk

LENGTH: 273 words


Vietnam has announced that foreign travelers will no longer need travel permits
to visit most areas of the country, lifting a rule that for years had
discouraged travelers from venturing much beyond Vietnam's two big cities.

The move, which went into effect this month, ends the need for travelers to go
through the time-consuming and sometimes fruitless process of applying for a
police travel permit whenever they wished to journey outside the capital, Hanoi,
or the country's commercial center, Ho Chi Minh City, formerly Saigon.

Despite the new rule, visitors, particularly unescorted individuals not
traveling with a tour group, should still be ready for problems if they plan on
going to very remote areas of the Vietnamese countryside, especially those
rarely visited by foreigners.

In a country that is still mostly without telephones and other forms of modern
communications, provincial bureaucrats continue to wield great authority, and
they do not always take kindly to directives from the central Government. In
recent months, business people and foreign reporters have been detained for
hours at provincial checkpoints and have sometimes been turned back, even when
they carried police travel permits.

Special permits are still required for foreigners wishing to visit border areas
or near large military installations. Since few tourist maps identify military
sites, it's a good idea to go over itineraries with a tourist office in Hanoi or
Ho Chi Minh City.

The central office in Hanoi is at 30A Ly Thoung Kiet Street, telephone 64154 or
57532, and in Ho Chi Minh City at 69-71 Nguyen Hua Boulevard, 90772.

LOAD-DATE: April 25, 1993

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1993 The New York Times Company


                              91 of 312 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                  April 25, 1993, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

DINING OUT;
Where Asian Cuisine Can Be Sampled

BYLINE: By PATRICIA BROOKS

SECTION: Section 13CN; Page 25; Column 1; Connecticut Weekly Desk

LENGTH: 937 words


IN a travel-mad age, Asian Experience in Westport offers diners a quick culinary
tour of Asia, a chance to sample dishes that might be found in 10 countries. To
assure a smooth journey are chefs from Thailand, China (Canton), Taiwan, Vietnam
and Malaysia. It is probably no coincidence that most dishes on the large dinner
menu are from those countries and from the Philippines, Indonesia and Korea,
with a dish apiece from Singapore and Japan.

We have always been skeptical of restaurants that attempt too many different
cuisines. But Asian Experience's five specialty chefs should insure that those
five cuisines at least would be fittingly presented.

Well, yes and no. There are many successes at Asian Experience, which come in
surprising ways. Two of the better dishes were the vegetarian Tokyo bean curd
(large, custardy cubes lightly fried, with a soy sauce dip) and crispy wonton
filled with creamy spinach (a shatteringly crisp exterior, melt-in-mouth filling
-- a delicious morsel). Though supposedly from the Philippines, it and other
island specialties on the menu were unlike any this reviewer encountered while
living there.

Some of the best dishes were Chinese, as might be expected with two chefs from
Chinese cultures. Many were starters, such as steamed dumplings (with crunchy
bits of shrimp), Sichuan dumplings (in a gently spiced sesame sauce) and
scallion pancake (well-browned, with a thin slice of roast pork on top, and a
hoisin sauce for dipping).

Also agreeable was the chicken satay (listed as Malaysian but a staple of many
Asian cuisines): large pieces of skewered white meat with a mildly spiced peanut
sauce. Tod mun pla (Thai fish cake) hinted of lemon grass but lacked sauce. It
was better than another Thai favorite, mee krob. At its best, mee krob links
various ingredients with the Thai penchant for hot, sour and sweet flavors, but
in this case it was merely crisp fried rice vermicelli -- a truly boring and
skimpy dish for $5.50.

A similar dichotomy existed with several Thai entrees. Winners were pad Thai (a
noodle dish rife with jumbo shrimp, egg and bean sprouts) and crispy fish with
Thai sauce (a whole sea bass cooked to perfection, with a crisp facade and sweet
white meat inside, served in a succulent hot and peppery sweet sauce), the most
triumphantly satisfying dish of our Asian Experience. On the other hand, Bangkok
duck smacked of being reheated, and its glutinous anise-accented sauce tasted
tired.

One of the best of many seafood dishes was firecracker prawns, a Vietnamese
specialty, with a sharp, tangy (if gluey) sauce. Prawn Bali style sounded
terrific, as described by our waiter ("with lemon grass and ginger"). The
reality were giant prawns, deep fried, served with a pleasing medley of al dente
asparagus, black mushrooms, snow peas and red pepper strips in a hoisin-based
sauce; very good, generous in portion, but without a hint of the promised lemon
grass or ginger.

Other successes included Singapore rice noodles (with carrots, shrimp, green
beans, pork and chicken strips), pork with garlic sauce (a Chinese classic with
water chestnuts, onions, peppers and lots of zing), and kim chi beef with hot
pepper (peppery beef squares, served alongside the incendiary Korean kim chi --
red-hot, pickled cabbage). Emphatically skippable were the Manila chicken
(escalopes of flattened breasts, battered and fried, served with a chilled,
bland peanut sauce) and Indonesian rendang beef (cubes of fiery-seasoned beef,
unrelieved by the menu-promised coconut sauce or any sauce at all).

Things are a bit hit and miss at Asian Experience but the new restaurant (with
the same ownership as the Little Kitchen of New Canaan), deserves an A for good
intentions. Saucers of pickled seaweed, broccoli stems and grated pickles,
served on one's arrival, were refreshing touches. Choosing carefully, one can
enjoy a lively, satisfying, well-priced meal in pleasant, well-spaced
surroundings. Most entrees are in the $8.95 to $11.95 range, with appetizers
from $1 to $5.95. One can eat well for less than $20 a person, with two courses
(desserts are minimal), tax and tip included. A large, well-priced wine list has
mostly American vintages, and beers include Tsingtao, which goes well with all
Asian dishes.
Asian Experience

Good

1849 Post Road East (near Fairfield line), Westport. 255-4000.

Atmosphere: A handsomely designed, large dining room has well-spaced tables,
track lighting, posters of samurai warriors in alcoves, cheerful chintz
tablecloths and draperies and a separate bar near the entrance.

Service: Solicitous, friendly and competent.

Recommended dishes: Scallion pancake, tod mun pla, crispy wonton, chicken satay,
Sichuan dumpling, steamed dumplings, pad Thai, prawn Bali style, Tokyo bean
curd, crispy fish with Thai sauce, kim chi beef with hot pepper, firecracker
prawns.

Price range: Lunch entrees $4.95 to $7.50, dinner entrees $7.50 to $23.95.

Credit cards: Mastercard and Visa.

Hours: 11:30 A.M. to 3 P.M. Monday through Friday, noon to 3 P.M. Saturday and
Sunday, 3 to 10 P.M. Sunday through Thursday, 3 to 11 P.M. Friday and Saturday.

Reservations: Accepted.

Wheelchair accessibility: Ground-level access.

Ratings:

Poor
Satisfactory
Good
Very Good
Excellent
Extraordinary

Ratings are based on the reviewer's reaction to food and price in relation to
comparable establishments.

The Times Restaurant Line offers capsule reviews by cuisine, price and location
(in New York City and suburbs), published in the last 18 months. Touch-line
telephones only: 1-900-988-0101 (75 cents a minute).

LOAD-DATE: April 25, 1993

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Review

                   Copyright 1993 The New York Times Company


                              92 of 312 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                  April 25, 1993, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

THE WORLD;
The C.I.A.'s Old Friends Come Around, Menacingly

BYLINE: By ALISON MITCHELL

SECTION: Section 4; Page 5; Column 1; Week in Review Desk

LENGTH: 1038 words


EVER since the Director of Central Intelligence warned President John F. Kennedy
in 1961 that the Cuban exiles training for the Bay of Pigs invasion could become
a "disposal problem," America has learned repeatedly that covert support of
foreign armies often fuels passions and bears consequences that the American
patrons never intended.

Cubans trained by the Central Intelligence Agency to attack the Castro regime
later turned up as Watergate burglars and as the bombers of Miami homes and
offices of those they suspected favored contact with the Cuban Government. In
Nicaragua, the hard-core leftovers of the contra rebels continue to wage war
against President Violeta Chamorro, even though her Government was elected and
has United States support.

Now come warnings that the Afghan rebel war against a Soviet-backed regime, the
biggest American covert operation (though in this case hardly a secret) since
the Vietnam years and the most successful, has also come back to haunt the
United States and its allies, as they turn their attention from the evaporated
Soviet threat to newer challenges.

In the Middle East, Western diplomats and officials of embattled regimes say
thousands of Islamic militants who trained and fought with the Afghan rebels
have now joined clandestine campaigns to overthrow secular governments from
Egypt to Jordan to Algeria. And in New York, as investigators study the World
Trade Center bombing, they have taken a second look at a Brooklyn storefront
office that recruited young Arab immigrants for the most hard-line Afghan rebel
factions. One suspect in the World Trade Center bombing -- Mahmud Abohalima --
is said by acquaintances to have made the pilgrimage to join the rebels. And El
Sayyid A. Nosair, imprisoned on charges relating to the murder of Rabbi Meir
Kahane, received money from the Brooklyn center for weapons training.

"We have a disposal problem," said Jack A. Blum, a former special counsel to the
Senate Foreign Relations Committee, in an echo of what Allen Dulles told
President Kennedy. Distance, he said, is no longer a shield against the castoff
warriors and grudges of far-off wars. "What used to be containable because it
was local and tribal now gets on a plane and heads for New York."

The new questions have an ironic edge, because the Afghan rebels' war was a
popular cause. Covert support began under the Carter Administration, and got
bipartisan backing during the bitter battle over contra aid in the 1980's. And
when a demoralized Red Army retreated across a bridge into the dusty Soviet
border town of Termez a decade later, the withdrawal was hailed as a victory
that far exceeded the expectations of the officials who had pumped $3 billion
into the rebel cause.

Bleeding Moscow, the Infidel

At the start, policy-makers had viewed their mission as an effort to bleed the
Soviets, financially and morally, with a guerrilla war. The C.I.A. provided
logistics, armaments and money. Saudi Arabia also financed the rebels and China
also provided weapons. Training and supervision of the rebel factions was ceded
to Pakistan's Inter-Services Intelligence Agency, and Peshawar, Pakistan, became
the main rebel base.

But if the war represented for America another mission in Soviet containment,
for the fervent Arabs it began to attract it was a holy war to protect fellow
Muslims from an infidel invader. And the rebellion was hardly an American cause
alone. Iran gave sanctuary to some factions; the Saudi Government and private
Saudi groups donated to the cause. People associated with the Brooklyn
recruitment operation said they worked with a professor of Islamic law from
Jordan.

"Afghanistan turned out to have an effect on militant Islamic movements
throughout the Islamic world similar to what the Spanish Civil War had on
Communist movements," said Robert A. Oakley, a former American Ambassador to
Pakistan. "The movements all there were fighting for a common cause. The
individuals who ran the movements as well as the fighters all got to know each
other and developed an Islamic network."

Among those who made their way to Peshawar, diplomats and American officials
say, were the brother of one of the assassins of President Anwar El-Sadat of
Egypt and other members of Egypt's militant Islamic Group, fleeing the Egyptian
police. Sheik Omar Abdel Rahman, the New Jersey-based cleric who was acquitted
in the Sadat murder but remains a spiritual leader-in-exile of the Islamic
Group, was in Pakistan in 1988 and 1990, American officials say.

Most of the Arab fighters who went to Pakistan coalesced around two of the seven
feuding Afghan factions there, the ones led by the vehemently anti-American
Abdul Rasual Sayyaf and by Gulbuddin Hekmatyar, the anti-Western head of the
Islamic Party. The two fell into disfavor with the United States when they
backed Saddam Hussein in the Persian Gulf war of 1991. By then, the Russians had
withdrawn and the bulk of C.I.A. money pumped into Afghanistan had long since
been channeled by Pakistan to Mr. Hekmatyar's fighters.

The victorious rebels seized Kabul last year and the Arab fighters, estimated in
the thousands, began returning home, to countries jarred by diminished
superpower interest and domestic opposition to repressive rule.

In restrospect, while policy-makers still praise the Afghan war as a factor that
led to the Soviet implosion, some officials now wonder whether the United States
should have been as free with dispensing Stinger anti-aircraft missiles to the
rebels, missiles that have now shown up in places like Iran and could reach
terrorist hands. They also ask whether the C.I.A. should have taken a firmer
stand with Pakistan about its bias toward Mr. Hekmatyar.

In a way, an epilogue to the war came last week in Washington at a Senate
hearing into terrorism prompted by the World Trade Center bombing. If Pakistan
and the United States were wed in the days of the Afghan war, the long honeymoon
had ended. The current Director of Central Intelligence, R. James Woolsey, told
the Senate committee that Pakistan is now "on the brink" of being put on a State
Department list of terrorist nations because it has aided insurgencies in India.

LOAD-DATE: April 25, 1993

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo: An Afghan rebel with a Stinger anti-aircraft missile supplied by
the U.S. Some of those Stingers -- which terrorists could use to shoot down
civilian planes -- have now shown up in countries like Iran. (Robert
Nickelsberg/Gamma-Liaison)

                   Copyright 1993 The New York Times Company


                              93 of 312 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                  April 25, 1993, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

Man Is Given Death Sentence for Killing 4

BYLINE: AP

SECTION: Section 1; Page 40; Column 5; National Desk

LENGTH: 172 words

DATELINE: LEBANON, Mo., April 24


A man was sentenced to death on Friday for the ambush killings of three
law-enforcement officers and a sheriff's wife in 1991.

The man, James R. Johnson, contended at his trial that the killings were
prompted by a combat flashback from his service in Vietnam.

After being sentenced by Judge Mary Dickerson of Laclede County Circuit Court,
Mr. Johnson, 43, said he planned to appeal his conviction.

The prosecutor, Kenny Hulshof, called the sentence "what we expected and what we
hoped."

At his trial, Mr. Johnson and his lawyers said that the December 1991 rampage in
and around the small town of California in central Missouri was the result of a
flashback to Mr. Johnson's four months as an infantryman in South Vietnam in
1970.

But prosecutors said the four ambushes within five hours were prompted by a
vendetta against the Moniteau County Sheriff's Department. They said Mr. Johnson
was apparently upset that Sheriff Kenny Jones was unable to keep a boyfriend
away from Mr. Johnson's teen-age stepdaughter.

LOAD-DATE: April 25, 1993

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1993 The New York Times Company


                              94 of 312 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                  April 25, 1993, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

A French Soldier of Fortune Tries on the Mantle of Patriot and Finds It Fits

BYLINE: By ALAN RIDING,  Special to The New York Times

SECTION: Section 1; Page 18; Column 1; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 1415 words

DATELINE: PARIS, April 21


Wandering past the Cafe de la Paix near the Paris Opera wearing a blue blazer,
collar and tie, Bob Denard looked like any other respectable Parisian returning
to work after lunch. "One can be a mercenary and a gentleman, you know," he said
with a smile.

The dapper 64-year-old had good reason to feel relaxed. After 30 years of
adventure, war and politics across Africa, this country's most famous soldier of
fortune has at last come in from the heat, surprised to be alive, even more
surprised to find France ready to embrace him as a patriot.

When he returned home in February from three years in exile in South Africa, his
reception was less warm. He was promptly jailed on charges of "criminal
association" for his role in an abortive coup that left eight people dead in
Benin in 1977.

But, at his trial, even the prosecutor asked for leniency. More importantly, a
parade of retired generals, intelligence chiefs and politicians testified that
Mr. Denard had never betrayed French interests. And when the judge gave him a
five-year suspended sentence, he walked free after spending two months behind
bars.

'I Had to Come Home'

"All my roots, all my family, all my children are in France," he said of his
eight offspring from seven different wives. "I could no longer stay away. I
couldn't continue living like a pariah. I had to come home."

Yet there was more to his return than nostalgia. With the end of the cold war,
Africa is no longer an arena for East-West rivalry. South Africa is seeking new
friends among its neighbors. And, with all this, the hired gun is no longer much
in demand.

"For a long time, it was the fight against Communism," he said. "For us,
wherever there was Communism, it had to be eliminated. And since in all these
rebellions, the two blocs, East and West, were always confronted, well, we were
the soldiers of the West."

Indeed, his list of assignments coincides with many African and some Middle
Eastern hot spots of recent decades -- Katanga in 1962, Yemen in 1963, Zaire
from 1965 to 1967, Biafra in 1967, the Kurdish region in 1974, the Comoro
Islands in 1975, Angola in 1976, Benin in 1977, the Comoros again in 1978 and
Chad in 1981-1982.

Yellow Light From Elysee

But he said that before embarking on an action he always checked with Paris --
with French military intelligence or with the official in charge of African
affairs in Elysee Palace. "I would receive the yellow light," he said, "which
meant there was no opposition."

He said he worked with British intelligence in Yemen and with the Central
Intelligence Agency in Angola. But elsewhere, he and his men -- at one point in
Zaire, he led an army of 1,200 mercenaries -- invariably fought for African
presidents or rebel leaders who enjoyed official French sympathy.

Paradoxically, it was also France that ended his career. In December 1989 it
sent five warships and 3,000 troops to the Indian Ocean to chase Mr. Denard and
his 30-man mercenary corps from the Comoros, an island nation where for over a
decade they had been the power behind President Ahmed Abdallah Abdermane.

Weeks earlier, Mr. Abdallah had been assassinated under murky circumstances.
France braced for the possibility of major unrest in its former colony and
rather than combat French troops, Mr. Denard took a plane into exile in South
Africa.

Warrior Waiting by the Phone

Renting a home in a Pretoria suburb, he waited to be called out of retirement,
but the invitation never came. South Africa no longer needed him. France, which
had sentenced him to jail in absentia for the Benin case, refused to renew his
passport. So he sat down to write his memoirs.

Born of a soldier father in a village in the Bordeaux region, he joined the navy
as a teen-ager and was sent to Vietnam, where France was fighting to hold on to
its colony. There, he suffered the first of his three war wounds.

In 1952, he left the French Navy and joined the police in Morocco, where an
independence movement was also stirring. In 1956, he was accused of taking part
in an attempt to assassinate Pierre Mendes-France, the Radical Socialist Prime
Minister who ended France's involvement in Indochina. Though he was later
acquitted, Mr. Denard spent 14 months in jail.

Back in France, Mr. Denard found a job as a salesman, but he was restless. In
1961, learning there was a need for experienced soldiers in what was then the
Belgian Congo, he signed up to train Moise Tshombe's troops, who were fighting
for the independence of Katanga Province, now Shaba in Zaire.

From then on, Africa and its troubles became his life. He was badly wounded in
Zaire in 1967 and still walks with a limp. Years later, fighting for the other
side in yet another Zaire uprising, President Mobutu Sese Seko made him a
colonel. But unlike other famous mercenaries such as the Irish-born (Mad) Mike
Hoare, who ended his career in a South African jail, and the Belgian Jacques
Schramme, who retired, Mr. Denard kept going.

Adventure, Money, Idealism

"There was the adventure," he explained. "There was also the money, though not a
lot. But there was also some idealism. We had our code of ethics, our code of
honor. We never committed acts of terrorism, never killed innocent civilians. We
had our own rules but also the laws of the country where we worked."

He insisted that he never saw his role as that of defending whites or
"civilizing" Africa. "That was the excuse for colonialism," he said, "and so
many mistakes were made. If we have lots of African immigrants here today, it is
because we took their raw materials and never created jobs. Now we're paying for
it."

In the Comoros, Mr. Denard said, he finally had a chance to do something more
than fight. Having deposed President Abdallah in 1975, he helped to reinstate
him in 1978. From then on, he not only ran the Presidential Guard and served as
the President's chief adviser, but also worked, he said, to improve agriculture
and bring foreign investment to the islands.

He married a local woman, with whom he has had two children, and converted to
Islam. "People would not have understood if I had not married a Comorean," he
said. "In that sense, my conversion to Islam was a symbol of my integration
there. It was what people expected."

The Wages of Politics

But politics disrupted this idyll. He was criticized for using harsh methods to
put down a rebellion. Mr. Abdallah's decision to seek a third successive term
stirred local opposition. And when the President was slain in November 1989,
there were allegations that Mr. Denard had arranged the killing to prevent Mr.
Abdallah from expelling him and his mercenaries.

Mr. Denard claims that he and two other mercenaries saw Mr. Abdallah killed by
his own bodyguard who was in turn immediately shot to death. He scoffs at the
idea that he was trying to seize power. "If I made mistakes like that, I would
not have lasted these 30 years," he said. But that case is also pending before
the French courts.

After the trial involving the Benin coup attempt, though, Mr. Denard has good
reason to feel protected. During it, two former French ambassadors in Africa
said he had always served France. The former chief of staff of the armed forces,
Gen. Jeannou Lacaze, said in a letter that he could not imagine Mr. Denard
acting without French official approval. Jacques Foccart, who was de Gaulle's
chief African adviser, said that Mr. Denard's "only ambition was to serve his
country."

A Business With No Contracts

"The rule in this business is that there are no contracts," Mr. Denard said, "so
when you're in a situation where everything turns against you, it's very
rewarding, it's very moving that there are people of honor who speak out on your
behalf."

"It's true," he went on, "I wasn't a saint. You can't be in combat. But I would
not still be here if I had done truly reprehensible things."

More than mercenary or pirate or filibuster, Mr. Denard prefers the term
corsair. "The corsairs in France would receive written permission from the King
to attack foreign ships," he said. "I didn't have such permission, but I had
passports given to me by the intelligence services."

Now, he said, he cannot afford to retire because he has no pension. "But life is
not over," he said. "I can find something else to do. I don't need to make war.
For the moment, though, I must finish my book. I have to add the two months I
spent in prison. My only wealth is this past that I've had."

LOAD-DATE: April 25, 1993

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo: "All my roots, all my family, all my children are in France,"
said Bob Denard, France's most famous soldier of fortune who returned home after
spending 30 years in Africa. "I could no longer stay away. I couldn't continue
living like a pariah. I had to come home." (Alan Riding/The New York Times)

                   Copyright 1993 The New York Times Company


                              95 of 312 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                  April 25, 1993, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

Foreign Affairs;
Clinton As Carter?

BYLINE: By LESLIE H. GELB

SECTION: Section 4; Page 17; Column 1; Editorial Desk

LENGTH: 722 words


From Washington and around the world, the grumbling has begun about President
Clinton's leadership, his ability to wield power and his willingness to do
what's necessary to prevail.

To combat this, he has to gain control quickly of two keystone issues, mastering
Congress on the budget and mustering Europeans behind a plan for bold action on
Bosnia. Otherwise, his Administration risks becoming what it fears most -- a
repeat of the Carter Administration.

Much of the grumbling is politically motivated, premature and unfair. But it
does contain a growing kernel of truth.

Tellingly, the criticisms come not just from Republicans and attack journalists,
but from Democrats who desperately want him to succeed.

In the last weeks, friends and foes alike have been taking the measure of the
man in the White House and are finding him wanting. Most troubling is that he's
losing control of the budget, the carefully crafted economic plan he set before
Congress to wide acclaim barely two months ago.

Bob Dole, the Republican leader in the Senate, savaged the President's grab-bag
economic stimulus package. Mr. Clinton struck back, arguing that the package was
critical. Mr. Dole held fast. The President offered a quick compromise. Mr. Dole
dug in. Within days, Mr. Clinton caved.

In the game of power perceptions, Mr. Clinton's collapse cost him dearly. Either
he shouldn't have made the issue a test case, or he should have cracked heads to
make sure he had the votes to win.

Now the President must regroup and refocus on what was most applauded and needed
in the budget -- the energy taxes, the higher taxes on the rich and deficit
reduction. And he has to push the budget through Congress before midsummer,
before the even bigger battle that looms over health care reform.

Mr. Clinton's ability to do this is absolutely essential to his international
power. What foreign leaders admired most about him two months ago was his
courage in tackling America's massive debts and his seeming capacity to command
Congressional and popular support. They know, as Mr. Clinton knows, that
America's power abroad rests on America's economic good health.

But the President's standing abroad also hinges on his handling of the Bosnian
crisis. Most of the fault for this situation rests on the Europeans. They would
not stand up to Serb aggression at the outset.

Now the Europeans want it both ways on Bosnia. They want to avoid military
intervention, and they want U.S. leadership to quell the crisis. Foolishly, Mr.
Clinton tried for months to dodge hard decisions about force and follow Europe's
cynical policy of feeding the Muslims while doing nothing to prevent their
slaughter.

It makes no sense, however, to endlessly berate the hapless Europeans. They know
they can't lead, and Americans know they can't lead. Their leaders haven't got
the political strength or the military power.

To make matters worse, Mr. Clinton seemed to lose control of his own
Administration on Bosnia. Defense Secretary Aspin talked publicly about using
force. Secretary of State Christopher publicly ruled it out. Madeleine Albright,
the U.N. envoy, sent Mr. Clinton a private letter calling for the use of force.
Twelve Balkan experts in the State Department did as much, and leaked it to the
press.

Finally, on Friday, Mr. Clinton showed signs of stepping up to the challenge.
Now he must unite his own team and then NATO behind realistic and understandable
objectives: not bringing the Serbs to their knees military, which would require
a massive land war, or even forcing them to make concessions at the negotiating
table, which they won't do. But raising the costs of genocide to the Serbs and
giving the Muslims a better chance to defend themselves. These goals can be met
by using NATO air power and by arming the Muslims, and would call for minimal
ground troops to guard safe havens.

If Mr. Clinton will lead in this direction, Europe will follow. The path leads
not to another Vietnam, but to a fighting chance for the victims of genocide and
to the reassertion of basic Western values.

The Clinton Presidency is on the line in Bosnia and Congress. With Mr. Clinton's
formidable political skills and dazzling mind, he must know that he cannot
afford to appear weak, that he must take clear stands and risks -- and lead.

LOAD-DATE: April 25, 1993

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Op-Ed

                   Copyright 1993 The New York Times Company


                              96 of 312 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                  April 25, 1993, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

THEATER;
At the Schoolhouse, 'Lone Star'

BYLINE: By ALVIN KLEIN

SECTION: Section 13WC; Page 17; Column 1; Westchester Weekly Desk

LENGTH: 499 words

DATELINE: CROTON FALLS


STUFFING himself with peanuts, popcorn, beef jerky, Mars Bars and Baby Ruths,
and slugging down Lone Star beer, Roy, back from Vietnam for two years, keeps
taunting his younger brother, Ray, about how he served his time. And Ray didn't.

Roy dwells on war memories, of stealth as a way of life; of rape, plunder and
baby burning as the highlights of that life.

The simple-minded Ray has a trick knee. But Roy goads him into playing war games
in the moonlight out back, behind Angel's Bar in Maynard, Tex., on this night,
as he does every night.

In "Lone Star," a one-act play by James McLure presented by the Visiting
Edgartown Theater of New York and Massachusetts at the renovated Schoolhouse, a
third character, Cletis, a depressed, socially, mentally and sexually deficient
would-be alcoholic, appears as the catalyst to a shrewd reversal in a power play
between two brothers.

When the work appeared on a double bill, first on Broadway in 1979 with "Pvt.
Wars," which has since been needlessly expanded into a full-length piece, and
then, in 1980 in regional theaters, with "1959 Pink Thunderbird" as a companion
piece, "Lone Star" was perceived as raucously, comically offbeat.

But Mr. McLure's comic gift is neither sustaining nor so wacky and outrageous as
to put a singular stamp on an all-too-recognizable view of creepy, wasted
small-town lives and hollow values. All Roy and Ray want to do is nothing --
"forever." For Cletis, "life woulda been complete" if only he had Roy's pink
Thunderbird convertible, with Sandra Dee in it.

Fleetingly, Mr. McLure's comic imagination mixes hostility and whimsy, as when
the older brother bares grudges against their father, wondering what sort of a
man would name his two sons Roy and Ray.

At its most useful, "Lone Star" is a good acting exercise. Chris Dolman, the
company's founder and artistic director, desperately holds onto Roy's big bully
act, even when the blowhard is losing his grip. Don Cummings (Ray) has a cool
grasp of the transforming strategy of an ostensible loser, turning ingenuousness
into ingenuity. Steve Mosto (Cletis) is a jumpy misfit who has mustered enough
ambition and guile to make it in these undemanding surroundings.

As a prelude to the play, which lasts but an hour, the three versatile actors
(on two guitars and one harmonica) come on as indigenous country singers, with
twangs in proper places and getting up to high registers with ease.

In a mini-concert, against the "Lone Star" roadhouse set, on a floor strewn with
empty beer and bourbon bottles, milk crates and assorted litter, "Home on the
Range" is introduced as an ironic lead-in to rowdier, darker songs about honky
tonkin', "howling at the moon" and other yahoo doings.

"Lone Star" by James McLure, presented by the Edgartown Theater Company at the
Schoolhouse on Owens Road in Croton Falls. Box office: 277-8477. Performances
today and next Sunday at 4 P.M and Thursday through Saturday at 8 P.M.; through
May 2.

LOAD-DATE: April 25, 1993

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo: Don Cummings, left, with Chris Dolman in "Lone Star."

TYPE: Review

                   Copyright 1993 The New York Times Company


                              97 of 312 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                  April 25, 1993, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

An Army of the Faithful

BYLINE: By Robert Sullivan;  Robert Sullivan is a writer who lives in Portland,
Ore.

SECTION: Section 6; Page 33; Column 2; Magazine Desk

LENGTH: 5159 words


Usually, Christie Adkisson stays home when it snows. But on this particular
snowy day, a Saturday at the beginning of January, she and her husband, Jim --
founding members of the Oregon Christian Coalition -- jump in the car for the
45-minute trip into Portland. They pass a few lonely cars along the way, but
when they arrive at the downtown Red Lion Hotel they are more pleased than
surprised to see the parking lot stuffed with the cars of Oregon's most
prominent Republicans. After all, the day is being billed by all concerned as
the battle for the soul of Oregon's Republican Party.

Within minutes of the vote for state party chairman -- a contest between two
local businessmen -- Bill Witt, a conservative, and Randy Miller, who is only
slightly more moderate -- the political skirmishing begins, and the delegates
find themselves wrangling over obscure rules and complex voting regulations.
"They disenfranchised us twice before," Jim Adkisson says of the party regulars,
"but now the shoe's on the other foot." Still, like every other conservative in
the room, he is worried about 10 crucial swing votes. "It's going to be close,"
Adkisson says, pacing past urns of coffee in the back of the Red Lion conference
room.

Christie Adkisson, sitting up front, is much cooler, for she figures her side
will eventually win no matter what the outcome of this contest. After years of
tedious legwork, networking through the less glitzy channels of politics -- in
malls, at kitchen tables and in the sticky plastic chairs of local churches and
schools -- she and her husband and their friends have moved the mountain of
political debate in Oregon miles to the right. "This has been a great
education," she is saying to the people around her, "and the greatest thing I've
learned is that the power of the individual precinct person is tremendous. This
is where the rubber meets the road."

If there was one thing the conservative wing of the party didn't want that day,
however, it was the coverage the local press was splashing on Bill Witt, their
man at the top of the ticket. Witt had helped found the Oregon Christian
Coalition the previous fall; yet, when he announced his candidacy for the
chairmanship, he also withdrew from the coalition, calling himself "a consensus
candidate." To the Oregon press, as well as to frightened Republican moderates
and liberals, this sounded ominously like the "stealth tactics" employed by many
Christian Coalition members running for school boards, state Republican parties
and city council seats around the country last year. ("You should never mention
the name Christian Coalition in Republican circles," reads an organizational
manual of the Pennsylvania Christian Coalition.)

Employing another well-established tactic, Witt counterattacked by questioning
the motives of his critics and the press. "I find it curious that when
Christians want to get politically involved, people start asking questions," he
says. "There seems to be some special scrutiny."

But this whole issue, as Christie Adkisson already knew, was almost beside the
point. Randy Miller, the ostensibly moderate candidate, was anti-abortion and
was even opposed by many gay activists. For once, the Christian conservatives
felt, the battle was being fought on their terms; that groups like the Christian
Coalition could finally force a halt to what they see as a militant homosexual
agenda and the decline of traditional morality.

"People are concerned," Christie Adkisson says. "They care. They recognize the
importance of their involvement now."

THE CHRISTIAN COALITION WAS spawned in 1989 from the mailing lists of Pat
Robertson's failed 1988 presidential campaign. Since then, under its director,
Ralph Reed, 31, it has grown into a group with 350,000 members, 750 local
chapters across the United States, full-time staff in 15 states, a lobbyist in
Washington and an annual budget of $8 million to $10 million.

Though it claims tax-exempt status as a religious-education organization (an
exemption that is currently under review by the Internal Revenue Service), its
critics argue that its political-training seminars, its fund-raising techniques
and its support of causes that are apolitical only on their face (the battle
against homosexuals in the military, for example) prove it to be nothing less
than a miniature political party -- and one with large ambitions, to boot. "We
at the Christian Coalition are raising an army who cares," Pat Robertson wrote
in a 1991 fund-raising letter. "We are training people to be effective -- to be
elected to school boards, to city councils, to state legislatures and to key
positions in political parties." Later in the letter, he added, "By the end of
this decade, if we work and give and organize and train, THE CHRISTIAN COALITION
WILL BE THE MOST POWERFUL POLITICAL ORGANIZATION IN AMERICA."

A lot of Republicans insist the strength of the coalition is greatly overrated.
"Never has so much been conjured about something with such little political
impact," says Stuart Stevens, a Republican political consultant. "I mean, I
think the Vietnamese have more influence."

But as the best-run organization within what has been called the New Religious
Right, the Christian Coalition is a growing force, intent on quietly winning the
least visible and vied-for of America's political offices. Under the savvy
direction of Reed, a former political consultant, the coalition has managed, in
just four years, to prove the potency of a relatively small, highly committed
group, in this case a mixture of the evangelical, fundamentalist and charismatic
Christians.

For the religious right, the Christian Coalition is the second grass-roots try
at modern politics. The first, with groups organized in the style of the
personality-driven Moral Majority of Jerry Falwell, dissolved in the 80's when
many of the leaders (but not Falwell) fell in a wave of scandals.

This time around, the emphasis is on the rank and file and political nuts and
bolts, rather than on personality cults. Those who track its activities claim
the Christian Coalition had about 20 members and 8 allies on the 165-member
platform committee at the Republican National Committee and controlled seven
state delegations at the convention -- including 42 of the 46 Iowa delegates,
three-fourths of the Oregon delegation, the majority of South Carolina's and
Alaska's delegates and one-third of California's. According to a study by the
Institute for First Amendment Studies, a group that monitors the activities of
the religious right, seven winners of 1991 congressional races had direct
connections to the coalition and 64 others were given 100 percent ratings in
voter-education guides distributed by the group.

Taking advantage of low voter turnout and a national decline in party
identification, the Christian Coalition has managed to win, by one estimate, 40
percent of the races it has targeted, all with the old-fashioned legwork that
had until now been supplanted by mailing lists, computers and media consultants.
Says Skipp Porteous, president of the Institute for First Amendment Studies:
"People look at TV evangelists and think that's the religious right but it
actually has little or nothing to do with it. It's like they have a union hall
in every town."

For national Republicans, the emergence of the Christian Coalition represents
the latest flare-up in the chronic struggle between the party's conservative and
moderate wings. In this latest episode, moderate Republicans charge that the
seeds of George Bush's defeat were sown at the Republican National Convention in
Houston, with its emphasis on abortion and Pat Buchanan's right-wing rhetoric.
In response, members of the Christian Coalition point out that its members
provided the former President's only solid electoral support. Says one activist,
"Ralph Reed said it best when he said that blaming the Christians for losing the
election is like blaming the guys who were shoveling coal on the Titanic."

Nevertheless, recent surveys show that the public now associates phrases like
"rigid," "right wing" and "restrictive" with the Republicans. And with
Republican voter identification in decline, new groups of moderate Republicans
are popping up nearly as quickly as Christian Coalition chapters, each trying to
keep a particular segment of the Republican middle from running off with the
Democrats or Ross Perot.

At the moment, though, it's not at all clear that any of these new groups will
succeed. "The moderates who had stayed with the Republican Party stayed mostly
for economic reasons, and put up with the right-wing social agenda, found that
in 1992 the economic issues weren't there anymore, so they left," says William
Schneider, a political analyst for the American Enterprise Institute. "Now the
question is, Is there going to be a civil war in the Republican Party?"

IF THERE IS A CIVIL war, and families like the Adkissons are the infantry, then
Darrell Fuller, 27, will be one of the lieutenants. In a double-breasted suit on
the floor of the Republican-controlled House, the executive director of the
Oregon Christian Coalition looks like another state senator debating health
care, a representative talking deals in the house. On weekends, with his wife,
he looks for antiques for their apartment in Salem, or drives up to Portland to
take in some classical music or, say, the latest traveling Andrew Lloyd Webber
play. At the Hi-Ho Diner, wearing polo shirt and khakis, discussing modern
politics and natural law, he orders ice cream on his berry pie. He stands as the
opposite of the Northwest's well-publicized tendency toward grunge.

Fuller became involved in politics as a student at Willamette University in
Oregon, where he worked on local campaigns; when he graduated, he began his own
political consulting business. For a while he was a field coordinator with the
Oregon Citizens Alliance, the group that sponsored the notorious anti-gay No
Special Rights Initiative. The measure, which was defeated last November, would
have amended the state constitution to label homosexuality as "abnormal, wrong,
unnatural and perverse . . . to be discouraged and avoided."

Now, since the organizational merger of the alliance and the Christian Coalition
(the director of the alliance, Lon Mabon, heads the Oregon Christian Coalition's
board), Fuller is the coalition's full-time executive director. Because of the
merger, critics say, the coalition is strong-arming its way into the political
process, capitalizing on ignorance and fear, and equating equal rights for gay
men and women with equal rights for pedophiles. But Fuller says he simply wants
to give Christians a political voice. "If you're an African-American you have
the N.A.A.C.P.," he says. "If you're a small business you have the National
Federation of Independent Business and if you work for the government you have
the public employees union. Practically all the groups have their lobbyists,
except evangelical Christians."

Like many Christian Coalition members, Fuller talks most about what he calls
"the militant homosexual agenda," the point of battle in what conservatives call
the great cultural war. "I don't care if you believe in evolution or
creationism." Fuller says, "Either way, homosexuality is unnatural for
government to be sanctioning."

Fear that gay people are becoming the predominant political force in the country
is only one concern of Fuller and his members; they also see an overall national
decline. "It's a moral degeneration," Fuller says. "The existing values that
founded this country aren't represented anymore. And the symptoms of this
degeneration are all over the place. Forty years ago in schools the biggest
problems were spitballs and bubble gum. Now, it's pregnancy and teen suicide,
and we have metal detectors."

Fuller's is a world filled with the social, economic and political problems
described in Pat Robertson's books -- a world where the United Nations is on its
way to constructing a one-world, godless government, a socialist state, crippled
by political correctness, with no place in it for the traditional family. In
this light, Fuller and his members see themselves as the last hope, as taking a
desperate final stand to keep God as the linchpin of their country. "Everyone's
talking about conservatives pushing these issues but conservatives are reacting
to the issues," Fuller says.

In fact, like Fuller, most Christian Coalition members around the country became
involved in politics for fear of all the more terrible things that might happen
if they didn't. As Fuller sees it, it is his task to provide his people with the
tools to reverse the decline -- tools like political training seminars,
instruction in public relations techniques, voter education guides or whatever
else his expertise as a political consultant can offer. "We provide the quote
unquote little people with good information," he says, "and we find that when
you give good people good information, they make good decisions."

THE POLITICAL party apparatus is organized in such a manner that it makes it
very easy for it to be taken over by zealots because they have a cause," says
Craig Berkman.

Berkman, a successful Portland entrepreneur, left his chairmanship of the Oregon
Republican Party ostensibly to run for the national Republican Party
chairmanship, won eventually by a Mississippian, Haley Barbour. Many people in
his state, however, believe that Berkman ran for national office because
conservatives had enough power in the Oregon Republican Party to prevent him
from winning re-election, a charge that Berkman dismisses. Whatever his reason,
Berkman, seen as a liberal city slicker by the Christian Coalition and its
mostly out-of-Portland kind, is not too friendly toward his party's most
conservative wing. "The scripture, as I read it, says that you should be
truthful and these people try to tell untruths and disinformation," he says,
"and this is the opposite of being Christian to me."

During his four-year tenure, Berkman brought the party out of bankruptcy. But,
while the liberal and moderate Republicans were out fund-raising, the
conservatives were out winning the precinct seats. Now, like moderate
Republicans elsewhere, Berkman has begun to consider ways to counterattack. He
is campaigning to have the party organization changed to include its elected
representatives and financial donors, so that party activists -- in this case,
religious conservatives -- aren't the only ones with a say. He also hopes to
require runoffs in state elections that include more than two candidates when no
candidate has 51 percent. Unconcerned by his adversaries' charges of elitism,
Berkman says simply: "Somebody has to step up and stop this."

Berkman's concerns are shared by moderate Republicans in Iowa, Kansas, Minnesota
and especially Texas. There, Steven Hotze, a proponent of the death penalty for
homosexuals (based on a narrow and literal reading of the Bible) is the de facto
chairman of the Harris County Republican Party, the third-largest county
Republican Party in the country and the home Republican Party to President Bush.

Berkman's concerns are also shared by moderate Republicans watching things like
teachers' organizations in Pennsylvania fighting to introduce a state curriculum
that the religious right says is anti-God; or a woman running for county sheriff
in Louisville, Kent., who the local Pro-Family Coalition says is insufficiently
pro-family and who, in any event, "ought to be a man." In New York City, the
symbolic heart of godless liberalism, the coalition is backing scores of
school-board candidates and has enlisted the Roman Catholic Archdiocese to
distribute voter guides in its 213 parishes.

Using the motto "Winning Elections by Inclusion," Burt Day, a moderate
Republican from Iowa, has begun Pro Party, a group of Republicans who feel the
religious right is involved in politics more for the sake of their key issues
(abortion, gay rights) than for the sake of the Republican Party. Having watched
the coalition seize control of the Iowa central committee's seats in 1992, Day
sees an unremitting political threat. "Republicans in other states say to us,
'Oh, you've got to get along with these people because you can't win elections
without them,' " he says. "But they don't understand that these people are very
well organized and that their 51 percent becomes 100 percent. They're in it for
the long run. They're not going to go away."

Much of what people like Berkman and Day are proposing is being proposed on the
national level as well. As is often the case after they lose the White House,
Republicans want to make their "Big Tent" big again, which would mean a
compromise on abortion. "What the party's got to do is broaden its focus," says
Tommy G. Thompson, the moderate Republican Governor of Wisconsin. "People who
have certain morals and ethics are welcome as they always have been, but we also
have to be more tolerant. We have to take in people who vote with us only 60
percent of the time."

But such appeals, commonplace in Republican circles, go nowhere among social
conservatives, for whom there is no compromising on abortion. If moderate
Republicans succeed in ripping the anti-abortion plank from the platform, the
conservative Christians could leave in force. And that, as moderates well know,
could inflict deep wounds on election day.

"The voice of the religious right is a voice that you can't ignore," says
Senator Nancy Kassebaum who, with two former legislators, Senator Warren Rudman
of New Hampshire and Tom Campbell of California, has set up the Republican
Majority Coalition. "It's a voice that in many ways comes from people who feel
they've never been part of the political process, and they've won their precinct
positions fair and square. If we want them back then we've got to go back in
there and win them. I don't think that you can just stand back and wring your
hands and say, 'Look what's happened!' "

In a recent Wall Street Journal article titled "The Coming 'Conservative
Century,' " Irving Kristol, editor of The Public Interest, argues that the key
to the future of the Republican Party lies in appealing to the religious voter
in the same way the Democrats appealed to European immigrants at the turn of the
century. "The Democrats are never going to be able to welcome the religious, but
if the Republicans keep them at arm's length instead of embracing them, and
shaping their political thinking, a third party and a restructuring of American
politics are certain," he warns. The problem is, embracing the religious right
-- and its anti-abortion position -- also risks creating a third party, or
perhaps a new Democratic majority.

Aware of all this, Craig Berkman has lately made frequent overtures to his
party's right wing. Last year, he made a pilgrimage to Ralph Reed's office,
where they both promised to work together; and on his final day in office,
Berkman called for reconciliation for the sake of winning. For the moment, power
in the Oregon Republican Party is in the hands of the conservatives. But the
moderates think conciliation on both sides is necessary for the party to
survive. "We have to take the steps to be the party of the open door," Berkman
said at the Red Lion, in his final speech as party chairman, "not of exclusion
and division."

THE ADKISSONS' home outside Portland is something of a Christian conservative's
dream world. It is a big patch of rolling land with a cute red farmhouse and a
quiet little creek. Their two girls play with the three dogs outside; the new
Christian American newspaper is in the den, and family publications are arranged
neatly on tables around the house.

Sitting down to reminisce about the past few months of electioneering and
grass-roots work, the Adkissons are as proud of their quick and fruitful entry
into politics as they are fearful of America's future. For them, the election of
the county officers at the Red Lion was the high point of a political
involvement that began slowly, if not reluctantly, about five years ago when
they helped oppose a state executive order that sought to protect gay rights.
Around that time, they'd begun to realize that their way of life was in
jeopardy.

"I finally understood that I was in someone's cross hairs," Jim says, sitting in
his big-backed comfortable chair. "The things that I believe in and that are
important to me, I felt were being targeted. It's like when I was in Vietnam.
When someone was targeting you, you knew."

"Obviously," says Christie, speaking of homosexuals, "in the last 20 years since
they wrote their homosexual agenda, they have had a methodical plan. That's why
we've had to wake up."

Since the Adkissons have begun their political involvement, almost everything
they have seen has convinced them of their work's inherent worthiness. Early on,
Christie says, she watched Act Up members throw condoms at her and her friends'
small children, who then picked them up thinking the condoms were gum. ("A
baptism by fire," she calls the experience.) They have been shouted at while
collecting signatures in malls; people once came to protest in their own
driveway but were scared away when the two Adkisson girls came running from
around the house with their BB guns, innocently checking to see what was going
on.

Christie's trip to a training seminar for teachers has confirmed her worst
fears: that the seminars are designed to advance the gay agenda among children.
Likewise, her experience in counseling sessions for homosexuals (she believes
homosexuality is an illness that can be treated) has given her hope that, with
more work, things can be changed. She believes she is simply doing what any good
Christian would do. "This is one of the greatest gifts that I can give my
children," she says. "To be what I say I am."

In the meantime, the Adkissons marvel at how they are stereotyped. Jim Adkisson
is the president of a software and database company, with a degree in
international business. Christie has a B.A. in education and has taken courses
in international business. They both hear all the talk about the poor,
undereducated Christian voter and laugh.

"I think it's impressive to see," says Christie, in telling about Jim's
background and her own, "so that people don't think we're dumb hicks."

Jim says: "In the press the slant is that we're the radicals, we're the crazies.
I guess the untold story is that it's not so much that the so-called religious
right or social conservatives or whatever brand you want to put on them, it
isn't that they're trying to change anything; the untold story is that they're
running around trying to put their fingers in the dikes."

The Adkissons are taking a little time to rest these days, feeling worn down by
the rigors of the past election. But they remain involved with the coalition, in
which they have a great moral investment. "The thing about the coalition," Jim
says, "is that it is telling people to stop talking about it and get involved."
Sometimes Jim seems to get a little depressed considering the stakes. "The
reason I get so emotional," he says, "is that the things I held dear are just
not what they were -- our court system, our schools. I don't have the same
patriotic allegiance because it's been destroyed by the reality of what these
lofty institutions have turned into."

Christie, on the other hand, appears to remain strong and always assured,
whether at home or speaking to an audience, moving herself to tears in a small
church. Her talks on the infiltration of the gay agenda in the schools are
beginning to be recorded and passed around the state. She takes consolation in
such things as the fall of Joseph Fernandez, the outgoing chancellor of the New
York City Schools, who fought for condom distribution and a controversial
Rainbow curriculum. The Adkissons regularly pray that homosexuality will one day
be considered wrong in the eyes of the law. To them it is just a matter of
realigning man's law with the laws of nature and God.

"Any Christian that tells you that on some of these issues it's all a matter of
perspective just doesn't read the Bible," Jim says.

BY MIDMORNING on that snowy winter day in the Red Lion conference room, it was
clear to all the party's conservatives that their candidate was going to lose.
When the vote finally was taken, Randy Miller beat the conservative candidate,
Bill Witt, by just seven votes. "This is a victory for the Republican Party,"
Craig Berkman said. Then, relinquishing his chairmanship to the barely masked
joy of the conservatives, Berkman got into his car and drove away.

The remainder of the election was something of a duck shoot for the Christian
Coalition, whose candidates won the remaining seats. To some extent, this was
because of the inclement weather: in many cases, the conservatives had managed
to outwait the moderates who had to drive -- and, in some instances, fly -- back
across the icy state before dark. But it also seemed to have to do with
political trickery.

The moderate candidate running for treasurer, for instance, assured by Bill Witt
he would have no opposition, discovered a slate backed by the Oregon Citizens
Alliance too late in the game for him to start campaigning. It wasn't typical
political sour grapes that brought on accusations of lies when Monday morning
quarterbacking time came around. All through his campaign Bill Witt was fooling
the people who believed he had only incidental connections to the Christian
Coalition and the alliance.

Even Witt's loss of the chairmanship felt a little like a win to the
conservatives. Lon Mabon, the head of the Oregon Citizens Alliance and the key
conservative power broker, announced that he would be able to work with Randy
Miller, in light of Miller's anti-abortion stance; he said Miller was nearly a
conservative. Jim Adkisson, for one, was pacing a little less now. "The irony is
seeing these liberals support Randy Miller when they wouldn't have sat at the
same table with him two months ago," he said when it was all over.

Similarly, Darrell Fuller left the hotel thinking to himself that the Oregon
Republican Party was now being run by a man who shared many of the key tenets of
the Christian Coalition, a fact that would make his life as the coalition's
local representative a little easier: in addition to telling people of the
cultural havoc being wrought by the Clinton Administration, Fuller could now
point to actual political inroads made by the coalition. In fact, minutes after
the chairmanship had been lost, quite a few coalition members and other
conservatives were beginning to say that Bill Witt could have won by avoiding
the fatal stealth label and embracing his membership in the Christian Coalition.

It was getting dark by the time the conservatives were pulling out of the Red
Lion's parking lot, and the political fires were dying out; the slush, long ago
pushed to the sides of the road, was beginning to creep back and freeze to ice.
The Adkissons were two of the last people to leave the Red Lion conference room.
Now, finally, after a long and tedious day, Christie could drive home in the car
alongside her husband, pull into her driveway, kiss her two daughters hello and
know that she had rolled up her political sleeves, stood up for what she
believes in and made the world more like the kind of place that she had grown up
in -- more the kind of place that she wants her two girls to grow up in, too.



FAITH HEELERS

The Christian Coalition is expanding rapidly across the country, with plans to
run two-day political seminars, or Leadership Schools, in 33 states this year.
Under the motto "Think Like Jesus . . . Fight Like David . . . Lead Like Moses .
. . Run Like Lincoln . . . ," each seminar is designed to teach people how to
run campaigns, put together grass-roots organizations and influence local policy
making -- using, for example, simple phone trees to pepper legislators with
hundreds of phone calls in a matter of minutes.

Calls might be triggered by one of a number of issues that attract the
coalition's attention. These include: legislation, municipal or state, that
might protect gay men and lesbians from any kind of discrimination; condom
distribution in schools; school prayer or the pledge of allegiance, and
curriculum changes that mention phrases like "problem solving" or "tolerance,"
both of which coalition members generally label "new age."

The Christian Coalition has already made its mark in a number of states and
regions.

CALIFORNIA. After quietly winning school-board seats in San Diego County, the
coalition is becoming more active in Los Angeles. In a fund-raising letter last
summer, Sara DiVito Hardnan, the group's California director, wrote: "We are
currently involved in a campaign to take back the L.A. school board for
pro-family values. . . . We will raise up pro-family candidates to break up the
school board."

ILLINOIS. The coalition has recently defeated a proposal for casino gambling in
Chicago, is fighting the display of Madonna's book, "Sex," in public libraries
around the state and has criticized what the Illinois coalition members call
"new age mentalities" in school districts. "You can teach any religion today in
public schools as long as it's not Christianity," he said.

PACIFIC NORTHWEST. In Oregon, Washington and Idaho, the coalition is supporting
the work of the Oregon Citizens Alliance as it opens affiliates in the region
and pushes for state amendments that would make homosexuality unconstitutional.

NEW YORK. A half-dozen Leadership Schools are scheduled to open in 1993, and the
coalition plans to run candidates for most of the 288 seats opening up on the
New York City school board. The city's Roman Catholic Archdiocese will
distribute at least 100,000 of the coalition's voter guides before the
school-board elections. These guides typically cast candidates as strictly for
or against the family, abortion and "cutting spending rather than raising taxes
to balance the budget," as one such guide recently put it.

The coalition's impact has been felt in numerous smaller settings as well. In
Lafayette, Ind., it successfully campaigned against a city ordinance designed to
protect gay men and lesbians from employment and housing discrimination. In
Louisiana, the local coalition director, Sally Campbell, recently opposed the
appointment of
Ginger Berrigan, a lawyer with the American Civil Liberties Union, as a Federal
district judge, calling her a "Hillary-style woman." In Virginia, in addition to
sending out filing forms for local Republican Party conventions -- the I.R.S.
takes a dim view of such activities by a putatively nonpolitical group -- the
coalition sent its members a phone number for information about winning seats in
the Virginia Democratic Party.

LOAD-DATE: April 25, 1993

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photos: Darrell Fuller, 27, executive director of the Oregon Christian
Coalition. "We provide the quote unquote little people with good information,"
he says, "and we find that when you give good people good information, they make
good decisions." Learning begins -- and ends -- in the home. Christie Adkisson,
who holds a degree in education, teaches her daughters, Anne, 13 (center), and
Erin, 12, the Christian perspective on historical events. The children do not
attend school. (Photographs by Robbie McClaran for The New York Times)(pg.
32-33); President Bush courted Pat Robertson, to his left, and the Christian
Coalition during his 1992 campaign. (Denis Finley); Under the stewardship of
Ralph Reed, 31, the ranks of the Christian Coalition have swelled to 350,000.
(Richard A. Bloom/Saba)(pg. 34); Lon Mabon, second from left, checks a
churchgoer's reaction to a children's book about homosexuals that Mabon had
spoken against at the Celebration Foursquare Church in Gresham, Ore. (Photograph
by Robbie McClaran for The New York Times); Irreconcilable differences: Members
of Queer Nation/Seattle (far left) protested activities of the Oregon Citizens
Alliance in February (Chlen-Chi Chang/The Seattle Times); Portland residents
(left) rallied for Measure 9, the so-called anti-gay amendment, in November.
(Donna Binder/Impact Visuals)(pg. 35); New recruits: A Christian Coalition
seminar in Renton, Wash. Similar training sessions are planned in 33 states.
(Photograph by Robbie McClaran for The New York Times)(pg. 42); Randy Miller,
called "nearly a conservative" by the Christian Coalition, beat their candidate
for the chairmanship of the Oregon Republican Party by seven votes. (Photograph
by Bob Ellis/The Oregonian)(pg. 44)

                   Copyright 1993 The New York Times Company


                              98 of 312 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                  April 26, 1993, Monday, Late Edition - Final

MARCH FOR GAY RIGHTS;
Gay Marchers Throng Mall in Appeal for Rights

BYLINE: By JEFFREY SCHMALZ,  Special to The New York Times

SECTION: Section A; Page 1; Column 1; National Desk

LENGTH: 1328 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, April 25


At once defiant and festive, hundreds of thousands of gay and lesbian Americans
and their supporters rallied in the capital today, celebrating the right to be
homosexual and demanding freedom from discrimination.

"Make no mistake, America," David B. Mixner, a longtime gay friend of President
Clinton, who has lately been critical of him, told the crowd. "We won't
compromise our freedom. We won't go back. We will win."

Several speakers, including Senator Edward M. Kennedy, Democrat of
Massachusetts, who spoke by way of a taped audio message, likened the rally to
the 1963 civil rights march on Washington: "We stand again at the crossroads of
national conscience."

Temperatures in the 70's

At 4 P.M. on a sparkling day with temperatures in the 70's, the Mall, from the
Washington Monument to the Capitol, was packed -- a sea of marchers, rainbow
flags, banners, signs, red ribbons and pink triangles. Chants welled up: "Act
Up! Fight Back! Fight AIDS!"

Although the marchers came with a broad civil rights agenda, the ban on
homosexuals in the military dominated the tone of the day. "End the Ban Now!"
the crowd chanted. "End the Ban Now!" Gay Vietnam veterans received thunderous
applause. Speaker after speaker repeated, "Our time has come."

By 5 P.M., groups of marchers were still streaming past the White House. The
march route took them from the Ellipse, past the White House to end up at the
Mall. Organizers said they had reached their goal of a million marchers, a
figure supported by the Mayor's office.

Generally Peaceful Mood

But the United States Park Police's estimates often conflict with those of
organizers, and that agency put the total at 300,000. That made it, by the park
police estimate, larger than the 1963 civil rights march but smaller than a 1992
march for abortion rights.

The mood of the march was generally peaceful, with the Park Police reporting
only five arrests for disorderly conduct. The police presence was minimal.

Clinton Letter Is Read

President Clinton, who chose not to attend the rally or make a video or audio
presentation, going instead to Boston to speak before newspaper publishers, sent
a five-paragraph letter that was read to marchers by Representative Nancy
Pelosi, Democrat of California.

"I stand with you in the strugle for equality for All Americans, including gay
men and lesbians," the President wrote. "In this great country, founded on the
principle that all people are created equal, we must learn to put aside what
divides us and focus on what we share."

Mr. Clinton reminded the crowd that he had asked for a report by July 15 on how
to put into effect an end to the ban on homosexuals in the military. And he
reaffirmed his commitment to increasing spending for AIDS research.

Reaction to the letter was moderate applause mixed with boos.

With a few exceptions, Mr. Clinton generally came off well during the day. A
slight majority of marchers said in dozens of conversations that they thought he
was doing all he could for gay rights. But AIDS organizers were less kind. Larry
Kramer, the playright, asserting that Mr. Clinton had not kept his AIDS
promises, including one to name a Government AIDS overseer.

At precisely 2 P.M., hundreds of men and women under the banner of the Gay Men's
Health Crisis of New York lay down in front of the White House in silence,
symbolizing the number of AIDS deaths. Other protesters passed by shouting,
"Where's Bill?"

"He's all talk on AIDS," said Marilyn Hipp, a 24-year-old teacher from upstate
New York.

"It's not the numbers," said Wilber Janeway, 56, from Chapel Hill, N.C. "It's
the feeling of brotherhood, of being together." Indeed, many marchers were
accompanied by small children and parents.

Indeed, that feeling seemed pervasive. Planning for the march began two years
ago, when George Bush was in office. But the numbers were clearly swelled by
reaction to recent anti-gay measures in Oregon and Colorado, by increased
opposition to homosexuality from religious groups and by the sharply anti-gay
comments in the fight over ending the ban on homosexuals in the military.

Feelings of Pride

The overall tone at the march today was one of pride, of feeling part of a
larger gay community and not being afraid to march down the street to proclaim
it. Increasingly, homosexuals have come to feel they are the only group still
acceptable to hate. And today was their chance to chant: "We're here. We're
queer. We're not going away."

One of the throatiest roars from onlookers went up shortly before 2 P.M., when
the Colorado contingent stepped onto 17th Street. The state has been an intense
political battleground, with the passage last year of Amendment 2, which
prohibits local anti-discriminatory laws that are designed to protect lesbians
and gay men.

The Coloradans' black banners, one of them proclaiming "Under Siege," stretched
almost the full width of the thoroughfare.

Hundreds of Coloradans passed by. "Did they send the whole state, or what?"
asked Karen Bilsing, of Portland, Ore., who was waiting with two friends on the
sidewalk to join the Oregon group, which was next in line.

Certain chants were heard again and again during the march -- with variations
appropriate to the given contingent. From the gay parents' group: "Ho, ho, hey,
hey, we are in the P.T.A." From the vicinity of Oklahoma: "Ho, ho, hey, hey,
even farmers can be gay." From North Carolina: "Hey, hey, ho, ho, Jesse Helms
has got to go."

A thin line of counterdemonstrators stretched along Pennsylvania Avenue, between
13th and 14th Streets. Their signs declared: "Sodomy is no civil right" and "God
hates fags" and "Fags burn in hell" and "Fag equals AIDS." Some of the marchers
responded in silence. Others took to chanting, "Shame," over and over again as
they passed.

The Christian Action Network, a conservative religious group that opposes
homosexual rights, labeled the march "a wake-up call to the silent majority of
Americans whose individual rights are at stake."

For march organizers, the day was a chance to show off much-needed support from
leaders of other civil rights groups, including the Rev. Jesse Jackson,
president of the Rainbow Coalition, and Patricia Ireland, president of the
National Organization for Women.

Series of Short Speeches

There was no one single galvanizing speech. Instead, the day consisted of a
series of short speeches by dozens of figures. Politicians speaking, from Mayor
David N. Dinkins of New York to Mayor Sharon Pratt Kelly of the District of
Columbia, from Representative Patricia Schroeder, Democrat of Colorado, to
Senator Paul Wellstone, Democrat of Minnesota.

The military issue surfaced repeatedly at the march. Service men and women
discharged for homosexuality, who have become heroes among gay people, lined up
in uniform on the stage before the crowd, setting off thunderous applause, tears
and screams. But all was quiet when Dorothy Hajdys, the mother of Allen R.
Schindler, a 22-year-old Navy radioman beaten to death last October near the
United States Navy base in Sasebo, Japan, expressed fear for every gay and
lesbian service member.

The march -- officially called the 1993 March on Washington for Lesbian, Gay and
Bi-Equal Rights and Liberation -- called for the meeting of several demands,
including passage of a civil rights bill and other antidiscrimination measures;
more money for AIDS education, treatment and research; the inclusion of
lesbians, gay men, bisexuals and transgender people in the educational system;
reproductive freedom; and an end to discrimination and violent oppression based
on sexual orientation, race, religion, sex, disability, age, class or H.I.V.
infection.

But the demands could be summed up in one word -- acceptance.

"We want to be left alone, to just be ourselves," said Mark Connor, 42, a St.
Louis businessman. "There's no mystery to being gay. We're just like everybody
else in America."


LOAD-DATE: April 26, 1993

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo: Thousands of gay and lesbian Americans and their supporters
marched yesterday by the White House. (Jose R. Lopez/The New York Times) (pg.
A1); Thousands attended yesterday's march for gay rights. On display in the
foreground was the AIDS quilt. (Michael Geissinger for The New York Times); Some
of the participants in the rally yesterday holding signs calling for more
research to fight AIDS. (Mariella Furrar for The New York Times) (pg. B8)

                   Copyright 1993 The New York Times Company


                              99 of 312 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                  April 26, 1993, Monday, Late Edition - Final

March for Gay Rights;
Not the Biggest of All Marches

BYLINE: Special to The New York Times

SECTION: Section B; Page 8; Column 6; National Desk

LENGTH: 186 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, April 25


The gay demonstration here today drew hundreds of thousands of marchers. But by
the estimates of the United States Park Police, it was not the biggest protest
march in the capital's history.

That one, according to the police, was a Vietnam War moratorium rally in 1969
that drew 600,000 people. Another Vietnam protest, in 1971, drew 500,000. A
march in 1992 organized by the National Organization for Women also drew 500,000
people, according to the Park Police's calculations.

The police said that 300,000 people attended today's gay march. But that figure
was disputed by march organizers, who put the total at a million, a figure
supported by the Mayor's office here. The Park Police have occasionally revised
figures when confronted with sharp protest, especially when members of Congress
join in that protest. It was not clear if that would be the case this time.

While it is not a record, the 300,000 figure exceeds the total listed for the
civil rights march of 1963, the one that produced Martin Luther King Jr.'s "I
Have a Dream" speech. That rally, the police say, drew 250,000 people.


LOAD-DATE: April 26, 1993

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1993 The New York Times Company


                              100 of 312 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                  April 26, 1993, Monday, Late Edition - Final

The Road to Reconciliation With Vietnam

SECTION: Section A; Page 16; Column 4; Editorial Desk

LENGTH: 353 words


To the Editor:

I don't know whether the document found in Soviet archives about Vietnam's
holding back American prisoners of war is authentic or not. Some of the previous
evidence about P.O.W.'s turned out to be forged, but I agree with Leslie H. Gelb
(column, April 15) that if this document proves accurate, a minimum requirement
for reconciliation with the Vietnamese would be their admission of guilt.

But what about an admission of guilt by Americans on responsibility for the
Vietnam War? The genesis of the war is documented in our archives in an
originally secret history of the war compiled by the Pentagon on orders of
Robert S. McNamara when he was Secretary of Defense. You published parts of this
history in June and July 1971 as "The Pentagon Papers," after the Supreme Court
overruled a Government restraining order against publication.

In 1954, after the Vietminh victory over the French at Dienbienphu, an
international conference at Geneva scheduled secret-ballot, internationally
supervised elections for Vietnam. The Pentagon historians recorded the National
Security Council's recommendation that the United States "prevent a Communist
victory through all-Vietnam elections."

The National Security Council's secret projection of the outcome of democratic
elections in Vietnam was later repeated openly by Dwight D. Eisenhower. In his
book "Mandate for Change," the former President stated that "had elections been
held as of the time of the fighting, possibly 80 percent of the population would
have voted for the Communist Ho Chi Minh."

The United States prevented the elections by backing formation of a separate,
nonrepresentative government in the South that refused to participate in them.
"South Vietnam," said the Pentagon writers, "was essentially the creation of the
United States."

The record shows we created a separate state against the will of its inhabitants
and then fought a bloody war to defend our creation. We ought to show the same
candor about that war that we rightfully demand of the Vietnamese.

EDGAR VILLCHUR
Woodstock, New York, April 19, 1993

LOAD-DATE: April 26, 1993

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Letter

                   Copyright 1993 The New York Times Company


                              101 of 312 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                  April 26, 1993, Monday, Late Edition - Final

The Road to Reconciliation With Vietnam;
Live P.O.W.'s

SECTION: Section A; Page 16; Column 6; Editorial Desk

LENGTH: 649 words


To the Editor:

There is something disturbing in your reports on a newly found 1972 North
Vietnamese document in which the Vietnamese say they hold far more American
prisoners of war than they acknowledged at the time. On April 13 you quote
Zbigniew Brzezinski that "the great likelihood is that the Vietnamese . . . shot
them." Really? Based on what information? And on April 14 you echo that the men
"are now almost certainly dead," but cite no sources or evidence.

Can there be certainty without evidence? In three years of research for a novel
on prisoners and those missing in action, research that has taken me to Vietnam,
Laos, Thailand and Paris, I have not come across even a ripple of innuendo that
the Vietnamese executed large numbers of American P.O.W.'s. The evidence of the
opposite -- that American P.O.W.'s survive in Indochina -- is so abundant and
diverse that a select committee of the Senate just spent an entire year sifting
through it.

This evidence comes, for example, from Lieut. Gen. Eugene Tighe, former head of
the Defense Intelligence Agency; from Jerry Mooney and Terry Minarcin, former
Air Force intelligence analysts; from Vietnamese defectors; from Iwanobu
Yoshida, a Japanese monk imprisoned in Vietnam until 1989, who said he shared
his cell with three American P.O.W.'s and saw many others; from Robert Garwood,
the Marine who returned in 1979 and reported seeing about 70 other American
P.O.W.'s in northern Vietnam after the war; from hundreds of Indochinese
refugees, who have reported firsthand P.O.W. sightings and from United States
reconnaissance photos.

I often hear three arguments for the view that no American prisoners remain in
Indochina: (1) the Vietnamese and Laotians have no reason for holding them; (2)
if they existed, one would surely have escaped by now, and (3) they could not
have survived this long.

*(1) As for motives, in the 1972 documents you published April 13 the Vietnamese
list three conditions necessary to "resolve" the P.O.W. issue. The last is
"Nixon must compensate North Vietnam for those enormous losses which the
destructive war caused." This was never done.

The United States Government, by denying the existence of the P.O.W.'s, refuses
to make any deal, and the Vietnamese can hardly say: "We do in fact hold your
countrymen. What will you offer?" Like burglars stuck with hot gems, their only
fence won't deal, and they can't advertise.

*(2) Should a P.O.W. have escaped by now? A former Laotian policeman, whom the
ruling Communists interned in a re-education camp in Northern Laos from 1975 to
1990, told me in an interview that the possibility of escape through the rugged
countryside was so small that the internees were allowed to forage unguarded for
food and firewood up to one mile from camp. Seven inmates who tried to flee were
captured three months later nearly dead of starvation. They had made it over
just one mountain on the long way to Thailand.

*(3) How could P.O.W.'s have survived until now? Iwanobu Yoshida, the Japanese
monk, was elderly and ill, but survived 14 years of captivity in Vietnam until
Amnesty International secured his release in 1989. Hundreds of Americans were
held 5, 6, 7 or more years in North Vietnamese prisons until Operation
Homecoming in 1973. Military doctors were surprised at their good physical
condition on release. If you can survive 7 years, why not 20?

The P.O.W.'s who came home in 1973 have said that their North Vietnamese captors
gave them any news from the American press that might demoralize them, such as
reports of antiwar protests and American military setbacks. If Americans remain
imprisoned in Indochina today, as I believe they do, my heart bends to think
what they will feel if shown your article reporting that their countrymen
believe they "are almost certainly dead."

WILLIAM GERARD
Madison, Wis., April 16, 1993

LOAD-DATE: April 26, 1993

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Letter

                   Copyright 1993 The New York Times Company


                              102 of 312 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 April 27, 1993, Tuesday, Late Edition - Final

BUSINESS DIGEST

SECTION: Section D; Page 1; Column 1; Financial Desk

LENGTH: 596 words



International

Japan's main telephone company will buy a dozen A.T.& T. telephone switches. The
first A.T.& T. sale to Nippon Telegraph and Telephone came after years of U.S.
pressure. [Page D1.]

Huge losses at Lloyd's of London are forcing the underwriters of policies to pay
up, sometimes with their entire wealth. [D1.]

Coca-Cola will spend $195 million to buy a 30 percent stake in its Mexican
franchisee, stepping up the battle there with Pepsi. [D1.]

The I.M.F. said the U.S. economy would grow moderately, but predicted stagnation
in Europe and slow growth in Japan. [D2.]

The British Government declared the recession over, reporting the best economic
growth figures in three years. [D2.]

Italy wants to sell some huge state-owned companies, but nothing has been sold
and critics say the plan is too ambitious. [D5.]

The head of the European Bank for Reconstruction and Development was chastised
by the U.S. for lavish spending. [D16.]

Critics of President Boris N. Yeltsin questioned his mandate for economic change
from Russia's referendum results. [A1.] The Yeltsin victory cheered supporters
of U.S. aid to Russia. [A8.]

Vietnam's paradoxes are evident everywhere, as it tries to combine aspects of a
free market with Communist rule. [A4.]

The Economy

Many American towns have been devastated by plant closings. Occasionally,
companies have provided assistance, but mostly, communities have been left to
fend for themselves. [D1.]

Momentum is gathering for new safeguards for abandoned mines, with companies
cooperating by cleaning up toxic sites. [A1.]

Accountants cannot be barred by states from soliciting prospective business
clients, the Supreme Court ruled. [A17.]

Companies

A Swedish insurance company is nearing a compromise with regulators and
preservationists on building a community for 35,000 in Sterling Forest, a
woodland 40 miles from New York City. [A1.]

I.B.M.'s new chief executive got an earful from disappointed shareholders at the
company's annual meeting. [D1.]

The executive who created SmithKline Beecham from two lackluster companies will
retire as chief executive in 1994. [D4.]

R. J. Reynolds cut prices of Winston and Camel cigarettes to compete with
Marlboro cuts announced earlier. [D4.]

Motorola said it had begun shipping a chip meant to compete with Intel's new
Pentium chip as the P.C. standard. [D4.]

Short-haul airlines have found a niche as feeders for the big airlines and
expect further benefits as majors cut back. [D4.]

Galeries Lafayette's troubled New York store received a blow when the top
executive said she was leaving for Saks. [D5.]

Six major hearing aid makers and distributors were warned by the F.D.A. to stop
making misleading claims. [B7.]

Markets

Stocks closed lower for the sixth consecutive session. All major indexes were
down, and the Dow industrials lost 15.40. [D8.]

The pace of new corporate-bond issues has dropped sharply in the last four
weeks. New municipal issues are also down. [D16.]

Gold surged again on reports of a big purchase by a British financier. [D18.]
The dollar fell, except against the yen. [D18.]

The number of Nasdaq shares sold short and not covered rose from mid-March to
mid-April, to record levels. [D19.]

Today's Columns

Wall Street has thrashed bank stocks even though their earnings have been above
expectations. Market Place. [D8.]

Avon hopes to update its traditional image in a new campaign by FCB/Leber Katz.
Stuart Elliott: Advertising. [D21.]

LOAD-DATE: April 27, 1993

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Summary

                   Copyright 1993 The New York Times Company


                              103 of 312 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 April 27, 1993, Tuesday, Late Edition - Final

Ho Chi Minh City Journal;
The Smiles for Americans, and Other Paradoxes

BYLINE: By HENRY KAMM,  Special to The New York Times

SECTION: Section A; Page 4; Column 3; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 873 words

DATELINE: HO CHI MINH CITY, Vietnam


The contradictions of Vietnam are evident everywhere, as the Communist
Government tries to combine a free-market economy with rigid, one-party rule.

But they are most palpable in this city, which has been Communist for 18 years.
Ho Chi Minh City, the former Saigon, has made rapid progress in the 1990's to
undo the dour monotony imposed since 1975 by the stern party bureaucrats from
the North, who came down to show their brothers the virtues of Marxism-Leninism.

It is not only that the restaurants today are more elegant than the best of the
pre-Communist era. It is also that those who go there to dine and be seen do so
with the self-assurance that only a very full wallet confers.

American Entrepreneurs Dine

It is also that among the diners there are American business people whose main
offices may be in Singapore, Kuala Lumpur or Hong Kong, in observance of the
American embargo on trading with Vietnam, but much of whose business is done
here.

Moreover, one may find among the guests men who for many years have been in the
shadows because of supposed political unreliability. They include people active
in politics under the old Saigon Government, as well as southern revolutionaries
who fell into oblivion for resenting the North's dominance after 1975 or
individualists difficult to incorporate into any authoritarian system.

The city also offers the sight of sailors from the first Communist country,
whose ships no longer bring Soviet aid but serve as tramp freighters for cargoes
from thriving Asian countries, stealing into the rear of shops on Nguyen Hue
Street, bustling once more, to sell satchels full of contraband caviar for a
pittance.

The Soviet Union was the country without which Vietnam might not have survived
the enmity of the United States first and China later, and the reward for its
extensive aid in war and peace is barely disguised scorn for the poverty of the
few Russians still seen here.

The eagerness to welcome Americans in Vietnam, North and South, is one of the
few things in which official pronouncements coincide with public opinion.

"We never felt bitterness toward the Americans," said Nguyen Tu Chi, a
67-year-old Hanoi anthropologist, combat soldier in the struggle against the
French, and Communist Party member since 1946. "Maybe we have passed through too
many wars. One gets used to it."

Visible as are the paradoxes of this city, they are equally strong in Hanoi.
There, however, they strike the ear more than the eye. The lovely city of lakes,
ringed by buildings of old Vietnamese, Chinese and French-colonial architecture,
sadly run down, has changed little.

The paradoxes lie in the verbal gymnastics with which Government and party
officials of the old school cling to justifications for an ideology that few
others still believe.

While the ideology continues to be proclaimed and taught, throughout the North
temples forced by the ideologists to be neglected for decades are being restored
by villagers with their own hands and their limited money.

The face and voice of Pham Van Ngoc, an elderly carpenter in Xa Dong Tien, near
Haiphong, trembled with modest pride as he showed the handsome dragons that he
had copied in cement from another temple to decorate the classical roof of the
village shrine. On an ordinary day, the restored temple was crowded with
villagers praying, lighting joss sticks and bringing offerings of food.

At the opposite end of the widened ideological range, Vu Huu Ngoan, deputy
director of the Institute of Marxism-Leninism, and a senior colleague, Dao Duy
Quat, took pains to assure a visitor that the demise of their sister institutes
in Europe, along with the parties that trained their functionaries there, had
served only to reinforce them in their faith.

"I don't believe the doctrine has collapsed," Mr. Ngoan said. "On the contrary,
the collapse of those countries proves that the principles are right and they
applied them wrongly."

But because of the declining standing of Marx and Lenin, some of whose ideas
they said had proved erroneous, the institute last May took out a kind of
dialectical insurance. Mr. Ngoan said the name of Ho Chi Minh was added to the
school's title.

"Maybe their own gods are no ideological giants, but they are their own," a
Russian diplomat said.

Tran Cong Man, an amiable retired major general and journalist, who often serves
as informal party spokesman, conceded that there was an ideological crisis. But
all the old ideas of the class struggle still apply, he added. "There must be
state enterprises," he said. "If we don't control them, we don't control the
situation."

"In our experience, it isn't too necessary to have many parties," he said. "We
want to have more and more democracy every day under the rule of one party."

There was real pain in the voice of General Man, an old Communist, when he said
two of the highest socialist ideals -- free education and free medical care --
had proved luxuries that Vietnam could no longer afford.  Parents now pay fees
for their children from secondary school on, and doctors and medicines must be
paid for.

Prof. Vu Van Tao, assistant to the Education Minister, said, "Today, free
education is utopian in Vietnam."

LOAD-DATE: April 27, 1993

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo: Ho Chi Minh City, the former Saigon, has made rapid progress in
the 1990's to undo the dour monotony imposed in Vietnam since 1975. Those who
dine in Ho Chi Minh City's elegant restaurants, like these guests at a wedding
party, display a wealth and extravagance previously unknown. (Robert Maas/Sipa
Press)

Map of Vietnam showing location of Ho Chi Minh City.

                   Copyright 1993 The New York Times Company


                              104 of 312 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                April 28, 1993, Wednesday, Late Edition - Final

NEWS SUMMARY

SECTION: Section A; Page 1; Column 5; Metropolitan Desk

LENGTH: 1031 words



International A3-11

CLINTON CAUTIOUS ON BOSNIA
Seeking to reassure lawmakers and others who fear being drawn into a new
Vietnam, Secretary of State Warren Christopher told Congress that President
Clinton would not authorize military action in Bosnia unless he was certain the
United States could avoid getting more deeply involved than it wanted.  A1

FEARS OF A NEW VIETNAM
While advocates for tougher American action against the Bosnian Serbs have drawn
parallels to the origins of World War II and the appeasement of Nazi aggression,
on Capitol Hill a growing number of lawmakers expressed the fear that the
bombing of Serbian positions would inevitably lead to a runaway deployment of
ground troops.  A10


SERBS MOUNT NEW BOSNIA ATTACK
Defying growing international pressure aimed at forcing an end to the fighting
in Bosnia, Serbs mounted a new ground and artillery attack on the Muslim-held
area around the town of Bihac.  A11

ALLIES FEAR INVOLVEMENT
Behind Western Europe's reluctance to agree to air strikes or military
operations on the ground in Bosnia is the fear, expressed by the European
Community's mediator, Lord Owen, of becoming involved in somebody else's civil
war.  A11

BIG SPLIT ON TRADE POLICY
Deep ideological divisions and turf battles within the Clinton Administration
have nearly paralyzed its trade policy.  A1

EUROPEAN AIRLINE MERGER
Four big European airlines have agreed to pursue a merger that would lead to the
creation of Europe's largest overseas carrier.  A1

TAKING LONG VIEW IN SOUTH AFRICA
If there is one thing they share, South Africa's white President, now in office,
and its black President-to-be, it is an ability to peer over the daily political
panics and take their bearings on the long course of South Africa's trek to
democracy.  A1

MIDEAST PEACE TALKS RESUME
After a four-month hiatus in which there was a change in American
administrations and violence flared in Israel and its occupied territories, the
Middle East Peace talks resumed at the State Department, amid rising and
contradictory pressures on all parties.  A3

PEACE TALKS ASSAILED
Uncompromising hawks among Israelis and Palestinians denounced the resumption of
Middle East peace negotiations in Washington, stressing that if an agreement was
ever reached, it would encounter strong opposition on each side.  A3

YELTSIN'S OPTIONS AFTER VOTE
With nearly complete tallies confirming President Yeltsin's impressive vote of
confidence in the referendum on Sunday, speculation turned to his options in
trying to turn this moral victory into political advantage.  A9

National A12-18

FEWER LIMITS ON MILITARY WOMEN
Senior Pentagon officials said that Defense Secretary Les Aspin would issue a
directive on Thursday ordering the armed services to let women fly in combat and
that the Administration would ask Congress to repeal a law that bars women from
serving on many warships.  A1

NO DELAY IN OFFERING HEALTH PLAN
President Clinton insisted he would not delay announcement of his health-care
program next month, rejecting the pleas of top economic advisers and siding with
his wife and her health-care team.  A1

MEDICAL PANEL TO REVIEW PLAN
President Clinton named 47 doctors, nurses and other medical experts to assess
his plan to revamp the nation's health-care system before he sends it to
Congress.  A14

A WELFARE PLAN'S LESSONS
Experiences of teen-age mothers show the possibilities and limits of a widely
praised program that offers financial incentives for staying in high school.
A12

LEE BROWN CHOSEN AS DRUG CZAR
Lee Brown, the former Police Commissioner of New York City, has been chosen to
be President Clinton's senior official for drug policy, lawmakers said.  A15

SUPPORT FOR THEORY IN CULT BLAZE
Fire experts offered support for officials' preliminary conclusion that members
of the Branch Davidian sect started the fire that destroyed their Texas
compound.  A16

The authorities pressed their search for David Koresh's remains.  A16

EX-OFFICER OF B.C.C.I. TESTIFIES
A former official of the Bank of Credit and Commerce International testified
that Clark M. Clifford and Robert A. Altman participated in a scheme to defraud
Federal and state bank regulators.  A16

ENGLISH A 2D LANGUAGE FOR MORE
A Census Bureau report said the number of United States residents for whom
English is a foreign tongue jumped by more than a third to 31.8 million in the
1980's, due to a wave of immigration from Latin America, Asia and Europe.  A18

An execution stay is considered after the facts are questioned.  A12

Education Page A19

Ten years after a scathing report, schools show uneven progress.

Metro Digest B1

DINKINS PLANS SERVICE CUTS
The Dinkins administration acknowledged that it would be forced to reduce
services to close a half-billion-dollar budget gap it projects for the next
fiscal year.  A1

FIGHTING OVER LANDMARKS
Some grumbling New Yorkers say that the city's Landmarks Commission often blocks
useful changes and sometimes hounds private citizens over small details,
dragging them into bureaucratic thickets.  A1

Business Digest D1

Living Section C1-10

What the check doesn't tell about the price of a meal.  C1
At tea with David Larible.  C1
Paris chefs revitalize the
 bistro.  C1

Health Page C11

Arts/Entertainment C12-18

Who is Conan O'Brien?  C13
Film: "The Execution
Protocol." C13
Music: "Shining Brow," an opera about Frank Lloyd Wright.  C13
Final "Ring" reflections.  C13
Books: Book Notes C15
"At the Hand of Man." C17
Television: "Sons of Derry." C18
"Fires in the Mirror." C18

Sports B8-14

Obituaries B7

Editorials/Op-Ed A20-21

Editorials

Cut New York's un-welcome tax.
"Justice" in Glen Ridge.
Eritrea's harder test is peace.
The State Senate's busy censors.

Letters

Anna Quindlen: The power of one.
Stephen L. Carter: A litmus test for justices? No, it demeans the Court.
Paul Gewirtz: Yes to the litmus test -- legal views matter.

LOAD-DATE: April 28, 1993

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Summary

                   Copyright 1993 The New York Times Company


                              105 of 312 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                April 28, 1993, Wednesday, Late Edition - Final

Christopher Explains Conditions For Use of U.S. Force in Bosnia

BYLINE: By ELAINE SCIOLINO,  Special to The New York Times

SECTION: Section A; Page 1; Column 1; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 1408 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, April 27


Seeking to reassure lawmakers and others who fear being drawn into a new
Vietnam, Secretary of State Warren Christopher told Congress today that
President Clinton will not authorize military action in Bosnia unless he is
certain the United States can avoid getting more deeply involved than it wants.

Mr. Christopher laid out four strict tests for the use of force: the goal must
be stated clearly, there must be a strong likelihood of success, there must be
"an exit strategy" and the action must win sustained public support.

As he has in meetings at the White House and in conversations with lawmakers,
Mr. Christopher offered the diplomatic equivalent of the cautious military
doctrine enunciated by Gen. Colin L. Powell, the Chairman of the Joint Chiefs of
Staff, asking a question that has become the Christopher mantra: What is the
endgame?

Dark Shadows From the Past

Just as General Powell's ideas are heavily influenced by his experience as an
officer in Vietnam, so that war figures in Congressional deliberations on
Bosnia.

Although some key senators have drawn parallels to the Holocaust in demanding
that the United States and its allies take immediate military action in Bosnia,
Vietnam is the dominant image evoked on Capitol Hill, where a growing number of
lawmakers are warning against an open-ended military commitment that could
overtake the Presidency. [Page A10.]

"I am perfectly -- personally -- quite prepared to see the United States use
force, not only there but any place around the world," Mr. Christopher said in
testimony before a Senate Appropriations subcommittee. "But it has to meet some
very severe tests."

During the hearing, Senator Ernest Hollings, the South Carolina Democrat,
reflected the anti-interventionist view most strongly. "I would say nyet, nyet,
nyet, nyet," in response to Mr. Christopher's four tests, he said. "No! That's
the honest answer to all those questions right now."

And a new opinion poll shows that the public has little enthusiasm for military
action despite continuing reports of Serbian "ethnic cleansing" of
Muslim-populated areas in Bosnia. A poll last weekend by Cable News Network, USA
Today and the Gallup Organization found 62 percent of the respondents opposed to
United States air strikes against Serbian targets and 30 percent in favor.

Some Political Leeway

One senior Administration official said Mr. Christopher's testimony was intended
to give Mr. Clinton room to maneuver politically.

The President is said by aides to be deeply ambivalent about how to stop Serbian
aggression without getting the United States too involved. His indecision runs
so deep that, according to an aide to President Francois Mitterrand, White House
officials canceled a telephone call on Monday in which Mr. Clinton was to brief
Mr. Mitterrand, telling Elysee Palace that Mr. Clinton wants to define his
position better before they speak.

Mr. Clinton said on Monday that the United States and its allies needed "a
stronger policy" and promised to decide on action in a few days. But the White
House spokesman, George Stephanopoulos, said today that he did not expect the
President to announce his decision this week.

Trip Without a Focus, Yet

What is likely, a senior Administration official said, is that Mr. Clinton will
make his decision within the next two to three days but send Mr. Christopher to
consult with the allies before he announces it.

The policy is still so unsettled that the Administration has not decided what
Mr. Christopher's mission should be. One senior official said Mr. Christopher
would use the trip, to Paris, London, Moscow and perhaps other capitals, to
build support for whatever Washington's policy proves to be. But another senior
official said Mr. Christopher would go more to hear what the allies have to say.

Mr. Clinton met this afternoon for more than two hours with 20 lawmakers to
determine the degree of support on Capitol Hill for military action.

He laid out possible courses of action, including the use of air strikes and the
arming of the Bosnian Muslims, but told lawmakers that he had yet to define the
goal of American policy, an exercise he must complete before deciding what
action is warranted, senior Administration officials said.

Senator Claiborne Pell, the Rhode Island Democrat and chairman of the Foreign
Relations Committee, said one of the President's options was to rely on the
status quo, which includes newly tightened United Nations sanctions. Mr.
Clinton, he said, took no position on any of the options but appeared committed
on one point: that something more be done to halt what Senator Pell
characterized as a "slaughter" being carried out by the Serbs in Bosnia.

White House officials say the key problem debated in heated meetings in recent
weeks is whether the United States and its allies should try to halt Serbian
aggression and freeze its military gains by a cease-fire, or whether to take on
the more ambitious goal of punishing Serbian aggression.

The first goal could be pursued by controlled air strikes, senior Administration
officials said.

Money for the Muslims

But the more ambitious goal would require more aggressive action, perhaps the
arming of the Bosnian Muslims. Mr. Christopher has said that arming the Muslims
could help "level the playing field" so they could fight more fairly against the
Serbs. In Cognressional testimony last week, he reminded lawmakers that they had
already appropriated $50 million in this year's budget for such action.

The Clinton Administration has decided that additional United Nations
authorization is unnecessary if the United States decides, unilaterally or with
its allies, to use military force against Serbs in order to protect the
humanitarian effort. Such authorization is included under Resolution 770, which
allows Security Council members to use "all necessary measures" to deliver
relief supplies and "would provide legal authority to use force against military
installations hindering the relief effort."

European Worries

The State Department explained that position last week in a letter to Senator
Joseph R. Biden Jr., Democrat of Delaware, who has repeatedly called for air
strikes and a selective easing of the United Nations arms embargo.

Britain and France have indicated distaste for any military action, though they
seem to prefer bombing to other military options, and have spoken out strongly
against arming the Bosnian Muslims, arguing that more weapons would intensify
the war and endanger thousands of British and French ground troops working with
the United Nations.

In a warning from another side, Adm. David Jeremiah, Vice Chairman of the Joint
Chiefs of Staff, told reporters that air strikes in Bosnia could lead to a
difficult, drawn-out commitment that would include civilian deaths and damage to
civilian areas.

If the assumption is that bombing raids "will be a painless action, it will not
be, because there will clearly be collateral military damage" to civilian areas,
he said. "You cannot allow somebody to go forward and assume you're going to get
in and out with a 'quickie.' "

Balkan Update

As tighter United Nations sanctions against Serb-dominated YUGOSLAVIA took
effect yesterday, Serbs attacked around BIHAC, a strategic pocket of Muslim
territory in northwestern BOSNIA AND HERZEGOVINA. In SARAJEVO, an exploding tank
shell killed three children.

The Bosnian Serb military chief of staff said that if United Nations officials
did not disarm Muslim defenders of SREBRENICA by May 7, Serbs would again block
relief and evacuation convoys.

Secretary of State Warren Christopher said in WASHINGTON that rigorous standards
must be met, including a sure way out, before any decision is made to use
American military might in the former Yugoslavia.

NATO military chiefs, including Gen. Colin L. Powell, expressed concern in
BRUSSELS about the deteriorating Bosnia situation but made no calls for military
action.

The European Community's mediator, Lord Owen, said in LONDON that American
troops should join the relief operation in Bosnia instead of leaving Europeans
to take the risks.

The Security Council's sanctions committee at the UNITED NATIONS rejected an
American effort to bar nonessential foodstuffs from Yugoslavia, but decided that
large shipments of gourmet items like caviar and champagne should not be allowed
in. (pg. A10)

LOAD-DATE: April 28, 1993

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo: Secretary of State Warren Christopher during Senate testimony.
(Reuters) (pg. A1)

                   Copyright 1993 The New York Times Company


                              106 of 312 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                April 28, 1993, Wednesday, Late Edition - Final

Many in Congress, Citing Vietnam, Oppose Attacks

BYLINE: By CLIFFORD KRAUSS,  Special to The New York Times

SECTION: Section A; Page 10; Column 3; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 1273 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, April 27


While many advocates of tougher American action against the Bosnian Serbs have
drawn parallels to the origins of World War II and the appeasement of Nazi
aggression and brutality, the dominant analogy in Congress today was Vietnam.

A growing number of lawmakers are warning the Clinton Administration against
bombing Serbian positions, fearing that it would inevitably lead to the kind of
runaway deployment of ground troops that characterized American involvement in
Southeast Asia.

Senators George J. Mitchell of Maine and Bob Dole of Kansas, who respectively
lead the Democratic and Republican parties in the Senate, are arguing
strenuously for the Administration to push for NATO air strikes to halt the
fighting in Bosnia and Herzegovina. On the few occasions when they agree, they
can usually can take the heat out of any issue. But their calls for immediate
military action in the former Yugoslavia have failed to win widespread support
in Congress.

"We're all scared to death of public reaction to things that have a Vietnam
overtone," said Senator James M. Jeffords of Vermont, a Republican member of the
Foreign Relations Committee who nevertheless supports the use of air strikes
against Serbian petroleum depots and manufacturing plants to hinder the Serbian
forces fighting in Bosnia.

Some Veterans Opposed

The opposition to military intervention cuts across party and ideological lines,
and is especially fierce among some legislators who fought in Vietnam. Many of
them have painful memories of another young Democratic President stumbling
toward a prolonged conflict without a clear strategy.

Senator Patrick J. Leahy, Democrat of Vermont, warned that bombing or the use of
ground troops could lead to Serbian terrorist attacks in the United States that
would be "different from anything we have ever experienced and for which we are
largely unprepared."

Furthermore, he added, bombing alone would not deter the Serbs.

"Are we prepared to go to the next move?" he asked. "The next move would have to
be ground troops, and I'm not convinced the American people are willing to go to
ground troops, especially when the Europeans are so neglectful of their
responsibilities that they have not done anything."

Senator John McCain of Arizona, a senior Republican member of the Armed Services
Committee, said, "I have yet to talk to a military expert who believes that air
strikes alone will beneficially affect that tragic situation." His views in part
reflect the advice he and other members close to the Pentagon have received from
senior officers who oppose military intervention, but they also reflect the
experience of a Navy pilot who was shot down and spent several years in a North
Vietnamese prison camp before coming home to an unappreciative country.

'No Clear-Cut Objectives'

As in Vietnam and Lebanon, Mr. McCain said, in Bosnia the Administration faces
"a civil war with a great difficulty in differentiating between participants --
and there are no clear-cut military objectives."

Senator Hank Brown of Colorado, a Republican who served as a Navy air navigator
in Vietnam, said, "The Vietnam experience is a very pertinent analogy because
when Americans suffer casualties in Yugoslavia, support for American involvement
is going to fade."

"Bombing is going to involve ground personnel by necessity," Mr. Brown added,
"because you have to have spotters, you have to have intelligence and you have
to have a way to pick up the pilots if any planes are lost. We are kidding
ourselves if we think we can do surgical air strikes and not have American
personnel at risk."

Republicans and Democrats said the kind of Congressional consensus that
coalesced behind President Bush's call for intervention in the Persian Gulf has
not emerged because lawmakers do not believe that American interests are at
stake. Nor can they see how Washington can quickly bring an intervention in the
Balkans to a conclusion.

Difficult Terrain Noted

Many also noted that while Iraq and Kuwait are desert countries where air power
can be decisive against enemy forces without adequate cover, the unpredictable
weather and tough mountain terrain in Bosnia limit the effectiveness of air
warfare.

Members of both parties are expressing growing alarm about the "ethnic
cleansing" campaign by the Serbs and frustration with the failure of the
European allies to take tougher action. But few, including Representative Lee H.
Hamilton, the influential Democratic chairman of the Foreign Affairs Committee,
seem ready to go much farther than a partial lifting of the United Nations arms
embargo on the Bosnian factions so the Muslims can rearm themselves.

"The draconian sanctions just went into effect," Mr. Hamilton said, referring to
a tightened United Nations embargo. "It doesn't make sense to put the sanctions
in today and bomb tomorrow."

Representative Newt Gingrich of Georgia, the Republican whip, who has been a
hawk on other foreign policy issues, also urged caution. "It is vital to think
through the last step before you take the first step," he said, adding that the
Administration could unwisely escalate the war in incremental steps. Instead, he
favors lifting the arms embargo on the Muslims and urges that the Administration
encourage American civilians with military experience to train the Muslims,
perhaps with the help of the Turks and Egyptians.

Clinton Promises to Refocus

The powerful Congressional reservations appear to make it difficult for the
Administration to move decisively on Bosnia, especially since much of its
legislative program faces an uphill battle. Since the recent defeat of the
spending portion of his economic stimulus package, President Clinton has
promised to refocus his efforts to enact the rest of the economic program and
health care reform.

The debate over whether the crisis in Bosnia is more resonant of the Holocaust
or Vietnam is going on in both parties, and crosses the fault lines of the old
doves and hawks. On Friday night, at a Senate Democratic retreat at Jamestown,
Va., Senator Paul Simon of Illinois got up to ask the opponents of intervention
in his party, "What happens next if we do nothing?" Senator Daniel Patrick
Moynihan of New York responded, "Another museum," a reference to the new
Holocaust Museum in Washington.

Mr. Simon, an influential member of the Senate Foreign Relations Committee, said
the next American step should be air strikes against Serbian artillery positions
and supply routes. He has also recommended that Mr. Clinton deploy fighter
planes to escort relief aircraft so they can fly at lower altitudes for greater
accuracy when they drop supplies to Bosnian civilians.

Moral Outrage Expressed

Expressing the moral outrage that fuels such arguments for more direct
intervention, Representative Nita M. Lowey, Democrat of Westchester, called for
air strikes. "We just can't let the killing go on," Ms. Lowey said. "We have to
be a leader in the world community."

Representative David E. Bonior, the Democratic whip from Michigan, agreed,
saying, "Nothing else has worked."

But many other Congressional Democrats appear unconvinced that to act cautiously
in the former Yugoslavia is to invite comparisons to Neville Chamberlain's
appeasement of Hitler at Munich.

Representative Robert G. Torricelli of New Jersey, a senior Democratic member of
the Foreign Affairs Committee, said Congress would follow the President to war
only when "there is a clear American interest, an identifiable foe and a sense
that victory can be gained at an acceptable price and in an acceptable amount of
time."


LOAD-DATE: April 28, 1993

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo: Senator Claiborne Pell entering his car yesterday after a
meeting at the White House with President Clinton about the Bosnian war. Walking
to their cars were, from the left, Senators Bob Graham, John W. Warner and
Richard G. Lugar, who also took part in the meeting. (Paul Hosefros/The New York
Times)

                   Copyright 1993 The New York Times Company


                              107 of 312 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 April 29, 1993, Thursday, Late Edition - Final

U.S. MILITARY SPLIT ON USING AIR POWER AGAINST THE SERBS

BYLINE: By ELAINE SCIOLINO,  Special to The New York Times

SECTION: Section A; Page 1; Column 6; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 1408 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, April 28


While President Clinton nears a decision on a more active policy in the Balkans,
top generals engaged in an unusually public debate today over the effectiveness
of air strikes to stop Serbian attacks against the Bosnian Government.

In the most positive endorsement by a senior American military officer of the
use of air power, Gen. Merrill A. McPeak, the Air Force Chief of Staff, told a
Senate subcommittee that one option under consideration -- bombing the Bosnian
Serbs' gun positions -- would be completely effective and pose "virtually no
risk" to attacking American warplanes.

General McPeak, a former fighter pilot, predicted that air strikes could be used
to clear away the Serbian artillery and make it easier to deliver relief
supplies. "Give us time," he said, and Western air forces will order strikes "on
every one of those artillery positions and put it out of business."

Assessment of Dangers

In response to questions before the Senate Appropriations Subcommittee on
Defense, General McPeak acknowledged that the terrain and weather would make air
strikes in Bosnia more difficult than the attacks launched against Iraq during
the Persian Gulf war. But he added that the Serbian antiaircraft guns and
surface-to-air missiles were relatively unsophisticated and presented little
threat to American fliers.

His statements contradicted the negative assessment of a number of Army and Navy
officials, including Admiral David Jeremiah, the Vice Chairman of the Joint
Chiefs of Staff, a surface naval officer, who said on Tuesday that air attacks
would lead to allied losses and civilian damage.

And during their confirmation hearings before the Senate Armed Services
Committee today, a group of senior generals aired their concerns about the
difficulty of conducting air strikes in Bosnia and Herzegovina.

Lieut. Gen. Barry R. McCaffrey, the nominee as Director of Strategy, Plans and
Policy for the military's Joint Staff, said the use of air strikes to stop the
Serbs would "be quite a severe challenge for the use of air power." He added,
"My gut sense is that there is no military solution to use."

'They'll Go Into Hiding'

During the same hearing, Maj. Gen. Michael E. Ryan of the Air Force, nominated
as assistant to the Chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff, said: "If you can
find the artillery pieces and get the pilots' eyeballs on them, you can probably
take them out. But after the first time, they'll go into hiding, camouflage them
or move them around. It's really a tough issue."

General Ryan and the other generals suggested that ground forces would be
necessary to insure an air campaign's success. "Without the threat of follow-up
ground forces, they'll just ride out" a bombing strike, said General Ryan, who,
like the other generals testifying, said he was giving his personal opinion, not
an official recommendation.

Maj. Gen. John J. Sheehan of the Marines, the nominee as the Joint Staff's
Director of Operations, put it more bluntly. "At the end of the day, it takes
the introduction of ground forces to solve this," he said.

The public split in the military's thinking comes as Mr. Clinton vowed again
today to win allied support for stronger American-led action to force the
Bosnian Serbs to make peace.

"I think there is a fair chance that we'll be able to get the U.N. to go along
with what we decide to do," he said in a brief exchange with reporters in the
Rose Garden, adding, "I will decide what I think the right thing is to do and
see if I can prod the allies and Congress to go along."

The White House spokesman, George Stephanopoulos, said that he expected Mr.
Clinton to make a decision this week, but that the public announcement of the
policy would await consultation with the allies. Secretary of State Warren
Christopher is expected to leave for European capitals within the next two to
five days, senior Administration officials said.

The split among the military officers reflects traditional biases within the
services. Ground commanders, citing the Vietnam War, believe that the efficacy
of air power has been exaggerated. Air Force officers say the ground commanders
do not appreciate the capabilities of the new generation of precision guided
weapons.

This debate was aired before the gulf war, but the arguments were not critical
because President Bush was prepared to launch a ground war. But in the case of
Bosnia, President Clinton has ruled out sending ground forces, making the debate
over air power all the more important.

Mr. Clinton is still undecided about what the goals of American policy should be
and what steps to take to achieve those goals. Lawmakers whose support is
crucial met with him for nearly three hours on Tuesday and said they came away
with the impression that Mr. Clinton is leaning toward a decision to arm the
Bosnian Government, perhaps in conjunction with air strikes against Serbian
positions.

In the meeting with 20 Senators and Representatives, Mr. Clinton appeared to
reflect the view of those military commanders who doubt the effectiveness of
using air strikes alone, but he stressed he has made no decision, several
lawmakers said.

"He had a positive feeling towards lifting the embargo -- that justice has to be
served in that respect," said Senator Richard G. Lugar, the Indiana Republican.
"But the President was much less certain about heading down the trail of air
strikes."

Other lawmakers said they too came away with the impression that Mr. Clinton
most favored the selective lifting of the United Nations arms embargo in order
to arm the Bosnian Government forces.

"The way Clinton was talking it was very clear to me that Al Gore has been
pressing him to lift the arms embargo, and that air strikes are not necessarily
part of this," said Representative John P. Murtha, the Pennsylvania Democrat. "I
got the impression he favors either lifting the arms embargo by itself or
combining it with air strikes."

And Senator Joseph R. Biden, the Delaware Democrat, said that based on the
meeting, he believes Mr. Clinton "will reach the conclusion that he must lift
the arms embargo."

Senior Administration officials familiar with the meeting said the group could
have gotten the impression that Mr. Clinton was inclined to press the allies to
arm the Bosnian Muslims and perhaps use air power to neutralize the Serbs at
least until the arms arrive. But the officials stressed that Mr. Clinton has yet
to make up his mind.

One indication of Mr. Clinton's indecision about what his objectives should be
came toward the end of the meeting, when lawmakers said he posed two questions,
and asked them to seek the advice of their colleagues and report back to him.
The first was that if the United States and its allies stopped the fighting with
military action, would that deter ethnic- and religious-based aggression
elsewhere in the world? And the second was that if the chosen course of military
intervention failed to stop Serbian aggression, at what point should the United
States say it had tried its best but had failed?

Senator John H. Warner, the Virginia Republican, who has strongly opposed air
strikes, said that when the President asked the second question, a number of
senators in effect said, bluntly, "Once we get in with our military, we cannot
accept failure."

Balkan Update

President Dobrica Cosic of YUGOSLAVIA denounced tighter trade sanctions against
his country and warned that Western military intervention in BOSNIA AND
HERZEGOVINA could cause "permanent war" in the Balkans.

NATO allies, meeting in BRUSSELS, authorized their warships in the ADRIATIC to
pursue vessels into Yugoslav waters if they are suspected of violating the trade
ban.

A British commander in SARAJEVO with United Nations peacekeepers said Serbian
nationalists had threatened to shell his troops if NATO bombed positions held by
Bosnian Serb. Serbian troops shelled several villages in Bosnia and reportedly
stopped a supply convoy and seized food in CROATIA.

As President Clinton neared a decision on U.S. policy in Bosnia, top generals in
WASHINGTON engaged in an unusually public debate on whether bombing would stop
Serbian attacks. Officials said the President was torn over military steps that
might end the war quickly but would in effect let the Serbs keep land they had
taken by force.

In KARACHI, Pakistan, Islamic countries pledged $68 million in emergency aid to
Bosnia.

LOAD-DATE: April 29, 1993

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Map of Bosnia and Herzegovina. (pg. A6)

                   Copyright 1993 The New York Times Company


                              108 of 312 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 April 29, 1993, Thursday, Late Edition - Final

Michael Stanley, 49, Suicide Researcher And Neuroscientist

BYLINE: By WOLFGANG SAXON

SECTION: Section B; Page 16; Column 1; Metropolitan Desk

LENGTH: 319 words


Dr. Michael Edward Stanley, a Columbia University neuroscientist known
nationally for his research on the biochemistry of suicide, died on Monday at
his home in Short Hills, N.J. He was 49.

The cause was a heart attack, said his wife and fellow researcher, Dr. Barbara
Stanley.

At the time of his death, Dr. Stanley held twin positions at the
Columbia-Presbyterian Medical Center. He was the director of the Department of
Neuroscience at the New York State Psychiatric Institute, a part of the center.
And he was clinical professor of psychopharmacology in the Departments of
Psychiatry and Pharmacology at Columbia University's College of Physicians and
Surgeons.

He held both positions since 1989.

Dr. Stanley published more than 100 scientific papers. His subjects, besides
suicide, included self-injurious behavior and ethics in psychiatry.

He was a member and chairman of the psychopharmacology advisory committee of the
Food and Drug Administration. He also was a consultant for the National
Institute of Mental Health, which provided grants for much of his work, and the
American Suicide Foundation.

Dr. Stanley, a native of Elizabeth, N.J., was an Army helicopter pilot in
Vietnam and Germany from 1965 to 1968, with the rank of chief warrant officer.

He graduated magna cum laude with a psychology major from Montclair State
College in 1972. He then studied pharmacology and received a master's degree and
a Ph.D. with honors in 1979, both from Mount Sinai School of Medicine-City
University of New York.

Coming from Wayne State University School of Medicine, he joined the Columbia
faculty in 1985 as an associate professor.

Besides Dr. Stanley's wife of 23 years, the former Barbara Hrevnack, he is
survived by two children, Melissa, 13, and Thomas, 10; his mother, Marie Stanley
of South Plainfield, N.J., and two brothers, William of Newark, Del., and Jon of
Cape Elizabeth, Me.

NAME: Michael Edward Stanley

LOAD-DATE: April 29, 1993

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo: Dr. Michael Edward Stanley (Rene Perez, 1987)

TYPE: Obituary (Obit); Biography

                   Copyright 1993 The New York Times Company


                              109 of 312 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 April 29, 1993, Thursday, Late Edition - Final

Bosnia: Talk Plus Threat

SECTION: Section A; Page 22; Column 1; Editorial Desk

LENGTH: 681 words


Senator John McCain of Arizona boiled President Clinton's problems down to a
precise phrase. The arguments of those who want him to bomb the Serbs are
"hauntingly familiar" reminders of Vietnam. Senator Ernest F. Hollings of South
Carolina made a telling point, too. The Reagan Administration's eagerness to
bomb the Bekaa Valley and inject marines into the chaos of Lebanon led to a
disastrous loss of life.

Secretary of State Warren Christopher advanced a wise formula. There should be
no American military action in the Balkans without a clear goal, a likelihood of
success and a plan for getting out. Finally, he said, there must be public
support.

All these comments were produced by a fruitful debate begun by President
Clinton. He has come under enormous pressure from those who, for very sound
humanitarian reasons, have urged him to launch air strikes against Serbian
artillery and supply lines. But that is an impulsive reaction that fails the
Christopher test. Those who advocate air strikes need to think past the first
bomb.


Isolated air strikes or even a long series of them will force the Bosnian
Serbian army to hunker down for a while, but then what? There can be no
realistic expectation that such strikes will be "surgical." Non-military targets
like houses and field hospitals will surely be hit, military ones like mortars
will surely be missed. And what if the Serbian army, instead of being cowed,
launches an all-out infantry attack on Srebrenica and other Muslim towns? Is the
United States prepared to have its airplanes try to shoot that army on the
ground or to put its own army in the field?

On this last point, the healthy public dialogue and Congressional consultations
have shown there is no public or Congressional support for ground combat by U.S.
troops, because the country does not believe a vital U.S. interest is at stake
in this historically rooted conflict. Even on humanitarian grounds, there is so
far no strong public demand for air strikes, nor a majority in Congress for
them.

Yet the public discussion of force has helped protect innocent lives in Bosnia's
besieged cities. In response to Mr. Clinton's threat of a "stronger policy,"
Bosnian Serbs and their sponsors in Belgrade are observing a de facto
cease-fire, giving Mr. Christopher a chance to use his trip to Europe next week
for an encircling diplomatic offensive.

In London and Paris, there is now at least a half-hearted willingness to follow
an American lead into more muscular bargaining. In Moscow, a reinforced Yeltsin
Government has warned Belgrade that Russia will no longer defend its traditional
Serbian ally from the consequences of further international defiance. And at the
U.N., the normally quiescent non-permanent members of the Security Council are
pressing strongly to declare the surrounded cities internationally protected
areas, backed by a threat of military enforcement if necessary.

Mr. Christopher's objective should be an international ultimatum to Belgrade:
Refrain from shelling population centers or risk future military consequences.
Bosnian Serbian forces should be required either to withdraw their heavy siege
artillery pieces from urban perimeters or turn them over to U.N. control. This
tough-minded new consensus should then be embodied in a new Security Council
resolution, backed up by the military enforcement language of Chapter 7 of the
U.N. Charter.

Perhaps Mr. Clinton can be faulted for moving too deliberately. But even
well-meaning proponents of force, such as Senator Joseph Biden, have failed to
define what steps would follow air strikes that many experts believe would offer
neither surgical neatness nor lasting effect.

The answer to deadly ethnic cleansing is not the risk of death for Americans
sent into foreign conflict with no purpose, no plan and no foundation of support
at home. The answer may lie in threat-backed diplomacy that enlists the
traditional European allies and the Russians in a campaign of relentless
pressure on Belgrade and the Bosnian Serbs. Only Mr. Clinton can make that
happen.

LOAD-DATE: April 29, 1993

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Editorial

                   Copyright 1993 The New York Times Company


                              110 of 312 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                  April 30, 1993, Friday, Late Edition - Final

Last Chance

SECTION: Section C; Page 4; Column 5; Weekend Desk

LENGTH: 533 words


Here is a sampling of shows and art exhibitions in the New York metropolitan
region that close soon:

Closing This Weekend

"CANDIDA," Roundabout Theater, 1530 Broadway, at 45th Street. George Bernard
Shaw's romantic comedy, directed by Gloria Muzio and featuring Mary Steenburgen.
Through Sunday. Performances: Tonight at 8; tomorrow at 2 and 8 P.M.; Sunday at
2 P.M. Tickets: $42; $38 for Saturday matinee. Information: (212) 869-8400.


"FIVE GUYS NAMED MOE," Eugene O'Neill Theater, 230 West 49th Street, Manhattan.
Through Sunday. Performances: Tonight at 8; tomorrow at 2 and 8 P.M.; Sunday at
3 P.M. Tickets: $15 to $60. Information: (212) 239-6200.

"REDWOOD CURTAIN," Brooks Atkinson Theater, 256 West 47th Street, Manhattan.
Lanford Wilson's drama about a Vietnam War veteran living in the forests of
Northern California. Through Sunday. Performances: tonight at 8; tomorrow at 2
and 8 P.M.; Sunday at 3 P.M. Tickets: $37.50 to 47.50. Information: (212)
307-4100.

"CARNIVAL," Theater at St. Peter's Church, Lexington Avenue at 54th Street. A
revival of the 1961 musical, based on the film "Lili," directed by Pamela Hunt.
Through Sunday. Performances: Tonight at 8; tomorrow at 2:30 and 8 P.M.; Sunday
at 2:30 P.M. Tickets: $20. Information: (212) 534-5366.

"MEMORY TRICKS," Papp Public Theater, 425 Lafayette Street, East Village. Marga
Gomez's one-woman play about her relationship with her mother. Through Sunday.
Performances: Tonight and tomorrow night at 7 and 10; Sunday at 7 P.M. Tickets:
$17.50. Information: (212) 598-7150.

"MY OEDIPUS COMPLEX" and "SECONDS OUT," Irish Repertory Company at the Papp
Public Theater, 425 Lafayette Street, East Village. Through Sunday.
Performances: Tonight at 8 P.M.; tomorrow at 3 and 8 P.M.; Sunday at 3 P.M.
Tickets: $25. Information: (212) 598-7150.

CECIL BEATON, James Danziger Gallery, 415 West Broadway, at Prince Street, SoHo.
Fashion and portrait photography from the 1930's to the 60's. Through Saturday.
Hours: Today, 11 A.M. to 6 P.M.; tomorrow, noon to 6 P.M. Free. Information:
(212) 226-0056.

DESIGN EXHIBITION, National Academy of Design, 1083 Fifth Avenue, at 89th
Street. Annual exhibition of contemporary works by members of the academy.
Through Sunday. Hours: Today, noon to 8 P.M.; tomorrow and Sunday, noon to 5
P.M. Admission: $3.50; $2 for students and the elderly. Information: (212)
369-4880.

Closing Next Weekend

"ANOTHER TIME," American Jewish Theater, 307 West 26th Street, Chelsea. A drama
by Ronald Harwood about a Jewish family in South Africa, directed by Stanley
Brechner, with Malcolm McDowell, Marian Seldes, Joan Copeland, Michael Lombard
and James Waterston. Through May 9. Performances: Tuesday through Saturday at 8
P.M.; Sunday at 2 and 7 P.M.; Tickets: $30; Information: (212) 633-9797.

"WIDOWERS' HOUSES," Pearl Theater, 125 West 22d Street, Chelsea. George Bernard
Shaw's comedy about class differences, directed by Grey Johnson. Through May 9.
Performances: Tuesday, Thursday and Friday at 8 P.M.; Wednesday at 2 and 8 P.M.;
Saturday at 5 and 9 P.M.; Sunday at 2 P.M.; Tickets: $14 weekdays; $16 weekends.
Information: (212) 645-7708.

LOAD-DATE: April 30, 1993

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: List

                   Copyright 1993 The New York Times Company


                              111 of 312 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                  April 30, 1993, Friday, Late Edition - Final

Review/Film;
The Chicano Experience, in Its Glory and Tedium

BYLINE: By VINCENT CANBY

SECTION: Section C; Page 8; Column 1; Weekend Desk

LENGTH: 967 words


"Bound by Honor," Taylor Hackford's ambitious melodrama about the Chicano
experience in and around East Los Angeles, is like one of those huge wall murals
that give bold, defiant color to an urban landscape that otherwise looks passive
and drab.  The film is big and long (nearly three hours), passionate and flat.
It's full of heroic and tragic incident, but skimpy about the details of
quotidian lives. Though it's not the epic it means to be, it is not a failure.

"Bound by Honor" is the story of 12 crucial years in the formation of three
young men: Paco (Benjamin Bratt), who seems to have been born angry; his
half-brother, Cruz (Jesse Borrego), who has the talent and temperament of an
artist, and Paco's cousin Miklo (Damian Chapa), whose father is Anglo and mother
is Mexican-American, a fact that determines the direction of his life.

With his light skin, sandy hair and blue eyes, Miklo grows up always having to
certify his claim to be a member of the macho Chicano brotherhood. Of the three
young men, he becomes the most furious and fanatical, the one with the most
obsessed vision. Paco, a seeming loose cannon with a hair-trigger temper, goes
through an off-screen conversion of character while serving a hitch in the
United States Marines. By the middle of the film, he is a police detective and,
it seems, a good one, patiently negotiating his way between his own minority
culture and that of the dominant white society. Cruz's early success as a
painter is nearly wrecked by his addiction to drugs.

This is the barest outline of the screenplay, which was written by Jimmy
Santiago Baca, the New Mexico-born poet, after earlier versions had been written
by Floyd Mutrux and then by Jeremy Iacone, from a story by Ross Thomas. The
film's title was not idly chosen. "Bound by Honor" is almost exclusively
concerned with each of the three friends' sense of his own identity in a
perilous environment in which the hostile forces are whites, blacks and other
Chicanos.

The initial impulse is to compare "Bound by Honor" to Luchino Visconti's epic
"Rocco and His Brothers." Yet "Bound by Honor" is no great family saga set in a
time of overwhelming social, political and economic change. "Bound by Honor" is
an action melodrama with a social conscience.

Miklo, Paco and Cruz are characters whose rich potential is severely limited by
the circumstances in which their stories are played out: gang fights and
beatings, car chases and shootouts, sit-downs and reconciliations, in East Los
Angeles and in San Quentin prison, where Miklo effectively grows up. Much of the
film is riveting, especially the San Quentin sequences actually shot inside the
prison. "Bound by Honor" takes on real heft as it follows Miklo's cool, brutal
rise through the prison's Chicano power structure to become a figure of dark
political importance.

Yet a lot is missing. Miklo, Paco and Cruz are defined almost entirely in the
terms in which they choose to present themselves to their peers.  They are all
swagger, intimidation and attitude. It's as if they had no private moments, to
say nothing of private lives.

With the exception of a sequence involving the accidental death of Paco's and
Cruz's younger brother, the film pays little attention to their families. The
movie sees virtually nothing of how these Chicanos earn their livings, eat,
sleep and make love. Only Cruz is seen to have a girlfriend, and then only
briefly. Paco and Miklo would appear to be celibate. "Bound by Honor" presents
their lives as an unending succession of moments of high melodrama.

If there were a greater urgency to the melodrama, the mind might not have time
to wander, and to wonder about everything that is not seen. The movie's
narrative is full of twists and turns, some of which remain undramatized (like
Paco's reformation), without gathering momentum until near the end. Even the
film's time frame seems arbitrary.

The story begins in 1972. Succeeding sequences are identified as taking place in
1973, 1980, 1983 and 1984. The significance of these dates remains unexplained,
either by the film or by anything the moviegoer can bring to it. A lot was going
on outside East Los Angeles and San Quentin in that period. Yet nothing the
audience sees in the film has any particular relation to the end of the Vietnam
War, the collapse of the Nixon era or the beginning of the Reagan years. If this
is the film's point, it's an unilluminating one.

Mr. Hackford has cast the film well. Though they must play at a fever pitch most
of the time, Mr. Chapa, Mr. Bratt and Mr. Borrego are excellent, as are the
members of the large supporting cast, notably Enrique Castillo, who appears as
the leader of San Quentin's Chicanos, and Lanny Flaherty, as the San Quentin con
who makes an unfortunate bargain with Miklo.

"Bound by Honor" looks and sounds authentic but, like many community wall
paintings, it has the manner less of one artist's vision than of a community
endeavor. This may explain its singular shortcomings and its redeeming
sincerity.

"Bound by Honor" has been rated R (Under 17 requires accompanying parent or
adult guardian). It has a lot of vulgar language and scenes of physical and
psychological violence.

Bound by Honor

Directed by Taylor Hackford; screenplay by Jimmy Santiago Baca, Jeremy Iacone
and Floyd Mutrux, based on a story by Ross Thomas; director of photography,
Gabriel Beristain; edited by Fredric Steinkamp and Karl F. Steinkamp; music by
Bill Conti; production designer, Bruno Rubeo; produced by Mr. Hackford and Jerry
Gershwin; released by Hollywood Pictures. Running time: 180 minutes. This film
is rated R.

Miklo . . . Damian Chapa
Cruz . . . Jesse Borrego
Paco . . . Benjamin Bratt
Montana . . . Enrique Castillo
Big Al . . . Lanny Flaherty

LOAD-DATE: April 30, 1993

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo: Damian Chapa, left, and Benjamin Bratt in "Bound by Honor."
(Merrick Morton)

TYPE: Review

                   Copyright 1993 The New York Times Company


                              112 of 312 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                  April 30, 1993, Friday, Late Edition - Final

On My Mind;
Bill Clinton's War

BYLINE: By A. M. ROSENTHAL

SECTION: Section A; Page 31; Column 6; Editorial Desk

LENGTH: 697 words


When an American President enters a war, widens a war or prolongs a war, it
becomes his war.

It makes no difference who started it. Japan, North Korea and Iraq started wars
that became the center of life and office for Presidents Roosevelt, Truman and
Bush. Neither Presidents Johnson nor Nixon started the war in Vietnam but it
became theirs from the moment of their oaths.

If United States planes bomb the Serbs, with or without allied support, the
Balkan war will become Bill Clinton's war.

Now, if bombing Bosnian Serbs somehow removes the hatreds among them and Bosnian
Muslims and Croats so that they all live together in peace, Mr. Clinton will
deserve the credit for that miracle.

But if the bombing results in just a temporary pause in Bosnia or if war spreads
in the Balkans he will have to face the responsibility.

Supporting the victims of war's atrocities does not mean always going to war. If
we do, we must not fool ourselves about the price.

What foreign war was won by outside military intervention without commitment of
land forces?

In the gulf war, those of us who favored intervention were honest enough to say
it would mean ground troops. In the Balkan war, those who call for bombing will
not concede that possibility.

If bombing manages to silence Serbian artillery, then what? Will the Serbs
surrender, turn in their mobile mortars and their mountain arsenals -- and their
hates and fears?

Will Croats not keep fighting Muslims? Will Muslims not break cease- fires to
encourage Western intervention, as the U.N. says they have before? If they do,
will we just bomb the lot of them? How hard? How long?

If we bomb airfields near Belgrade, now being discussed in Washington, will that
weaken Serbia's President Milosevic or make him a bigger hero?

Would bombing shorten the war or spread it? Nobody in government, journalism,
the military or politics has a clue.

Only one motive pushes Mr. Clinton to bombing -- the honorable reason of
stopping massacre.

In Bosnia, they are all slaughtering each other, that's the truth of it. But
journalists, the U.N. and human rights organizations agree Serbs are by far the
worst: atrocities, massacres, rape, burning, "cleansing" and concentration
camps.

Is this the Holocaust again? The question affects Western emotions -- and should
affect its actions.

The Holocaust was the meticulous German effort not to "cleanse" Jews out of
their homes to some other part of Germany, but to exterminate every Jew in every
country, wipe out their religion and history, their very status as human beings,
list them as unspeakable subhumans whose slaughter was duty.

If any other people is ever subject to a Holocaust, military power should be
used without delay or limit. Halfway measures like sanctions would be
impossible, and so would peace talks.

The Bosnian war is a terrible nationalist civil war, among ethnic cousins, for
land, minority rights and political control. The Serbian savagery against
Bosnian Muslims is horrible enough without insisting it is the Holocaust. That
eliminates hope of negotiated peace or attempt to achieve it.

The U.N.'s Vance-Owen peace plan for a unitary state with Muslim, Croatian and
Serbian enclaves has been accepted by Bosnia's Croats and Muslims but not its
Serbs.

Before risking the Balkan explosion that could come with bombing Bosnian Serbs
or Serbia, or arming Muslims, top Western and Russian leaders should meet
face-to-face with the Serbs for the first and last time.

They should offer temporary U.N. safe haven for trapped or refugee Serbs, as
well as Muslims and Croats. They should give Serbs a brief time to negotiate to
a conclusion on Vance-Owen.

If that is refused: a Western arms lift to Bosnian Muslims until they are strong
enough to retake some lost territory. Vance-Owen might look better to Serbs.

But let's understand that even just arming Muslims could carry the risk of
spreading the war in the Balkans -- out of which we should then stay.

The end to killing can come only through a political settlement. That cannot be
brought about by foreign bombs, foreign arms or foreign presidents -- just
Bosnians, all kinds.

LOAD-DATE: April 30, 1993

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Op-Ed

                   Copyright 1993 The New York Times Company


                              113 of 312 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                   May 2, 1993, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

Waiting for Act 2 Around Times Square

BYLINE: By CLAUDIA H. DEUTSCH

SECTION: Section 10; Page 1; Column 2; Real Estate Desk

LENGTH: 2999 words


THE three buildings certainly look impressive. There's 1585 Broadway, a silvery,
1.3 million-square-foot behemoth, towering over 47th and 48th Streets.

A couple of blocks south, between 45th and 46th Streets, there's 1540 Broadway,
its green tint and striking prow highlighting its million square feet of bulk.

Then there's the small-by-comparison 750 Seventh Avenue, a stark black
580,000-square-footer perched between 49th and 50th Streets, once envisioned as
Rockefeller Center's cousin to the west.

But an imposing presence does not a successful building make. And indeed, until
recently all three seemed headed for disaster. Two were barely tenanted; one,
1540, stood totally empty. Lenders were snapping at their developers' heels and
all three seemed to be sinking into a paralysis that neither their foreclosing
lenders nor their besieged developers could ever pull out of.

Today, the buildings' fortunes are as disparate as their appearances.

Ian Bruce Eichner's project, 1540 Broadway, is out of the fiscal woods. Last
year Bertelsmann Inc., the big German entertainment company, bought it as its
headquarters for $119 million, and is all but moved in. Mr. Eichner and the
lenders lost nearly $200 million on the building, but at least it is off their
books. As for renting the retail space or any excess office space -- well,
that's now Bertelsmann's problem, not theirs. And it's usually a lot easier to
rent space in a thriving, occupied building, anyway.

David Solomon's 750 Seventh Avenue is looking to be the Little Building That
Could. It has only one office tenant, Mendes & Mount, a law firm that took at a
rock-bottom rent about 100,000 feet of "as is" space previously occupied by the
now-disbanded law firm of Olwine, Connelly, Chase, O'Donnell & Wehyer.

But at least one company, Societe Generale, has expressed an interest in buying
it -- albeit at a price that few expect the banks to accept. Caroline's Comedy
Club has taken a chunk of the retail space and several office rental deals are
said to be in the offing.

The one big loser seems to be 1585 Broadway, also a Solomon building. Thanks to
ongoing disputes over the building's semi-finished condition, its sole occupant,
the Proskauer Rose Goetz & Mendelsohn law firm, did not begin paying rent for
its 11 floors until last November, more than two years after it moved in..

And what had seemed a done deal only a year ago -- the sale of the building to
Primerica Corporation, which would have used it to house its Smith Barney,
Harris Upham & Company stock brokerage unit -- fell apart when Sanford I. Weill,
Primerica's chairman, arranged to buyShearson Lehman Brothers and made plans to
shoehorn Smith Barney into vacant Shearson space.

Attempts to find another buyer, or even major renters, have been thwarted time
and again by disagreements among the Bank of Montreal, Swiss Bank Corporation
and the Toronto-Dominion Bank, the banks that control the building.

Why such different fates for properties that first seemed equally destined for
greatness, and then equally destined to shoot down the tubes together?

All three were conceived in the mid-80's, when New York City's economy was
vibrant, when Times Square redevelopment looked like it would really happen and
when the city had relaxed its West Side zoning rules to allow developers to
build the type of tall structures that offer gargantuan paybacks.

And all three had developers with glittering track records.

David and Jean Solomon, a husband-and-wife team, had made a fortune renovating
Manhattan lofts in the mid-70's and later, building Tower 49, an office building
on 49th Street east of Fifth Avenue that they later sold for multiples of its
cost.

Ian Bruce Eichner, a lawyer turned residential real estate developer, had also
done well with brownstones and condominiums and cut his commercial teeth on
Cityspire, the office building on 56th Street between Sixth and Seventh.

But by the time the buildings were ready for occupancy, the New York economy had
faltered, the Times Square redevelopment project was on hold and what had been a
seller's market in commercial real estate had turned into one where renters and
buyers dictated the terms.

The buildings sank into bankruptcy, making them even less attractive to the
dwindling number of space-hunters left.

"Their lenders consistently overvalued the market and they just would never
reach far enough to close deals," said Franklin Speyer, a senior director at
Cushman & Wakefield, the real estate brokerage and management company.

Indeed, the answer to the divergent fates lies less in the buildings themselves
or the economy that greeted them, than in the attitudes of the owners, the
degree of risk-taking their banks would allow and, in a few cases, pure luck.

1585 Broadway
A Home-Run Deal Proves Elusive

WITH bankruptcy goes bureaucracy, and with bureaucracy goes stretched-out
negotiations. That, more than anything else, has kept 1585 Broadway relatively
empty and unsold.

"If the banks had moved quicker, the sale would have been a done deal by the
time Sandy Weill made his acquisition," said one broker.

This may or may not be true. After all, Mr. Weill might have persuaded Smith
Barney to use its own stalling tactics while he was negotiating the Shearson
acquisition.

Nonetheless, an inability to agree on anything seems to pervade the building to
this day.

"This is a good building, with great large floorplates and a lot of usable
space," said Richard S. Hayden, whose architectural firm, Swanke Hayden Connell,
has analyzed the building for potential buyers and renters. "The deals are
falling apart because of the negotiation problems."

Mr. Solomon declined to rehash painful memories, but those close to him say his
frustration has been monumental.

"He had deals with tenants up and down the board, but the banks simply wouldn't
give the go-ahead," said one associate.

Mr. Eichner, for one, offers him total sympathy.

"It's like the Vietnam peace talks over there, where they can spend six months
arguing about the shape of the table," the rival developer said. "I don't think
anyone short of Attila the Hun could deal with that bank group."

Officially, Mr. Solomon's investment group still holds title to the building. In
March, though, the bankruptcy court approved a reorganization plan that will
ease the transfer of ownership to the banks. No one expects that to break any
impasses, though.

Apparently, the banks are still looking for a home run -- a buyer for the entire
building, or at least a tenant large enough to take many floors as well as the
building's base.

"I wanted to show a 100,000-foot tenant the top floors and the banks weren't
even interested in showing the space," said Franklin Speyer, a senior director
at Cushman & Wakefield.

David T. Lawrence, senior vice president of Hines Interests Limited Partnership,
which is now representing the building, concedes that anything less than a
mega-user doesn't interest him much, at least for now.

"It's just not always good strategy to lease the best space first," he said.
"You don't want to lose a user who will take 350,000 feet and the base because
you rented someone else the top of the building."

Potential buyers are not exactly tripping over each other.

Jarchow Investment Group of Dallas and Kuwait International Investment
Corporation bid on the building a few years ago, but their joint bid was not
pursued because the banks were so sure the Smith Barney deal would go through.

Mr. Lawrence said the Jarchow deal was still on the table, but "there's been a
lapse in communications, and negotiations are not currently active."

The problem again is probably price. A speculative investor would face enormous
workletter costs to rent the space and would probably offer no more than $130
million or so for a building that cost nearly triple that to build. There's no
reason to expect the banks will take that kind of bottom-line hit.

"Banks are always terrified of selling a building cheap and two weeks later
having the buyer flip it at twice the price," said Alan J. Pomerantz, head of
Weil, Gotshal & Manges's real estate department. "It's always, 'Let's just wait
a few more weeks and see what we can get.' "

There's been some good news, though. Proskauer, which had sued the banks and
Solomon Equities, has finally settled and begun paying its rent. And, although
it seems far from a satisfied tenant, it has expressed no desire to move.

"We would certainly have expected them to have finished the elevators and the
building's base long before this," said Herbert T. Weinstein, a Proskauer
partner, "and it really would be nice to have other tenants in the building."

Mr. Lawrence admits to frustration, but not to depression. "The activity we see
at 1540 and 750 encourages us," he said. "At least it shows that the West Side
is an acceptable location."

750 Seventh Avenue
Hurry Up and Wait: A Study in Frustration

IT can take a lot of patience to negotiate a deal at 750 Seventh. Just ask Mr.
Speyer of Cushman & Wakefield, who put Caroline's Comedy Club in the building's
retail space. He thought he had negotiated a pretty solid deal with David
Solomon, only to discover that Citibank and the other banks controlling the
bankrupt building thought otherwise.

"The bank's desire to protect their investment added eight months to the
process," he said. "When you're dealing with a bank consortium, a negotiation
process can turn into a cabinet meeting."

To be fair, that frustration is not unique to 750 Seventh Avenue, or even 1585
Broadway.  David Solomon (no relation to the developer), an executive vice
president of the Harper-Lawrence brokerage firm, remembers the horrors he went
through trying to negotiate a renewal and expansion deal for Frederick Atkins, a
major tenant at 1515 Broadway, when Equitable Real Estate, then its owner, filed
for bankruptcy protection for the building in 1991.

"Can you believe it took two tortuous years to negotiate expansion space?" Mr.
Solomon said. "We had to go through 10 drafts of a 150-page lease. Without the
bankruptcy, it would have been three drafts and 75 pages."

Still, at 750 Seventh Avenue there seems to be something else at play -- a
strong belief that holding out for high rents remains the best long-run way to
go. After all, an empty building -- or one with high-rent tenants -- remains
easier to sell than one that is locked into tenant-friendly leases.

"Citibank has been really bullish about pricing; they simply will not treat this
as a distressed product," said Mary Ann Tighe, executive managing director of
Edward S. Gordon.

In fact, some brokers insist that what they call the banks' voraciousness
consistently scuttles deals.

"Sometimes it seems that as soon as they smell an interested prospect, they
raise their asking price," said Mitchell S. Steir, a senior managing director at
Julien J. Studley, the real estate brokerage. "I've had them come back to the
table for second-round negotiations with suggested terms that had gotten worse,
not better."

But unlike 1585 Broadway, 750 Seventh Avenue does not represent an impregnable
wall to would-be tenants. The banks have hired Newmark Real Estate as leasing
agent for the building.

Newmark, in turn, has arranged to prebuild some space for quick rental to small
tenants and is aggressively marketing the larger blocks to brokers.

The Newmark people are playing host for breakfasts and guide for building tours
for any tenant brokers they can corral. They are offering Newmark's own tenant
reps cash for leads. A fancy marketing brochure stressing the building's
technological aspects and its great river views is just coming off the press.

Slowly, deals are moving. Ernst & Young is said to be ready to rent 50,000
square feet for a regional office and several brokers say they are making
nibbles at other space.

Many of the deals may still get skewered, though. The banks will not let Newmark
hold anything approaching a fire sale. James D. Kuhn, Newmark's president, says
he is holding out for rent from the mid-$30's for large blocks in the building's
middle to the $40's for the top floors.

"We've turned away tenants who won't pay what we see as market value," he said.
The reason, said another broker close to the bankers, is that the hope for a
buyer still remains paramount.

"Like everyone else, their main hope is for Bertelsmann II," he said.



1540 Broadway
Turning a Renter Into a Landlord

FROM the first, 1540 Broadway had things going for it that neither 750 Seventh
Avenue nor 1585 Broadway had. For one, it was totally empty, which meant a new
owner wouldn't have to worry about an angry Proskauer or an insolvent Olwine
Connelly plopped in the building's middle.

And it offered an empty block of 850,000 feet plus 150,000 feet of retail space,
enough to accommodate even a large owner/user's needs.

But it also had less tangible but equally important assets: a developer who was
comfortable bringing his banks to the negotiating table early, a lead bank
willing to rely on outside evaluations of the market and a tenant's
representative team that could persuade a recalcitrant company that it really
did want to buy a building.

Indeed, if anyone had told Bertelsmann management several years ago that they
would soon own Manhattan property, they would have laughed. They were a music
company, they were a publishing company -- but the one business they had little
desire to get into was real estate.

"We wanted to spend our capital on media properties," said Christian Alpers, a
Bertelsmann senior vice president.

What they did want to do was lower their occupancy costs. Their Bantam,
Doubleday, Dell subsidiary was locked into a way-over-market lease -- rent in
the high $40's in a market that was commanding maybe $32 -- for 250,000 feet at
666 Fifth Avenue, which didn't expire until the year 2000. The BMG Music Group
had the mirror-image situation: It was paying less than $17 a foot for a similar
amount of space at 1133 Avenue of the Americas, but that lease was expiring in
1994.

"We were hired to lower Bantam's costs and find a great deal for BMG, but we
were told not to even consider an equity deal," recalled Jeffrey A. Lichtenberg,
executive vice president of Peter R. Friedman, which represented Bertelsmann.

Mr. Lichtenberg and his crew looked at 1221 and 1251 Avenue of the Americas,
1585 Broadway -- and yes, 1540 Broadway -- but no one came up with a deal that
Bertelsmann liked. The sticking point in almost every case: Bertelsmann wanted
the new landlord to take over Bantam's lease and the landlords were having none
of it.

According to Mr. Lichtenberg, Mr. Eichner and his lenders showed signs that they
might bend on that score. But it became a moot point: the tenants and their
brokers ran the numbers, and realized that, with a credit-worthy tenant like
Bertelsmann renting a huge chunk of the building, the banks could probably sell
it for as much as $140 million. As a vacant building they'd be lucky to get $100
million, if they found a buyer at all.

"Why should the banks get the vigorish?" Mr. Lichtenberg asked.

Why indeed. By mid-April 1991, Bertelsmann was thinking "buy."

Still, getting Mr. Eichner, Citibank, 16 Japanese banks, a brokerage team and a
huge cost-conscious company to agree on price and terms was another matter. Mr.
Lichtenberg recalls that they had arrived at a deal by fall of 1991 only to have
Citibank back out at the last minute. (Citibank did not return repeated phone
calls.)

"Internally at Citibank, groups were fighting each other and nobody had the
authority to make a deal," he said.

Actually, Newmark's Jimmy Kuhn, then an independent consultant Citibank had
hired to advise it of what the market values were and to drum up alternative
buyers, says he recommended that Citibank turn down that deal.

It would have allowed Bertelsmann to buy the office portion of the building only
and stuck Citibank with the lease for 666 Fifth.

"That was too much of a hit to ask the bank to take," Mr. Kuhn said.

Finally, Bertelsmann paid a lowball price, but it had to buy the entire
building, including retail space, a theater and a garage. And it retained the
lease for 666 Fifth Avenue.

"It was a good buy, but it was a great sell," Mr. Kuhn said. Mr. Alpers's take
was: "We could finance this at rates that a real estate developer could only
dream about."

Mr. Eichner gets much of the credit for the deal, too. He was the liaison
between the brokers, the tenants and the banks. Many say it was his idea to put
the building into a prepackaged bankruptcy, which saved enormously on transfer
taxes. And, he helped the brokers persuade Bertelsmann that the banks would give
them a fairly low price on the building if they backed off on the lease-takeover
requirement for the 666 Fifth space.

"The question wasn't R for Rent or B for Buy, but C for Cheapest way to do it,"
Mr. Eichner said.

Today, Bertelsmann has moved into most of the building. It still has the
Broadway retail space to let out, as well as about 150,000 feet of contiguous
office space left over. Bertelsmann's deal with the city requires it to prebuild
about a third of that space for use as "incubators," places that companies that
do not currently have offices in the city can rent cheaply on a month-to-month
basis while they look for larger quarters elsewhere.

Bertelsmann has also agreed to provide a commercial concierge who will help
these newcomers, particularly foreigners, open bank accountants, establish
busines contacts and otherwise get a foothold in the city.

And Mr. Lichtenberg says that deals for the remaining space are in advanced
negotiations. In fact, he says, one full-floor deal is ready to close.

"We could negotiate that in a couple months," he said. "After all, with
Bertelsmann as the owner, we only have to get an O.K. from one party."

LOAD-DATE: May 2, 1993

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photos: 1585 Broadway, the 11.3 million-square-foot tower at 47th
Street. 750 Seventh Avenue, the black tower with 580,000 square feet at 49th
Street. 1540 Broadway has a million square feet between 45th and 46th Streets.
(Photographs by Marilynn K. Yee/The New York Times)(pg. 1); The lower facade at
the nearly empty 1585 Broadway building. (Marilynn K. Yee/The New York
Times)(pg. 8)

                   Copyright 1993 The New York Times Company


                              114 of 312 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                   May 2, 1993, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

GETTING IN, GETTING OUT;
Any War in Bosnia Would Carry a Domestic Price

BYLINE: By THOMAS L. FRIEDMAN

SECTION: Section 4; Page 1; Column 1; Week in Review Desk

LENGTH: 1257 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON


AS the Clinton Administration drew up its tougher policy on Bosnia last week,
Secretary of State Warren Christopher said any decision to intervene militarily
in the Balkans had to meet four criteria: the goals must be clear and
understandable to the American people; the chances for success must be high; the
American public must support the effort; and an "exit strategy" for getting out
quickly must exist from the start. That is a very sensible list of criteria. The
problem is that the only operation they could fit is another American invasion
of Grenada. World War II would not have qualified, let alone Bosnia.

Mr. Christopher cannot be faulted for trying to bring some analytical clarity to
President Clinton's first major foreign policy decision: to commit American
military power to help resolve the Bosnia crisis. But Mr. Christopher is like a
navigator advising his captain to follow the stars in the middle of a hurricane;
it's great advice, but in the middle of a storm, you can't see Orion. And in the
middle of a Balkan civil war, no checklist, no amount of advance planning, can
eliminate the risks when a great power becomes embroiled in the politics of
small tribes.

Mr. Christopher's effort, though, reflects the struggle going on now in
President Clinton's head as he weighs what to do in Bosnia. Mr. Clinton is not
just weighing military options -- sanctions versus bombing, lifting the arms
embargo on Bosnia versus sending in ground troops. He is weighing his
Presidency. He is weighing Bosnia versus his health care initiative, Bosnia
versus his budget, Bosnia versus his national service plans.

These are the real tradeoffs Mr. Clinton may have to make if he intervenes in
the Balkans, for it is hard to focus like a laser on the economy from inside the
windowless White House situation room. And the reason Mr. Clinton has agonized
over his Bosnia policy so long, the reason Mr. Christopher has come up with his
star chart for a Balkan black hole, is that they are trying to figure out how to
limit those tradeoffs. They are looking for that perfectly calibrated policy
that will be just enough to tilt the balance of power in Bosnia toward a
settlement, just enough to convince historians that when genocide stalked Europe
for the second time this century they didn't avert their eyes -- but not so much
as to suck them into a quagmire. Clinton aides say only by such a nuanced
strategy can they hope to have Bosnia and the budget, Sarajevo and national
service.

That is the underlying logic of the policy course decided at the White House
yesterday. While the details were not spelled out, Mr. Christopher said the
President had decided in principle to commit a limited amount of American
military power to try to end the fighting in the Balkans. He said he was being
sent to Europe to persuade the allies to go along with this strategy of using
limited force, economic sanctions and diplomatic pressure to compel the Serbs to
accept a peace agreement.

This is dangerous stuff. Why? Because as a student of the Presidency Mr. Clinton
surely knows that the minute the United States takes military action in Bosnia,
as the world's only superpower, it will assume responsibility for the outcome
there. It will become "our war," no matter how many allies join in, just as
happened in both the Persian Gulf war and in Korea. And Mr. Clinton will become
a war President, with all that that entails in terms of demands on his time and
the need to come out a winner. In effect, Mr. Clinton is going to make himself
responsible for resolving the ultimate tribal feud.

Which leads to the second thing Mr. Clinton undoubtedly realizes -- that an
open-ended American involvement in the Balkans could hamper his domestic agenda
with the very same ferocity that Vietnam hobbled Lyndon Johnson's Great Society.
"Like Bosnia, Vietnam was a war that Johnson was wary of getting involved in at
the time," said the historian Ronald Steel. "But the pundits said, 'How can we
just stand by and let this happen?' And columnists like Joe Alsop questioned
Johnson's manhood. And so he acted. In Vietnam we acted as the leader of the
free world. In Bosnia we are told we must act as leader of the whole world."

But Johnson was also trying to transform the country with his Great Society
programs, Mr. Steel said, "and then the war chewed up greater and greater
resources, and then he refused to raise taxes to pay for the war because it was
unpopular, so he had to reach into the domestic programs to pay for it, and
deficit financing, and that led to inflation, and then the opposition to his
Vietnam program from liberals was married to the conservatives in Congress who
hated his domestic programs and so he was totally paralyzed. In the end, the
same pundits who drove him into the war abandoned him."

Clinton aides say this analogy is very much on the President's mind. But there
is also a third thing weighing on him -- that a young President cannot afford to
look indecisive and unprincipled in the face of ethnic cleansing and rape -- for
that too can corrode a President's effectiveness at home and abroad.

"There is a price for Clinton not acting consistent with his principles, and
having acted, there is an equally weighty price for the inevitable unanticipated
consequences of being consistent with his principles," said Yaron Ezrahi, a
Princeton-based political theorist.

The necessity for the President to act on Bosnia now could not come at a worse
time for him, right at the end of his first 100 days, when he has been widely
criticized for having lost some of his single-minded focus on the nation's
economy, the main reason he got elected.

What he could use now is an easy victory abroad that would quickly yield
political capital at home -- capital that he could use to re-energize his
domestic agenda, and leadership stature. The gulf war victory was like a booster
rocket for Mr. Bush; the only problem was that he had no domestic agenda to
harness it to and so it simply flamed out.

Theoretically, a successful assertion of Clinton leadership in the Balkans could
help the President win approval of his health care plan at home. The problem for
Mr. Clinton is that Bosnia, by its very nature, is not a military situation that
will yield easy political capital, because in such an ethnic war the definition
of success is much more elusive.

The American people could easily understand the Iraqi invasion of Kuwait. It was
one nation seizing another. America came in and pushed Iraq back across the
border. But Bosnia is made up of a thousand mini-border wars, between people who
share the same sidewalks, the same hillsides, the same villages. What
constitutes success there? Is success when everyone is returned to his or her
ancestral home? Is success simply punishing the Serbs? Is success the
establishment of a Jeffersonian democracy in Bosnia? When everybody has a
definition of success, nobody has a definition, and that makes translating
victory there into political momentum at home extremely difficult.

What Mr. Christopher was trying to do in laying down his four fixed guidelines
was to chart a pathway for Mr. Clinton to be both principled and prudent. It was
a commendable effort, but there is no such thing as Euclidian diplomacy for a
civil war. There are no parallel lines in the Balkans; the laws of geometry do
not apply. The only rules there are no rules at all and, if history is any
guide, the only direction that you can be certain events there will go is in a
circle.

LOAD-DATE: May 2, 1993

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Drawing

                   Copyright 1993 The New York Times Company


                              115 of 312 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                   May 2, 1993, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

American Voices: On a Role in Bosnia/A special report.;
In American Voices, a Sense of Concern Over Bosnia Role

BYLINE: By B. DRUMMOND AYRES Jr.,  Special to The New York Times

SECTION: Section 1; Page 1; Column 5; National Desk

LENGTH: 1911 words

DATELINE: KANSAS CITY, Mo., April 28


When Nancy Brier talks about the shooting and killing in Bosnia, there is anger
in her voice. And frustration. And confusion.

Only one thing seems clear to her.

"It should be stopped, but we shouldn't try to stop it on our own, not with
American boys," she says. "Terrible as it is, it's basically Europe's problem
because it's in Europe's backyard. Maybe we can help out a bit through the
United Nations. But no more than that."

Wary of Involvement

The comments of Ms. Brier, a marketing representative here for the Sprint
telephone company, echoed many of those from about 100 conversations struck up
during a weeklong, 1,200-mile trip half-way across the waist of the country,
from Virginia's Atlantic Coast to the wheat fields of Kansas. If President
Clinton commits the United States to a major military role in the Balkans, he
will probably have a difficult time winning approval from people like Ms. Brier.

"Let Italy or Austria or some other neighboring country take the lead in this
one," Ms. Brier said. "It's not our guilt trip."

There is much confusion among Americans about what the fighting in Bosnia is all
about. There is suspicion that there are not many white hats in the feuding and
that neither diplomats nor reporters have made this clear.

'Everybody Is a Bad Guy'

"Who's the real enemy beyond the killing?" asked Abel Garcia, a financial
management executive in Overland Park, Kan. "Who would we be fighting? I've been
reading and watching for months, and I still don't know. Maybe everybody is a
bad guy in this one."

There is resentment that other nations, particularly those neighboring the
Balkans, are looking to the United States, thousands of miles away, for a
solution.

"Asking America to clean up that mess over there is like asking Sweden and
France to stop a fight over here between Illinois and Missouri," said Georgia
Dunaway, a hotel receptionist in Okawville, Ill., a farm village just east of
St. Louis. "It's absurd. Why are we forever being dragged into these things? Why
are we forever sending our sons?"

There is worry, some of it tinged with cynicism, that the President may be
making more of the American role in the crisis than is warranted, turning it
into a test of his political manhood or allowing others to turn it into such a
test.

"The danger is that he'll feel at some point, or that he'll be made to feel,
that this is the time and place where he has to prove he's a strong leader,"
said Jan Buerge, owner of the World's Window gift shop in Kansas City. "He's
already in trouble in the polls. Better watch out."

The Specter of Vietnam

There is abiding fear that the Balkans are another Vietnam, a deep-seated angst
that tends to outweigh concern that another Holocaust is in the making there.

"I know about the Holocaust and I certainly don't denigrate it as a concern,"
said Ernest Pepples, senior vice president and general counsel for the Brown &
Williamson Tobacco Corporation in Louisville, Ky. "But I also know about Vietnam
and what a hopeless quagmire it turned out to be for us."

Above all, when it comes to Bosnia, Americans have questions.

"The question I want answered is, 'Why are there so many questions?' " said
Arthur Parks, a public relations executive from Kansas City. "It seems to me
that when you have a situation in which there are so few answers, you'd better
slow down and give things some extra thought. If we go in, we'd all better agree
on why, what's at stake, what our goals are, how we're going to achieve them and
how we're going to get out. None of these questions has been answered yet."

Polls within the last 10 days have come up with contradictory results about what
role Americans think the United States should play in Bosnia, depending on how
the questions are asked. But every survey has uncovered deep concern about
greater United States involvement.

The random conversations, in seven states and a score of cities, towns and
villages, produced detailed explanations for this concern, some reasoned, some
emotional, some visceral. Some were given only under persistent questioning, as
if the subject was being explored thoroughly and openly only for the first time.


'You Just Grit Your Teeth'

Only a handful of people called for immediate United States military action
against Serbian gunners or for the strengthening of the anti-Serb forces. They
argued that "ethnic cleansing" had created a moral crisis that only American
leadership and armed might could end.

"Since others won't stop it, we have to step out front and do it," said Austin
St. Clair of Huntington, W.Va., clutching her 2-year-old daughter, Virginia.
"They're killing children over there in cold blood. This isn't something you
argue about. You just grit your teeth and do it because doing something is the
right and moral thing to do."

A few people said the United States should play no role at all in the crisis.

"All of this talk of genocide and another Holocaust -- that's overstatement,"
said Jabr Dumit, a St. Louis camera shop owner. "I know something about ethnic
tension. I'm Lebanese. Both sides are 'cleansing' over there. That goes with the
territory. Let 'em wear themselves out."

But while a few people wanted immediate American military involvement in the
crisis or no involvement at all, most tended to take the approach proposed by
Ms. Brier. In the absence of more action by European nations to end the crisis,
they were willing for the United States to take part in an intensified
peacekeeping effort by the United Nations, but only if the force was not made up
mainly of American units. And even then their enthusiasm was muted.

"You have to wonder when something like this is in Europe's backyard and Europe
doesn't bother to put an end to it," said Dr. York Silliman, a pathologist from
St. Joseph, Mo. "Still, I'd go along with a mixed, balanced U.N. force if all
efforts at negotiating fail. But I worry. These people have been fighting each
other for so long they can't remember why they're fighting. And now we're going
to break it up?"

Tom Mayberry, a hotel bellhop from Floyds Knobs, Ind., worried that if the
United States becomes involved in military action in the Balkans, even as a bit
player with a United Nations force, the involvement will drag on longer than
most people expect.

"We should help stop the killing," he said. "It's got to be stopped. But what
then? There's no way this is going to be a short-term affair. This strikes me as
an open-ended commitment when it comes to peacekeeping."

As Kendall Kiely, a Louisville insurance executive, sees the situation, it is
basically a leadership challenge for President Clinton, a challenge that could
fatally flaw his Presidency if mishandled. He wants Mr. Clinton to put more
pressure on the Europeans to take action on their own.

"He's trying to lead us when what he really needs to do is lead the Europeans,
get them more involved," Mr. Kiely said. "They won't do anything more until he
forces them to do something, even though it's basically their problem. They'll
just sucker us in if they can. He's got to tell them to move on something this
serious or our relations with Europe are going to sour. The Serbs will come
around if they become convinced that he's serious and the Europeans are
serious."

Crossroads for U.N.

For Sue Orwick, a secretary in Louisville, the only acceptable way for the
United States to play a military role in Bosnia would be as part of a United
Nations force. In fact, she sees the Balkans crisis as a crossroads for the
United Nations, coming as it has after the demise of Communism in Europe.

"This is as good a place as we're going to find to make U.N. peacekeeping a real
force in this world," she said. "The balance of power has changed and there's
now more opportunity than ever for nations to pull together, to share roles
without trying to dominate each other. The U.S. can be just another of the
players. You can't find a better test than Bosnia. We're talking about keeping a
whole nation from being wiped out -- another Holocaust, the moral dilemma of
this decade."

Is Bosnia another Holocaust in the making?

"That's overstating things," said Judge Ellis Gregory Jr. of the St. Louis
County Circuit Court in Clayton, Mo. "True, there is terrible killing going on
over there. But this is mostly a continuation of ethnic hatreds that have been
boiling over for literally centuries and are likely to continue boiling over.
The killing must be stopped. But let's not overstate the case."

To Rabbi Joshua Taub of Prairie Village, Kan., little is accomplished by trying
to compare what is happening now in Bosnia and what happened during the Nazi
occupation of Europe during World War II. The only real issue, in his view, is
that people are dying.

"Call it what you will," he said. "But we must all speak out. It must be
stopped. I would like to see the U.S. go in as part of a U.N. force. We don't
rule the world. We can't act independently. But having said all that, I'm not
very optimistic over the long haul. Holocaust? We had one. The world condemned
it. And the killing goes on. Speak out."

Ralph Maledy, a retired florist from Columbia, Mo., argues that what is
happening in Bosnia today bears little resemblance to what happened in Europe
half a century ago during World War II. He is a veteran of that war.

"I was with Patton's Third Army," he said. "We liberated some of the
concentration camps. This isn't on the same scale. That doesn't excuse what is
happening today. The killing ought to be stopped. But facts are facts."

Should the United States stop the killing?

"Only as part of a larger force," Mr. Maledy replied. "If the European nations
don't get in, we certainly shouldn't. This is no threat to us, not militarily,
not economically, not strategically, not any way. I deplore it. But ultimately I
can't see it as a threat to anybody but the people already fighting each other."

For Oscar Johnson, who owns a photo supply store in Clayton, Bosnia is more than
a killing ground. It is a bitter reminder that man's inhumanity to man does not
always move world leaders.

"If what's been going on in South Africa for all these years doesn't qualify for
intervention, than what does?" asked Mr. Johnson, who is black. "I say stop the
killing in Bosnia. And stop it in South Africa. And stop it in Central America.
Stop it everywhere, not just where there are white faces."

Marc Boysworth, a 19-year-old freshman at James Madison University in
Harrisonburg, Va., called Bosnia "another Vietnam we don't understand." He would
not object to minor American participation in United Nations intervention in the
Balkans, but thinks that is not practical because the United States has
historically been the leading force in military peacekeeping groups.

He also has another reason for opposing American involvement in Bosnia.

"It's my generation that will have to do the fighting," he said. "I don't want
to go to war with a commanding general who ducked the draft and now wants to
prove he's a tough guy."

Finally, there is Linda Ballard.

A librarian from University City, Mo., she has made a concerted effort in recent
months to understand the Balkans and reach a decision about what the United
States should do, but says she just cannot see an easy answer.

"Every morning I pick up the paper and I begin to read," she said. "And then I
see the word 'Bosnia.' I just despair."

LOAD-DATE: May 2, 1993

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photos: Sue Orwick/Secretary in Louisville, Ky., shown with her son
David: "The balance of power has changed and there's now more opportunity than
ever for nations to pull together, to share roles without trying to dominate
each other. The U.S. can be just another of the players. You can't find a better
test than Bosnia."; Oscar Johnson/Owner of a photo supply store in Clayton, Mo.:
"If what's been going on in South Africa for all these years doesn't qualify for
intervention, than what does? I say stop the killing in Bosnia. And stop it in
South Africa. And stop it in Central America. Stop it everywhere, not just where
there are white faces."; Georgia Dunaway/Hotel receptionist in Okawville, Ill.:
"Asking America to clean up that mess over there is like asking Sweden and
France to stop a fight over here between Illinois and Missouri. It's absurd. Why
are we forever being dragged into these things?" (Photographs by George Tames
for The New York Times) (pg. 30)

Map of central portion of U.S., indicating Kansas City and St. Louis (Mo.),
Louisville (Ky), Huntington (W. Va.) and Harrisburg (Va) (pg. 30)

TYPE: Special Report

                   Copyright 1993 The New York Times Company


                              116 of 312 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                   May 2, 1993, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

Commencements;
First Lady Promotes Health-Care Plan at Michigan

BYLINE: By RICHARD L. BERKE,  Special to The New York Times

SECTION: Section 1; Page 40; Column 3; National Desk

LENGTH: 898 words

DATELINE: ANN ARBOR, Mich., May 1


Hillary Rodham Clinton opened the commencement season today with a rousing pitch
for her health-care proposal, bluntly telling graduating students at the
University of Michigan that their futures depended on the plan's enactment.

"At the root of our economic and human challenge," she said to an audience that
filled nearly half the massive Michigan Stadium, "lies the fact that although we
are the richest country in the world, we spend more money and take care of fewer
people than many countries that are not as rich as we when it comes to health
care."

Mrs. Clinton noted that the nation paid for health care for welfare recipients
but failed to provide for working people. And at the same time she sought to put
the issue in personal terms as she decried how "we turn our backs on the people
who are in this stadium today who have sacrificed to have enabled you to attend
this university, but themselves can't count on health care if they need it."

After receiving an honorary doctor of laws degree, Mrs. Clinton, wearing a black
robe, started her half-hour address by imploring the 4,600 graduate and
undergraduates in the ceremony to rise to the world's new challenges. But the
First Lady wound up the address as if it were a stump speech to promote health
care and another "great issue," the national service plan that President Clinton
outlined on Friday, calling it "a domestic Peace Corps."

Her speech was a striking contrast to the commencement speech she gave a year
ago at Wellesley College, when she focused on family and values and told the
graduates that they could succeed "by making policy or by making cookies."
Today, on a sunny, breezy morning, she honed in on political action.

For the audience of nearly 50,000 today at the university's 175th spring
commencement, Mrs. Clinton looked back 24 years and spoke of an address she gave
when she graduated from Wellesley.

In her address in 1969, in a time of political protest and turmoil, Mrs. Clinton
challenged Edward W. Brooke, a Republican Senator from Massachusetts who urged
support for the Vietnam War in his own address.

"When I graduated in 1969, I, like many of you, had dreams for my own life, but
also for the world into which I was going," Mrs. Clinton told the Michigan
students. "In a commencement speech I talked about that. And going back and
reading it now, I see the idealism, I see the excitement. And I know that at 21
I was perhaps unable to appreciate the political and social restraints that one
faces in the world. But I'm glad I felt like that when I was 21, and I have
always tried to keep those feelings with me."

Her voice rose along with the cheers rising from the stands. "I want to be
idealistic," she continued.  "I want to care about the world."

The crowd gave her a standing ovation at the end. There was just one hint of of
controversy when a small plane buzzed over the stadium with banners, one of
which read, "Equal Rights for Unborn First Ladies."

Mindful, perhaps, that many of the graduates probably knew little of the
anti-war protests in Ann Arbor in the 1960's and that few would probably know of
Tom Hayden, perhaps the most famous graduate of that time, Mrs. Clinton joked
about how life has changed since her college days.

Before MTV or Rap Music

"I graduated from college 24 years ago, before MTV or rap or CD's or cellular
phones," she said. "Back then, if you had said, 10,000 Maniacs, you probably
would have been talking about Haight-Ashbury in San Francisco."

But then she turned serious, recalling the painful divisions over Vietnam, and
the racism and poverty that afflicted American cities, and she said many of
those problems were still around.

"Even though we do celebrate the end of the cold war. We have new problems:
places with names like Bosnia and Somalia that I never heard of when I graduated
from college are now on the front pages of our newspapers," Mrs. Clinton said.
"It is not any longer possible for us to postpone confronting what we are doing
to our children in these cities where they cannot leave their homes in safety to
walk to school."

In what has become a prominent theme of her campaign for the health-care plan,
which is expected to be presented late this month or later, Mrs. Clinton spoke
of the need for personal sacrifice. "Throughout the 1980's, we heard too much
about individual gain, about the ethos of selfishness and greed," she said. "We
did not hear enough about what it meant to be a member of a community."

University of Pittsburgh

Fred Rogers, the creator and host of "Mister Roger's Neighborhood," delivered
the keynote address to 3,125 graduating seniors and 2,700 recipients of masters
and other professional degrees at the University of Pittsburgh's 206th
commencement ceremony yesterday.

The university chancellor, J. Dennis O'Connor, presented Mr. Rogers with an
Honorary Doctor of Public Service at the ceremony in the Civic Arena.

"For the past two and a half decades, Fred Rogers has been a gentle but profound
source of inspiration for millions of children," Mr. O'Connor said. He added
that Mr. Rogers, the recipient of two Emmys and a George Peabody award, "is a
Pittsburgh legend and hero."

"Mister Roger's Neighborhood" has been on the air for 25 years, and its archives
are now housed at the University of Pittsburgh's School of Library and
Information Science.

LOAD-DATE: May 2, 1993

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1993 The New York Times Company


                              117 of 312 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                   May 2, 1993, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

Foreign Affairs;
Means Without Ends

BYLINE: By LESLIE H. GELB

SECTION: Section 4; Page 19; Column 6; Editorial Desk

LENGTH: 712 words


It looks like President Clinton has mercifully abandoned his search for the
immaculate conception on Bosnia. He now seems to realize there is no policy for
Bosnia that can miraculously roll back Serb aggression without risking an
American life, reconcile the irreconcilable warring factions and unite Gandhi
and Godzilla. So he finally appears to have gathered up his courage, ended his
endless policy seminars and chosen among the unhappy choices.

Unless he has third thoughts, Mr. Clinton has decided to bomb Serb forces in
Bosnia and arm the Muslims. But he will not act alone, nor should he. His
advisers expect the allies to go along, more or less, grudgingly.

The President's proposed actions are mostly on target, as Serb "interest" in the
current Athens peace parley shows.

But something critical is missing -- a crystal-clear statement of sensible
objectives. Without this, Mr. Clinton looks like he's drifting, allowing events
to shape goals and simply making tactical decisions to blunt political
pressures.

The omission of purpose could prove disastrous.

First, it creates the impression that Mr. Clinton doesn't know exactly what he's
trying to accomplish. Conversations with Administration officials do not inspire
confidence on this score either. All too revealing and depressing, Secretary of
State Christopher's prepared statement on Saturday contained nothing about
objectives.

From day one, the President and his team have been all over the lot about war
and peace aims. At various times, they talked vaguely about bringing about a
cease-fire, ending Serb aggression and supporting the Vance-Owen peace
"process." Any one of which goals would demand massive military intervention.

Mr. Clinton could get by with this unrealistic rhetoric as long as he was merely
squeezing the Serbs with words and trade sanctions. But now that he proposes to
put American lives on the line, he has to offer something more precise and
attainable -- or risk losing everyone's confidence and control of events.

Second, if Mr. Clinton fails to spell out his goals, others will do it for him,
with potentially fatal effects. Already the void is being filled by military
officers against U.S. intervention and legislators with politics on their minds.
If the U.S. uses force, they say, the U.S. must win a lasting military victory.

Such talk may have made sense in the cold war, when the U.S. faced a global
threat from the Soviet Union. Nowadays, it's just a pile of rhetoric. When
President Bush dispatched U.S. troops to Somalia, no one argued they had to
force the warlords to surrender. The idea was to give Somalis a chance to work
out a more peaceful future. That aim was clear, sufficient and wise then, and
now.

To insist on military victory in Bosnia would be catastrophic. Either it would
drive the U.S. and others to pour hundreds of thousands of troops into battle in
order to win, thus replaying Vietnam. Or it would make the reasonable use of
limited force for limited and sensible ends look like failure. Either way, Mr.
Clinton and the U.S. would lose.

In Bosnia, Mr. Clinton must not divorce ends from American interests or allow
means to dangle without ends.

U.S. interests in Bosnia are mainly humanitarian and regional. They are to save
lives and deter the Serbs from igniting a wider Balkan war.

The ends sufficient to those interests are to protect innocent civilians from
being slaughtered, to give Muslims a chance to defend themselves, and finally to
punish Serb genocide and tame Serb ambitions. In time and with the proper
application of force and economic sanctions, it would also be possible to seek a
balance of power, a cease-fire and some kind of political settlement.

For these limited and achievable ends, the means proposed by Mr. Clinton --
bombing Serb forces in Bosnia and arming the Muslims -- are largely adequate.
The only missing element is a limited number of NATO ground troops to create and
guard safe havens for civilians.

Mr. Clinton stands on the threshold of formulating a Bosnian policy that can
work. To cross it and command American and allied support, he must show that
U.S. interests -- not events -- are directing realistic U.S. goals, and that
these ends are defining his choice of means.

LOAD-DATE: May 2, 1993

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Op-Ed

                   Copyright 1993 The New York Times Company


                              118 of 312 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                   May 3, 1993, Monday, Late Edition - Final

CONFLICT IN THE BALKANS: TOP BOSNIAN SERB, FACING U.S. ACTION, SIGNS A PEACE
PLAN;
Now the Wait For the Deeds

BYLINE: By R. W. APPLE Jr.,  Special to The New York Times

SECTION: Section A; Page 1; Column 5; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 929 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, May 2


At least for the moment, and just possibly for a lot longer, the decision by the
leader of the Bosnian Serbs to accept a peace pact relieves the pressure on
President Clinton to do something immediately to end the slaughter in the
Balkans. It also eases the danger that Mr. Clinton's action might misfire and
undermine his already shaky political position at home.

The accent was on the negative in Washington today, with warnings from the
President, Vice President Al Gore and Senator Bob Dole of Kansas, the capital's
principal Republican spokesman, that "other agreements in this protracted war
have raised hopes but not changed behavior," as Mr. Clinton put it. All three
said Serbian deeds, not promises, were needed before there could be any
relaxation in the search for peace.

The Heat Is Still On

Because it believes the threat of military action by the West, along with
pressure from Moscow, produced today's potential breakthrough in negotiations,
the Administration vowed to continue its preparations for intervention.
Secretary of State Warren Christopher, who is visiting European capitals, was
instructed to keep pressing for British and French support for air strikes and
for the end of the arms embargo against the hard-pressed Muslims in Bosnia.

If the saber rattling in Washington over the last 10 days helped to convince
Radovan Karadzic, the Bosnian Serb leader, then it seemed good sense to keep up
the rattling in the hope that it would bring around the recalcitrant Bosnian
Serb parliament, the self-appointed group that rejected the agreement just last
Monday.

But beneath the skeptical words, there was more than a little private
satisfaction as this blissfully beautiful spring weekend, which had seemed a
paradoxical prelude to war, came to an end. One senior official, one of the many
whose views were shaped by years of service in Vietnam, described himself Friday
night as "full of foreboding." The decision in principle to intervene, taken at
a four-hour White House meeting on Saturday, left another top Presidential
adviser feeling "the President had started down a very fateful road."

The Gloom Seems to Lift

Today's news lifted that sense of impending darkness. The Administration
believes that its more aggressive policy in the Balkans has won a certain
tentative vindication, and that its approach to President Boris N. Yeltsin has
proved a greater success than generally acknowledged.

Told by many experts, diplomatic and academic, that he was erring in identifying
himself so closely with Mr. Yeltsin's fortunes, Mr. Clinton pressed ahead with
efforts to shore him up through personal meetings and increased aid to Russia.

The short-term results were all that Washington could have asked for: Mr.
Yeltsin beat back his competitors in last Sunday's referendum, and he responded
by telling the Serbian-dominated Government in Belgrade that it had better
dilute its support for Dr. Karadzic's regime and his policies.

Washington knows, of course, that it has already gone too far down the path of
involvement in the Balkans to back off until the "ethnic cleansing" has ended
and some semblance of order has returned. For that, even if the fighting really
stops, a commitment of upwards of 20,000 American ground troops may well be
necessary, as part of a United Nations force with orders to shoot at the first
sign of fighting.

Waiting for Reality

There are potential political perils for Mr. Clinton in any such deployment, but
a peacekeeping mission would probably be much more popular with the electorate
than intervention in a European war on one side, which seemed likely on Saturday
and could yet come to pass if today's agreement is not quickly translated into
reality. Polls show that only about a third of Americans support direct military
action.

Even if the Bosnian Serb "parliament" signs on, Mr. Clinton intends to be guided
by what happens on the battlefield. Will the Serbian artillery stop firing? Will
there be other signs of a changed outlook on the part of the Serbs, like
significant troop withdrawals?

Mr. Gore spoke of "three concrete steps" upon which, he said, the United States
would insist. On the NBC News program "Meet the Press," he said the Serbs would
have to obey the cease-fire, "lift the siege of these cities like Sarajevo" and
halt their efforts to stop relief convoys.

The President spoke this weekend by telephone with Mr. Yeltsin, Prime Minister
John Major, President Francois Mitterrand, Chancellor Helmut Kohl, Prime
Minister Brian Mulroney and Italy's new Prime Minister, Carlo Azeglio Ciampi.

He sought backing, officials said, for the two-part strategy -- bombing and
renewed arms shipments to the Muslim-led Government of Bosnia -- that he
committed himself to on Saturday.

Wariness in Europe

But the officials said Britain and France -- key allies, because they would be
expected to supply some bombers -- were reluctant to go along. They were said to
be willing to approve the idea of trying to knock out bridges and other targets
from the air, but were unready to end the United Nations embargo on arms
shipments because it would widen the war.

Mr. Christopher, forced to talk war and peace at the same time, was deprived of
most of his leverage by Dr. Karadzic's decision to sign the agreement. For the
next few days, Europe will be watching to see what happens on the ground in
Bosnia, and therefore will not be terribly interested in making any fresh
commitments.

Still, the prospect of wider war has receded, if only for a few days.

LOAD-DATE: May 3, 1993

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: News Analysis

                   Copyright 1993 The New York Times Company


                              119 of 312 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                   May 4, 1993, Tuesday, Late Edition - Final

Tran Duc Thao, 76, Vietnamese Thinker

SECTION: Section B; Page 13; Column 6; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 239 words


Tran Duc Thao, a Vietnamese philosopher who had ties to Jean-Paul Sartre, the
French Existentialist thinker, died on April 24 in a hospital in Paris. He was
76 and had returned in 1991 to France, where he had lived as a young man.

The Associated Press reported that Mr. Thao had been in ill health and had been
admitted to the hospital after a fall on April 23.

Mr. Thao worked for a time with a journal that Sartre founded in 1945, Les Temps
Modernes, publishing a series of conversations with Sartre on the relationship
between Marxism and Existentialism.

The French newspaper Le Figaro reported Friday that Mr. Thao aligned himself
with Communism in 1945 and that his book "Phenomenology and Dialectical
Materialism," published in French in 1951, brought him particular acclaim.

He was born in Hanoi, went to Paris when he was 20 and went on to study at the
Ecole Normale Superieure, earning a degree in philosophy in 1944.

Mr. Thao later returned to Hanoi, joined anti-French insurgents in 1951, and was
named Dean of the Faculty of History at the University of Hanoi in 1954. But he
fell from favor and was prevented from teaching and from publishing his writings
in his homeland for more than two decades, until 1987.

In reporting his death Friday, the French newspaper Liberation said that shortly
before his death he had decided to remain permanently in France.

No information about survivors was available.

LOAD-DATE: May 4, 1993

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1993 The New York Times Company


                              120 of 312 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                   May 4, 1993, Tuesday, Late Edition - Final

Backers of Canada-Type Health Plan: Idealistic, Outmuscled but Scrapping

BYLINE: By ROBIN TONER,  Special to The New York Times

SECTION: Section A; Page 22; Column 4; National Desk

LENGTH: 1705 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, May 3


They are the guerrilla fighters of the health-care debate: outfinanced by the
industry groups, outmuscled by the policy gurus in the White House, viewed by
most of the pundits as hopeless idealists.

But advocates of installing a Canadian-style health-care system in this country
have a simple message: They are not dead yet. The only true reform in health
care, they argue, is a system of national insurance financed by taxes.

Contrary to conventional wisdom, in which this "single payer" concept is
considered too radical for American politics to digest, they believe that the
public, over the long run, will rally to their side.

In the meantime, they are presenting a withering critique of the health-care
approach that President Clinton is believed to favor, the blend of market forces
and government regulation known as "managed competition." And like any good
guerrillas, they are organizing the provinces. As a result, the single-payer
advocates are a force to be reckoned with in the coming struggle on Capitol
Hill; they are Mr. Clinton's restive left flank.

In the view of many analysts, the Clinton forces cannot afford to ignore them.
The battle to overhaul the health-care system will be hard enough without losing
a constituency committed to reform.

"If I were worried about who I was going to have to compromise with, I think I'd
play to my strength," said Representative Pete Stark, the California Democrat
who heads the Ways and Means Subcommittee on Health, and a longtime advocate of
single-payer systems. (In the tortured language of health policy, single payer
means there is one entity -- the Government -- paying the bills for health
care.)

Scrapping for Small Gains

Right now, in the tradition of lobbying, the single-payer advocates are pushing
for what they can get, like a guarantee that any health-care revamping will
extend coverage to all Americans, as quickly as possible. The willingness to
compromise varies widely within the single-payer movement, but many say they
hope to be able to support Mr. Clinton's final package.

It is an eclectic group, with much more of an edge than the dryly intellectual
defenders of the Clinton planners. There is David Himmelstein, a 42-year-old
associate professor at Harvard, a doctor, a former Vietnam War protester and a
spokesman for Physicians for a National Health Program.

In a recent speech Dr. Himmelstein noted that just 3 percent of the Canadians in
one poll said they would prefer a health-care system like that in the United
States. "To put that in perspective, 16 percent of Canadians believe that Elvis
Presley is still alive," he said.

There is Senator Paul Wellstone, the Minnesota Democrat who is a chief sponsor
of single-payer legislation in the Senate and a former professor of political
science, reflecting on the theory of managed competition: "It always seemed to
me to be an A-plus discussion paper in an advanced public policy class. But go
out and try to explain it to people."

There is Citizen Action, an advocacy group, earnestly organizing "900" telephone
numbers and petition drives on behalf of a Canadian-style system. And Mother
Jones magazine, which included in the May issue preaddressed postcards to
Congress endorsing a single-payer system, and labor unions, like the
Communication Workers of America.

Translation: Government Pays

And there is Representative Jim McDermott, Democrat of Washington, a
psychiatrist and chief sponsor of a single-payer bill in the House, warning his
colleagues that the votes they cast on health care might be the most important
in their careers -- and that they had better be able to explain them.

The single-payer movement is hardly monolithic. But its advocates strike a few
basic themes.

They argue that the Canadian system is a proven and largely successful way of
delivering quality care to all. They argue that taxpayers will be willing to pay
for such a system once they understand that it replaces all other health
insurance costs. Or, as Dr. Himmelstein puts it, "Instead of writing a check to
the insurance companies, you write a check to the Government."

And they assert that the Clinton concept of relying on insurance companies but
in a more heavily regulated marketplace, while presented as a less radical
alternative, will in fact prove far more burdensome to consumers. Mr. McDermott
presents that argument in a nutshell: "You think the insurance industry is going
to do right by you?" he asks.

Since the details of Mr. Clinton's health plan are still technically under
wraps, their criticisms center on the theory of managed competition. Under that
theory, consumers and businesses would band together into regional cooperatives
to buy insurance, thus maximizing their bargaining clout. On the other end, the
system would force doctors, hospitals and insurance companies into networks like
today's health maintenance organizations that would compete for the
cooperatives' business, trying to offer the best quality health plan at the
lowest cost.

Fears of Intrusion

Unlike a single-payer system, which in many versions would largely replace the
private health insurance industry, managed competition would preserve the role
of insurance companies in health care. It would almost certainly further the
trend toward "managed care," in which insurance companies or other
administrators play an important role in monitoring the treatment given to
patients, with an eye toward preventing unnecessary services and holding down
costs.

Many single-payer advocates present this as extremely ominous, asserting that it
pushes the insurance companies further into the doctor-patient relationship and
inevitably erodes patients' rights to choose their own physicians. Spokesmen for
the Clinton Administration have repeatedly said they intend to preserve this
freedom of choice, but their assurances have not deterred the argument, which is
widely seen as one of the most potent lines of attack against a
managed-competition system.

If the advocates of a Canadian-style system seem combative, there are reasons:
Most of the savants in Washington tend to write them off, arguing that their
proposals are utterly unrealistic, particularly at a time when public distrust
of Government is high.

"In focus groups, they don't trust insurance companies, but they don't trust the
Government either," said Bob Blendon, an expert on public opinion and health
care at Harvard. "They say: 'Don't tell me how it works in Canada. I don't
believe it will work that way in this country.' "

Adding to the argument against a single-payer system is the enormous new taxes
it would require, and what critics assert are a host of flaws inherent in the
Canadian system, like long waits for some procedures, less technological
innovation and the system's own difficulty in controlling costs. Supporters
dismiss those charges and note that the cost of switching to national health
insurance would pay off in administrative savings and greater efficiency.

A Mood Favoring Change

In general, the single-payer supporters assert that the public is far more open
to this idea than the political professionals think it is. "It's one of those
disconnects," Mr. Wellstone said. "At the very moment that the public is in a
bold mood, calling for sweeping change, everyone here has turned incremental."

Mr. Clinton seemed to close down debate on the issue when he directed his
planners to produce some form of managed competition program that included
spending limits. But the single-payer advocates have been pushing hard ever
since. If they cannot get their preferred system in its entirety, they say, they
hope to push for as many of its features as they can get.

Many of their goals are similar to the Administration's. Among them, they say,
are extending health insurance to all, as quickly as possible; making the basic
benefits guaranteed under the plan as generous as possible; insuring that
reforms guard against inequities in access to health care; building in strong
cost controls, and assuring enough flexibility so that individual states have
the option to adopt a single-payer system if they choose. That single-payer
option for states is widely expected to be a part of the final Clinton plan.

Single-payer advocates say they are doing extensive grass-roots organizing,
rallying much of their support around the legislation in Congress, which has
more than 60 co-sponsors. Most of the advocates say they hope to be able to
support a Clinton plan, although they also hope to push it their way as the bill
makes its way through Congress.

One Democratic Senate aide, who has strong misgivings about a single-payer
approach, nevertheless said the influence of those who support it could not be
discounted. "If we wind up with universal coverage, the single-payer people will
deserve a lot of the credit for that," said the aide, who would speak only on
condition of anonymity.  "They'll have been the ones who kept up the pressure to
cover everyone."

Chance for Change Imperiled

Still, others worry that these advocates will hold out too long, for too much,
and thus jeopardize a real chance at health-care reform under a sympathetic
President.

Administration officials, in the meantime, are striking an inclusive note.

"We are not talking about managed competition," said Robert O. Boorstin, the
White House aide who serves as spokesman for the health-care team. "We also are
not talking about single-payer. We are not talking about any theory or
health-care system that is currently known. We are talking about combining the
best of what is out there, and I think when we announce our final plan, it will
include some of the pieces that the single-payer people want."

The single-payer people say they are confident that history is on their side.
But they also say they do not under estimate the fight.

Dr. Himmelstein closed a recent slide presentation at a "managed care"
convention with this: "I just show this slide to let you know I'm not completely
out of touch with reality, that I'm not a dreamer. This is a picture of the
Boston skyline. Our two tallest buildings there: John Hancock on your left, and
Prudential on your right."

LOAD-DATE: May 4, 1993

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo: Anne Braswell, right, a member of Citizen Action, an advocacy
group that stages petition drives on behalf of a Canadian-style health-care
system, speaking to Susan Meyers on Saturday in Atlanta. (Alan S. Weiner for The
New York Times)

                   Copyright 1993 The New York Times Company


                              121 of 312 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                  May 5, 1993, Wednesday, Late Edition - Final

CONFLICT IN THE BALKANS;
Prompt Military Reprisal Unlikely If Serbs Shun Pact, U.S. Aides Say

BYLINE: By R. W. APPLE Jr.,  Special to The New York Times

SECTION: Section A; Page 1; Column 4; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 1118 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, May 4


Even if the self-designated Bosnian Serb parliament rejects an international
peace plan when it meets on Wednesday, there will be no immediate American
military intervention in the Balkans, senior United States officials said today.

The officials said the Clinton Administration expected the parliament to approve
the peace plan, negotiated by Cyrus R. Vance and Lord Owen, which it rejected
only 10 days ago. One of them said the White House thought the odds were 2 to 1
in favor of approval, but the Administration is far less sure that the fighting
between Serbs and Muslims will actually stop as a result.

Washington's apprehensions were heightened this afternoon by reports of
increased Serbian pressure against Muslim enclaves in eastern Bosnia. Water
supplies to hard-pressed Srebrenica were not resumed, as promised by the Bosnian
Serb leader, Radovan Karadzic, and more than 40,000 towns people and refugees in
Zepa were said to be under tank and artillery attack. [Page A17.]

Threats Could Sound Hollow

If the peace plan is rejected, or if it is approved but Serbian artillery
barrages continue and the Serbian troops do not withdraw from areas around
Sarajevo and other besieged cities, President Clinton will be faced with demands
that he intervene quickly.

Not to do so, a number of Senators and Representatives are arguing, would make
his threats last week to use force sound hollow, and the Bosnian Serbs would
gain time for maneuver on the ground and at the bargaining table. The pressure
for quick compliance would ease, the lawmakers say.

But several of the top officials dealing with the Bosnian situation said it
would be difficult if not impossible to do anything quickly. A State Department
expert said it might be a week or so before the United States could mount air
strikes.

Easing of Arms Embargo

An option would be a partial lifting of the embargo on arms sales to the Bosnian
Muslims, but that would require United Nations approval. Secretary of State
Warren Christopher has spent two days trying to persuade the British, French and
others to support this, but he has been rebuffed repeatedly, and it is not clear
that the United States could push the plan through the United Nations, even if
it wished to open a broad public rift with its closest allies.

Representative Frank McCloskey of Indiana, a Democrat who serves on the Armed
Services and the Foreign Affairs Committees, said on Monday that "the planes
should be in the air Wednesday night" to take out bridges and gun emplacements
in case of a negative vote. Senators of both parties who are considerably less
hawkish argued today that Mr. Clinton would risk losing his credibility, given
his saber rattling of last week, unless he acted.

The President decided in principle on Saturday to commit United States air power
to the Balkans, and the Pentagon has worked out tentative plans for strikes
using planes based in Italy and on the carrier Theodore Roosevelt, which is
cruising in the Adriatic Sea. But the White House has repeatedly emphasized that
Mr. Clinton has made no final decision yet.

He has told aides that he would want not only to consult further with
Congressional leaders before authorizing any bombing but would seek a
sense-of-the-Congress resolution before doing so. That would be part of an
effort to build public support for American intervention; recent polls show that
only about a third of the public currently favors using military force.

Vietnam on Advisers' Minds

With the same goal in mind, the President would also want to make a television
speech to the American people, spelling out the ends he was pursuing in the
Balkans, aides said. Like other members of the Vietnam generation, many of his
key advisers think that a failure to set tangible goals was a major reason for
the American military failure in the Vietnam War.

Two other impediments could delay any bombing runs. Mr. Christopher will have to
complete his current trip and wrap up the agreement of the British and the
French to contribute fighter-bombers of their own to the air campaign, the
officials said, and the United Nations question will have to be resolved.

The United States argues that existing Security Council resolutions give it
authority to intervene in Bosnia and Herzegovina, but some European countries,
reportedly including Russia, believe that a more explicit resolution would be
required.

Planning at the Pentagon and at the State Department is now proceeding on two
tracks -- one assuming that American conditions for behavior by the Bosnian
Serbs will not be met, the other assuming that they eventually will. The most
complicated question is how long the Bosnian Serbs should be given to meet the
conditions of the peace plan that Dr. Karadzic signed near Athens on Sunday.

Serbs Given 45 Days to Comply

The terms of the pact give the Bosnian Serbs 45 days to comply. But assuming
approval by the Bosnian Serbs on Wednesday, American officials say Mr. Clinton
would want evidence of genuine battlefield change well before that.

In any event, withdrawals of troop units and heavy weapons in the mountainous
terrain of the former Yugoslavia would require considerable time, so it would
have to get under way reasonably soon to meet the plan's deadline.

Even if Mr. Clinton's conditions are met, he will face the task of convincing
Congress and the American public that he is justified in sending 20,000 or more
American troops into an unstable situation in the role of peacekeepers. Part of
a 60,000-member force, they might well be required to serve under foreign
command, which would further complicate the situation.


<Balkan Update">

The Government of BOSNIA said the Muslim town of ZEPA was had come under fierce
attack yesterday, and said up to 100 people were believed to have been killed or
wounded by forces of the Bosnian Serbs. The attack came a day before the
self-styled parliament of the Bosnian Serbs is to vote again on a peace plan its
members have already rejected once.

At the UNITED NATIONS, Security Council members who visited Bosnia proposed that
a "safe area" be established at ZEPA, similar to the zone around SREBRENICA that
is being protected by Canadian peacekeeping forces.

In WASHINGTON, Administration officials said that, whatever the outcome of the
Bosnian Serbs' vote, no immediate military action in Bosnia is expected.
 Secretary of State Warren Christopher, at a meeting in PARIS, encountered more
allied resistance to using military force in BOSNIA. The allies insist that the
Serbs, the Croats and the Muslims must all stop shooting before a larger and
better armed peacekeeping force is dispatched.

LOAD-DATE: May 5, 1993

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1993 The New York Times Company


                              122 of 312 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                  May 5, 1993, Wednesday, Late Edition - Final

Japanese Is Slain in Attack on U.N. in Cambodia

BYLINE: By PHILIP SHENON

SECTION: Section A; Page 7; Column 1; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 520 words

DATELINE: PHNOM PENH, Cambodia, May 4


A Japanese policeman assigned to the United Nations peacekeeping force in
Cambodia was killed today and another critically wounded in a rocket attack that
appeared to be the work of Khmer Rouge guerrillas intent on sabotaging this
month's United Nations-sponsored elections.

Seven other Dutch and Japanese peacekeepers were wounded in the ambush on a
United Nations convoy in a rebel-held area of northwestern Cambodia, near the
Thailand border.

Despite earlier suggestions from Japanese Government officials that Japan might
withdraw from the peacekeeping operation if its forces became the target of
violence, Tokyo today reaffirmed its intention to keep hundreds of Japanese
soldiers and non-military workers like the policemen in Cambodia.

United Nations officials had worried that a Japanese pullout would have a domino
effect on other countries that have contributed to the peacekeeping force.

The six-vehicle United Nations convoy was ambushed shortly after noon between
Phum Ku and Phum Ampil in Bantey Meanchey province, about 215 miles northwest of
Phnom Penh, the capital. The area is under the control of the Khmer Rouge and
other rebels.

According to the United Nations, the attackers fired a rocket at the lead
vehicle in the convoy, and then opened fire with small arms.

The Japanese policeman who died was identified as Haruyuki Takata, a 33-year-old
inspector from Okayama prefecture.

Two other Japanese police officers, one of them reported to be close to death,
were taken by helicopter to a hospital in Bangkok, Thailand, while a fourth was
treated in Cambodia. Five Dutch soldiers were also wounded.

United Nations officials said they had no proof that the Khmer Rouge were
responsible, but the Communist rebels were almost certainly involved, given the
area in which the ambush occurred, the type of weapons used and the fact that
the Khmer Rouge launched similar attacks on United Nations peacekeepers on
Monday.

The 'Other' Rebels

The other rebel group operating in Bantey Meanchey province is loyal to the
nation's former monarch, Prince Norodom Sihanouk, and has no history of violent
attacks on peacekeepers.

On Monday, nearly 300 Khmer Rouge soldiers attacked the northwestern city of
Siem Reap, firing on United Nations soldiers and temporarily seizing the city's
airport. No United Nations peacekeepers were wounded.

In a separate incident on Monday, Khmer Rouge soldiers wounded five Indian
peacekeeping soldiers in attacks in Kompong Cham province.

The Khmer Rouge, held responsible for the deaths of more than a million
Cambodians when they controlled the central Government in the 1970's, joined in
a 1991 peace settlement intended to end Cambodia's civil war.

But they have since backed out of the United Nations-brokered peace plan and
have suggested that they will use violence to disrupt the national elections,
which are to begin May 23.

The Khmer Rouge say the election has been rigged to guarantee victory for the
current Government, which was installed by Vietnam after the Vietnamese Army
invaded Cambodia in 1978 and toppled the Khmer Rouge.


LOAD-DATE: May 5, 1993

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Map of Cambodia shows the location of Bantey Meanchey.

                   Copyright 1993 The New York Times Company


                              123 of 312 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                  May 5, 1993, Wednesday, Late Edition - Final

Leslie Gelb Will Direct Foreign Affairs Group

SECTION: Section A; Page 11; Column 6; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 226 words


Leslie H. Gelb, a columnist for The New York Times, has been named president of
the Council on Foreign Relations, the Council's board announced yesterday.

Mr. Gelb, 56, succeeds Peter Tarnoff, who has joined the Clinton Administration
as Under Secretary of State for Political Affairs. Mr. Gelb will leave The
Times, and his last column is to appear on Sunday.

The Council is a nonprofit, nonpartisan organization dedicated to improving the
understanding of United States foreign policy. Each year, it sponsors
conferences to bring together American and foreign officials and policy experts,
and it publishes the journal Foreign Affairs.

Before becoming a columnist for The Times in January 1991, Mr. Gelb was deputy
editorial page editor, editor of the Op-Ed page and national security and
diplomatic correspondent. He was on a team investigating "Star Wars" that won a
Pulitzer Prize for explanatory reporting for The Times in 1986.

Mr. Gelb earned a bachelor's degree in government from Tufts University in 1959,
a master's from Harvard University in 1961 and a doctorate from Harvard in 1964.
He served in the Defense Department, and directed the Vietnam task force that
produced the documents later known as the Pentagon Papers. He served as
Assistant Secretary of State for Politico-Military Affairs in the Carter
Administration.


NAME: Leslie H. Gelb

LOAD-DATE: May 5, 1993

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Biography

                   Copyright 1993 The New York Times Company


                              124 of 312 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                  May 5, 1993, Wednesday, Late Edition - Final
                              Correction Appended

CONFLICT IN THE BALKANS;
Senator Who Saw War Up Close Doesn't Want to See Another

BYLINE: By MICHAEL WINES,  Special to The New York Times

SECTION: Section A; Page 16; Column 1; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 1248 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, May 4


Senator John S. McCain of Arizona is a conservative Republican and a war hero, a
medal-spangled Navy pilot in Vietnam, the son and grandson of admirals in a
family whose fighting lineage extends to George Washington's Continental Army.
If politicians were thoroughbreds and bloodlines dictated performance, Mr.
McCain might be the Secretariat of Senate militarists.

But anyone who wagered that Mr. McCain would favor United States intervention in
Bosnia's war would lose his shirt. As President Clinton and lawmakers ponder the
prospect of air strikes to counter Serbian aggression or the despatch of
thousands of American troops to enforce a cease-fire, Mr. McCain has been
sounding the Senate's most persistent and most urgent alarms on the question of
involvement in a European war.

Far Too Many Ifs

"We need to be honest about one central fact: We have no way to predict the
size, length and casualties of a peacemaking effort," he told the Senate on
April 21.

"If we find ourselves involved in a conflict in which American casualties mount,
in which there is no end in sight, in which we take sides in a foreign civil
war, in which American fighting men and women have great difficulty
distinguishing between friend and foe, then I suggest that American support for
military involvement would rapidly evaporate."

For now, Mr. McCain says, he prefers leaving the dirtiest work of peacemaking to
those whom the war threatens most -- Europeans.

"I think it's time to hold their coats instead of them holding ours," he said in
an interview.

Other senators have counseled against the use of United States force in Bosnia.
But Mr. McCain's views draw special attention because of who he is: the Senator
from Vietnam, who spent five and a half years in a prison camp after being blown
out of the sky on a bombing run over Hanoi.

It's Not Vietnam, He Says

Now, when he warns against what he calls the "tar baby" of Bosnia, the
temptation is overwhelming to conclude that he is reliving the frustration of
Vietnam.

Mr. McCain insists, a little wearily, that it isn't so. He says the 23 combat
missions, the mid-air ejection that left him with two broken legs and a broken
arm, the beatings by North Vietnamese guards, the solitary confinement, the
efforts at resistance -- heroic, by some accounts -- are a closed chapter in his
life.

"I never talk about Vietnam," he said last week during a talk in his Capitol
Hill office. "I never relate stories about it. When I walked away from that
place, it was over."

As for Bosnia, he said, there are better analogies.

"I think you can draw a parallel to the military challenge in Bosnia with what
the Russians faced in Afghanistan," he said. "Even with ground forces and with
overwhelming air superiority, they were unable to defeat a motivated, very
capable enemy."

He nevertheless admits to seeing a fair likeness between Washington's initial
response to Bosnia and its drift into Vietnam in the 1960's. Both began with a
clamor to punish an enemy with air strikes; both may entail what he contends
could be an open-ended commitment of troops and aircraft.

The Admirals Before Him

"Right now," he said, "we seem to be flailing around, looking for a way to do
this on the cheap. And there is no way to do this on the cheap."

How much of this caution is a reaction to Mr. McCain's Vietnam years, how much
is passed on from ancestral fighting men and how much is a matter of intellect
is speculation. But a background like Mr. McCain's cannot be ignored or
forgotten.

His grandfather was in charge of all Pacific Ocean aircraft carriers during
World War II; his father became commander of all United States forces in the
Pacific during the Vietnam War.

There was never much doubt that John 3d would follow in their steps. And so,
after an unimpressive stint at the United States Naval Academy, Ensign McCain
began flying fighter jets off carrier decks. Eventually, the job took him to the
aircraft carrier Forrestal and to Vietnam.

'Crown Prince' Is Downed

In October 1967, on his twenty-third bombing run, Mr. McCain's jet was struck by
an antiaircraft missile over Hanoi. He bailed out into a lake and was taken,
both legs and one arm broken, to a P.O.W. camp. Not until two months after the
the war's end, in March 1973, was he released; by that time, at 37, he weighed
about 100 pounds and his hair had turned white.

"I met him just before Christmas of '67," said Bud Day, a Florida lawyer who was
an Air Force pilot and had been shot down and imprisoned the previous August.
"He was in just horrible condition -- filthy, rotten dirty, hurting terribly.
I'm amazed to this day he ever lived through it."

Mr. McCain's imprisonment was especially rigorous because Hanoi regarded him as
special: the "crown prince," son of the Pacific commander who was directing the
war against them. Mr. McCain was beaten because of his refusal to cooperate, and
he spent long stretches in solitary confinement.

"Here's a guy who grew up in a very famous naval family, whose entire life
growing up consisted of people going out of their way to be nice to him because
of his last name," said Torie Clarke, who was his press secretary before joining
the Bush Administration in 1989.

"And he gets shot down, and within a few days he reached a point in life where
his last name not only didn't help him -- it actually hurt him. Suddenly he has
to fend for himself, and do what's right, and learn to count on friends.

"You can argue that it was one of the best things that ever happened to him."

A Political Takeoff

Today Mr. McCain is hobbled by a bad shoulder and arthritis in his legs, and he
has had to switch to his left hand when writing. But the infirmities did not
prevent him from regaining his flying status in the late 1970's and resuming his
Navy career, with posts in Florida and Washington.

After failing his flight physical in 1981, he quit the Navy, moved to Arizona
and immediately won a Congressional seat vacated by the House minority leader at
the time, John Rhodes. Five years later, he swept into Barry Goldwater's Senate
seat and a spot on the Armed Services Committee.

In Congress, Mr. McCain has supported most Republican military ventures, from
Afghanistan to Iraq. But he has not shied from the role of dove. In 1988, he
opposed President Reagan's decision to send warships to escort Kuwaiti oil
tankers through Persian Gulf minefields.

In 1983, while in the House, he ignored intense White House pressure and called
for American troops to quit Lebanon, saying their peacekeeping mission there was
futile and ill-planned.

Weeks later a terrorist proved him right, driving an explosives-laden truck into
a Marine compound and killing 241 troops.

'Should' vs. 'Can'

Mr. McCain professes to feel sympathy for President Clinton, a man who never
served in the military and who, Mr. McCain says, faces a no-win decision on
Bosnia.

"When you're sitting there at the dedication of the Holocaust museum, and Elie
Weisel correctly points out that this tragedy is ensuing and we're doing
nothing, that brings enormous pressure to bear," he said. "The question is what
is viable. We cannot confuse a desire to do good with viable military options."

Would he have reached the same decision 25 years ago?

"I'd like to say yes," he replied. "But I'm afraid I had not had some of the
experiences and reading and study. And I might have leaned toward another
solution."


NAME: John S. McCain

LOAD-DATE: May 5, 1993

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

CORRECTION-DATE: May 6, 1993, Thursday

CORRECTION:

An article yesterday about Senator John S. McCain referred incorrectly to the
end of the Vietnam War, in which he served and was a prisoner of war. It was in
April 1975; what occurred in January 1973 was the cease-fire agreement.


GRAPHIC: Photo: Senator John S. McCain of Arizona walking back to the Senate
yesterday after giving an update on the events in Bosnia to a group of high
school students from Phoenix who were visiting the Capitol. (Jose R. Lopez/The
New York Times)

TYPE: Biography

                   Copyright 1993 The New York Times Company


                              125 of 312 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                  May 6, 1993, Thursday, Late Edition - Final

CONFLICT IN THE BALKANS;
SERBS REJECT BOSNIA PACT, DEFYING FRIENDS AND FOES, AND INSIST ON REFERENDUM

BYLINE: By STEPHEN KINZER,  Special to The New York Times

SECTION: Section A; Page 1; Column 6; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 1922 words

DATELINE: PALE, Bosnia and Herzegovina, Thursday, May 6


Ignoring appeals from both friends and foes, delegates to the Bosnian Serbs'
assembly voted overwhelmingly today to reject the plan to end the war in Bosnia
and instead to put the peace accord to the people in a referendum.

Voting at the end of a 17-hour session at which the leaders of Serbia and
Yugoslavia and the Greek Prime Minister joined the assembly's leader in pleading
for acceptance of the peace plan, the delegates voted 65 to 1, with 12
abstentions, to call a referendum of all Bosnian Serbs on May 15 and 16 to
ratify their rejection of the plan.

It was not clear how the Serbs proposed holding a referendum amid the stark
conditions of the war in Bosnia.

Risk of Confrontation

Earlier, on Wednesday night, the Bosnian Serbs had indicated they would approve
the plan -- with conditions, and the vote this morning came as something of a
surprise.

By not accepting the plan, the Serbs risked a direct confrontation with the
United States, which is consulting its allies on using air strikes against
Serbian military positions and arming the Bosnian Muslims if the fighting
continues.

There was no immediate reaction from the White House to the vote.

In a last-ditch appeal minutes before the vote was taken, Slobodan Milosevic,
the president of Serbia, who has backed the Bosnian Serbs with arms throughout
the 13 months of the bitterest fighting in Europe since World War II, told the
delegates, "You have to understand that I can't help you anymore."

Threat of Military Intervention

The decision to put the peace plan to Serbian voters in Bosnia left open the
question of whether Western plans for possible military intervention will go
forward. The question had been left pending after the head of the Serbs'
assembly, Radovan Karadzic, agreed to the peace plan at a meeting near Athens
last weekend.

This morning, after the vote, Dr. Karadzic appealed to the West not to intervene
militarily. "The Serb army is for peace," he said. "It is not going to take a
single step into foreign territory."

The possiblity that the assembly might reject the plan became clear after
delegates suggested conditions that should be placed on their acceptance of it.

The delegates said the conditions could include such critical items as changes
in the map attached to the peace plan, which would divide Bosnia into 10
ethnically based provinces.

"We also want some of the economic sanctions against Serbia lifted right away,
and a commitment that others will be gradually lifted," said one delegate,
Dobrica Milenkovic, during the debate. "We want any United Nations forces sent
here to include countries we trust, like Greece and Russia, and not Arab
countries. With these conditions, we will probably vote to sign."

But in one indication the mood was going against the plan, one commentator who
watched the debate said: "They are asking for crazy things. There is a big fight
between emotion and logic, and it seems that emotion is winning."

What the Plan Calls For

Any changes in the peace plan, which was drafted by Cyrus R. Vance, the United
Nations mediator, and Lord Owen, for the European Community, would have to be
approved by the other sides. Both the Bosnian Croats and Muslims have signed the
original plan.

It was initially unclear whether the conditions being put forward by the Serbs
were meant as a negotiating ploy to delay carrying out the accord.

Under the terms of the plan, once it had been accepted by all parties, an
international force of 50,000 to 70,000 troops, including more than 20,000
Americans, would be dispatched to Bosnia as a peacekeeping force.

Another possibility was that the conditions put forward by the Serbs were
intended to be a face-saving declaration that they knew to be unacceptable and
would not insist upon, but wanted to promulgate for their own political reasons.

Prior to the vote, Dragan Kalinic, health minister of the republic that the
Serbs have proclaimed in Bosnia, outlined conditions contained in a draft
document to be voted on by the assembly.

The Conditions Put Forth

Chief among them was the establishment of corridors linking Serbian-controlled
areas. The issue is critical because at present, areas in western Bosnia and
Croatia with more than half a million Serbian residents are connected to the
Serbian republic in Yugoslavia by a corridor that is only a mile wide at one
point, and is regularly attacked by the Muslim-led Bosnian Government forces.

"All Serb provinces should be linked by unbroken territorial corridors," Mr.
Kalinic said.

Mr. Vance and Lord Owen agreed in Athens to establish a six-mile-wide corridor,
patrolled by United Nations troops, through the bottleneck in northern Bosnia.
But there was no guarantee of eventual Serbian political control of the new
province through which the corridor would pass; the area is hotly contested by
all three factions.

Mr. Kalinic told Reuters that the Bosnian Serbs were considering offering to
trade Serbian-held land elsewhere to the Croats in exchange for control of the
northern province.

Conditions Voted On

Reuters reported that Mr. Kalinic outlined these other conditions:

*Cessation of hostilities and the immediate deployment of United Nations
military observers along confrontation lines.

*The right of Serbs in towns and villages where they are in a majority in
Croatian- and Muslim-dominated provinces to vote on whether to join neighboring
Serbian provinces.

*The possibility of political and economic links among provinces.

Prominent friends of the Bosnian Serbs sat in the front row as the debate
dragged on. They included the chief patron of the Bosnian Serbs' army, Mr.
Milosevic; the Yugoslav President, Dobrica Cosic, and the Greek Prime Minister,
Constantine Mitsotakis, who was the mediator at the meeting near Athens last
weekend when Dr. Karadzic accepted the Vance-Owen plan in principle. All gave
speeches urging that the peace plan be accepted.

The assembly, a self-appointed body made up mostly of local political leaders,
met at the Jahorina, a once-popular ski resort, now virtually abandoned. The
resort was crowded with bodyguards, militiamen and other fighters who discussed
the peace plan among themselves as the delegates debated behind closed doors.

Few had good words for it.

"Nobody who spoke today said anything new," one soldier said. "I don't like
giving territory away for nothing."

"People are against the plan because we don't want to give our land back to the
Turks," said Ljubo Bosijcic of Sarajevo, referring to Bosnian Muslims. "That
point was made over and over again."

Serbs Would Give Back Land

Bosnian Serbs now control about 70 percent of the republic, but under the
Vance-Owen plan the regions over which the Serbs would have control amount to
only about 40 percent. The rest of the 10 regions would be divided between
Muslims and Croats, with Sarajevo an open city under joint administration.

Less than two weeks ago, the delegates voted unanimously to reject the peace
plan. Since then, United Nations sanctions against Serbia and Montenegro, the
two states remaining in Yugoslavia, have been tightened; Serbia's strongest
defenders in Russia have been defeated at the polls by President Boris N.
Yeltsin, and the United States and other Western nations have proceeded with
plans for military intervention.

Several delegates said the prospect of military intervention had led them to
consider support for the plan.

"I have to admit, the biggest change is the threat of military action against
us," said Nikola Peric, who represents Banja Luka but who, like many delegates,
lives and works in Belgrade. "Mr. Clinton refused to go to Vietnam himself, but
he was ready to create a new Vietnam in the Balkans."

Delegation From Belgrade

The tone today was set by the midday arrival of a 20-car caravan from Belgrade.
Among the passengers were Mr. Milosevic, Mr. Cosic and Mr. Mitsotakis. It was
the first time since the Bosnian war began 13 months ago that Mr. Milosevic has
entered Bosnia.

Although Serbia has supported the Bosnian Serbs in their campaign, Mr. Milosevic
has sought to preserve a measure of distance by declining invitations to visit
the front or address military commanders. His mere presence in Pale today, which
had not been expected, underlined the seriousness of his message.

"At the risk of simplifying things in order to make them clearer, I believe
there is now no alternative to a decision for peace," Mr. Milosevic told the
delegates. "We do not have to give up our remaining claims, but we must prepare
to present them at the negotiating table, with peaceful means, and not with the
sacrifice of lives."

Mr. Milosevic said the Vance-Owen plan "guarantees us freedom and justice," and
he urged the delegates to "be brave enough to make this decision."

Ties to Greece Recalled

After Mr. Milosevic, Mr. Mitsotakis took the floor. He expressed affection and
support for the Serbs and their cause, and reminded delegates of the political
and religious ties between Greece and Serbia, which he described as "brother
nations."

"Today you must find the strength to make a decision for peace," Mr. Mitsotakis
said. "This agreement provides 90 percent of what Serbia needs, and in such a
situation no one can expect 100 percent. We must not give an excuse to those
military forces anxious to intervene, to come here and fight.'

The other speaker who appeared to sway delegates was Mr. Cosic, a novelist whose
writings have helped define modern Serbian nationalism. He urged delegates not
to repeat what he said was a long Serbian tradition of "winning in war but then
losing in peace."

"The conditions of this plan are not ideal, and in fact they are painful," Mr.
Cosic said. "The plan is imperfect and unjust. But it gives us a chance to
achieve our goals through peace instead of war. The world is against us, and we
cannot continue this war to the point of committing suicide.

"We have no strength for this war. We cannot continue fighting this war."

The prospect that Serbs will have to withdraw from lands its fighters have shed
blood to capture was perhaps the principal objection from most of the delegates.


Balkan Update

In PALE, BOSNIA, the Bosnian Serbs' assembly rejected for a third time a peace
plan to end the fighting. The assembly voted after an all-night session in which
they considered attaching several conditions to the plan, but the members said
they would try to hold a referendum.

In WASHINGTON, senior Administration officials said during the assembly's debate
that it was unlikely that any new conditions to the peace plan would be
acceptable.

In a meeting yesterday in MOSCOW, President Boris N. Yeltsin of Russia promised
to contribute troops to a peacekeeping force, but he withheld endorsement of
military intervention.

At the UNITED NATIONS, Secretary-General Boutros Boutros-Ghali said the United
Nations would control any peacekeeping force; the United States pressed to keep
any such operation under NATO command. Mr. Boutros-Ghali also recommended
setting up a tribunal to try those responsible for "ethnic cleansing."

In BRUSSELS, Lord Owen, mediator for the European Community, said any
peacekeeping force should have a broader mandate to use military force.

In BELGRADE, four Yugoslav volunteers with the Bosnian Serb army were convicted
in absentia of murdering members of a Muslim family after promising them safe
passage in return for money.

LOAD-DATE: May 6, 1993

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo: The Serbian President, Slobodan Milosevic, in Pale yesterday.
(pg. A1); Before the vote by Bosnia's Serbian nationalist assembly to reject the
peace plan, a soldier kissed the flag of the self-proclaimed republic in Pale.
(pg. A16) (Agence France-Presse)

                   Copyright 1993 The New York Times Company


                              126 of 312 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                  May 6, 1993, Thursday, Late Edition - Final

NEWS SUMMARY

SECTION: Section A; Page 2; Column 5; Metropolitan Desk

LENGTH: 1052 words



International A3-17

CONDITIONS SEEN ON BOSNIA
The self-declared parliament of Bosnia's Serbian nationalists prepared to vote
this morning in favor of a peace plan, but they planned to attach conditions
that raised questions about whether they intended to live up to the plan's
terms.  A1

U.S. LEERY OF CONDITIONS
Administration officials said it was unlikely they would accept any conditions
that the Bosnian Serbs may attach to their acceptance of the Balkan peace plan,
but were holding back any formal reaction.  A16



DISAGREEMENT ON PEACEKEEPERS
United Nations Secretary General Boutros Boutros-Ghali is insisting on U.N.
control of peacekeeping forces in Bosnia; the United States wants the operation
under NATO command.  A16

RUSSIA TO COMMIT TROOPS
Russia promised to contribute troops to a force to police Bosnia, but in a
meeting with Secretary of State Warren Christopher, President Yeltsin withheld
endorsement of the contingency strategy for military intervention.  A16

EVIDENCE OF CHINA MISSILE SALES
United States intelligence agencies have accumulated compelling evidence that
China has shipped missile parts to Pakistan in violation of its pledge not to
export such technology, officials said.  A1

AFRIKANERS TO SEEK HOMELAND
Almost all of South Africa's white separatist political groups have united, and
their leaders demand that an Afrikaner homeland be carved from the Transvaal.
A3

NORTH KOREA RUSE FEARED
Specialists monitoring North Korea say they are increasingly concerned that the
country may be preparing to divert uranium from a nuclear reactor as raw
material for its suspected nuclear weapons project.  A7

MOSCOW STILL SHAKEN BY VIOLENCE
The May Day disturbances in Moscow electrified Russia's political scene, one
week after President Yeltsin won a vote of confidence in a national referendum.
A14

IN ISRAEL, NEW PRESSURE
Benjamin Netanyahu, new leader of the Likud party, makes it clear that he
intends to be a threat to the Rabin Government, promising "a hot political
summer" in Parliament and on the streets.  A11

Arab delegates agree to extend discussions with Israel.  A10

The market economy brings variety to Hungary.  A13

Japanese doctor is re-elected to lead the World Health Organization.  A5

Prime Minister Major suffers a setback on European union.  A12

State Department employee admitted to spying, FBI agent says.  A9

The Khmer Rouge attacked Chinese and Polish peacekeepers.  A8

Ho Chi Minh City Journal: A former revolutionary calls for reform.  A4

National A18-24, B15-17

POSSIBLE LEVIES FOR HEALTH PLAN
Under a plan being considered by the Administration, employers would have to pay
a percentage of their payrolls in premiums to help finance health care for all
Americans. Workers would also have to pay a portion of their wages.  A1

BLOW TO SECRECY ON GIFTS
The Senate tentatively agreed to disclose the size and worth of the gifts and
perks its members receive from lobbyists.  A1

CANCER-CAUSING GENE IS FOUND
In a discovery expected to wide impact on research and treatment, scientists
found a gene that causes an inherited strain of colon cancer and other types of
cancers.  A1

LABOR BILL ADVANCES
At the urging of organized labor, House and Senate committees approved
legislation to bar employers from hiring permanent replacements for strikers.
A18

MEAT TO COME WITH INSTRUCTIONS
In a safety move, the Government will require cooking and handling instructions
to be put on all meat sold in bulk or at retail outlets.  A18

ENERGY DEPT. ACCEPTS REVIEWS
The Energy Department agreed to supervision of worker safety by another Federal
agency.  A18

CLINTON NEEDS TO FOCUS, TOO
News analysis: White House staff members say the President is a major obstacle
to efforts to focus on the economy and health care.  A22

CAMPAIGN BILL IS DELAYED
The Administration delayed its announcement of a campaign reform bill in an
effort to compromise with House Democrats.  A22

COUNTY WANTS SAY IN LAND USE
A New Mexico county has asked to help manage Federal lands within its boundaries
through a contract with the Government. Environmentalists are wary.  A24

Tainted apple cider caused infections in Massachusetts.  A21

Manufacturers and farmers vowed to fight the energy tax.  B16

A House panel adopted economic criteria for pork-barrel projects.  B16

Lawyers in Robert Altman's trial argued over B.C.C.I.'s ties.  B17

Metro Digest B1

RESERVOIR NOT FOR TAPPING
Dinkins administration officials said they have decided to stop pumping drinking
water from the 131-year-old Central Park Reservoir by the end of the summer
because it has been rendered obsolete by changing technology.  A1

A FIGHT FOR CUSTODY AND LIFE
In a highly unusual dispute between two states, New York and Oklahoma are
battling for the custody, and the life, of a man whom both have convicted of
murder.  A1

Business Digest D1

Home Section C1-13

Amid the wildflowers with Lady Bird Johnson.  C1

Serene show house: balm for the frazzled.  C1

The Elements of Stress in Parenting, 101.C2

Arts/Entertainment C14-24

Barcelona honors Miro.  C17

Walt Disney's secret ties.  C17

Protest at Salk widens.  C17

Dance: City Ballet's "Balanchine Celebration." C17

Books: "Eclipse Fever." C21

Television: Salute to Elizabeth
Taylor.  C22

Some white South Africans and their drama.  C22

Critic's Notebook: Images of Bosnia's war.  C22

Theater in Review C22

Sports B18-23

Baseball: Angels defeat Yanks.  B19

Basketball: A fine but no ban for Starks.  B19

Cavaliers get 2-1 edge on Nets.  B19

Obituaries D22-23 Irving Howe, literary critic and editor of Dissent magazine.
D22

Editorials/Op-Ed A26-27

Editorials

To ban nuclear tests, stop now.

A sensible vaccine compromise.

Ms. Holtzman's ethical stumble.

Clean up the divorce bar.

Letters

William Safire: What about Weld?

Leslie H. Gelb: Two magic peace words.

Jeff Faux: Stimulus II.

Paul E. Dinter: Celibacy and its discontents.

LOAD-DATE: May 6, 1993

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Summary

                   Copyright 1993 The New York Times Company


                              127 of 312 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                  May 6, 1993, Thursday, Late Edition - Final

Three-Nation Talks in Hanoi To Discuss American M.I.A.'s

BYLINE: Reuters

SECTION: Section A; Page 4; Column 3; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 149 words

DATELINE: HANOI, Vietnam, May 5


Officials from Vietnam, Laos and the United States will hold talks in Hanoi this
week in an effort to speed the hunt for Americans still missing from the
Indochina war, American investigators said today.

The Hawaii-based task force investigating the fate of 2,260 Americans
unaccounted for after the Vietnam War said the talks scheduled for Friday and
Saturday were intended to improve coordination among the three nations and speed
up their joint efforts.

It would be the third technical level talks between the three and the first to
be held in Hanoi, said Ho Xuan Dich, head of Vietnam's investigating office.
Earlier meetings were held in Vientiane, Laos, in 1990 and 1991.

Washington sees full Vietnamese cooperation on the issue of missing Americans as
critical to its decision whether to end its 29-year-old economic embargo against
Vietnam and normalize relations.

LOAD-DATE: May 6, 1993

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1993 The New York Times Company


                              128 of 312 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                  May 6, 1993, Thursday, Late Edition - Final

Estonia Names American as Military Chief, but U.S. Objects

BYLINE: AP

SECTION: Section A; Page 15; Column 1; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 370 words

DATELINE: SAN JOSE, Calif., May 5


A retired American Army colonel has been named chief of the Estonian armed
forces, over objections from the United States Government.

The Estonian Parliament on Tuesday named Col. Aleksander Einseln as Commander in
Chief of the Baltic nation's fledgling armed forces.

Mr. Einseln said that Secretary of State Warren Christopher had denied his
request to assume the post. He faces possible loss of his American citizenship
and his $50,000 a year United States Army pension.

Mr. Einseln, an Estonian-born American citizen whose residence is in Mountain
View, Calif., has assumed command of the country's 2,000-man army, navy and air
force. He is subordinate only to the country's President.

Mr. Einseln has said the President, Lennart Meri, then Foreign Minister, wooed
him for the post last year because he was the top-ranking Estonian-speaking
officer in the American armed forces.

His wife, Lee Einseln, a psychologist, said today that canceling his citizenship
for helping his homeland would devastate his family.

"It would be absolutely agonizing for Aleks to lose his U.S. citizenship," said
Mrs. Einseln, his wife of 12 years and a psychologist in Mountain View. "He
truly believes in the American ideals.  That's why he joined the Army, to fight
for those,"

"He's still an idealist at 61, and somewhat heroic by nature," she said. "It
would really hurt him if that happened. It would devastate us financially if
they took his pension away."

Mr. Einseln, who fled with his family as the Red Army took control of Estonia in
1944, emigrated to the United States in 1949. He enlisted in the Army in 1950,
served in Korea, and as a Green Beret in the Vietnam War.  Later, he worked for
the Joint Chiefs of Staff. He served in the United States Pacific Command before
retiring in 1985.

All three Baltic nations -- Lithuania, Latvia and Estonia -- have drawn heavily
on the military experience of returning emigres, many of whom had fled the
Soviet regime.

Although Estonia's military leaders appeared somewhat divided over his
appointment, Mrs. Einseln said her husband favored negotiation over military
confrontation, and was working to Westernize the former Soviet-dominated
Estonian military.

NAME: Aleksander Einseln

LOAD-DATE: May 6, 1993

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Biography

                   Copyright 1993 The New York Times Company


                              129 of 312 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                  May 6, 1993, Thursday, Late Edition - Final

Ho Chi Minh City Journal;
How's Vietnam Doing? Doctor Expresses Disgust

BYLINE: By HENRY KAMM,  Special to The New York Times

SECTION: Section A; Page 4; Column 3; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 840 words

DATELINE: HO CHI MINH CITY, Vietnam


"We fought for freedom, independence and social justice," said Dr. Duong Quynh
Hoa, Health Minister in the underground Communist Government of South Vietnam
from its founding in 1969 until its merger with North Vietnam in 1976. "Now all
is money."

"All values have been turned upside down," she said in an interview in her
office at the Center for Pediatrics, Development and Health, which she heads.
"You can count on your fingers the revolutionaries who still believe in ideals."

Perhaps the only reason that the 63-year-old pediatrician and gynecologist can
afford to speak as freely as she does, in Parisian French, in a country that
tolerates no opposition is that she is herself one of the old revolutionaries.
She was allowed to resign from the Communist Party in 1979.

Dr. Hoa spoke with outrage at what she regards as the latest and ugliest
manifestation of the destruction of revolutionary ideals and traditional
Vietnamese values. This year, for the first time, she has had to treat four
girls, aged 11 to 13, who were sexually injured by Asian tourists to whom they
had been taken by men, perhaps their fathers, as prostitutes.

A Loss of Dignity

The doctor said she did not know whether the girls were street children or had
been sold by their parents to what she called a "mafia." The men who brought
them professed to be their fathers, but the addresses they gave proved false.
Three of the children were too frightened to tell their stories; the fourth said
her "father" had told her he was taking her to visit a "grandfather."

"Girls of all classes, not just the poor, interpret freedom as the right to sell
themselves for fast money," Dr. Hoa said. "We are losing our human dignity --
north, center and south."

Officials here and in Hanoi said that adolescent prostitution -- girls 15 to 17
years old -- had risen to a total of 7 percent of prostitutes detained, but that
they knew of no cases of prostitution involving younger girls.  Dr. Hoa said she
assumed that if four victims were brought to her hospital, there were likely to
be others as well.

Dr. Hoa, daughter of a professor of Vietnamese and Chinese, joined the French
Communist Party in 1954, when she finished her studies in France and returned to
Saigon, as this city was then called. "But I worked for the party since 1948,"
she said. On her return, her clandestine party task was to organize doctors and
other intellectuals. This led to several months in prison in 1960.

After her release, she became one of the founders, in the network of tunnels
beneath the market town of Cu Chi west of here, of the National Liberation
Front. This was the political organization of the South Vietnamese resistance
against the Saigon Government and the United States.

Son Dies in the Jungle

During the Communist Tet offensive in 1968, Dr. Hoa slipped out of the capital
and joined the Vietcong in the jungle. "I left on the back of a motorcycle," she
said. "Three suitcases of clothes followed by other means."

Dr. Hoa married Huynh Van Nghe, a mathematician educated at the Sorbonne. "There
was caviar but no champagne," she said. The party's Central Committee approved
the marriage, she recalled, "but not my cell, because I failed to ask their
permission." Their son died of encephalitis in the jungle.

When the Provisional Revolutionary Government was formed in 1969, Dr. Hoa became
Minister. She said she declined an offer to become Health Minister for all of
Vietnam when Hanoi reunified the country.

"I was for reunification, but it was too rapid, it came too soon," she said.
This is a view shared by many southern resistance fighters, who in private
accuse the northern leadership of acting like conquerors. "The North was
clumsy," Dr. Hoa said. "They never worked for national concord.  This could have
saved the country from the present disaster."

She asked to be allowed to quit the party because she no longer agreed with it.
It took three years for this to be granted. The only condition was that she
should not make this public for 10 years. "I kept my promise," she said.

At the same time, Dr. Hoa gave up her seat in Parliament. "I can't say what the
people who elected me think of your policies," she said she explained to party
leaders, who urged her to stay. Dr. Hoa said she remained on friendly speaking
terms with the Hanoi leadership.

Communism 'a Way Station'

"There must be a revolution within the revolution," she said. "I am a socialist.
Communism was a way station. There is a difference between ideals and ideology.
Ideology is a tactic, the Communist Party is a tactic; socialism is an ideal.

"This country went from feudalism to colonialism to imperialism to socialism
between quotation marks -- not the real socialism. It never knew liberty and
democracy under any system. It replaced one social injustice with another."

But Dr. Hoa is optimistic. "I am hopeful for Vietnam because it didn't suffer
from socialism as long as the European countries," she said. "It will recover
faster."

NAME: Duong Quynh Hoa

LOAD-DATE: May 6, 1993

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo: Dr. Duong Quynh Hoa, Health Minister in the underground
Communist Government of South Vietnam from 1969 to 1976, in her office at the
Center for Pediatrics, Development and Health in Ho Chi Minh City. (Henry
Kamm/The New York Times)

TYPE: Biography

                   Copyright 1993 The New York Times Company


                              130 of 312 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                  May 6, 1993, Thursday, Late Edition - Final

AMID THE WILDFLOWERS WITH: Lady Bird Johnson;
Spreading the Natural Colors of a Great Society

BYLINE: By ANNE RAVER

SECTION: Section C; Page 1; Column 1; Home Desk

LENGTH: 1969 words

DATELINE: JOHNSON CITY, Tex.


IT'S easy to miss the sign for Ranch Road, which turns off the state road north
of Johnson City, especially if you're looking for Texas bluebonnets along the
way.

It's a flat road, Ranch Road, but it winds gracefully along the Pedernales
River, where Lyndon B. Johnson's registered Herefords -- his initials are on
each pair of horns -- graze beneath the live oaks.

Lady Bird Johnson doesn't grant many interviews anymore, but she agreed to talk
about wildflowers -- and the progress of the National Wildflower Research
Center, one of those things that, Mrs. Johnson likes to say, "make my heart
sing."

She founded the center about 10 years ago, on her 70th birthday, and her
"birthday gift" to Austin, Tex., was 60 acres just east of town and $125,000 of
seed money to look into something America had forgotten: its native plants. "I
want our regions to look like themselves," she said. "When I get to Mississippi,
I want to see mountain laurel and azaleas."

She is now 80 and her eyes are beginning to blur the color and shapes of the
flowers she loves most. But come down in April, she had said, when the fields
are carpeted with bluebonnets and red phlox and the fiery orange-red spires of
Indian paintbrush.

It was a gray, chilly Sunday morning, as a Secret Service agent (First Ladies
can have them for life, if they like) helped Mrs. Johnson, dressed for church,
into the back seat of her white Lincoln Continental.

"I'm sorry you're seeing us on such a gray, drab day," Mrs. Johnson said as the
Lincoln purred out the drive and along the river. "It just makes you wonder, is
this local? Or is this global? It seems like we've broken more records for heat
in the last three summers, and we've had a lot more rain."

She picked a bit of lint off her dark blue suit and set her cane down by her
feet, which were in sensible blue flats with little bows (L.B.J. liked her in
heels, but she said the Lord didn't make the foot to fit). She's prettier than
in all those photos of the White House years. That stiff bubble hairdo has eased
with the years into thick, wavy gray hair. Her smile is wide (she likes coral
lipstick) and her eyes, even behind the thick glasses, have a level gaze.

She is gracious, but in an efficient way, as if this invitation had to be
extended for the sake of her wildflowers. (After all, she has weathered a
thousand interviews from journalists and biographers probing everything from
Vietnam to stolen elections to her husband's love life.) She pointed out some
trees along the river
bank, laden with pink flowers. "I think that's redbud, but I could be wrong,"
she said, adding that she has an eye disease, macular degeneration. "I could
feel real sorry for myself, but that wouldn't do any good."

The pecans weren't out yet, she noted. "The last two things to come out is
pecans and mesquite. That means spring is here."

Mrs. Johnson, born Claudia Alta Taylor (her black nurse declared her pretty as a
ladybird and the name stuck), grew up in Karnack, a little town in East Texas.
Her father had a general store and sold everything from cornmeal to coffins.

"I just roamed the countryside," Mrs. Johnson said. "I wouldn't ever think of
being afraid, or of getting lost. Of course, if I had, everybody knew T. J.
Taylor. It was cotton country and corn and black people. And my father was the
local landowner and gin owner so our life revolved around the crops."

She would wander down to the branch to find the first violets of spring. "The
wind through the pines made such a melancholy, beautiful sound," she said. In
summer, she went barefoot, reveling in the hot sand between her toes, and
walking among the birches and the wild white roses.

She said she didn't really think about preserving such rambling beauty until "I
got to the White House and was trying to figure out of all Lyndon's programs the
ones that made my heart sing, like Head Start and the environment."

It was her husband's Great Society speech in 1964 that struck home, the one in
which he exhorted Americans to clean up the air and water, preserve the
shrinking wilderness -- and the green spaces in their cities.

"I thought, 'That gives the environment a place of dignity on the national
agenda,' " Mrs. Johnson said. " 'It's not just a few garden club ladies. It
belongs to us.' And in an urban environment, it doesn't just mean planting
flowers in a park, it means the right to order and cleanliness and a pleasant
life."

On a barge in Lake Erie, she had watched "a great swivel-type dipper that
scooped up this water that looked like a combination of glue and ink, the
foulest-looking thing you could imagine," she said. "It fills you with rage to
realize how careless we've been."

Within the next year, Mrs. Johnson had rounded up a group of influential friends
for the First Lady's Committee for a More Beautiful Capital.

"The Secretary of the Interior, Stewart Udall, was very much a spark plug," she
said. "And so was Nash Castro of the National Parks Service, and so was a dear
friend of mine, Mrs. Jim Rowe, head of the garden clubs, then my good friend
Mary Lasker and Laurance Rockefeller, people who had similar beliefs.

"It was a mar-r-r-velous yeasty committee. Mary Lasker gave us a million
daffodil bulbs, which we planted around Rock Creek and along the Potomac."

In the next four years, they planted two million bulbs, thousands of cherry
trees and dogwoods -- and not just around the monuments. They went into the
blighted neighborhoods as well. "We did invest a lot of money on getting rid of
rats," Mrs. Johnson said, though critics said "beautification" was just putting
a pretty face on poverty.

The Lincoln pulled up to St. Barnabus Episcopal Church in Fredericksburg, west
of Johnson City, and Mrs. Johnson, who carries a cane these days but doesn't
like to use it, just tucked her hand into a nearby man's elbow, with the words,
"I'm going to grab onto you if you don't mind." Two men gave up their seats on a
pew, and at a pause in the service, she pointed out the stained glass: "Probably
the only place you will see a cactus blooming in a church window."

On the way home, Mrs. Johnson promised to "stop chasing rabbits" and get to the
nitty gritty of the work at the wildflower center. But chasing rabbits was maybe
the point.

"When we left the White House in '69, and came home, I was really shocked at the
change," she said. "The plow and the cow, so to speak, had been taken over.
Where you used to see open fields and slightly used pastures and wild lands, now
there were grids of housing and a spaghetti network of highways." She stared out
at a little orchard. "This is peach country, as you will observe."

She spent about five years helping Austin build a hiking trail along Town Lake
-- actually a part of the Colorado River that courses through the downtown --
turning an overgrown eyesore and a deserted old dump into a wide path now
bordered by native plants. "You must go walk on it," she said. "I loved that
project to death."

Then at 70, she thought, "If I'm ever going to do anything about this wildflower
idea, I better start now."

In 10 years, the center's membership -- from every state and 20 countries -- has
grown to 18,000. Its $1.7 million budget finances everything from researching
prairie restoration to advising states across the country on how to plant
wildflowers along their highways, at enormous savings in water, fertilizer and
work time. It also helps gardeners locate species native to their regions and
learn how to grow them. Which isn't easy.

And as wildflower gardeners know, one flower can easily take over another. "One
of my favorites, because it's a survivor, is Gaillardia, or Indian blanket,"
Mrs. Johnson said. "We planted it right in front of the house, and one summer it
just took off. We had bluebonnets and Indian paintbrush, too, but you had to
part the Gaillardia to find them."

The Lincoln trailed home along the Perdenales, where cattle herons grazed with
the L.B.J. Herefords, and Mrs Johnson pointed out the gravestones of the family
plot that lies by the river, beneath a great live oak.  There's Lyndon's stone,
she said, and his grandmother's and grandfather's, and his mother's and
father's, and his great-grandmother's (hers has the little lamb on the top).
They couldn't get her body across the river one year, it ran so high, so they
made this graveyard under the oak tree.

The sun was starting to come out as Mrs. Johnson walked up to the front door of
the ranch, saying: "Lyndon bought this house in the fall of '51 from his aunt --
her name was Frank, which is an awful thing to do to a woman -- and I went to
work on restoring it in February of '52. And I kind of fell in love with it as I
went along. First the live oaks, and the bluebonnets, and the limestone cliffs."

The original part of the house is fieldstone (one great room with a fireplace,
L.B.J.'s domino table and Sam Rayburn's picture, the one they had in the White
House). But the real living room, added later, the one with the comfortable
chairs and the vases of bluebonnets and the fire going, is where the family
gathers. Lynda Bird and Luci Baines, who have seven children between them, are
frequent visitors. The house is full of rugs and old furniture and American
paintings. And photographs line the hallways -- of the children and
grandchildren and everybody from Helen Hayes to Stewart Udall.

Over a Sunday dinner of chicken and collards and corn souffle, prepared by Felix
and Delma Munoz, who have cared for Mrs. Johnson for 13 years, she touched on
her years in Washington. ("The weight when you get into the White House. But
those were the most dramatic, the most tiring, the most varied years I ever
spent.") But it was with an air of plowing over old, old ground. The Whistlestop
Tour. The Vietnam War years. Better to watch the hummingbirds outside the
window.

"That's all you're having?" Mr. Munoz murmurred as Mrs. Johnson put half her
chicken on her butter plate. Yes, she said. She is two sizes bigger than she was
in the White House.

The best part was when she said she couldn't sing, and then she sang the boll
weevil song.

First time I seen the boll weevil,

He's settin' on the square.

Next time I seen him, he had his fam'ly there, he had his fammmm-'ly there.

Tell me, boll weee-vil,

Where is your na-tive home?

Way down in the bot-tom

Among the cot'n an' co'n.

It was suddenly easy to remember that Mrs. Johnson's father owned 18,000 acres
and was called Mr. Boss.

What does a boll weevil look like, Mrs. Johnson?

T. J. Taylor's daughter smiled faintly. "I've never seen one," she said. "But he
was a problem for the black man and a problem for the white man."

That so.

Spring pressed in on the windows. The bluebonnets turned bluer out in the yard.
It was time to change out of this Sunday garb and walk among the wildflowers.

A busload of tourists came down River Road, and Mrs. Johnson lifted her right
arm to the blue sky in a grand gesture. "Glad the sun came out for y'all," she
sang out. They pressed their faces to the windows. Look, there she is, standing
right in her bluebonnets. Chucking her cane under an old live oak as she walks
through the unmown grass toward the river.

The hummingbirds sipped nectar from the Indian paintbrush. A mockingbird sang.
The crape myrtle is coming back to life.

"I was afraid it got froze," Mrs. Johnson said. "We had a very bad out-of-season
freeze a week or two ago and it AWHHHH-most killed it."

The puffy clouds moved over the river at a good clip. The Indian paintbrush
turned the same coral color as Mrs. Johnson's lipstick.

Her assistant telephoned the visitor's hotel the next morning: "Mrs. Johnson
wants to make sure you know that Route 71, from Buchanan to Llano, has the best
wildflowers right now."

NAME: Lady Bird Johnson

LOAD-DATE: May 6, 1993

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photos: Lady Bird Johnson in a field of wildflowers on the Johnson
City, Tex., ranch that she said she gradually fell in love with: "first the live
oaks, and the bluebonnets, and the limestone cliffs." (pg. C1); Lady Bird
Johnson in her home with a wildflower. She founded the National Wildflower
Research Center in Austin, Tex. (pg. C10) (Suzanne DeChillo/The New York Times)

TYPE: Biography

                   Copyright 1993 The New York Times Company


                              131 of 312 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                  May 6, 1993, Thursday, Late Edition - Final

Critic's Notebook;
Inspiring Compassion, if Not Action

BYLINE: By WALTER GOODMAN

SECTION: Section C; Page 22; Column 4; Cultural Desk

LENGTH: 681 words


Most of the maunderings committed on the subject of television imagery have
focused hard on its power to influence policy. It was assumed that the impact of
the stunning scenes from China, Romania, Somalia, Los Angeles on so many
millions of Americans must make itself felt in pressure on Washington to do
something decisive to relieve the victims and punish the perpetrators. Whether
that should be a source of satisfaction or concern was less obvious.

For a year the "images of horror," as they were described on one of Sunday's
interview programs, have been coming from Bosnia like shells in a nonstop
assault: children dying, women raped, villages ravaged, cities blasted, with, as
someone else said, not too originally, "the whole world watching." And network
correspondents like Peter Jennings of ABC and Bob Simon of CBS added their own
indignation to the nightly displays of ethnic cleansing. The coverage has
amounted to a prolonged plea that something be done and a reprimand to those who
were failing to do it.

If the power of the television image were as irresistible as it is sometimes
assumed to be by the medium's professional observers, the nation would by now
have been roaring for intervention. Instead, Americans remain chary about
rushing to the rescue. Whatever one's opinion about what should already have
been done or must be done if the Serbs go back on the latest deal (pundits have
been generous with imperatives), the resistance is a sign that the image is not
all-powerful, that viewers are not just sponges for the tube's outpourings of
emotion.

Why the resistance? Why isn't revulsion against the brutality on show for months
making itself felt in Congress and the White House? Can it be that soft-hearted
America is hardening, that the pictures of this year's troubles of Muslims in
Bosnia are less moving than last year's pictures from Somalia, and that next
year's pictures from some other disaster spot on a disaster-prone globe will be
less moving still? Is it simply a case of producers' need to add ever more punch
to their product to achieve the same level of kick in television junkies?

Or is it that other images will not go away? There is Vietnam, of course, even
though Americans have been accused of having no historical memory. But much more
recently, the tube was taken up with America's actions in Somalia and Iraq.
Television cooperated in celebrating both as grand efforts in a noble tradition,
and they were widely supported around the country. But Iraq remains troublesome,
Kuwait shows no hint of reform and Somalia's future is anybody's guess. People
may be wondering why the late Yugoslavia should prove more amenable to virtuous
intervention.

And this time, for audiences who listen as well as watch, television exposed the
shakiness of Administration officials, Pentagon tacticians, and sundry
politicians and experts, which could only bolster an inherent reluctance to send
young people into danger for even so righteous a cause. That reluctance may be
shortsighted this time; it may be cruel; it may be a throwback to isolationism.
But as evidence of the limitations of the tube's images, it is oddly welcome.

For a year, the pictures from Bosnia of death and destruction, of whole peoples
searching for refuge from their neighborly killers, have cried for retaliation.
If Americans have not responded, perhaps it is not only out of heartlessness or
a feeling that they have enough troubles at home at the moment without looking
for more. Perhaps they have decided, despite all the puffy phrases that are
attached to foreign adventures, that the famous new world order is neither new
nor orderly, and that although the United States, as the commentators keep
reminding them, is now the sole superpower, it cannot handle every nation or
tribe or group bent on slaughter.

Be that as it may, much of the television audience has evidently concluded that
the appalling images that demand instant action tell little about the price of
specific actions or their consequences. That is not a bad lesson in a democracy.


LOAD-DATE: May 6, 1993

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1993 The New York Times Company


                              132 of 312 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                  May 6, 1993, Thursday, Late Edition - Final

Corrections

SECTION: Section A; Page 2; Column 5; Metropolitan Desk

LENGTH: 39 words


An article yesterday about Senator John S. McCain referred incorrectly to the
end of the Vietnam War, in which he served and was a prisoner of war. It was in
April 1975; what occurred in January 1973 was the cease-fire agreement.

LOAD-DATE: May 6, 1993

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Correction

                   Copyright 1993 The New York Times Company


                              133 of 312 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                   May 7, 1993, Friday, Late Edition - Final

Schedule of Human Rights Film Festival

SECTION: Section C; Page 21; Column 1; Weekend Desk

LENGTH: 634 words


The Human Rights Watch Film Festival begins tonight and runs through May 20 at
the Loews Village Theater VII, Third Avenue at 11th Street, East Village.
Admission: $6.50. Information: (212) 978-8991. Festival sponsors include Loews
and MTV. Here is the festival schedule for this weekend.

Today

"SERBIAN EPICS" (1992), directed by Pawel Pawlikowski, and "A DAY IN THE DEATH
OF SARAJEVO" (1992), directed by Thierry Ravalet, Alain Ferrari and
Bernard-Henri Levy, 6 P.M. Two views of the violence in the former Yugoslavia.

"THE JOURNEY" (1991), directed by Fernando E. Solanas, 6:15 P.M. A surreal
Argentine road film.

"KIEV BLUE" (1992), directed by Heather MacDonald, "SEX AND THE SANDINISTAS"
(1991), directed by Lucinda Broadbent, and "KHUSH" (1991), directed by Pratibha
Parmar, 9:30 P.M. Documentaries on homosexuality.

"MEMORY OF THE WATER" (1992), directed by Hector Favor, 9:45 P.M. A portrait of
a concentration-camp survivor.

Tomorrow

"MESSING UP GOD'S GLORY" (1993), directed by Avril Johnson and Afua
Namiley-Viana; "THE VOICE OF THE SHAWLS" (1992), directed by Marcelo Cespedes
and Carmen Guarini, and "WOMEN OF ALGIERS" (1992), directed by Kamal Dehane,
noon. Works on women's experiences.

"THE HOUR OF THE FURNACES" (1968), directed by Fernando E. Solanos and Octavio
Getino, focusing on the exploitation of Latin America, 12:15 P.M.;

"BLUE NOTES AND EXILED VOICES" (1992), directed by Imruh Bakari, and "MIZIKE
MAMA" (1992), directed by Vollaine de Villers, 2 P.M. Two works on singing
groups in Africa.

"MAMA SAID" (1992), directed by Michael Costanza; "NO JUSTICE, NO PEACE" (1992),
directed by Portia Cobb; "APRIL 29TH," (1993), directed by Dai Sil Kim-Gibson,
and "HANDS ON THE VERDICT" (1992), directed by Liz Canner and Julia Meltzer, 4
P.M. Four views of the Los Angeles riots.

"FROM HOLLYWOOD TO HANOI," (1992), directed by Tiana Thi Thanh Nga, 6 P.M. A
Vietnamese-American returns to Vietnam.

"ANOTHER AFRICA," (1992), directed by Francoise Ebrand, 7 P.M. A coming-of-age
drama set in New Guinea.

"TANGOS: THE EXILE OF GARDEL," (1985), directed by Fernando E. Solanos, about
Argentine political exiles in Paris, 9 P.M.

"DISMISSED FROM LIFE," (1992), directed by Waldemar Krzystek, 9:15 P.M. An
amnesiac wanders during the emergence of democracy in Poland.

Sunday

"THE UNDECLARED WAR" (1991), directed by Bertrand Tavernier, focusing on former
French soldiers discussing the Algerian war, noon.

"SERBIAN EPICS" (1992), directed by Pawel Pawlikowski, and "A DAY IN THE DEATH
OF SARAJEVO" (1992), directed by Thierry Ravalet, Alain Ferrari and
Bernard-Henri Levy, 12:15 P.M. Two views of the violence in the former
Yugoslavia.

"TXAI MACEDO" (1992), directed by Marcia Machado and Tal Danai, focusing on the
Amazon rain forest, and "WINDS OF MEMORY" (1992), directed by Felix Zurita,
about Mayan life in Guatemala, 3:15 P.M.

"EIGHTH DAY THEATER" (1992), directed by Joanna Helander and Bo Persson, 4:30
P.M. Emigration of a Polish theater group.

"KIEV BLUE" (1992), directed by Heather MacDonald; "SEX AND THE SANDINISTAS"
(1991), directed by Lucinda Broadbent, and "KHUSH" (1991), directed by Pratibha
Parmar. 5:15 P.M. Documentaries on homosexuality.

"FROM HOLLYWOOD TO HANOI" (1992), directed by Tiana Thi Thanh Nga, 6:30 P.M. A
Vietnamese-American returns to Vietnam.

"HEAR MY CRY" (1991), directed by Maciej Janusz Drygas, and "THE KATYN FOREST"
(1991), directed by Marcel Lozinski and Andrzej Wajda, 7:30 P.M. Documentaries
about Poland.

"IN THE NAME OF GOD" (1992), directed by Anand Patwardhan, 9 P.M. An examination
of Hindu fundamentalism.

"TERRORISM AND KEBOB" (1992), directed by Sherif Araf, 9:30 P.M. An Arab farce
about bureaucracy.

LOAD-DATE: May 7, 1993

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Schedule

                   Copyright 1993 The New York Times Company


                              134 of 312 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                  May 8, 1993, Saturday, Late Edition - Final

Senators Loudly Debate Gay Ban

BYLINE: AP

SECTION: Section 1; Page 9; Column 1; National Desk

LENGTH: 249 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, May 8


Congressional hearings on letting homosexuals serve in the military turned into
an argument between senators today over sexual practices.

In a hearing given exclusively to views of senators, Senator Strom Thurmond of
South Carolina at one point argued that only homosexuals perform sodomy.
"Heterosexuals don't practice sodomy," he shouted.

The comment by Mr. Thurmond, the ranking Republican on the committee, brought
laughter from the audience.

Senator John Kerry, a Massachusetts Democrat who was testifying, said he
disagreed with the statement.  He also pointed out that there were homosexuals
working in Congress and that none had been arrested for sexual practices.

"You want them arrested for that," Mr. Thurmond said.

Mr. Kerry replied sharply, "Do you, sir?"

Mr. Thurmond responded: "Sodomy is against the law. Why shouldn't they be
arrested?"

The Armed Services Committee heard from six senators who favor or oppose the
military's ban on homosexuals. Senator Kerry, a decorated Vietnam War veteran,
said the ban was "fundamentally wrong," adding, "There is nothing inherent in
homosexuality that makes a gay American incapable of serving."

Senator Sam Nunn, Democrat of Georgia and chairman of the committee, supports
the ban. He argued that lifting it required a change in the Uniform Code of
Military Justice, which prohibits sodomy. President Clinton can end the ban by
executive order, but only Congress can amend the 1951 code, a politically
difficult task.


LOAD-DATE: May 8, 1993

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1993 The New York Times Company


                              135 of 312 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                  May 8, 1993, Saturday, Late Edition - Final

CONFLICT IN THE BALKANS;
War Powers: An Old Debate Clinton May Resolve

BYLINE: By NEIL A. LEWIS,  Special to The New York Times

SECTION: Section 1; Page 4; Column 4; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 691 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, May 7


When President Clinton said this week that he would certainly seek some form of
Congressional backing for any use of American forces in Bosnia, he may help
resolve a debate as old as the Constitution that has grown more agonizing since
the Vietnam War -- whether and how the President should consult with Congress
over the use of force on foreign soil.

Although the Constitution explicitly grants Congress the power to declare war,
recent Presidents have resisted the notion that they are obliged to deal with
lawmakers over dispatching troops.

Some analysts believe that Mr. Clinton, who is facing a troubling decision over
whether to put Americans at risk to help end the war in Bosnia and Herzegovina,
apparently believes protecting his Presidential prerogatives is less important
than obtaining political cover by sharing the responsibility with Congress.

"This is a potentially defining moment in the post-cold-war period," said Harold
H. Koh, a professor of law at Yale University and an authority on national
security law.

Bush Asked as a Courtesy

President George Bush sought Congressional approval for the American-led
military operation to drive Iraqi invaders from Kuwait in 1991. But he did so
under pressure, portraying his action as a courtesy to Congress, not something
he was obliged to do. His decision to seek resolutions in both houses endorsing
the Persian Gulf war came after intense debate in the White House as to whether
he was setting a bad precedent.

If Mr. Clinton, a Democrat, follows the albeit grudging lead of a Republican
President, he could help to set a pattern.

In recent years, the debate has been framed around the War Powers Act, adopted
by Congress in 1973 as America's involvement in the Vietnam War was winding
down. The law requires the President to notify Congress in a timely fashion when
American troops are being sent abroad with a strong probability that they will
engage in combat. It calls for the troops to be removed from foreign territory
within 90 days unless Congress explicity gives approval for them to remain.

The law has proven largely ineffective because of Presidential resistance and
the willingness of Congress to stand aside and allow the White House to assume
the political risks of sending troops abroad. But in the case of Bosnia, both
opponents and supporters of military intervention in Congress have made it clear
that they want a role in the decision.

A senior White House official suggested that President Clinton, unlike many of
his predecessors, also believes Congress should have a role in such decisions.

"In the cold-war period, we used force reactively," Mr. Koh said. This allowed
Presidents to argue that they could not await the time-consuming process of
having Congress declare war. Their power to conduct diplomacy as detailed in the
Constitution, they argued, was enough to allow them to dispatch troops.

But many scholars say that the developing post-cold-war model for the use of
American forces is one in which the United States contributes troops to a
multinational force under the control of the United Nations or some other
international organization. Such circumstances allow for a more deliberate
consideration by Congress.

Peter Raven-Hansen of the George Washington University school of law said it
would be nearly impossible for President Clinton to argue that he could send
troops to the Balkans without some kind of Congressional approval. "Congress is
compelled by the Constitution to deliberate and decide if it will give formal
authority to do this," he said. "The main argument in getting involved in Bosnia
is a moral one and the people's representatives ought to have a say in whether
they want American lives risked for a moral reason."

Although the debate over Congressional prerogatives sharpened after Vietnam, it
has existed since the United States was formed. Scholars have estimated that
Presidents have dispatched forces abroad between 120 and 200 times, but Congress
has only formally declared war on five occasions: the War of 1812, the
Spanish-American War, the Mexican-American War and the two World Wars.

LOAD-DATE: May 8, 1993

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo: People running by a wall yesterday in Sarajevo to avoid sniper
fire. The route is subject to sporadic fire. (Associated Press)

                   Copyright 1993 The New York Times Company


                              136 of 312 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                  May 8, 1993, Saturday, Late Edition - Final

Arms Makers Vie to Build Rail Cars

BYLINE: By CALVIN SIMS,  Special to The New York Times

SECTION: Section 1; Page 37; Column 3; Financial Desk

LENGTH: 1446 words

DATELINE: LOS ANGELES, May 7


In what public officials here are billing as the first serious effort to steer
the declining weapons industry toward commercial work, five of the nation's
largest military and aerospace contractors are competing for a contract to build
rail cars for this city's new mass transit system.

The military contractors have each joined forces with established rail-car
manufacturers to bid for the contract, which is seen as a test case of whether
the companies can successfully transfer decades of high-tech weapons production
into marketable products for the rapidly expanding transportation equipment and
services market.

The contract, with an estimated value of $200 million, is to be awarded by the
end of June. It covers the building of 87 cars for the city's Green Line,
scheduled to open in late 1994, and to develop technologically advanced
transportation products that can be used in Los Angeles cars and other transit
systems worldwide.

"Unlike some businesses that the defense contractors are considering entering,
transportation is still an underdeveloped market, and a lot of the skills used
in defense are applicable to mass transit," said James Raffel, a research
analyst for the National Commission for Economic Conversion and Disarmament, a
Washington group.

Rail-car industry executives appear pleased to form partnerships with military
contractors, which they said had developed a variety of technologies that would
benefit future mass transit systems.

They may include lightweight frames for rail cars and buses, made from the same
composite materials that the military contractors use in their rocket and
missile designs. The contractors may also use their knowledge of aerospace
electronics to develop safer braking and more fuel-efficient propulsion systems
for the rail cars.

"Most of this technology has been too expensive for us to develop for the
current market, and a lot of it has been kept confidential or classified as
sensitive because of its use by the military," said Thomas J. Smith, president
of the Morrison Knudsen Corporation's rail system group, which has teamed with
the Hughes Aircraft Company and the Lockheed Corporation. "It's a unique
opportunity for us to get our hands on some of it."

Many weapons industry experts and executives have long maintained that the
skills the contractors gained in building complex weaponry like missiles, jet
fighters and radar have direct applications to transportation. Even critics say
that if military contractors are at all successful in commercial ventures, they
will most likely be transportation related, mainly because that market remains
largely undeveloped.
 Yet Mr. Raffel said that military contractors were unlikely to enter the market
for transportation equipment and services, despite its predicted fast growth,
unless the Federal Government made a considerable investment in the development
of new technologies and in the rebuilding of roads, bridges and mass transit.

As an example of why such conversion efforts are prone to fail when there is no
Government support, Mr. Raffel cites the Boeing Corporation's early success in
building rail cars and trolleys after the Vietnam War. But the Seattle-based jet
builder ultimately abandoned its rail-car efforts when financing from the Urban
Mass Transit Administration was cut during the Carter and Reagan Administrations
and the market became unstable.

President Clinton has said he intends to increase Federal investment in
transportation and rebuilding roads and the like, but no specific plans have yet
been formulated.

The American Public Transit Association, an industry group, estimates that
transit systems across the United States will have to spend about $8.1 billion
by the end of the decade to replace rail vehicles and keep them in proper
working order. That amount compares with $4.5 billion spent in 1990.

Los Angeles plans to spend $150 billion over the next 30 years on a 400-mile
metro system that includes light- , heavy- and commuter-rail systems. About $70
billion will be spent on the light-rail system, which will require hundreds of
rail cars.


Motive Was Loss of Jobs

Officials of the Los Angeles Metropolitan Transportation Authority said that the
region's loss of some 150,000 aerospace and weapons jobs in the last five years
prompted them to structure the rail-car procurement as an enticement for
military contractors to consider transportation work to offset the decline in
military business.

"We've worked very hard to encourage local aerospace and defense firms to form
these partnerships with the rail-car industry to help them make the transition
into the emerging surface transportation industry," said Mike Antonovich,
chairman of the Los Angeles Metropolitan Transportation Authority.

The four bidding teams are: the Northrop Corporation with the Bombardier
Corporation; Lockheed, Hughes and Morrison Knudsen; TRW Aerospace, the AAI
Corporation and the Siemens Duewag Corporation, and the Rockwell International
Corporation with the Sumitomo Corporation.

Under the contract, the winning team will receive up to $10 million to develop
product ideas, which will be tested on two prototype cars and possibly be
included in some of the 87 cars ordered. The winning team is expected to be well
positioned to compete for other transit rail contracts and to sell its products
across the country and overseas.

But some critics and supporters of conversion alike say that the military
contractors have yet to show a real commitment to transportation and that the
companies' participation in the Los Angeles rail system is only window dressing
because it requires little capital investment.

Union Is Skeptical

"If they are serious about transportation, why aren't they creating design and
development centers within the companies to study the new technologies and make
prototypes?" asked Don Nakamoto, research director for the International
Association of Machinists and Aerospace Workers District 727 in Los Angeles.
"They are very reluctant to take the first step."

Mr. Nakamoto, whose union strongly supports conversion for jobs growth, said he
believed the city's effort to get military contractors to participate in the
rail-car procurement was partly political. After the metropolitan transportation
commission canceled a $121.8 million contract it had awarded to Sumitomo for the
Green Line cars, amid a storm of criticism about the selection of a
foreign-owned company, it was forced to find American companies to bid with
foreign rail-car makers, Mr. Nakamoto said.

Gwendolyn Williams, manager of contracting for the vehicle acquisition project
for the Los Angeles Metropolitan Transportation Authority, said that initially
the rail-car makers responded coldly to the idea of teaming with the military
contractors because the two were in totally different businesses. After months
of collaboration, however, the rail-car makers have expressed optimism that the
partnerships will prosper.

Greg Fountain, Lockheed's manager of advanced product development for commercial
systems, said that the Los Angeles procurement represented an opportunity to
test ideas. "The critical issue here is that we in the defense business must
learn to assess the needs of the market and match those needs with the
appropriate technology," he said. "In the past we were just given requirements
and we met them."

Mr. Fountain said that if Lockheed was successful in developing new
transportation technologies, he believed the new area of business could amount
to as much as $100 million in annual revenue and possibly more in the long term.


Rockwell Sees Advantage

Officials of Rockwell International said they believed they had an advantage
over other military contractors competing for the Los Angeles rail contract
because of the company's history of translating military technology into
transportation products.

Using its military navigation and electronics skills, Rockwell recently
developed satellite navigation and communications systems that are being used by
trucking companies, transit systems and railroads to track vehicles and provide
the latest type of communications. The contractor is also developing so-called
intelligent vehicle highway systems, a traffic management tool, and it is a
major supplier of car and truck components and systems.

"It's not hard to imagine transportation being half of Rockwell International,"
Mr. Black said. "The same technology that we put in infrared sensors can be used
for traffic-lane monitoring or even for collision avoidance in cars. The trick
is correctly identifying the market and applying the technology."

LOAD-DATE: May 8, 1993

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Drawing

                   Copyright 1993 The New York Times Company


                              137 of 312 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                   May 9, 1993, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

Tet and Television

SECTION: Section 7; Page 30; Column 3; Book Review Desk

LENGTH: 469 words


To the Editor:

Picking a network television star to review a serious work of history is always
risky. What if the star is too busy to do his homework? Morley Safer, a onetime
CBS reporter in Vietnam, now a presence on "60 Minutes," seems a case in point
(April 11). He assesses Ronald H. Spector's "After Tet," a vivid but balanced
account of the Americans' grinding war in South Vietnam in 1968, after Hanoi's
surprise Tet offensive in January and February.

In his loose-knit review, Mr. Safer takes an angry jab at "those revisionists .
. . who declare that the battles during the early months of 1968 were an
American victory that was criminally misreported by American journalists." He
names as chief villain Don Oberdorfer, the author of the 1971 classic "Tet!"

This is misleading. First, Mr. Oberdorfer was himself a journalist, an
eyewitness, in South Vietnam at Tet (Mr. Safer was not). Second, Mr.
Oberdorfer's "revisionism" lay only in stating early what most serious scholars
(including Mr. Spector) have since concluded: at Tet, the Communists suffered a
bloody military setback (but President Lyndon B. Johnson found himself facing a
political crisis in Washington over his Vietnam policy). Third, in his
dispassionate book Mr. Oberdorfer did not chastise the television networks for
failing to convey this reality, even as he described the contemporary impact of
their highly dramatic reportage on the nation's capital.

In short, Mr. Safer read Mr. Oberdorfer wrong or now confuses him with someone
else. The true source of Mr. Safer's enduring resentment, I suspect, may be "Big
Story" (1977), a lengthy (but nonpolemical) analysis of Tet news media coverage,
especially television's emotive "disaster" themes. The author was one of Mr.
Oberdorfer's fellow newspapermen in Vietnam during the 1968 battle. Namely, me.

PETER BRAESTRUP
Washington

Morley Safer replies:

I will let readers decide which is the more loose-knit -- Peter Braestrup's
carping letter or my review of Ronald Spector's excellent book.

Mr. Braestrup positively unravels when he ignores my conclusion that Hanoi paid
"an enormous price" in virtually every major engagement in 1968 and then goes on
to point out that he came to precisely the same conclusion.

Mr. Braestrup is upset by my current line of work -- co-editor of "60 Minutes"
-- which he misleadingly describes as "network television star." It offends him
that someone in so unworthy a profession dare review a serious work of history.

My biggest offense, however, is reserved for his concluding paragraph, in which
he shows a petty resentment over my reference to only Don Oberdorfer's book and
not to Mr. Braestrup's "Big Story." In other words, he did not get "star"
billing. Big deal. Sic transit show business, Mr. Braestrup.

LOAD-DATE: May 9, 1993

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Letter

                   Copyright 1993 The New York Times Company


                              138 of 312 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                   May 9, 1993, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

Seeking the Enemy

SECTION: Section 7; Page 30; Column 3; Book Review Desk

LENGTH: 237 words


To the Editor:

Although I appreciate the favorable tone present in Russell F. Weigley's review
of my book "Red Thunder, Tropic Lightning" (April 11), he badly distorts my
views on two important issues.

Mr. Weigley implies that my research supports his claim that the blood tax paid
during the Vietnam War was levied "with gross disproportion upon the
underclasses of American society." Although no one would deny that inequities
existed in the Vietnam-era draft, the dozens of veterans I interviewed, nearly
all of whom served on the spearpoint, represented a very large cross section of
American society as it existed 25 years ago.

In addition, I find preposterous Mr. Weigley's suggestion that infantry
commanders in Vietnam, believing that their "underclass" combat soldiers were
expendable, offered them up as "sacrifices" in a conscious attempt to
precipitate enemy ambush. It is true that commanders sometimes tried to entice
an enemy assault on a heavily defended American firebase. Day by day, however,
American infantrymen did what all infantrymen have done in all wars when on the
tactical offensive: they sought the enemy. Whether the opponent fights for the
Vietcong or the Wehrmacht, defenders by definition are well hidden and almost
invariably get off the first shot. This is because of the harsh dynamic of
battle and has nothing to do with sociology.

ERIC M. BERGERUD
Albany, Calif.

LOAD-DATE: May 9, 1993

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Letter

                   Copyright 1993 The New York Times Company


                              139 of 312 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                   May 9, 1993, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

Florida Electrocutes a Vietnam Veteran for a 1979 Murder

BYLINE: AP

SECTION: Section 1; Page 23; Column 1; National Desk

LENGTH: 327 words

DATELINE: STARKE, Fla., May 8


A Vietnam veteran diagnosed with post-traumatic stress disorder was executed
tonight in the electric chair for the 1979 shotgun murder of a gasoline station
owner.

The veteran, Larry Joe Johnson, was pronounced dead at 10:07 P.M., said Jo
Miglino, a spokeswoman for Gov. Lawton Chiles.

Earlier today, the United States Supreme Court denied two separate petitions to
review Mr. Johnson's case and the accompanying applications for a stay of
execution.

Veterans' groups had called for state officials to spare Mr. Johnson's life. The
effort succeeded in winning at least one delay.

Mr. Johnson, 49, was condemned for killing James Hadden, 67, who was killed with
a sawed-off shotgun during a robbery.

Delay in February

Mr. Johnson came within days of execution in February, but Governor Chiles
delayed it to review a State Supreme Court suggestion that Mr. Johnson had been
psychologically damaged by his military service.

But after his review, Mr. Chiles issued another death warrant.

"I recognize the Vietnam veteran syndrome," Mr. Chiles said last week. "I do not
think it applies in this case."

During the war, Mr. Johnson was in a Navy construction unit in Vietnam. After he
received an honorable discharge, he joined the Kentucky National Guard. His
military career ended in 1974, when he was hit by a smoke grenade during a
training exercise.

That accident caused brain damage and Mr. Johnson spent years in a military
psychiatric ward.

The war stress argument had failed to avert an execution before in Florida.
Another Vietnam veteran, David Funchess, who was convicted of a double murder in
Jacksonville, was put to death in 1986, four years after the state rejected his
appeal based on post-traumatic stress.

Mr. Johnson was the 201st person executed nationwide since the Supreme Court
allowed states to resume capital punishment in 1976. He became the 31st inmate
executed since Florida reinstated the death penalty in 1979.

LOAD-DATE: May 9, 1993

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1993 The New York Times Company


                              140 of 312 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                   May 9, 1993, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

Chinese Support for Khmer Rouge Grows Cooler

BYLINE: By NICHOLAS D. KRISTOF,  Special to The New York Times

SECTION: Section 1; Page 12; Column 3; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 866 words

DATELINE: BEIJING, May 8


Back in 1965, when China was still a deep shade of red, an impressionable
Cambodian in his 30's hiked through the jungles from Indochina and began a long
friendship with the Chinese authorities.

His name was Pol Pot, and the support he received from China's leadership proved
crucial throughout his subsequent career.

Beijing supplied the weaponry he used to seize power in Cambodia in 1975, stood
by him as he presided over the slaughter of more than a million Cambodians and
supported him diplomatically and militarily after he and his Khmer Rouge forces
were deposed at the beginning of 1979.

Alliance May Be Crumbling

In a region where alliances are often fickle, the friendship between China and
the Khmer Rouge has been one of the most durable around. But now that friendship
may finally be crumbling, with far-reaching implications for Indochina.

"We've seen more tensions between the Khmer Rouge and China in recent years,"
said a diplomat from one of China's neighbors. "There's been a cooling of ties.
But it's not yet possible to say that there's been a final break."

The problem for China is that while it has abandoned many of its Maoist policies
and is now trying on pin-striped business suits, some of its former
comrades-in-arms are still wearing camouflage gear. Aside from the Khmer Rouge,
Maoist rebels are active in such places as Peru and the Philippines. In
December, the Maoist guerrillas of the Shining Path organization set off a car
bomb near the Chinese Embassy in Lima to protest against Beijing's revisionism.

While China has gradually been distancing itself from the Khmer Rouge since the
peace accords on Cambodia were signed in Paris in 1991, the last few days marked
a new low in the relationship.

On Tuesday, troops believed to be from the Khmer Rouge attacked a group of
Chinese engineers working in Cambodia, wounding some of them. And on Thursday,
the Khmer Rouge boycotted talks in Beijing attended by the three other Cambodian
factions.

Chinese in Cambodia Attacked

The Chinese engineers were probably attacked with Chinese weapons, for China has
been the main supplier of the Khmer Rouge. The official Chinese news media
blamed the Khmer Rouge for the attack, but the Foreign Ministry has said it is
still investigating.

"It is still unclear who was behind the bombardment," said Wu Jianmin, the
Foreign Ministry spokesman.

Later, the Foreign Ministry was asked whether China's relationship with the
Khmer Rouge remained one of friendship. The ministry responded a day later with
one sentence stating that the Paris accord should be carried out and the four
factions treated equally.

In effect, the answer seemed to be: "Friendship? What friendship?"

Without backing from China, the Khmer Rouge may find it more difficult in the
long run to obtain the weapons and international respectability they seek. In
time, the lack of Chinese support would erode the Khmer Rouge's strength and
perhaps make it easier for Cambodia to end the long turmoil and civil war.

But in the short run, a break with Beijing may free Pol Pot from any restraint.
The Khmer Rouge appear, for example, to be stepping up their efforts to
intimidate the Cambodian electorate and disrupt the elections scheduled for
later this month.

The Khmer Rouge apparently have a considerable stockpile of weapons obtained
before China cut off the supply a couple of years ago, and they may now try to
turn a political competition into a military one. Thus some diplomats fear that
the increased isolation of the Khmer Rouge simply means more danger for the
Cambodian people.

U.N. Official Decries Pessimism

Yasushi Akashi, the head of the United Nations peacekeeping operation in
Cambodia, bristled when he was asked at a news conference on Thursday if the
Khmer Rouge's refusal to take part in the transition outlined in the peace
accords meant that Cambodia faced continued civil war.

"A lot of journalists like to indulge in worst-case scenarios of civil war," he
said. Mr. Akashi insisted that the elections would be fair and comprehensive by
the yardstick of the region.

Many of China's suave diplomats appear embarrassed about their country's links
with the Khmer Rouge. They are just the kind of urban intellectuals whom the
Khmer Rouge tended to bludgeon to death with hammers when Cambodia was short of
ammunition.

The problem for China's leaders is that their links with Pol Pot go so far back
that it is difficult for them to disavow him openly. Indeed, China gave Pol Pot
and his 30,000 guerrillas the military supplies that they used in 1975 to seize
control of Cambodia. Those supplies were delivered via North Vietnam, which then
also supported the Khmer Rouge.

A Chinese history book published two years ago suggests somewhat ruefully that
Pol Pot's extremism may derive in part from his fond memories of Maoist China.
The book notes that after Pol Pot's initial three-month visit in 1965, he
visited again in 1968 and soaked up the excitement of the Cultural Revolution.

"This couldn't help but leave a deep impression on Pol Pot," the book said. "The
leftist errors of Chinese Communism strongly affected the party's admirers."

LOAD-DATE: May 9, 1993

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo: China has gradually been distancing itself from the Khmer Rouge
since the Cambodian peace accords were signed in 1991, and the relationship has
sunk to a new low in the last few days. United Nations peacekeeping soldiers
patrolled the streets of Phnom Penh. (Associated Press)

                   Copyright 1993 The New York Times Company


                              141 of 312 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                   May 9, 1993, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

Washington Is Star-Struck As Hollywood Gets Serious

BYLINE: By MAUREEN DOWD,  Special to The New York Times

SECTION: Section 1; Page 1; Column 1; National Desk

LENGTH: 1998 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, May 8


It's hard to pinpoint the exact moment when things began spinning out of control
on the celebrity front.

Was it when Michael Douglas eclipsed President Clinton at last weekend's White
House Correspondents' Association dinner?

Was it when George Stephanopoulos, the White House communications director,
began dating Jennifer Grey, the actress who starred in the 1987 movie "Dirty
Dancing?"

Maybe it was simply when Barbra Streisand became as familiar a figure on the
political scene as John McLaughlin, the carnivorous talk-show host.

A Rush From the Coast

The Clinton White House is extravagantly star-struck, and Hollywood's liberal
luminaries, sensing an opportunity to be taken seriously and savoring the
compatible politics, are flocking to Washington. Hollywood moguls and stars are
pushing to move beyond their traditional roles as campaign ornaments and cash
machines and become more substantive players as communications, image and policy
advisers, and as salesmen for Clinton Administration programs.

Cabinet members and White House officials are giving the Hollywood big shots
policy briefings and asking their help in selling programs on health care, the
environment and national service.

"The idea that these insulated and bubble-headed people should help make policy
is ridiculous," said Leon Wieseltier, the cultural editor of The New Republic
magazine. "Hollywood actors are even more out of touch than elected politicians.
In Hollywood, politics is another way of dressing and talking."

But Mr. Wieseltier appreciates the similar qualities that link the worlds of
politics and movies. "They're highly scripted, poorly directed and always over
budget," he said.

Washington and Hollywood have always been drawn to each other because of their
common interest in performance and image, and their complementary insecurities:
the Hollywood elite wants to be seen as serious, and the Washington elite wants
to be seen as glamorous.

But with the technological and talk-show revolution of the last Presidential
campaign, politics has taken on even more of the techniques of popular culture
and packaged entertainment. The Clinton convention and inauguration were
painstakingly produced by Harry Thomason and Linda Bloodworth-Thomason, the
Hollywood sitcom czars who have also bought a beach-front estate outside Santa
Barbara, Calif., that the Clintons, their longtime friends, can use as a Western
retreat.

Ronald and Nancy Reagan entertained old friends from Hollywood in the White
House, veteran stars like Charlton Heston and Jimmy Stewart. With George Bush,
there were only rare glimpses of glitter: drop-bys by Bo Derek and Michael
Jackson and the pumping-up appearances of Arnold Schwarzenegger.

A Hot Script

But now there is a Democratic President whose nickname is Elvis and who likes
Hollywood, a town that was slow to warm to him as a candidate but now seems to
be in a stampede.

As Peter Guber, the chairman of Sony Pictures Entertainment, put it: "The
herding mentality is so strong here that when a script is hot, everyone goes
after it, whether they've read it or not."

Having become more sophisticated politically, many in Hollywood's royalty now
want the same sort of access that other valuable constituencies like Wall Street
have long enjoyed.

"Celebrities don't want to just be called to write checks," said Margery
Tabankin, the executive director of the Hollywood Women's Political Committee
and the head of the Barbra Streisand Foundation, a charitable organization.
"Nobody in Hollywood comes to the table thinking that they have the answers on
Bosnia. Come on! But they do come as artists, pained by human suffering, who
want to bring their creative skills to the process."

Hollywood Commitments

She said Hollywood types were helping to develop marketing themes for
Administration programs and were committed to make personal appearances and
public-service announcements.

A couple of Clinton strategists, detecting some negative sentiment about Mr.
Clinton's celebrity connections showing up in polls, have warned that the
President and his bedazzled young aides should cool their romance with Hollywood
because it gives a liberal and elitist cast to a White House that wants to
appear centrist and populist.

Even some on the West Coast privately worry that Mr. Clinton might be too taken
with what one calls "the siren song that is so alluring to politicians."

"Frankly," said this powerful member of the Hollywood set who is close to the
Clintons, "he'd be very wise to keep us at arm's length."

Politicians have been hurt in the past by being too closely identified with the
city confected of dreams and desire: John F. Kennedy was drawn to that world,
hanging around with movie stars and visiting Frank Sinatra in Las Vegas, Nev.
The friendship of Gary Hart and Warren Beatty became emblematic of the sometimes
dangerous liaison between these worlds, one Puritan, the other sybaritic.

Loss of Temper

At least one Clinton strategist was openly contemptuous of the idea of catering
to Hollywood. When the White House invited a group of Hollywood people to a
health-care briefing, James Carville, one of the briefers, lost his
Southern-fried temper and lectured them in a profane manner that made it clear
that he did not believe that their affluent lives had equipped them to devise a
plan to sell health care to average, struggling Americans.

Gary David Goldberg, the producer and director of such television series as
"Family Ties" and "Brooklyn Bridge," stormed out and later told The Los Angeles
Times that Mr. Carville had acted like "Anthony Perkins playing Fidel Castro on
acid."

Mr. Carville seems relatively unrepentant, saying only: "Do I use bad words from
time to time? Yes. They started telling me how many degrees they had. Somebody
blurted out, 'I have a Ph.D. in communications from U.C.L.A.' Well,
wowee-kazowee!"

But every day there is a bit more tinsel draped on the White House. On Thursday,
Hillary Rodham Clinton sat for a photographic session with Kenny Rogers, the
country singer who photographs stars on the side.

White House Mail

David Geffen, the producer and record-industry executive, and Michael Medavoy,
the chairman of Tri star Pictures, telephone Thomas F. McLarty 3d, the White
House chief of staff, to jawbone about the economy, and Mr. Geffen is looking
for an apartment in Washington. Judy Collins, the singer, the Thomasons and the
Medavoys have all spent the night in the Lincoln Bedroom, and Liza Minelli is
invited to stay over next month. (Sending a letter to a fellow movie mogul on
the stationery kept in the residence is now the ultimate bit of Hollywood
one-upmanship.)

Last month, a Hollywood group, including Billy Crystal, Christopher Reeve, John
Ritter, Sam Waterston and Lindsay Wagner, checked out the Oval Office and White
House mess, met the President and Vice President and got environmental briefings
from Interior Secretary Bruce Babbitt; Carol M. Browner, the Administrator of
the Environmental Protection Agency; Timothy E. Wirth, the Under Secretary of
State for Global Affairs, and Katie McGinty, the White House director of
environmental policy.

Markie Post, a cast member of the Thomason-produced series "Hearts Afire," and
Ivan Reitman, the director of "Dave," have dropped by to watch the President
deliver his Saturday radio address.

Ambitious Schedule

On a clear day in Washington, you can see Barbra Streisand forever. In the last
few weeks, she has popped up as a guest at the annual Gridiron dinner, slept
over in the Queen's Bedroom in the White House and attended the health-care
briefing.

Her schedule this past week was as ambitious as Senator Bob Dole's. A week ago,
she went to the White House Correspondents' Dinner as a guest of Newsweek and
chatted with Gen. Colin L. Powell, the Chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff,
about Bosnia and homosexuals in the military. On Monday night, as Federal Bureau
of Investigation agents stood guard, she hashed over issues with Attorney
General Janet Reno during dinner at Citronelle, a modish Georgetown restaurant.
On Tuesday, she met with female House members by day and went to a Democratic
fund-raising event by night. On Wednesday afternoon, she made phone calls from
the study off the Oval Office and then dined at a Georgetown home with Labor
Secretary Robert B. Reich and a trio of eligible Senators, Bob Kerrey of
Nebraska, Christopher J. Dodd of Connecticut and William S. Cohen of Maine.

Consider the scene on Thursday night, at a dinner party for the newly confirmed
Ambassador to France, Pamela Harriman, at the Georgetown home of Katharine
Graham, the chairwoman of the Washington Post Company.

From Bosnia to Camcorders

Barry Diller, the former chairman of Paramount Pictures and Fox Inc. who now
owns part of QVC, a television shopping channel, joined some politicians and
journalists on Mrs. Graham's terrace who were discussing whether Bosnia could
turn into a Vietnam.

Mr. Diller listened for a while and then changed the subject to show business.
"QVC is wonderful," he said. "The other night we sold 3,000 camcorders for $800
apiece."

After meeting with President Boris Yeltsin of Russia last month in Vancouver,
British Columbia, Mr. Clinton had a late party in his suite with a bunch of
Hollywood celebrities, including Sharon Stone, Richard Dreyfuss and Richard
Gere.

Mr. Gere took the opportunity to lobby the President about meeting with the
Dalai Lama, a conversation Mr. Clinton tried to sidestep by telling the actor
that his China policy was not yet set.

"Hollywood people have realized that they don't have to be window dressing, that
on particular issues they care deeply about, they can exercise their right to
influence policy direction, whether it be the White House, the state house or
city hall," said Donna Bojarsky, an adviser to Mr. Dreyfuss on public policy.
(It is chic in Hollywood for celebrities to have their own political
consultants.)

Model's Compliment

At the invitation of Time, Ms. Bojarsky and Mr. Dreyfuss flew in for the White
House Correspondents' Dinner and a glittering post-dinner party put on by Vanity
Fair.

Vendela, the Sports Illustrated swimsuit model, quickly deserted a conversation
with Michael Douglas when she caught sight of George Stephanopoulos. "You're so
cute; I've seen you on television," the Swedish model cooed at the spokesman,
who was speechless with appreciation.

Nearby, Ms. Streisand was analyzing news coverage of the President's first 100
days with Dee Dee Myers, the Clinton press secretary. And in another dark
corner, Mr. Douglas, a guest of Howard Fineman, the Newsweek political
correspondent, was deep in conversation about Bosnia with the Ambassador to the
United Nations Madeleine K. Albright.

Mr. Douglas was the most coveted celebrity that evening, even outshining the
President who had an off night with a speech that was not very funny and
contained a couple of gaffes. The actor wanted to talk issues, shrugging off
inquiries about his steamy love scenes with Sharon Stone in "Basic Instinct"
with the comment: "Another day, another dollar."

Fans Make No Apologies

Two people in the White House, at least, are not making any bones about being
huge fans.

Mark D. Gearan, the deputy chief of staff, keeps a video camera in his desk so
he can ask stars to film messages to his 1-year-old daughter, Madeleine. "I feel
like a bad reporter for Variety lurking in the West Wing with my camcorder
waiting to catch celebrities," he said.

And then there is the President, who with the First Lady recently took Paul
Newman and Joanne Woodward to dinner at Galileo, a Washington restaurant.

"He grew up watching movies like 'The Hustler,' 'Hud' and 'Cat on a Hot Tin
Roof' and he still gets genuinely blown away by spending time with some of these
people," Dee Dee Myers said. "There's still a lot of the kid from Hope, Ark., in
him."

LOAD-DATE: May 9, 1993

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo: Gen. Colin L. Powell, the Chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff,
chatting with Barbra Streisand on May 1 at the White House Correspondents'
Association annual dinner in Washington. (Agence France-Presse) (pg. 22)

                   Copyright 1993 The New York Times Company


                              142 of 312 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                   May 9, 1993, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

NEW JERSEY GUIDE

BYLINE: By ALVIN KLEIN

SECTION: Section 13NJ; Page 7; Column 1; New Jersey Weekly Desk

LENGTH: 1317 words



BATTLESHIP TRIBUTE

History-making sea adventures will be recounted by men who served aboard the
battleship New Jersey at a celebration of the 50th anniversary of her
commissioning. The tribute to the ship, which earned 16 battle stars serving in
World War II, Korea, Vietnam and other actions, will be held on Saturday
afternoon at the Monmouth County Library in Manalapan.

Paul Stillwell, director of history at the United States Naval Institute in
Annapolis and author of "Battleship New Jersey" and other books published by the
institute, will speak on "The Mystique and Aura of the Dreadnought," as the
class of ship is known.

Capt. Joseph Azzolina, U.S.N., retired, will recall his days with the New Jersey
at Beirut, and Capt. Walter M. Migrala Jr., commanding officer of the Naval
Weapons Station at Earle, will report on her role in Vietnam.

The Battleship New Jersey Historical Museum Society will sponsor the free
program. The society's executive vice president, Leon Morrison, will set the
stage for the other speakers by presenting a historical overview of the
battleship, which now sits decommissioned in Bremerton, Wash. The purpose of the
society is to make the New Jersey a museum in her namesake state.

The afternoon will also feature an exhibition including models of the ship,
photographs and memorabilia and a large-screen videotape tour of the ship,
introduced by Capt. John C. Baker, who was commanding officer of the
battleship's reserve detachment from 1985 to 1989.

The program will begin at 1 P.M. at the library, 125 Symmes Avenue, with an
introduction by Walter E. Olkowski, president of the museum society. Naval
cadets from Squadron One in Lakehurst will present the colors, and Gloria
Patrizio, soprano, will sing "The Star-Spangled Banner." A welcome and remarks
by Freeholder Theodore J. Narozanick will follow.

At the conclusion of the program, Ms. Patrizio will lead the audience in singing
"God Bless America" and "Anchors Aweigh."

Exhibits, including a nine-foot-long model of the New Jersey from the Intrepid
Sea-Air Space Museum in New York City, will be displayed in the rotunda of the
State House in Trenton from May 17 through May 20, and there will be a
ceremonial observance in the Assembly about 12:30 P.M. on May 20.

Information: (201) 592-1223 or (908) 722-6869.

DAYS OF OLD

The treadmill, familiar as an exercise contraption for people in this age, may
be seen at Fosterfields in Morris Township today in its original form, as the
horse-driven source of power for machinery in an earlier age.

From 1 to 3 P.M., the horse treadmill at the Morris County Park Commission's
Living Historical Farm will be demonstrated for the first time since its
restoration. The power generated depends on the horse's weight, visitors will
hear in a commentary of facts and anecdotes.

Programs at the farm highlight skills and practices from the late 19th and early
20th centuries. From 1 to 4 P.M. Saturday, a volunteer carpenter, Ralph
LeFevere, will be working on the reproduction of a chair that also serves as a
step stool.

Next Sunday from 1 to 4 P.M., croquet players in period costume will discuss and
illustrate the game and invite visitors to participate.

Fosterfields is on Kahdena Road off Route 24 west of Morristown. It is open from
10 a.M. to 5 P.M. Wednesday through Saturday and 1 to 5 P.M. Sunday. Admission
is free except on Saturdays, Sundays and holidays, when the fee is $2 for those
6 to 16 or over 65, free for those under 6 and $3 for others.

Information: (201) 326-7645.

FLOWER SALE

Mother's Day gift baskets and a wide selection of annuals, perennials, shrubs
and hanging baskets will be available at a sale at the Flat Rock Brook Nature
Center in Englewood from 10 A.M. to 4 P.M. today.

The sale is sponsored by the Garden Club of Englewood, which won an award of the
Garden Club of America last spring to finance a "backyard habitat," a garden
featuring native plants that are attractive to birds and butterflies and
requiring little, if any, pesticide treatment.

Weather conditions retarded the garden's development at the nature center, but
visitors may view the plans, and the plant species selected for it will be
displayed and sold.

Club members will supply advice, and Dwight Englewood School students will
assist in transporting purchases to cars. Proceeds of the sale will support the
club's civic projects, including planters on Palisade Avenue, the courtyard
garden at Englewood Hospital and the nature center, which is at the eastern end
of Van Nostrand Avenue. Admission is free.

Information: 201 567-1265.

DESIGNER SHOW HOUSE

The Pretty Brook Farm, the former home of Dean Mathey, who provided much of the
land for the Princeton Day School campus and made an additional gift of the
house when he died in 1972, is serving as the eighth designer show house of the
Junior League of Greater Princeton through next Sunday.

The original structure, built before the Revolutionary War, was preserved when
an architect, Arthur Holden, redesigned the house for Mathey and created new
wings between 1926 and 1928.

The house, displaying the work of 27 interior designers in a setting enhanced by
seven landscapers, will open at 10 A.M. Monday through Saturday. Closing time
will be at 3 P.M., but at 8 P.M. on Thursday and at 4 P.M. on Saturday. Sunday
hours will be noon to 4 P.M.

Tickets are $15, or $12 for the elderly. A lecture on protecting an investment
in furniture will be given by Mark Reed, a furniture restorer and conservator,
at 10 A.M. Thursday. Lunch will be available except on Sunday, when tea will be
the fare. The farm is on the Great Road.

Information: (609) 771-0525.

MARY L. EMBLEN


THEATER READINGS

For Crossroads Theater Company audiences in New Brunswick, the fourth annual
series of staged readings known as "Genesis Festival: A Celebration of New
Voices in African-American Theater" can be something like a sneak preview of
coming attractions.

Plays from festivals past, by Denise Nicholas ("Buses"), Ntozake Shange ("The
Love Space Demands") and Kathleen McGhee-Anderson ("Oak and Ivy" and "Mothers"),
and an adaptation by Ruby Dee ("The Disappearance") evolved into full
productions.

And an early work by Anna Deavere Smith, who won fame and prizes with her
one-woman, 29-character piece, "Fires in the Mirror," is a Genesis product.
Under the title "Dreams," it was scheduled for the current Crossroads season and
is now on hold.

"Our focus this year is on unrecognized playwrights, as opposed to the celebrity
or performance art," said Sydne Mahone, the theater's director of play
development, who describes her role as director of the series, her brainchild,
as "steering the design of the festival."

Ms. Mahone selects the plays in collaboration with the Crossroads artistic
director, Ricardo Kahn, and the literary manager, Pamela Faith Jackson.

Remaining plays in Genesis 1993, which began on April 30 and lasts through next
Sunday, exemplify the divergent styles Ms. Mahone seeks. "Talking Bones" by Shay
Youngblood (today at 5 P.M.) is part real, part fantastical, part ritualistic.
It concerns three generations of women atop a burial ground. "And the World
Laughs With You" (Thursday and Saturday at 8 P.M.) is a traditional naturalistic
drama by Karimah, and "Homer Gee and the Rhapsodies in 'The Fall of Detroit' "
by Ifa Bayeza, who is Ms. Shange's sister, is described as a comedic epic
(Friday at 8 P.M.).

Other Genesis events are "Saturday's Children," a program of short plays by
seventh and eighth graders in the New Brunswick public schools, to be presented
on Saturday at 3 P.M. and a gospel concert next Sunday at 5 P.M.

All performances are at the theater, at 7 Livingston Avenue. Tickets cost $15
for each performance; Crossroads subscribers are entitled to one free.

Information: (908) 249-5560.

LOAD-DATE: May 9, 1993

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1993 The New York Times Company


                              143 of 312 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                   May 10, 1993, Monday, Late Edition - Final

Bosnia Move? Not Just Now;
Few Expect a Decision On Use of Force Soon

BYLINE: By R. W. APPLE Jr.,  Special to The New York Times

SECTION: Section A; Page 1; Column 2; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 978 words

DATELINE: ASHINGTON, May 9


Why is it taking so long? Are they just stalling, or what?

The carnage in Bosnia has been horrifying the rest of the world for a year now.
Troops from Britain, France and other countries have been there for months under
the auspices of the United Nations, doing what little they could to alleviate
the suffering. President Clinton has been talking for weeks about new, tougher
actions.

Yet this weekend in Washington and in the West European capitals, there was
still no agreement on what sort of military action should be taken, or when to
start. There was no agreement, in fact, on just how much military action could
achieve.

To hear the White House tell it, the delay stems largely from European doubts.
But the memory of Vietnam, with futile escalation following futile escalation,
with bombing campaigns succeeded by pauses succeeded by more bombing and more
pauses, has made American officials, military and civilian, look three times
before they leap.

No Desire to Rush Things

This time, they vow, they will have an answer to the question that dogged a
whole generation of leaders: If this doesn't work, what next? This time, they
vow, they will take the country into their confidence before acting.

Call it prudent, call it fainthearted, there is no disposition on the American
side to rush things. Few in Washington see much prospect of allied military
moves in the Balkans this week.

The Europeans do indeed remain skeptical about taking any military action,
though some are ready to set doubts aside in the interest of maintaining good
relations with the United States. The British in particular are loath to see
President Clinton intervene alone, get his nose bloodied and then turn his back
on Europe.

But the West Europeans, who tend to believe in containing problems rather than
solving them, have set very limited goals for any military moves. They want to
ease the Serbian pressure on Muslim enclaves in central and eastern Bosnia and
prevent the fighting from spreading to other countries.

So, pushed to the wall, they favor the use of air power against the Bosnian
Serbs' artillery, ammunition dumps and supply routes because that would not
widen the war, even though they question how effective it would be. But they
favor it only after giving the international peace plan every conceivable chance
(including some that seem pretty inconceivable, like a referendum on the plan
that the Bosnian Serbs propose to hold next weekend).

A List of European Fears

The Europeans have compiled, furthermore, a formidable list of things to worry
about and talk about before agreeing to go forward. Prime Minister Poul N.
Rasmussen of Denmark, whose country currently holds the presidency of the
European Community for a six-month period, was here last week, discussing some
of the pitfalls.

"Without a common enemy in Moscow," he said, "it isn't so easy to coordinate our
efforts. Can we get weapons through to the Muslims? If we do, will they be able
to fight effectively? What about the peacekeeping troops already there? Will we
bring the Croats back into full-scale conflict? Will the war spread to Kosovo
and Macedonia? Will the Russians decide to help their Slavic cousins?"

To many American ears, recitals like that sound like excuses for continuing
inaction. Not so, the Europeans respond. A ranking European diplomat insisted on
Friday, "We will get an agreement, believe it or not, and we will get it within
the next week."

President Clinton said much the same thing. But at least in part, this is a case
of the wish giving birth to the thought.

Europe Has Different Goals

The Clinton Administration has much broader goals than the Europeans have, and
the gap that results has yet to be bridged. Although Mr. Clinton has concluded
that there is no real prospect of rolling back Serbian gains with outside
military force, he still hopes to influence the underlying political situation.
Unwilling to send American troops to tilt the balance on the battlefield, he
wants to allow arms to reach the Muslims and use air power mainly to hold off
the Bosnian Serbs until deliveries of heavy weapons to their enemies can be
completed.

Mr. Clinton could, in theory, undertake that policy on his own. But his advisers
think it would be political suicide to try to do so at a time when American
voters, fretful about the domestic economy, think Europeans should take the
principal role in looking after Europe. Senior figures in Congress who hope to
push through a measure of support for the President when the moment comes say
they can not do it if he does not already have the Europeans on board.

Mr. Clinton did not take the steps he could have taken while Secretary of State
Warren Christopher was making the rounds of the European capitals last week in
search of consensus. He did not appeal to the American people on television for
support for action in Bosnia; he did not even use his weekly radio speech to do
so.

Nor did he announce his strategy publicly and call upon the Europeans, once Mr.
Christopher's initial talks had been completed, to follow his lead.

The truth is that almost no one in any of the major capitals is terribly
confident that allied arms can make a decisive difference, no matter how they
are employed. One of Mr. Clinton's chief advisers spoke the other night about
the President's plan as "the least bad thing we could come up with in a
situation where we think we have to do something, if we don't want to seem to be
condoning genocide."

Lord Owen, the European Community's peace negotiator, said on the NBC News
program "Meet the Press" today that "you will not solve the problem at 10,000
feet." But it has not been settled by months at the bargaining table, either,
and solving it on the battlefields would entail more fighting and more
widespread death and destruction.

LOAD-DATE: May 10, 1993

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: News Analysis

                   Copyright 1993 The New York Times Company


                              144 of 312 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                   May 10, 1993, Monday, Late Edition - Final

CAMBODIA FACTIONS USE TERROR TACTICS IN CRUCIAL ELECTION

BYLINE: By PHILIP SHENON,  Special to The New York Times

SECTION: Section A; Page 1; Column 1; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 1717 words

DATELINE: PHNOM PENH, Cambodia, May 9


After 14 years of savagery in a civil war that has taken tens of thousands of
lives, the Cambodian Government and the rebels of the Khmer Rouge have settled
on a common strategy, if not a common goal. Both are using terror to try to
prevent a free and fair election this month in their shattered homeland.

The Khmer Rouge do not want an election at all, and the Maoist-inspired
guerrillas have stepped up a terror campaign intended to sabotage the vote,
scheduled for May 23 to May 28.

According to the United Nations, the rebels' victims have included nine United
Nations peacekeepers who died during preparations for Cambodia's first truly
democratic elections, the centerpiece of the largest peacekeeping operation in
the history of the United Nations.

Japanese Police Are Nervous

Two of the peacekeepers, both civilian policemen, one from Japan, one from the
Philippines, died last week. In a meeting here today with Japan's Home Affairs
Minister, several Japanese peacekeepers asked that they be pulled out of
Cambodia before more of them are killed in guerrilla attacks.

The Cambodian Government appears willing to allow the voting to take place, but
it is accused of doing whatever it can to guarantee that the election is not
fair. United Nations officials say the Government is engaged in an intimidation
campaign intended to coerce voters into believing that their votes will not be
secret, and that they will be punished if they do not vote for candidates of the
Government's new political party, the Cambodian People's Party.

The United Nations insists that it will go forward with the election even though
it is taken for granted that the last two weeks of the campaign will be a
frightening, violent time -- and that the weeks after the election may be worse
as the armed factions jostle for control of the new government. The election
will choose a 120-seat constituent assembly, which will have three months to
draft a constitution acceptable to two-thirds of its members.

The United Nations Transitional Authority in Cambodia, the 22,000-member
peacekeeping force that came here under a 1991 peace treaty, is incapable of
stopping the bloodshed. The peacekeeping force failed in its mission of
disarming Government and rebel soldiers, and Cambodia remains a nation awash in
guns.

The Government does not shrink from using violence. United Nations investigators
have linked the Government to several political slayings, most of them against
the opposition political party founded by Prince Norodom Sihanouk, the nation's
beloved former monarch. The party, the United Front for an Independent, Neutral,
Peaceful and Cooperative Cambodia, is known by the French acronym Funcinpec.

"In a number of instances, we're confident that the attacks on Funcinpec have
been carried out by SOC police and security officials," said Dennis McNamara,
the United Nations human rights director in Cambodia, using the acronym for
State of Cambodia.

Party members in the northwestern province of Siem Reap were visited in their
office on Wednesday by a group of drunken, heavily armed Government soldiers who
threatened to kill them. When a United Nations human rights investigator went to
the scene, he later told colleagues, he found himself with a grenade at his feet
-- as one soldier threatened to detonate it with his rifle.

Campaign Official Fears Assassination

"There's a $50,000 price on my head," said Ung Huot, a Cambodian businessman who
has lived in Australia for years and who returned to direct the party's election
campaign.

"The State of Cambodia is creating the terror because they know that Funcinpec
will win," said Mr. Ung Huot, who is so worried by the threat of assassination
that he and his colleagues rarely venture beyond the high walls of the party's
offices in Phnom Penh. "We must be very careful."

Government officials have repeatedly denied any involvement in political
violence or intimidation, although there is compelling evidence to suggest that
they are not telling the truth.

The Khmer Rouge insist that their troops would never harm a United Nations
worker, an assertion that few here find persuasive, knowing the history of the
Khmer Rouge. The rebels continue to insist that the well-documented genocide
they carried out in Cambodia in the 1970's is a fiction.

Official Admits Vote Will Not Be 'Perfect'

Yasushi Akashi of Japan, who directs the peacekeeping force, conceded recently
that "we will certainly not have perfect, ideal conditions for free and fair
elections -- it may well be that conditions will worsen."

The fear that has long been pervasive in the countryside has finally arrived
here along the leafy boulevards of the capital, a city that had only just begun
to grow accustomed to the comforts of peace.

The threat of violence in the capital has led the United Nations in recent weeks
to ring its headquarters in Phnom Penh with thick wire, stacks of sandbags and
heavily armed guards. Foreigners can enter the structure unsearched so long as
they hold an official pass, but metal detectors are used to frisk Cambodians,
including the saffron-robed Buddhist monks who often turn up at the offices to
petition United Nations officials for help.

As more and more members of the free-spending expatriate community refuse to
venture out at night, Phnom Penh restaurants and nightclubs that opened only
several months ago are going out of business.

Seats on flights into Phnom Penh are now easy to obtain. But flights leaving the
capital are often booked up days in advance, crowded with Cambodians and
foreigners who fear violence in the final days of the election campaign.

"This is for my security, so I can be sure I will be safe," said a 30-year-old
Government worker, pulling a newly issued Cambodian passport out of her handbag.
"It took all of my savings to get passports for myself and my family. We are all
very worried about what will happen during the election."

She would not give her name, saying she did not want her bosses to know that she
was considering leaving the country on short notice. "I'm sure they all have
passports, too," she said.

The passport office here has become a frantic place as Cambodians join the long
lines each morning in hopes of obtaining one of the blue-bordered books. Dozens
of applicants lined up on a recent morning, some acknowledging that they had
brought along bribe money -- about $30 per applicant is said to be routine -- to
guarantee that they had passports before the election.

Ex-Guerrilla Leader Is Prime Minister

Cambodia's civil war began in 1979, when the invading Vietnamese Army toppled
the Khmer Rouge Government, forcing its leaders back into the jungle to take up
arms as insurgents. The Khmer Rouge are now led by the same men who controlled
the Government in the 1970's, when more than one million Cambodians died in a
maniacal effort by the Khmer Rouge to convert Cambodia into a giant agricultural
labor camp. Its supreme leader is still believed to be Pol Pot, who directed the
genocide.

The Vietnamese installed a government in Phnom Penh in 1979, and many of those
leaders remain in power today. The current Cambodian Prime Minister is Hun Sen,
a former Khmer Rouge commander who defected to Vietnam. The Khmer Rouge joined
the Government and two smaller rebel groups who had also fought the Government
in signing the 1991 peace treaty.

Despite the United Nations-brokered settlement, the war never really ended in
large stretches of the country. And last year, the Khmer Rouge pulled out of the
transition toward peace. They are boycotting the election, asserting that the
voting has been rigged to guarantee a victory for the Government.

United Nations military officials say the Khmer Rouge are simply not powerful
enough to prevent the election from taking place, even with a major expansion of
the terror campaign. The Khmer Rouge are estimated to have 10,000 to 12,000
soldiers, compared with the United Nations force of nearly 15,000 peacekeeping
troops.

"But the Khmer Rouge can still cause a lot of problems," one peacekeeper said.
"Terrorism? They are not amateurs at this sort of thing. There will be trouble
in some provinces."

The threat of Khmer Rouge violence has terrorized many of nearly 700 Japanese
soldiers and civilian policemen assigned to the peacekeeping force. Several of
them met today with Home Affairs Minister Keijiro Murata, who asked the United
Nations to tighten security for Japanese peacekeepers after the death of the
Japanese civilian police inspector. He was killed in an ambush on Tuesday, and
the United Nations blamed the Khmer Rouge.

Japanese reporters stationed in Cambodia received briefings on the meeting and,
according to the Japanese news agency Kyodo, a director of the Japanese
peacekeeping unit asked Mr. Murata, "How many of us will have to die before you
decide to pull the Japanese police out of Cambodia?"

The Authorities Scare Peasants

The Cambodian Government's political intimidation campaign is directed
principally against the uneducated peasant farmers who make up nearly 90 percent
of Cambodia's population of about 8 million, and who have only the most
rudimentary understanding of democracy and free elections.

United Nations election workers say the Government has preyed on that ignorance
and, in political rallies far from Phnom Penh, its leaders tell crowds that
their ballots will not be secret, and that voters may lose their jobs and their
homes if they vote against the Cambodian People's Party.

"We're very concerned that the State of Cambodia has used its apparatus, it
bureaucratic setup, to press for support for the Cambodian People's Party," said
Mr. McNamara, the human rights director. "Coercion is the word for what is
happening."

United Nations investigators say they know of at least one People's Party rally
at which organizers warned people that the Government had access to satellites
that would watch from overhead as they marked their ballots.

Civil servants throughout the country, clerks, school teachers, even hospital
nurses, have been ordered to leave work to go among their neighbors to campaign
for the Government, and to warn voters against working for opposition political
parties or attending opposition rallies.

LOAD-DATE: May 10, 1993

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo: Cambodians, who applied for passports because of increased
pre-election violence, checked a waiting list at Foreign Ministry in Phnom Penh.
(David Portnoy for The New York Times) (pg. A6)

Map of Cambodia shows location of Phnom Penh. (pg. A6)

                   Copyright 1993 The New York Times Company


                              145 of 312 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                   May 10, 1993, Monday, Late Edition - Final

An American Carrier Crew Watches and Waits, and Prepares

BYLINE: By MICHAEL R. GORDON,  Special to The New York Times

SECTION: Section A; Page 8; Column 1; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 1035 words

DATELINE: ABOARD U.S.S. THEODORE ROOSEVELT, in the Adriatic, May 6


When Lieut. Comdr. Eli E. Hertz flies his F-18 "Hornet" over Bosnia to enforce
the no-flight zone, he can see the artillery flashes and fires from the fighting
below.

"It's frustrating from our perspective," said the Syracuse, N.Y., native. "I'd
like to see the fighting stopped."

On this floating city bristling with warplanes, helicopters and munitions, what
happens on the ground in Bosnia has a direct and personal meaning. Whether the
outcome is peace or continued fighting, the carrier is likely to be involved. If
a decision is made to strike Bosnia, Navy and Marine Corps pilots may find
themselves bombing artillery, bridges and other targets. If a peace accord is
reached, the 600-man Marine task force aboard the carrier is likely to find
itself in Bosnia as the Roosevelt's planes circle overhead.

Prepared to Act if Necessary

Steering by the stars of public opinion polls, lawmakers have been skittish
about launching air strikes to end the fighting in Bosnia and sending in
American troops to enforce any peace settlement.

But while Navy pilots and marines aboard the Roosevelt discuss the issues, they
say these are tasks they are prepared to take on if necessary.

"To sit off the coast and hear reports about ethnic cleansing is not very
desirable," said Lieut. Col. Marty Peatross, the commander of the Marine
Helicopter Squadron from New River, N.C.

The Roosevelt, powered by two nuclear reactors and populated by 5,500 sailors
and marines, is a city that never sleeps.

Under normal circumstances, the Roosevelt would have made at least one port call
in a sunny Mediterranean city in nearly two months at sea. But the volatile
ethnic war in Bosnia has determined the Roosevelt's assignment: "box, Adriatic,"
military-speak for constant presence some 50 miles off the coast of the former
Yugoslavia.

This week, the Roosevelt's pilots were operating a night combat air patrol area
over Bosnia to enforce the no-flight zone.

Starting at 1 A.M., catapults rocked Navy and Marine Corps planes off the deck
of the carrier, sending thunderous metallic shudders through the ship. In the
coming week, the pilots are to shift to day patrols and readjust their sleep
cycles.

Landings Are Dangerous

Even without a shot fired, carrier operations have their dangers.

Aircraft landings, which involve maneuvering a plane so that the aircraft's
tailhook grabs a cable stretched across the deck, are videotaped and reviewed by
pilots later.

"We are in the business out here of risk management," said Rear Adm. Jay L.
Johnson. "It is a very high-stress environment."

Soon after the United States began airdropping relief supplies to Bosnian
Muslims, one of the carrier's E-2C "Hawkeye" surveillance planes came in for a
night landing but was waved off because of a the obstruction of the landing
area. Circling around to attempt another landing, the plane slammed into the
Adriatic, killing its crew of five.

Five weeks later, Navy ships are still retrieving bits and pieces of the plane
from the Adriatic, a reminder of the hazards even in peacetime.

With much of the crew working 12-hour shifts, there is not much leisure time.
Eating and watching movies on the ship's closed-circuit television are the main
forms of recreation. The sailors and marines use exercise rooms to stay fit.
Mail calls are their main link to home, and some of them are more inventive than
others.

The other week a helicopter flew over the air defense cruiser Hue City, named
after the bitter 1968 battle in Vietnam during the Tet offensive. The helicopter
unloaded a mailbag on the deck and flew off.

When the Hue City crew opened the bag, a pig ran out, complete with fake
military papers. The pig was passed from ship to ship, enduring the bobbing seas
of the Adriatic, until it finally disembarked in Italy.

Keeping Up by Television

Though the pilots sometimes catch glimpses of the fighting from their
high-altitude sanctuary over Bosnia, most of the crew on the Roosevelt learns
about the killing in Bosnia the way the rest of the world does -- from watching
television newscasts, which are beamed aboard by satellite.

American policy toward Bosnia has been the subject of some discussion. Commander
Hertz said air strikes should be launched if they were needed to slow the
killing.

"I do not think that doing nothing is a real good option," he said. "If we don't
do anything the aggression will continue.

"We debate the issues, but stay focused on our task."

With the possibility that it might be called on for peacekeeping duty in Bosnia,
the Marine task force checks its equipment, works out and practices with
bayonets, part of the standard training in hand-to-hand combat.

During a recent training exercise, Marine pilots on the aircraft carrier flew
their helicopters over the hills of Italy, the better to prepare for the
possibility of peacekeeping duty in Bosnia.

The Bosnian Serbs "have a war-fighting mentality," observed Col. John Schmidt,
the commander of the Marine task force. "But one on one, they are not a match
for a United States marine or soldier."

Concern Over Killings

Maj. Bob Carrey, a Marine helicopter maintenance officer, said reports of
children being hurt and killed in the fighting made a compelling case for
peacekeeping by Western forces.

"It's hard to see a child, who does not have a determining say in what's
happening, get hurt," Major Carrey said.

Maj. Corky Gardner, a Marine aviation safety officer, agreed that a peacekeeping
force was needed, but also worried what would happen if major fighting broke out
after peacekeeping troops were deployed.

"If we go in, and they do not want any part of the peace settlement, that will
make our job tough," Major Gardner said. "From a peacekeeping point of view, how
do you stop three sides from fighting?"

Colonel Peatross, their commanding officer, said, "We will be in harm's way,
perhaps in the best of circumstances."

He added, "Every time you go into somebody else's country, he has the
advantage," noting that the marines had to be prepared for snipers and
terrorism.

But he quickly added, "On a personal level, I think it is the right thing to
do."


LOAD-DATE: May 10, 1993

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH



GRAPHIC: United Nations observers said yesterday that the new cease-fire
agreement between Serbs and Muslims in BOSNIA and HERZEGOVINA, which provides
for both sides to withdraw from the Muslim enclaves of ZEPA and SREBRENICA,
appeared to be holding.
Chart/Map: "Balkan Update"

However, there was fierce Croat-Muslim fighting in MOSTAR, 45 miles southwest of
SARAJEVO. The truce was signed by the Muslims and Serbs but not the Croats.

A group of United Nations military observers reached the besieged Bosnian
enclave of ZEPA on foot after their vehicle was blocked. But they found that the
center of the town had been destroyed by Serbian gunfire and that most of the
inhabitants have fled.

In LONDON,The Sunday Times said Western planes were ready to blast rebel Bosnian
Serb targets within 10 days from bases in ITALY, TURKEY and GERMANY, but senior
officials dismissed the report as speculation. Other reports said that, on the
contrary, the United States was not in a hurry to make a decision and that
European allies were still skeptical of whether military intervention would be
helpful.

In WASHINGTON, senior lawmakers said President Clinton had not adequately
articulated his Bosnia policy and lacked the votes in Congress for approval of
military action.

                   Copyright 1993 The New York Times Company


                              146 of 312 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                   May 10, 1993, Monday, Late Edition - Final

Florida Executes Man Who Killed During Robbery

BYLINE: AP

SECTION: Section A; Page 20; Column 1; National Desk

LENGTH: 398 words

DATELINE: STARKE, Fla., May 9


A Vietnam veteran diagnosed with post-traumatic stress disorder was executed
Saturday night in the electric chair for the 1979 killing of a gasoline station
owner.

The prisoner, Larry Joe Johnson, was pronounced dead at 10:07 P.M., said Jo
Miglino, a spokeswoman for Gov. Lawton Chiles.

Earlier Saturday, the United States Supreme Court denied two separate petitions
to review Mr. Johnson's case and the accompanying applications for a stay of
execution.

Veterans' groups had called for state officials to spare Mr. Johnson. The effort
succeeded in winning at least one delay.

Mr. Johnson, 49, was condemned for shooting James Hadden, 67, to death during a
robbery.

One Review Granted

Mr. Johnson waved and nodded to a few people in the witness chamber as he was
led to the electric chair, witnesses said. After declining to make a final
statement, he was strapped to the chair and groaned loudly as electrodes were
attached to his head. Mr. Johnson had come within days of execution in February,
but Governor Chiles granted a stay to review a State Supreme Court suggestion
that Mr. Johnson had been psychologically damaged by his military service.

After his review, Mr. Chiles issued another death warrant.

"I recognize the Vietnam veteran syndrome," the Governor said late last month.
"I do not think it applies in this case."

The stay of execution was the first that Mr. Chiles, a Democrat, had granted in
two years in office. Five executions, including Saturday's, have taken place
during Mr. Chiles's tenure.

During the war, Mr. Johnson was in a Navy construction unit in Vietnam, and
after receiving an honorable discharge, he joined the Kentucky National Guard.
His military career ended in 1974, when he was hit by a smoke grenade in a
training exercise.

That accident damaged Mr. Johnson's brain, and he spent years in a military
psychiatric ward.

The war-stress argument also failed to avert a previous execution in Florida.
David Funchess, who was convicted of a double murder in Jacksonville, was put to
death in 1986, four years after the state rejected his appeal based on
post-traumatic stress arising from duty in Vietnam.

Mr. Johnson was the 201st person executed nationwide since the Supreme Court
allowed states to resume capital punishment in 1976. He became the 31st inmate
executed since Florida reinstated the death penalty in 1979.

LOAD-DATE: May 10, 1993

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1993 The New York Times Company


                              147 of 312 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                   May 10, 1993, Monday, Late Edition - Final

Editorial Notebook;
A Long Lunch With Irving Howe

BYLINE: By MICHAEL WEINSTEIN

SECTION: Section A; Page 18; Column 1; Editorial Desk

LENGTH: 719 words


"How would you like to go to lunch with Irving Howe?" a Stanford University dean
asked me when I was an 18-year-old antiwar activist during the late 1960's.
"Irving who?" I asked without embarrassment.

The startled dean described Mr. Howe as a visiting Faulkner scholar and editor
of Dissent, which even I knew to be a leading socialist journal. As I soon found
out, that's like describing Willie Mays as a jock who hangs around center field
chasing fly balls.

I agreed to lunch -- but only as a kindness to the dean because I anticipated
another dreary lecture on political manners by an academic who cared more about
university decorum than human life in Vietnam. We met at a hamburger joint and
argued politics.

Actually, I spoke and Mr. Howe argued -- barely containing his contempt for my
ignorance of everything that he valued: culture, political discourse, and
historical and philosophical inquiry. He weaved a vision of a socialist future
achieved by democratic, civilized and respectful means. More astounded than
accusatory, he would ask how I presumed to pronounce on, say, the economic
origins of the Vietnam War when I didn't know a thing about economics or war or
Southeast Asia or . . .

But why, I asked, did he delight in bashing the left? The scowl on his face left
no room for misinterpretation: He took no delight. He'd been a committed
socialist his entire adult life. He railed against the stupidity and
irrationality of the student left because such traits tarnished the glorious
tradition he represented. He hadn't turned right one iota; a know-nothing
authoritarian strain had swiped the left's good name.

It says volumes about Mr. Howe that I took his inquisition less as an insult
than as a challenge -- an invitation to read and study with his guidance. We met
several more times that year. I picked his brain, his sensitivities, his
judgments. He had little time for Herbert Marcuse and Norman O. Brown -- the
mainstays of the student left of the time. Instead, he'd talk about Georgi
Plekhanov. So I'd read Plekhanov. He'd talk about Karl Kautsky, Rosa Luxemburg,
Leon Trotsky, Nikolai Bukharin, G. B. Shaw and Ignazio Silone. So I'd read some
more. He taught me about culture and tradition, politics and civility. He
encouraged me to study economics -- which I did -- and Yiddish -- which I
foolishly did not.

Mr. Howe was at once a revered scholar and intellectual anchor of a important
segment of the socialist movement. Add to that his accomplishments as cultural
critic and Jewish chronicler. But to list components is to miss the person. Mr.
Howe wasn't an amalgam of separate identities but a seamless whole. For him,
democratic socialism was a cultural statement every bit as much as a political
allegiance.

For me, his teaching also served as an emotional anchor. The late 1960's were
frightening years to be a student -- rocked by Vietnam War protests, urban
riots, political assassinations, combined with survivors' guilt that we had a
free ticket past the jungles of Vietnam. But to Mr. Howe, every political fight
had a precedent, every political fad a parallel. Steeped in one's heritage, sure
of one's values, a student would be less easily buffeted by demagogues. What Mr.
Howe took from our meetings wasn't clear -- perhaps no more than a window,
however blurred, on the world of student heathens.

Irving Howe was a man of the left who fought the left -- denouncing the violent,
authoritarian strains of the New Left with a vehemence he once reserved for
fascists. He battled to preserve the socialist heritage that was democratic even
when those ideals were out of intellectual fashion. When I read of his recent
death, I felt profound sadness even though I hadn't seen him in a quarter
century. Those lunches didn't turn me into a socialist, but they set a standard
of integrity I would strive to emulate the rest of my life.

Reminiscing after Mr. Howe's death, the dean who introduced us recalled a
confrontation between a student activist and Mr. Howe in the 1960's. After
hearing Mr. Howe say something kind about suburban families, the student asked
by what right he called himself a radical. "I'll be radical long after you're a
dentist," Mr. Howe predicted.

The student became a conventional lawyer. And Mr. Howe remained radical.


LOAD-DATE: May 10, 1993

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Editorial

                   Copyright 1993 The New York Times Company


                              148 of 312 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                  May 11, 1993, Tuesday, Late Edition - Final
                              Correction Appended

Books of The Times;
Witness to a Brief and Brutish War

BYLINE: By COL. HARRY G. SUMMERS Jr.;  Colonel Summers, a Distinguished Fellow
of the Army War College, is the author of "On Strategy II: A Critical Analysis
of the Gulf War" and the forthcoming "Persian Gulf War Almanac."

SECTION: Section C; Page 17; Column 1; Cultural Desk

LENGTH: 946 words



Martyrs' Day
Chronicle of a Small War
By Michael Kelly
354 pages. Random House. $23.

Few Americans, civilian or military, have experienced war first-hand. During the
Vietnam War, television claimed to have brought the war into America's living
rooms. But a postwar analysis of that coverage indicated that only about 2
percent of the film broadcast showed any combat action whatsoever. Even in our
technological age, the best way to learn about war, next to being there, is to
learn from books like Michael Herr's "Dispatches."

True of the Vietnam War, it's also true of the war in the Persian Gulf. As NBC's
military analyst during that conflict, I know that some of the television
pictures were spectacular. But eye-catching as they were, those "colored lights
moving around on a screen," to use one reporter's felicitous phrase, do not
begin to have the visceral impact of the written word.

Evidence is Michael Kelly's impressionistic "Martyrs' Day," an account of his
observations while working in the Middle East as a freelance writer from
November 1990 to November 1991. The book is in part a travelogue, reminiscent of
A. J. Leibling's classic vignettes of his travels across North Africa and France
during World War II. Like Liebling, Mr. Kelly has a wry and observant eye. And
like Liebling, he, too, is a master of the written word.

Mr. Kelly, who is now a reporter in the Washington bureau of The New York Times,
can convey the feeling of a place in almost tactile terms. "The fog is so dirty
that it has a texture, a fine grit that gets in your eyes and hair and, worst of
all, teeth," he writes of Baghdad on the eve of the war, adding that "with each
breath you are an involuntary Hoover."

And he can capture the mood as well. The week before the bombs fell, he says,
Baghdad was "a city in deep denial, where every man chose his own myth." And, he
continues, "As if the local variety were not enough, the city had become a great
importer of foreign delusions, in the form of peace missionaries. . . . For
weeks, from all over the West, they had been streaming in a great babbling mass
to the land of Babel."

Then came the bombing: "I saw the allied forces take out the heart and symbol of
Iraq's military forces in 10 minutes' work. . . . In Baghdad the days of
delusion had ended abruptly. Even the minders were shocked into truth-telling."

Traveling to Amman, Jordan, over a road that "existed only out of force of habit
and memory of better times," he finds "the city hummed with a mean joy. At last
someone was killing the Jews." As Mr. Kelly observes: "This was, in truth, a
senile, old, toothless wreck of a dream, doddering and wheezing and buckling at
the knees, a balding retread of the dreams of '48 and '67 and '73. But Saddam
had given it voice again, and Amman loved him."

Going on to Tel Aviv, he steps back in time. "Israel's war was London in the
blitz, speeded up as everything was now, and colorized, but still the stuff of
the late-night movies, the best of the good war, when everyone, not just
soldiers, could be part of a brave and important stand simply by not running
away."

Returning to Saudi Arabia just in time for the ground war, Mr. Kelly ends up
with the Egyptians' Fourth Mechanized Division, which was leading the Arab
elements of the allied attack. On his way to Kuwait, he ends up "capturing" 10
Iraqi soldiers who surrendered to him and his partner, Dan Fesperman of The
Baltimore Sun. In itself the incident evidenced the total collapse of the Iraqi
military.


The middle third of the book concentrates on Kuwait City in the aftermath of its
liberation. Mr. Kelly's descriptions of the sheer barbarism of the Iraqi
occupiers are horrific, even more so when he leaves some details to the
imagination.

"In normal life," he observes, "you hardly ever see grown men cry; in war, it is
a commonplace. Between the beginning of things and the end, I must have seen 20
men cry, not counting myself."

Thus Mr. Kelly wastes little sympathy on those Iraqi thugs and torturers,
fleeing in stolen automobiles crammed with booty from looted Kuwaiti homes, who
were caught by American aircraft on the infamous "Highway to Hell." Although the
carnage was extensive, he estimates that "probably only several hundred" were
killed. "So fierce was the bombing that most of the Iraqis who survived the
first waves . . . ran away into the desert."

From Kuwait, he journeys through Iran to the Kurdish refugee camps in the
mountains of northern Iraq. Almost dead from amoebic dysentery before his trek
is completed, Mr. Kelly paints a heart-wrenching portrait of the proud Kurds who
have spent their lives fighting for independence.

In his final chapter he returns to Baghdad to witness what an Iraqi woman
describes as the moral disintegration of a society. "All that this woman said
was true," he concludes. "The war that had liberated Kuwait City had also
liberated Baghdad, freeing it to reach, you might say, its fullest expression of
self. It had become the ideal mob town, the perfect capital of a gangster
nation."

Mr. Kelly closes the circle with the book's beginnings, where he tells of the
"professional crowd of mourners" celebrating "Martyr's Day" on Dec. 1, 1991. The
lack of ordinary citizens was evidence that Saddam Hussein had defeated Iraq in
ways far beyond what the United States could ever do:

"Over the last quarter century, the Leader had killed off, one way or another,
an astonishing number of the ordinary citizens of Iraq, and many of those left
living in the winter of 1991 were too crippled or drunk or hungry to gin up much
enthusiasm for the celebration of their condition."

LOAD-DATE: May 11, 1993

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

CORRECTION-DATE: May 13, 1993, Thursday

CORRECTION:

A book review on Tuesday about "Martyrs' Day: Chronicle of a Small War," by
Michael Kelly, referred incorrectly to another author. He was A. J. Liebling.


GRAPHIC: Photo of Michael Kelly (Random House)

TYPE: Review

                   Copyright 1993 The New York Times Company


                              149 of 312 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 May 12, 1993, Wednesday, Late Edition - Final

ABOUT NEW YORK;
U.N. of Pit Crews Revs For Old Brooklyn Poly

BYLINE: By Michael T. Kaufman

SECTION: Section B; Page 3; Column 1; Metropolitan Desk

LENGTH: 805 words


REMEMBER the 1969 Mets, Harry S. Truman in 1948, David?  Well, slingshot,
longshot and underdog fans, meet the car racing team from Brooklyn Polytechnic
University.

Brooklyn Polytechnic is a no-frills school. It does not have dormitories or a
gymnasium and few of the 4,000 students seem to know that the school's nickname
is the Blue Jays. The students, many of them foreign born or the children of
immigrants, come to the downtown Brooklyn buildings, study hard, become
engineers and get good jobs. There is not much rah-rah.

But now, Brooklyn Poly has a student-built, scaled-down Formula One racing car
ready to compete against entries from better-heeled schools in the Society of
Automotive Engineers competition to be held near Detroit at the end of May.
Building such a car is an expensive and time-consuming undertaking, and for
Brooklyn Poly it has been a little like having the Dead End Kids preparing for a
fox hunt.

"You have to realize that Brooklyn Polytechnical is a very tough school," said
Minh Duong, a 19-year-old sophomore who is the elected president of the car
building group. "Nobody lives on campus. All of us commute. Most of us have to
work at jobs in addition to our course work."

"There's not much room for social life," Mr. Duong said. "For the last year this
has been our social life," he said, gesturing to the 10-foot-long tubular car in
the center of a basement workshop. "Many nights we've slept here."

As Mr. Duong spoke, Andres Matias, also 19, was taking off the car's front
wheels. "We have to do it so that we can get it through the doors into the
parking lot," said Mr. Matias, who was to be the first driver on the first test
run. Meanwhile, the car's other builders were drifting in: James Wong, who was
originally from Malaysia; Miguel Pires from Portugal; Meijiao Sara Chen from
China. Mr. Matias was born and finished high school in Puerto Rico while Mr.
Duong came to New York 11 years ago from Vietnam along with his parents, two
older sisters and a younger brother. Of the basic core group only Stacy Genovese
from Howard Beach has a car of her own.

"We've had people from all over working together," said Mr. Matias, "Pakistan,
the Caribbean, the Middle East. We've had men, women, about 40 people
altogether, though only about 15 worked on it regularly."

Four of the students were struggling to wiggle the 400-pound car past the door
frames. Dominick Rivera, a powerful sophomore, was holding up the front end as
Mark Rodrigues angled the back through the opening. Then they wheeled it onto an
elevator and down to a loading dock. There, in an efficient application of the
physics of simple machines, they hooked the car onto a hydraulic crane and
lowered it from the four-foot ledge.

"Our idea is to drive it in a way that will break things," said Mr. Matias.

"We want to anticipate what could go wrong," said Mr. Duong, adding that a year
ago, when Brooklyn Polytechnical sent its first car to the competition, the team
was left crushed by a faulty drive train.

"We had done real well in the first two days of technical inspections and
tests," said Mr. Duong, who was there as a freshman. "We were up there holding
our own with Cornell and R.P.I. -- but then, just before the key 70-mile time
trials, the drive train broke. We didn't have spare parts or money to buy
anything, and anyway it was a Sunday and everything was closed. It was pretty
sad, but all we could do is watch the others."

This year, he predicted, will be different, largely because the group has
received $25,000 from Roger Penske, the sponsor of a professional racing team
who heads companies selling automotive products. The contribution more than
doubled the meager funds that the students managed to come up with last year,
though it reportedly still left them with less to work with than most of the
competing schools. When a single racing tire costs $500 and it takes $6,000 to
transport the car and its builders to Detroit for three days, even the new, more
generous budget required careful economizing.

Now Mr. Matias, dressed in fireproof driver's suit and helmet, strapped himself
into the car. He hit the ignition and the 600-cubic-centimeter Yamaha engine
roared. Mr. Rodrigues tinkered with the carburetor until he got the right pitch.
Mr. Matias put the car into the first of six forward gears. And then a cable on
the clutch pedal snapped.

Mr. Duong used baling wire for temporary repairs. For the next four hours the
students kept the engine going while they tinkered and gauged performance. They
never got out of first gear. They spotted a tiny crack on the critical drive
train that would have to be welded. No one seemed alarmed.

"No problem -- we'll be ready in Detroit," said Mr. Duong, hinting at an upset
victory for Brooklyn Poly, poly as in polyglot.

LOAD-DATE: May 12, 1993

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Drawing

                   Copyright 1993 The New York Times Company


                              150 of 312 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                  May 13, 1993, Thursday, Late Edition - Final

Bosnia and the Credibility Trap

BYLINE: By Eric Alterman;  Eric Alterman, a senior fellow at the World Policy
Institute, is author of "Sound and Fury: The Washington Punditocracy and the
Collapse of American Politics."

SECTION: Section A; Page 23; Column 1; Editorial Desk

LENGTH: 931 words


The debate over U.S. military intervention in Bosnia is reaching a fever pitch.
Senators Bob Dole and Joseph Biden are talking tough from both sides of the
aisle. Newsweek warned in its latest issue that President Clinton "can't back
down without looking weak." A Time magazine cover story stated that the
President will "risk a loss of credibility by backing away." And on Sunday's
"McLaughlin Group," the pundit Fred Barnes promised that without intervention --
unilateral if necessary -- Mr. Clinton will henceforth be considered "President
Marshmallow."

Such arguments have surrounded every dispute over using U.S. military force
since the cold war began. As recently as the gulf war, proponents of military
action argued that free and open debate over sending troops to free Kuwait would
give aid and comfort to Saddam Hussein, as if the proper functioning of a
democratic system undermines protection of a democratic society. Even worse,
frequently during the cold war America's leaders insisted on military action
that they admitted had little strategic importance. Henry Kissinger defended the
Vietnam War as a means of pretecting our "credibility" in such places as "the
Middle East, Europe, Latin America, even Japan."

The credibility of America's political and military commitments has long
obsessed our leaders, stifling debate while inspiring decisions to expend blood
and treasure on chimerical crusades. Lyndon Johnson defended escalation of the
Vietnam conflict by insisting that if Communism prevailed: "We'll lose all of
Asia and then Europe, and then we'll be a rich little island all by ourselves.
That means World War III."

Richard Nixon, on launching the American bombing of Cambodia, insisted that,
"If, when the chips are down, the world's most powerful nation, the United
States of America, acts like a pitiful, helpless giant, the forces of
totalitarianism and anarchy will threaten free institutions throughout the
world." Similarly, Ronald Reagan, at a joint session of Congress in 1983, said:
"If we cannot defend ourselves [in Central America], we cannot expect to prevail
elsewhere. Our credibility would collapse, our alliances would crumble and the
safety of our homeland would be put in jeopardy."

A further complication of the credibility trap is the tendency of Presidents to
tie the nation's prestige to their own political fortunes. George Bush did this
masterfully during the gulf war debate when, by positioning troops for war
without Congressional assent, he created a situation in which a vote against his
initiative would be successfully portrayed as a potential humiliation for the
U.S.

Many Congressmen insisted that while they preferred to give sanctions more time,
they would not embarrass him by voting their own consciences. Senator Frank
Murkowsky, a Republican, argued on the Senate floor,"For those who believe in
allowing the sanctions to take effect, the only responsible action to take now
is to grant the President his request for a realistic threat of force." Senators
Bennett Johnston and Albert Gore, both Democrats, made similar statements.

Without these votes, the resolution authorizing war would have been defeated.
Senator John Kerry, a Democrat, estimated during the debate that "75 percent or
more of those who will vote for the use of force do not want it to be used, and
a significant number will vote for it only because they want to prevent the
President from being reversed."

In fact, our adversaries paid little attention to our repeated demonstrations of
credibility through strategically meaningless military interventions across the
globe. To the degree that they wished us ill fortunes, they must have rejoiced
at our ill-considered adventures in Vietnam, Cambodia, Lebanon, Nicaragua and El
Salvador.

Most NATO allies certainly made it clear that they resented these escapades, as
we moved U.S. forces from more strategically important theaters. Moreover, this
legacy of senseless adventurism has undermined American popular support for more
enlightened foreign commitments such as helping the Soviet Union make the
transition to democracy.

The insistence that patience, debate and open discussion threaten the survival
of democracies while their absence strengthens that of autocracies -- an
argument frequently put forth by neo-conservative pundits during the 1980's --
turned out to be equally misleading.

Had Congress forced Lyndon Johnson to be more forthcoming with details about the
supposed North Vietnamese attack on U.S. ships in the Gulf of Tonkin in 1964,
they would have learned that the Administration largely fabricated the incident
as a pretext to make war without having to make a case before the nation. ("For
all I know," Mr. Johnson later confessed, "our Navy was shooting at whales out
there.") Mr. Johnson's foolish underestimation of the need for popular support
for military commitments cost him his Presidency and the nation 57,000 lives.

Bosnia is as vexing a foreign policy question as any that has faced an American
President since World War II. There are conflicting moral imperatives and no
good options. To the degree that they approach the problem soberly, follow
constitutional procedure and explain their actions in an open and
non-manipulative fashion, they deserve our support.

But insistence that America has something to prove through a demonstration of
force should not hinder full-scale debate. The world does not care for such
demonstrations. The lives we may be about to risk deserve the freest and most
wide ranging debate possible.

LOAD-DATE: May 13, 1993

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Drawing.

TYPE: Op-Ed

                   Copyright 1993 The New York Times Company


                              151 of 312 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                   May 14, 1993, Friday, Late Edition - Final

Kelly Appoints a Deputy To Watch Internal Affairs

BYLINE: By CRAIG WOLFF

SECTION: Section B; Page 3; Column 5; Metropolitan Desk

LENGTH: 685 words


Attempting to keep his Internal Affairs Bureau from falling under the control of
an outside monitor, Police Commissioner Raymond W. Kelly yesterday announced the
appointment of a Deputy Commissioner for Internal Affairs.

The creation of the new post is the latest in a series of changes that Mr. Kelly
has made to shore up the system for uncovering corrupt police officers. The move
comes at a crucial time for the department, as a mayoral commission considers
establishing the position of an outside inspector general who would take the
ultimate authority over Internal Affairs out of Mr. Kelly's hands.

The new Deputy Commissioner is Walter S. Mack Jr., a lawyer and former
prosecutor who won cases against organized crime figures. Mr. Kelly said that he
had sought someone with a prosecutor's investigative background to give the
position credibility and prestige.

'We Need Credibility'

"We are working on many significant changes to Internal Affairs, in my
judgment," he said. "But we need credibility and validation to what we are
doing. Regardless, there has always been a feeling out there which people have
expressed through the years that the police are unwilling to make the changes."

Mr. Kelly said the appointment was not motivated to circumvent the Mollen
Commission, an outside agency created last year by Mayor David N. Dinkins to
investigate the department's handling of corruption. But he acknowledged that he
intended the new position to be a kind of middle ground between an inspector
general and the present Internal Affairs Bureau -- a way to bring in an outsider
to supervise the bureau while insuring that the Commissioner maintains ultimate
control.

Mr. Kelly said that he recognized that some would view the new position with
skepticism, but that he believed it was "the only way to go."

"I don't know of any steps by the Mollen Commission," Mr. Kelly said. "I cannot
be governed by what the Mollen Commission will or will not do. I've got to do
the best I can do."

A Civilian Employee

Mr. Kelly said that he made the appointment while mindful that many people carry
the old perception that the police are unwilling to police themselves. To help
combat that, he said, he created the new position at the rank of deputy
commissioner. Deputy Commissioners answer directly to the Commissioner and are
civilian employees.

"Someone from the outside with experience as a prosecutor brings all the right
things to the table," he said.

Milton Mollen, head of the Mollen Commission, remained neutral on the new
appointment yesterday, saying that the five-member panel and its staff of
investigators would stay true to their mandate to "review the structure of the
department and look at the changes being made."

With the hiring of Mr. Mack, like himself a former marine who fought in Vietnam,
Mr. Kelly has added another layer to an Internal Affairs hierarchy, which he
began overhauling several months ago. He has added dozens of new investigators
to the bureau and attempted, he said, to involve superior officers in the
day-to-day handling of cases. He has also created what he has called a "culture
committee" to examine why some police officers become corrupt.

Celebrated Cases

Mr. Mack, 49, is a first vice president at Shearson Lehman Brothers, but for 16
years until 1990 was an Assistant United States Attorney in the Southern
District of New York. His most celebrated cases included the prosecutions of
Paul Castellano and Anthony F. Gaggi, two organized crime figures.

In addition to overseeing Internal Affairs, Mr. Mack will also serve as an
intermediary between the department and the five district attorneys and two
United States Attorneys in New York, a relationship that department officials
say has soured over the years.

Mr. Mack seemed sensitive yesterday to the existence of the Mollen Commission
and to the perception that police officers are often reluctant to report
suspicions of wrongdoing.

"By accepting this job, I think the fair inference is that the Police Department
can and should be able to police itself," he said.

LOAD-DATE: May 14, 1993

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo: Walter S. Mack Jr., a lawyer and former prosecutor, was
appointed the new Deputy Commissioner for Internal Affairs. (Sara Krulwich/The
New York Times)

                   Copyright 1993 The New York Times Company


                              152 of 312 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                   May 14, 1993, Friday, Late Edition - Final

Jeffrey Christmas, 39, Media Firm Executive

SECTION: Section B; Page 7; Column 5; Metropolitan Desk

LENGTH: 199 words


Jeffrey L. Christmas, a public relations executive and former military
journalist, died on Wednesday at a hospital in Brandon, Fla. He was 39 and until
recently lived in Queens.

His family said the cause was bronchial pneumonia.

Mr. Christmas was on medical leave from his post as a vice president of the Hill
& Knowlton public relations firm in Manhattan, where he had worked since 1983.
As the deputy manager of the company's media services group, he supervised
business, consumer, medical and technology media relations and managed
electronic communications.

His previous job was supervising media relations for the American Society of
Mechanical Engineers.

Earlier, as a broadcast reporter for the American Forces Radio and Television
Service in Asia and Europe, he covered United States military operations in
Cambodia, Vietnam and Ethiopia.

He also served as a media relations specialist for the Navy's Office of
Information. He held the rank of petty officer first class.

Mr. Christmas was born in Brandon. He graduated from the New York Institute of
Technology.

His survivors include his mother, Nellie, and three brothers, Jerry, Nathan and
Victor, all of Brandon.

LOAD-DATE: May 14, 1993

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Obituary (Obit); Biography

                   Copyright 1993 The New York Times Company


                              153 of 312 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                   May 14, 1993, Friday, Late Edition - Final

Law Enforcer vs. Pennsylvania Crime Commission

BYLINE: By MICHAEL deCOURCY HINDS,  Special to The New York Times

SECTION: Section B; Page 8; Column 3; National Desk

LENGTH: 1207 words

DATELINE: PHILADELPHIA, May 13


The Pennsylvania Crime Commission is a little-known investigative agency that
spends much of its time looking for mobsters in the solid-waste industry. Many
lawmakers of both parties consider it a toothless tiger and a waste of money,
and they want to eliminate it from the state budget.

This year they may succeed. But before the crime commission goes out of
business, it might just take Attorney General Ernest D. Preate Jr. -- next
year's probable Republican candidate for governor -- down with it.

Last week, the commission announced that it was investigating allegations that
Mr. Preate (pronounced PREE-ate) had failed to seek the maximum criminal
penalties against distributors of illegal video poker games because some of them
had contributed to his campaigns.

This matter is not new. The news media have covered it extensively, as did Mr.
Preate's political opponents in the 1988 and 1992 campaigns for attorney
general. And though crime commission officials say they have ample evidence to
warrant their inquiry, they concede that their best information comes from
jailhouse interviews with a convicted loan shark and hearsay from a dead man.

'It's a Retaliation'

Mr. Preate, who has long called for abolishing the commission, calls the
investigation a "witch hunt" to smear his name. "It's a retaliation for my
calling for the abolition of the commission that is a waste of taxpayers'
money," he said in a recent interview.

Nevertheless, the news that the commission was investigating stunned
Pennsylvanians and threw a cloud over Mr. Preate's political future. "Preate
will absolutely be hurt by this," said David L. Buffington, editor of The
Pennsylvania Report, a nonpartisan political newsletter published in Harrisburg.
"Having a crime commission call him a sinister influence is perfect fodder for
an opposition campaign."

The governor's race is wide open next year because Gov. Robert P. Casey, a
Democrat, will finish his second consecutive term and is barred by law from
running for a third. Before the commission announced its investigation, Mr.
Preate was expected to prevail in a tight Republican primary race with United
States Representative Thomas J. Ridge, who represents the northwest corner of
the state.

Mr. Preate, 52, has campaigned as a decorated Marine captain who fought in
Vietnam and has spent the last 24 years fighting crime and calling for tougher
and tougher sentencing laws. Mr. Preate, who was elected district attorney of
Lackawanna County in 1977, wrote a manual on prosecuting death penalty cases,
and he has aggressively defended the state's restrictions on abortion.

The crime commission said that it will now continue its investigation, and has
set no date for completing it.

"Ernie Preate has exerted a sinister force and influence over the Legislature,"
said Michael J. Reilly, the commission's chairman, in an interview. "He tried to
eliminate the only state agency with a mandate to look into organized crime and
public corruption at a time when we strongly suspected he was using his office
to encourage video poker racketeers to contribute to his campaign."

A Loan Shark's Tip

Commission officials say the investigation began with a tip from a convicted
loan shark during a prison interview in January 1992. The prisoner, Elmo
Baldassari, told investigators that in 1987 Mr. Preate, then the Lackawanna
County District Attorney, asked him to help in collecting campaign contributions
from the scores of distributors of vending machines and illegal video poker
games.

Joseph Kovach, Mr. Baldassari's business partner, subsequently collected $21,000
from many distributors in the industry who, commission officials said, viewed
the contributions "as a form of insurance."

In April 1988, the state police raided more than 100 bars, making numerous
arrests and seizing 400 video poker machines in Lackawanna County. Such poker
games are legal in Pennsylvania but only if they are not used for gambling. One
of those arrested was Mr. Kovach.

After the raids, Mr. Preate returned $2,200 in campaign contributions to some of
the video poker distributors who were arrested. In 1989, Mr. Preate became
attorney general. Mr. Kovach, according to Mr. Baldassari and other sources the
commission did not name, said he had contacted an official at Mr. Preate's
office and said: "If I go to jail, Ernie's going to go with me."

Pleas Raise Suspicions

Mr. Kovach died in 1991, before the crime commission could interview him.

In 1990, a grand jury convened by the attorney general recommended that state
prosecutors charge 25 people working at 10 distribution companies with a variety
of misdemeanor gambling offenses. Of the 25 charged, three were also charged
with felonies carrying prison terms of 10 to 20 years.

But Mr. Preate's prosecutors negotiated pleas with the defendants, including Mr.
Kovach. The prosecutors dropped all charges against the individual distributors
and their companies were allowed to plead no contest to a single count of
gambling.

One judge in Wayne County refused to accept the plea bargain, calling it
"garbage" and "a fraud," so the prosecutors moved the case to Lackawanna County
and reinstated a single gambling charge against the individual distributor. The
distributor was sentenced to one year's probation, 25 hours of community service
and a $7,500 fine.

Mr. Preate has defended the plea bargains, saying, among other things, that no
other prosecutor had ever got stiffer penalties and that few other prosecutors
even bothered with such cases. At the same time these pleas were being
negotiated, the State Legislature was considering legislation to legalize video
poker gambling. The lawmakers passed the legislation, but Mr. Preate opposed it,
and Governor Casey vetoed it in 1990.

Powers Are Limited

The Legislature created the crime commission in the 1960's to investigate
organized crime and public corruption. The commission, which has a staff of 40
and an annual budget of $2.5 million, bears some similarity to commissions in
many other states, but it has no prosecutorial powers and limited investigative
powers. Its principal mission is to gather intelligence and publish its
findings.

Civil libertarians have repeatedly criticized the commission, saying it makes
bold accusations without providing enough evidence to prosecute the people named
in the reports.

At a legislative hearing last week, lawmakers peppered commission officials with
hostile questions. "It's hearsay on hearsay on hearsay," Senator Vincent J.
Fumo, a Democrat from Philadelphia, said in an interview afterward. "I've heard
many Democrats say they won't vote for the budget if the commission is in it."

But some legislators remain neutral. "The commission has satisfied me that they
did not leak any information about the investigation, and that they are not on
any witch hunt to politically embarrass the Attorney General," Senator H. Craig
Lewis, a Democrat from Bucks County and chairman of the joint session, said.

True or false, the allegations make Pennsylvanians cringe. "We're seeing a loss
of public confidence in the justice system," said Andre L. Dennis, chancellor of
the Philadelphia Bar Association.

LOAD-DATE: May 14, 1993

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo: Attorney General Ernest D. Preate Jr., left, is being
investigated by the Pennsylvania Crime Commission, which he seeks to abolish. He
spoke recently with Michael Streib, a law professor at Duquesne University.
(Steve Mellon for The New York Times)

                   Copyright 1993 The New York Times Company


                              154 of 312 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                   May 16, 1993, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

ART;
The Gripes of Wrath: 25 Years of Edward Sorel

BYLINE: By WILLIAM GRIMES

SECTION: Section 2; Page 37; Column 3; Arts & Leisure Desk

LENGTH: 1613 words


The studio of Edward Sorel is a clean, well-lighted place, a cozy, garretlike
work space in the corner of his TriBeCa loft. The billboards over his drawing
table and on the wall opposite are something else: a magpie assortment of
preliminary sketches, notes, photographs, inside jokes, an award or two, and
scraps ripped out of magazines. A tour through the bits and pieces is a ramble
through Mr. Sorel's surprising and unusually convoluted brain.

There's the old Newsweek cover showing Sylvester Stallone as Rambo wrapped in an
American flag. "Someday I may need to know how the stripes work," Mr. Sorel
says; it's an odd comment from one of America's foremost political satirists. An
illuminated page by Jean Fouquet shows Joshua and his army blowing trumpets
outside the walls of Jericho, which is represented as a jewel-like cluster of
medieval town buildings. That, too, might come in handy. "I thought it would
make a nice Christmas cover if all those buildings were department stores," Mr.
Sorel says.

There's a letter from Mary Astor to Mr. Sorel, thanking him for a cartoon he did
of "The Maltese Falcon," and a photograph of Jack Oakie, one of Mr. Sorel's
heroes from Hollywood's golden age. A sketch for a New Yorker cover shows a gang
of rioting dinosaurs, a reference to the forthcoming film "Jurassic Park." The
assignment is supposed to be finished, but Mr. Sorel, a soft-spoken, unassuming
man, shows no sign of distress. "Something's due today, but I don't think it's a
real deadline," he says mildly, then points toward a precious document, an
authentic-looking certificate from the Vatican with the words: "The Holy Father,
Pope Paul II, paternally imparts his apostolic blessing to EDWARD SOREL as a
pledge of heavenly favors."

Here are all the major obsessions and themes: the left-wing politics, the
anti-clericalism, the movie mania, the strong streak of fantasy and the
literate, off-the-wall sense of humor. All will be on display at the Society of
Illustrators, which is mounting a one-man exhibition, "Edward Sorel:
Pre-Post-Modernist Drawings," opening on Wednesday and running through June 24
at the society's headquarters at 128 East 63d Street.

With some 75 drawings, caricatures, illustrations and cartoons, the show will
dip in and out of Mr. Sorel's varied output over the past 25 years, including an
early cartoon for Ramparts magazine and a record album cover or two, and a
generous helping of his more recent work for The Village Voice, The Atlantic and
The Nation.

Mr. Sorel's work has appeared in Time, Harper's, Esquire and other magazines,
but The Atlantic and The Nation have been his flagships. At The Nation, he
supplies his scribbly, scratchy cartoons as the mood strikes him. The drawing is
loose, the concepts wild. A recent issue presented a scene from the book of
Revelations, as revised by the artist. Thundering across a field were the Four
Horsepersons of the Apocalypse: Pestilence, War, Hunger and . . . Madonna, a
shrieking skeleton with a torpedo bra.

For The Atlantic, Mr. Sorel and his wife, Nancy, contribute "First Encounters,"
a series that commemorates the first meetings of, say, Lotte Lenya and Kurt
Weill or J. Edgar Hoover and Emma Goldman. In one first encounter, F. Scott
Fitzgerald, with the self-confident charm of a man working on his sixth martini,
holds forth to Edith Wharton, who fixes him with a gaze of steel. Mr. Sorel does
the drawings. His wife, Nancy Caldwell Sorel, does the research and writes the
text.

Now, at 63, Mr. Sorel has ratcheted his career up a couple of notches, breaking
into the pages of the Tina Brown New Yorker with a bang. With attention focused
on the new New Yorker's maiden issue last fall, the first thing to hit the
reader's eye was Mr. Sorel's cover, showing a spindly punk (Eustace Tilly's
grandson, perhaps?), stretched out in an exaggerated pose of aristocratic
languor, riding through Central Park in a carriage.

Mr. Sorel is a satirist of the old school, the one that begins with the European
Enlightenment, and the ferocious rationalism of Swift and Voltaire. His targets
are the tried and true ones: pomposity, hypocrisy, vanity and human folly. It is
the "noble calling," as he puts it, of the cartoonist to defend the powerless
and attack injustice.

"I was never a theorist," says Mr. Sorel. "I respond viscerally to injustice. I
think every cartoonist responds viscerally to injustice and dislikes bullies."

Mr. Sorel's gut instincts, and his earliest artistic influence, can be traced
directly to his childhood in the Bronx, where his Jewish immigrant parents
scratched out a living. Newspaper cartoons and movies were ready to hand. "Poor
kids grow up with popular culture," he says. "They don't go to the Met."

When a case of double pneumonia confined him to bed for nearly a year, Mr. Sorel
amused himself by drawing on shirt cardboard. After graduating from the High
School of Music and Art, he entered Cooper Union, a tuition-free arts and
engineering school, where he learned graphic design and layout. His goals were
modest. "I imagined that someday I'd make $85 a week and get my own apartment,"
he says.

The stars were aligning favorably, however. Among his fellow students at Cooper
Union were Milton Glaser and Seymour Chwast, with whom Mr. Sorel created a
graphic design company called the Push Pin Studios after leaving school. The
venture became an instant success. In 1958, he left to become an art director in
charge of advertising at CBS, a cushy job that left him plenty of time to
freelance.

"He immediately revealed a wild imagination, which is the striking feature of
his art," says Alan Fern, director of the National Portrait Gallery in
Washington, which owns many of Mr. Sorel's works. "There's a sense of dramatic
presence -- something always happening." Mr. Glaser, who in the late 70's hired
Mr. Sorel as his art director for New York magazine, sums it up a little
differently. "The most constant quality was he was always a smartass," he says.

Mr. Sorel claims that by the time he left Cooper Union, where illustration was
looked down on as silly Saturday Evening Post stuff, he could no longer draw.
Even more surprising, given his free and easy style, he says that drawing
remains a struggle.

"David Levine can knock one of these out in three hours," he says, looking
ruefully at one of the caricatures mounted along the hallway of his loft. "It
takes me three hours just to figure out which features to exaggerate." Mr. Sorel
routinely goes through 30 or 40 preliminary drawings, on cheap paper, before
committing to a pen-and-ink version.

"He's a wonderful draftsman, although he doesn't think so," says Mr. Fern. "He
has a gift for gesture, and how the features and body parts go together. He's
also great fun in that he's quite literate. His allusions are very rich,
especially in the things he's done that deal with movies and the theater."

The commercial assignments piled up. And Mr. Sorel grew increasingly frustrated.
"I was politically angry," he says. "I saw the cold war as an excuse for an
entrenched power to stay entrenched, and I must say that nothing in recent
history has dispelled this notion."

Two events conspired to push Mr. Sorel's art in a political direction. First,
Victor Navasky, now editor of The Nation, invited him in 1963 to serve as art
director for the Monocle, a magazine of political satire.

"Being at the Monocle put me in the middle of people who were politically
aware," says Mr. Sorel. "It also showed me you could be funny and pointed at the
same time."

Mr. Navasky says: "He did the greatest cartoon of all time for us. It was Christ
on the Cross, and underneath was the caption, 'He was a great teacher, but he
didn't publish.' "

The other political influence on Mr. Sorel's art was the Vietnam War. The
inexhaustible material provided by the Johnson and Nixon Administrations, with
Watergate thrown in as a bonus, gave Mr. Sorel a great 10-year run. For a time,
his political cartoons were syndicated, appearing in as many as 44 newspapers,
but the mass-marketing of Sorelian satire was doomed to fail. The cartoon that
did him in showed President Nixon juggling the skulls of America's war dead. The
caption quoted Mr. Nixon defining fun as "the opportunity to do things that you
couldn't do if you weren't President." Middle America was not amused, and the
syndicated feature, called Sorel's News Service, bit the dust.

But Mr. Sorel prospered. He was on the A-list for magazine covers, his work
appeared in one-man shows and in book collections, notably "Making the World
Safe for Hypocrisy" (1972) and "Superpen" (1978).

Mr. Sorel tends to see his career, however, as a string of mishaps, with his
beloved profession spiraling downward. "Essentially it's a dying field," he
says. "The magazines are drying up. It's all TV and computers. I think my
generation is the last one that can make a living and support a family doing
this."

Even worse, they aren't making villains the way they used too. For a satirist,
the only thing worse than a bad guy is a good guy, and the bouncy figure of Bill
Clinton shows dangerous signs of falling into the second category. A recent
cartoon by Mr. Sorel in The Nation, titled Difficult Days Ahead, summed up the
problem. It showed the artist, hunched over his board, his brow creased, looking
at a beaming, apple-cheeked Clinton and thinking, "Let's face it . . . he's no
Nixon."

It would be difficult to exaggerate the scope of this looming disaster. No
anger, no cartoon. It's that simple. "Until I think of somebody I'd like to
kill," says Mr. Sorel with a smile, "I can't get up in the morning."

NAME: Edward Sorel

LOAD-DATE: May 16, 1993

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photos: Mr. Sorel at home in his TriBeCa studio -- "I think every
cartoonist responds viscerally to injustice and dislikes bullies." (Fred R.
Conrad/The New York Times)(pg. 37); Edward Sorel's "Four Horsepersons of the
Apocalyypse." (© Edward Sorel, 1992)(pg. 38)

TYPE: Biography

                   Copyright 1993 The New York Times Company


                              155 of 312 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                   May 16, 1993, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

U.S. Forces in Europe Train for Possible Role in Bosnia

BYLINE: By CRAIG R. WHITNEY,  Special to The New York Times

SECTION: Section 1; Page 8; Column 5; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 834 words

DATELINE: FRANKFURT, May 15


Quietly and with great misgivings, the United States military in Europe is
training for the kinds of operations it could be called upon to perform in the
Balkans.

Air Force fighter-bomber pilots at Ramstein Air Base have been practicing
bombing and missile-firing runs against field guns at the Army's training range
at Grafenwohr, in northern Bavaria, in case President Clinton orders them into
action against Serbian nationalist military targets in Bosnia and Herzegovina.

At the same range, two Army battalions have already gone through a training
course for peacekeeping missions in a mythical Balkan-like country called
"Danubia." The training includes simulation of how to deal with ethnic warfare,
well-armed militias, civilians, and newspaper and television crews on the
battlefield.

Publicly, American military commanders do not make the comparison to Bosnia.
"We're training for the whole spectrum of possible military operations,
including low-intensity peacekeeping missions," said Brig. Gen. Montgomery C.
Meigs. "If we were called upon, we would be ready," he said.

Commanders Are Wary

But a score of other American and allied NATO commanders in Germany and Belgium
said this week that any kind of outside military intervention to try to stop the
fighting in the Balkans would probably be messy, drawn out, and possibly fraught
with unwanted consequences.

"The level of hatred between the combatants in Northern Ireland is nothing like
what there is in the former Yugoslavia," said a British officer. "A peacekeeping
force that went in would quickly be seen as the enemy by everybody who was
disappointed to find that it hadn't come in to be on their side."

President Clinton said on Friday that he did not believe American ground forces
should enter the conflict on behalf of any of the belligerents. But he said that
despite allied opposition he still favored a partial lifting of the arms embargo
on the Balkans to allow the Bosnian Muslims to arm themselves, and threatening
the Serbs with air strikes if they interfered.

United States Air Force commanders at Ramstein said that even with Maverick
air-to-ground missiles, isolated artillery pieces in thickly-settled hilly
terrain like that in Bosnia would be hard to hit. Pilots have to see them to
guide the missiles to a hit, they say, or target positions have to be precisely
known in advance.

'We Read the Newspapers'

They said that they had not been formally ordered to prepare contingency plans
for such missions in Bosnia, but did so prudently. "We read the newspapers like
everybody else," one said. But they warn that unintended damage to civilian
targets close to the guns would probably be great, and Serbian artillery and
mortar fire would be hard to stop.

British and French commanders with United Nations relief missions already in
Bosnia are also afraid that their troops could become targets of Serbian
retaliation against air strikes.

Plans for United States Army training for peacekeeping operations began in
mid-1992, according to a senior officer, after the Bosnian Serbs began the siege
of Sarajevo. Using intelligence data and information from United Nations forces
on the ground, Army trainers developed a war-game scenario for "Danubia," a
country with an embattled province whose ethnic and geographic complexity
strongly resembles Bosnia's.

Two American battalions in Europe went through the training this spring,
struggling in a mock-up village in the Grafenwohr training area with complex
rules of engagement that do not permit them to fire unless clearly confronted
with hostile acts. They faced irregular militias, frightened civilians, snipers,
and competing forces played by the training base's resident force.

Most soldiers in the computer-driven Army are too young to remember Vietnam, but
the experienced officers above them often have misgivings.

'We'll Do the Best We Can'

"The military isn't very fond of the idea of going to Bosnia," one officer said.
"And it isn't clear on how to go in without re-opening old scars. If we're asked
to do it, we'll do the best we can, but this one's really tough."

NATO officials in Brussels said the allies were considering the option of
putting up to 25,000 American ground troops into Bosnia as part of a United
Nations peacekeeping force if the plan worked out by former Secretary of State
Cyrus R. Vance and the European Community mediator, Lord Owen, was accepted by
the Bosnian Serbs. The Bosnian Government and the Bosnian Croats have agreed to
the plan.

So far, though, President Clinton has not indicated he is close to a decision to
send American troops to perform other tasks, such as monitoring the border
between Bosnia and Serbia, a possibility being contemplated by the United
Nations.

Unless the United States makes a commitment of some kind on the ground, some
European officers say, the Administration will not have much leverage on its
allies for suggesting stronger action to stop the fighting.

LOAD-DATE: May 16, 1993

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1993 The New York Times Company


                              156 of 312 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                   May 16, 1993, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

Australia Speeds Effort to End Ties to Queen

BYLINE: Special to The New York Times

SECTION: Section 1; Page 11; Column 1; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 661 words

DATELINE: CANBERRA, Australia


When the new session of Parliament opened this month, Prime Minister Paul
Keating and his Cabinet swore allegiance to "Her Majesty Queen Elizabeth II, her
heirs and successors."

At the same time, a committee appointed by the Prime Minister began considering
constitutional changes for appointing a president to replace the Queen as
Australia's head of state, a position held by British sovereigns since 1788.

Since ousting Prime Minister Bob Hawke in a Labor Party revolt in December 1991,
Mr. Keating has called for severing links with the monarchy and establishing a
republic, saying it was time Australians decided whether they "wanted to be
masters of our own destiny."

When the Queen visited Australia in February last year, some British newspapers
expressed outrage over Mr. Keating remarks and what was regarded as a breach of
protocol by the Prime Minister and his wife at a reception for the Queen in
Parliament House.

In his speech, Mr. Keating told the Queen that "our outlook is necessarily
independent" and that Australia would vigorously seek partnerships with
countries in the Pacific region. At the reception, the Prime Minister put his
arm around the Queen while introducing her to officials, and Mrs. Keating did
not curtsy.

In the campaign before the national elections this March, Mr. Keating promised a
timetable "taking some years" for a national debate and referendum on severing
links with Britain and establishing a republic by 2001, the 100th anniversary of
Australia's federation.

But his decision in April to appoint a committee that is to report on the issue
by Sept. 1 has accelerated the timetable and intensified the debate, which is
now drawing attention away from Australia's economic problems. The next stage is
scheduled to be a constitutional convention to decide the questions to be put to
a referendum.

The Prime Minister favors "a minimalist approach" in changing the Constitution,
and the Government is believed to prefer election of a president by Parliament.
But recent polls show that most Australians believe that if the present system
is changed, a president should be elected by the people.

Under the Labor Government's proposals for "a Federal Republic of Australia," no
changes are planned to the present Westminster system of parliamentary
government. But the necessary constitutional amendments are subject to approval
in a referendum. To succeed, a referendum must be carried by more than three of
the six states, and a national majority is required.

The pro-republican movement, based in Sydney, has active support in the cities
on the east coast, but to carry a referendum the Keating Government needs the
endorsement of the predominantly rural states of West Australia, Queensland,
Tasmania, and South Australia, some with large migrant populations from Britain.

An estimated two million people in Australia hold British passports and many
live in Western Australia, where the Liberal Government has warned the Prime
Minister that the state, which occupies about one third of Australia's land
mass, may secede if the country becomes a republic.

Lined up alongside the monarchists in the bush are more than 250,000 members of
a veterans organization, the Returned Services League. Their leader, Brigadier
Alfred Garland, a Vietnam veteran, has promised the Prime Minister "a long hard
fight" if he attempts to change the Constitution.

"As the leader of Her Majesty's Government in Australia, what the Prime Minister
is preaching would have been once regarded as sedition," he said.

While there is much support for the change in Mr. Keating's own party, the
conservative Liberal-National coalition is opposed to the move.

Mr. Keating invited the opposition to nominate one person to the 10-member
committee studying the issue, but the offer was turned down by the coalition's
leader, John Hewson of the Liberal Party, who described the committee as a
"blatantly political exercise."

LOAD-DATE: May 16, 1993

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1993 The New York Times Company


                              157 of 312 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                   May 16, 1993, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

William Randolph Hearst Jr., 85, Journalist, Dies

BYLINE: By BRUCE LAMBERT

SECTION: Section 1; Page 40; Column 1; National Desk

LENGTH: 1052 words


William Randolph Hearst Jr., a Pulitzer Prize-winning journalist and the editor
in chief of the media empire his father founded, died Friday night at New York
Hospital. He was 85 and lived in Manhattan.

He suffered cardiac arrest and died shortly after arriving by ambulance at the
emergency room, a hospital spokeswoman said.

"Bill Hearst's long and illustrious career in journalism extended from the brash
newsrooms of the 1920's to the computerized news operations of the 1990's," said
Frank A. Bennack Jr., the Hearst Corporation's president and chief executive.

The privately held company owns daily newspapers -- including The San Francisco
Examiner, the company's flagship paper -- magazines, radio and television
stations, a cable television programming operation, two book publishing
companies and King Features Syndicate. Its International News Service is now
part of United Press International.

Won Pulitzer Prize in '1956

In 1956 Mr. Hearst shared a Pulitzer Prize for international reporting on the
Soviet Union. Two years later he won an Overseas Press Club award.

For 40 years he wrote the Editor's Report column, printed throughout the Hearst
chain. His last one is scheduled to be published today.

Despite his achievements, he once wrote, "I lived in my father's shadow all my
life."

The elder Mr. Hearst was the prototype of the swashbuckling publisher who used
the power of his presses to project his views, and to influence national and
world affairs. His life was the basis for the fictional character Charles Foster
Kane in the Orson Welles film "Citizen Kane."

Although Mr. Hearst helped remold the content of his father's newspapers and
succeeded him as the company's editor in chief and chairman, he never assumed
the helm of corporate leadership.

His professional and personal lives blended as he socialized with celebrities
like John Wayne and Bing Crosby, New York power brokers and night club
socialites, the Washington elite and foreign dignitaries. He flew planes and was
fond of high-performance cars.

Niece Abducted in 1974

Presidents granted him exclusive interviews. His column was a bulwark of
anti-Communism, and he supported Senator Joseph R. McCarthy of Wisconsin long
after others had deserted the Republican in his mission to investigate suspected
Communists.

During the Vietnam War, Mr. Hearst sent a telegram on his personal proposals to
the American diplomat, W. Averell Harriman, at the Paris peace talks.

Mr. Hearst's found himself a bystander in one of the most sensational episodes
of America's turbulent 1970's. In 1974 his niece, Patricia, was abducted by the
Symbionese Liberation Army and eventually joined in their terrorist exploits,
adopting the name Tanya. She was later apprehended and convicted of bank
robbery.

The second of five sons of William Randolph and Millicent Willson Hearst,
William Jr. was born in Manhattan on Jan. 27, 1908. Referring to his last name,
Mr. Hearst once said: "I don't need a title. My father gave me one when I was
born."

The family's fortune afforded a lavish life style. In his book "The Hearsts:
Father and Son" (Roberts Rinehart, 1991), Mr. Hearst wrote: "None of us knew the
meaning of financial need. We asked, and things simply appeared."

Professionally, however, his father, sometimes called Chief, was more demanding.
Young Bill, as the son was known, said his father "made it clear from our high
school years that each of us would have to pull his own weight in life,
especially if we went to work for him."

Winning Father's Approval

Mr. Hearst started out in the family business working summers while in military
school. His entry-level position was as a flyboy, a production job on the
presses, at The New York Mirror.

After two years of study at the University of California, he left to join
another Hearst paper, The New York American, as a police reporter. He was
promoted to an editing job and then to publisher in 1936, a year before the
paper merged to become The Journal-American.

The fledgling executive was frustrated because his father was secretly still in
command. The son wrote to the elder Hearst, "I am responsible for this paper,
but I can't very well be if your are communicating your suggestions or orders
through half a dozen other people without my knowledge."

But Mr. Hearst eventually earned his stripes. While serving as a World War II
correspondent in Europe and North Africa, he was prodded by his father -- who
edited his dispatches himself -- into flying on a bombing mission.

After the war, he said: "Pop said I had written some pretty good stuff. I had
become a real newspaperman in his eyes. Nothing in the world was more important
to me than the old man's approval."

Although some people suggested the father-son relationship was harsh, Mr. Hearst
disavowed such talk. "The old man loved us, and we cared about him," he said.
"That's the bottom line."

Met With Khruschev

After his father died in 1951, Mr. Hearst headed a review and modernization of
the chain's newspaper content.

Despite Mr. Hearst's battle against Communism, in 1955 he took two colleagues,
Frank Conniff and Joseph Kingsbury-Smith, to the Soviet Union. They gained
interviews with Prime Minister Nikolai A. Bulganin, Foreign Minister Vyacheslav
M. Molotov, Party Secretary Nikita S. Khrushchev, and Marshall Georgi K. Zhukov.

The journalists' resulting series of eight articles drew worldwide public and
diplomatic attention. On returning home, Mr. Hearst briefed President Dwight D.
Eisenhower and gave an interview correctly identifying Khruschev as a rising
star.

When the series won the Pulitzer, Mr. Hearst, who was known for congeniality,
credited Mr. Kingsbury-Smith as the leader of the team.

The prize had a special significance to Mr. Hearst, since it was named for
Joseph Pulitzer, a publisher who decades earlier was a fierce rival of the elder
Mr. Hearst.

Mr. Hearst's marriages to Alma Walker and Lorelle McCarver ended in divorce, and
his third wife, the former Austine McDonnell, died in 1991.

He is survived by two sons, both of whom followed in the family business:
William Randolph Hearst 3d, who became publisher of The Examiner, and Austin
Hearst of Manhattan, who became president of Hearst Entertainment and
Syndication.

NAME: William Randolph Hearst Jr.

LOAD-DATE: May 16, 1993

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo:s William Randolph Hearst Jr., center, with Frank Conniff, left,
and Joseph Kingsbury-Smith, second from right, in Berlin in 1955. Mr. Hearst
shared the Pulitzer Prize for international reporting with them in 1956.
(Associated Press); Willian Randolph Hearst Jr. (Associated Press, 1989)

TYPE: Obituary (Obit); Biography

                   Copyright 1993 The New York Times Company


                              158 of 312 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                   May 17, 1993, Monday, Late Edition - Final

CONFLICT IN THE BALKANS;
Nationalist Says Serbs' Rejection Of Pact Means the End of Bosnia

BYLINE: By JOHN F. BURNS,  Special to The New York Times

SECTION: Section A; Page 1; Column 4; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 1182 words

DATELINE: PALE, Bosnia and Herzegovina, May 16


Radovan Karadzic, leader of the Bosnian Serbs, said today that the imminent
failure of a referendum on a peace plan for Bosnia opened the way for a "Greater
Serbia" that no outside military or political pressure could change.

"Bosnia never existed, and it will never exist," he said, offering the view --
common among Serbian nationalists -- that Bosnia, as it existed when it was part
of the Yugoslav federation, was an artificial creation.

During the two-day referendum, which is expected to bring a landslide defeat for
the peace plan, political and military leaders of the Bosnian Serbs apparently
discounted the possibility of Western military intervention to force the Serbs
to accept the Vance-Owen peace plan for Bosnia.

Several senior officials told reporters that they believed that President
Clinton, after warning of possible military action earlier this month, had
backed away from the threats under pressure from his own advisers and from
reluctant European allies.

In his public remarks, Dr. Karadzic was more circumspect. But it seemed clear
that he, too, believed that Washington's reluctance to use military force had
cleared the last major obstacle to Serbian objectives.

"If they want to do it, they can, they have the capacity to do it," he said,
referring to the United States and military intervention. "But why would they
want to come to intervene here on a single side? Why would they come to destroy
a small state that exists? We see no reason for them to intervene."

[The Clinton Administration discounted Mr. Karadzic's taunts. The Serbs' vote
drew little official comment, but a State Department official said the
Administration would once again review options with its European allies. Page
A6.]

Although Dr. Karadzic signed the Vance-Owen plan three weeks ago in Athens, he
seemed gratified at the prospect of a decisive rejection when the referendum
results were formally announced, possibly on Tuesday. The plan, which calls for
maintaining Bosnia as a nation with 10 ethnically based provinces, is named for
Cyrus R. Vance, who negotiated it for the United Nations, and Lord Owen, the
European Community's mediator.

Dr. Karadzic, 47, a psychiatrist in Sarajevo, the capital, before the war began
nearly 14 months ago, told reporters that he had signed the plan under duress
from western Governments and from Serbia, and that his acceptance had been
contingent on endorsement of the plan by Serbian voters in Bosnia.

"Vance-Owen Mark 1 is dead," he said. "Let us make a Vance-Owen Mark 2."

Dr. Karadzic made it clear that a new round of negotiations should abandon the
objective of retaining Bosnia as a state, and break it up into three separate
political entities for Serbs, Muslims and Croats.

Serbian nationalists have said that the three states could be joined in a loose
federation, but that they should also be free to join other states; this would
eventually allow Serbs in Bosnia to annex lands under their control.

'Republika Srpska'

Benefiting from an overwhelming military advantage, the Serbs have occupied
nearly 70 per cent of Bosnia's territory, driving at least 1.3 million Muslims
and Croats from their homes and proclaiming an independent state -- Republika
Srpska -- on the seized lands.

Immediately after the referendum ended today, Dr. Karadzic told reporters at a
news conference that the world should accept the new state, which is composed of
stretches of territory captured by the Serbs, as a reality.

"You yourselves have seen that this is a state that operates," he told
reporters. "It exists."

All indications have pointed toward a landslide rejection of the Vance-Owen
plan, possibly by as many as 90 percent of the voters.

Counting the Ballots

In the first ballot box opened in Pale, the Serbian nationalist headquarters in
the mountains 15 miles southeast of Sarajevo, election officials counted 120
votes against the peace plan and 2 in favor. When the officials opened another
box containing votes on the other question in the referendum, they said every
one of scores of votes had been cast in favor of independence for the
Serbian-controlled parts of Bosnia.

The Vance-Owen plan, which has been accepted by Muslim and Croatian leaders,
would divide Bosnia into 10 largely autonomous republics, nine of which would
effectively become nationalist enclaves governed by Serbs, Muslims or Croats.
Government of the 10th province, the region around Sarajevo, would be shared by
the three groups. A central Government with limited powers would also be shared
by the three groups.

When he signed the peace plan, Dr. Karadzic hinted that he would resign if the
plan were rejected in the referendum. But since then, two developments seem to
have encouraged him to take a more defiant stand.

One of these has been the international maneuvering over Bosnia, in which
Britain and France, among others, have strongly opposed military intervention.

The other was the fact that Dr. Karadzic's agreement to sign the peace plan was
effectively forced by Slobodan Milosevic, the President of Serbia, who flew to
Athens and announced that his republic could no longer bear the sanctions
imposed by the United Nations to punish Serbia for backing nationalists in
Bosnia.

Backing From Other Serbs

Mr. Milosevic's announced change of policy has been strongly opposed by Vojislav
Seselj, an extremist leader who is widely regarded as the most powerful
nationalist politician in Serbia after Mr. Milosevic.

While diplomats have debated whether Mr. Milosevic is sincere in his pledge to
cut off supplies to Bosnian Serbs, Mr. Seselj has reacted by mounting a bitter
campaign against the Serbian President.

During the balloting, Mr. Seselj held rallies denouncing Mr. Milosevic and
urging Serbs in Bosnia to hold fast to the dream of a "Greater Serbia,"
enfolding Serbian-occupied territories in Croatia and in Bosnia.

His position, coupled with the apparent weakening of President Clinton's resolve
to take strong action, appeared to embolden Dr. Karadzic, or at least to
convince him that there were fewer risks in holding to nationalist objectives
than in abandoning them.

In what appeared to be a bid to gain popularity among Serbs in Bosnia at the
expense of Dr. Karadzic, Mr. Seselj roused feelings with rallies at which his
followers appeared in military regalia dating to World War I, rang the bells of
Serbian Orthodox churches and raised black flags emblazoned with skulls.

'War Will Be Total'

Mr. Seselj, wearing a pistol on his belt, held a news conference of his own
today in Pale. He invoked the threat of United States military intervention to
stir his followers.

If United States forces are used here, he said, "the war will be total." United
States commanders would discover that air attacks were insufficient, and would
have to deploy ground troops, he added.

"We would have tens of thousands of volunteers, and we would score a glorious
victory," Mr. Seselj said. "The Americans would have to send thousands of body
bags. It would be a new Vietnam."

LOAD-DATE: May 17, 1993

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo: Bosnian Serb soldiers taking a ballot box to the front line near
Brcko yesterday so other soldiers could vote on the second day of a referendum
on a peace plan for Bosnia. The vote seemed overwhelmingly negative. (Reuters)
(pg. A6)

                   Copyright 1993 The New York Times Company


                              159 of 312 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                   May 17, 1993, Monday, Late Edition - Final

Who's Got a Secret? Disillusioned Helper Is Battling the C.I.A.

BYLINE: By TIM WEINER,  Special to The New York Times

SECTION: Section A; Page 1; Column 1; National Desk

LENGTH: 1257 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, May 14


Erwin Rautenberg did the Central Intelligence Agency a favor more than 36 years
ago, a secret service for his country.

In return, he says, the C.I.A. sold him out after closing down a covert business
it had operated in his name, leaving him adrift in a sea of legal and financial
troubles. Among them, he says, were hundreds of thousands of dollars in bills
and liabilities amassed by the covert company.

Mr. Rautenberg sued, and seven years ago he appeared to have won. A Federal jury
awarded him $6.2 million in damages, even though Mr. Rautenberg had been
hampered by a secrecy order, issued by the trial judge at the request of the
C.I.A., keeping him from presenting some facts in the case.

But the trial judge, who met privately with C.I.A. officials while the case was
pending, set aside the verdict. An appeals court has ordered a new trial, but in
what seems like a post-cold-war Catch-22, the trial judge has said there will be
no trial until the Supreme Court resolves the issue of the secrecy order.

The Justices are to decide on Monday whether to grant a hearing on unsealing the
order. How the High Court rules, assuming it decides to take up the issue, would
determine when and how Mr. Rautenberg presents his story at the new trial.
Meanwhile, he has not collected a penny.

The intelligence agency, which has always carefully protected its secrets, has
feared that Mr. Rautenberg would reveal deep secrets of state. It offered him a
settlement and a secret handshake, which Mr. Rautenberg declined. He wants
public vindication.

The secrecy order, issued in 1984, sits in a sealed file in a vault in Los
Angeles. It governs the breach-of-contract case filed 12 years ago by Mr.
Rautenberg, who now runs a small freight-forwarding concern, against E-Systems,
a big Texas company that builds espionage equipment for the C.I.A. and the
Pentagon.

Eight Years of Silence

For eight years, the order commanded Mr. Rautenberg to keep silent about his
dealings with the company and the C.I.A. It forbade him to speak of the order
itself, or of the fact that the C.I.A. demanded his silence. Despite those
restrictions, Mr. Rautenberg persuaded jurors that he was wronged.

The secrecy order has already become something of a charade. Motions filed with
the Supreme Court by the Government and Mr. Rautenberg have now been unsealed.
So Mr. Rautenberg has felt free outside of court to relate a story about secret
government operations, and about secrecy itself.

The Supreme Court's ruling will affect only Mr. Rautenberg. The case offers no
legal landmarks, only an unread page in a chapter of cold-war history.

Two Companies in One

Mr. Rautenberg, a 71-year-old Holocaust survivor who performed espionage work
against the Axis powers in Argentina after fleeing Germany, runs a company near
Los Angeles International Airport called Air-Sea Forwarders. For 25 years,
Air-Sea really was two freight-forwarding companies: the real one and a false
one bearing the same name. The false one owned and operated by the C.I.A.

The false company was an arm of Air Asia, a C.I.A. aviation complex in Taiwan.
Air Asia, in turn, was part of Air America, which ran thousands of secret
missions for the C.I.A. in the 1950's and 1960's.

Mr. Rautenberg refers to the false company as "the C.I.A. proprietary," meaning
a company that looks like an ordinary business but in reality is run by the
C.I.A.

"Until 1956," Mr. Rautenberg explained, "the C.I.A. proprietary worked through a
company called Slick Airways. Then they started their own operation and ran
immediately into tax problems with the State of California. As a Federal agency,
they were tax-exempt, but they couldn't say so. They wanted to maintain their
secrecy and still not pay taxes."

'They Made a Deal'

C.I.A. lawyers researched the question and learned that cargo handled by an
international freight-forwarder is tax-exempt in California. The C.I.A. then
checked out Mr. Rautenberg.

"They made a deal with me in the late fall of 1956," Mr. Rautenberg said. "An
operation would be conducted under the name of Air-Sea Forwarders, but it would
be an entirely different business."

Mr. Rautenberg would lend the name of his company to the C.I.A. In exchange, he
would handle the agency's shipments in his regular business. Any legal snarls
would be handled by the Government.

Business boomed with the cold war. "It was enormous at the peak of the Vietnam
war," Mr. Rautenberg said. It dropped off after Vietnam.

As Saigon fell in 1975, so did the C.I.A.'s reputation. Senate hearings that
year revealed a long train of abuses by the agency. And as the men who built Air
America and Air Asia were dismissed or retired, the C.I.A.'s institutional
memory of people like Mr. Rautenberg faded, said William T. Leary, a University
of Georgia history professor who has written extensively about the secret air
services.

In 1975, the C.I.A. sold Air Asia at a huge loss to E-Systems. Nothing else
changed for six years, Mr. Rautenberg said. Then, in 1981, E-Systems notified
him that his services were no longer required. Mr. Rautenberg said he was left
holding "a million-dollar bag" of trouble: the false company's unpaid bills and
corporate taxes, its disputes with a teamsters local, and cargo piling up in its
warehouse.

Exactly why E-Systems ousted Mr. Rautenberg remains in dispute. A spokesman for
E-Systems, John Kumpf, said the Dallas-based company cannot comment about court
matters. E-Systems is required to be reticent under its $1.6 billion in
contracts with the C.I.A. and the Pentagon.

A Countersuit Backfires

Mr. Rautenberg sued. E-Systems' countersuit backfired when a California state
court jury found that the countersuit constituted "malicious prosecution" and
awarded Mr. Rautenberg $4.8 million in damages. But E-Systems appealed, so Mr.
Rautenberg cannot collect.

In November 1984, before his Federal breach-of-contract case came to trial, Mr.
Rautenberg was summoned to the offices of his lawyer, Mickey Kantor (who is now
the United States Trade Representative) at the demand of a C.I.A. official and a
Justice Department lawyer.

They presented him with the secrecy order now before the Supreme Court. The
Government lawyer told him to sign it. So did Mr. Kantor. Under protest, he
complied.

He then sought another lawyer. It was difficult, Mr. Rautenberg said, for the
order decreed he could not discuss the existence of the order, much less the
gist of the case.

Nevertheless, in 1986 a Federal jury awarded Mr. Rautenberg $6.2 million in
damages against E-Systems. Mr. Rautenberg has not collected that award either.
In a rare action, Judge Richard A. Gadbois Jr. overturned the verdict, declaring
that Mr. Rautenberg "had blown cloak-and-dagger smoke at the jurors."

A Federal appeals court reversed Judge Gadbois, who had been appointed by
President Ronald Reagan in 1982.

To the Justice Department, the argument for keeping the order sealed is clear:
it reveals "a confidential relationship between the Government and a specified
private entity." The "private entity" is E-Systems, whose relationship with
military and intelligence agencies is made public in the company's annual
reports.

To Robert S. Gerstein, a Santa Monica, Calif., lawyer representing Mr.
Rautenberg before the Supreme Court, the Government's case is "ridiculous and
embarrassing."

Recalling his early reluctance to deal with the C.I.A., Mr. Rautenberg said, "I
always came back to thinking that Uncle Sam wouldn't let me down."

LOAD-DATE: May 17, 1993

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo: Erwin Rautenberg, a 71-year-old Holocaust survivor who runs a
company called Air-Sea Forwarders in Los Angeles, says the C.I.A. sold him out
after closing down a covert business it had operated in his name. (Tony Esparza
for The New York Times) (pg. A14)

                   Copyright 1993 The New York Times Company


                              160 of 312 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                   May 17, 1993, Monday, Late Edition - Final

Review/Film;
In the Show-Biz Jungle, Seeking a Gentler Life

BYLINE: By JOHN J. O'CONNOR

SECTION: Section C; Page 11; Column 5; Cultural Desk

LENGTH: 872 words


The millennium approaches, in the sense not of a golden age but of threatened
apocalypse. Just watch television for the signs.

On the news you have, live and in color, religious cultists and their children
going up in the flames they so often envisioned being unleashed by their
Babylonian enemies. On prime-time entertainment, the four-hour movie "The Fire
the Next Time" warned a few weeks ago that the entire planet hovered on the
brink of global-warming annihilation. And now, on ABC for four consecutive
nights through Wednesday (this evening at 9), the six-hour "Wild Palms" is
squinting warily at technology and doing a hallucinatory dance to the music of
future anxieties.

The mini-series marks the television debut of Oliver Stone, who shares
executive-producer credits with Bruce Wagner, the writer, who is drawing loosely
upon a comic strip he wrote for Details magazine. The scene is Los Angeles, year
2007. Senator Anton Kreutzer (Robert Loggia), a former science-fiction writer
and founder of the Church of Synthiotics, a therapy cult propounding the idea
that there is more than one reality, heads a media conglomerate that has
developed virtual-reality holograms to the point where people's dreams may be
controlled. New Realism is this religion's name. Anton's Fathers, patriarchal
totalitarians, are locked in battle with the Friends, sort of liberal humanists.
Not much subtlety here.


Why did Mr. Stone fix on this particular project? Easy answer: The director of
"J. F. K.," an instant classic in contemporary paranoia, is drawn to stories of
wide-ranging conspiracies. Beyond the obvious, however, Mr. Stone is also
remarkably adept at prodding the more sensitive areas of assorted social ills,
at plugging in to communal neuroses. In "Wall Street," it was the amorality of
corporate America. In "Born on the Fourth of July," it was the nation's neglect
of Vietnam veterans. In "Wild Palms," it's the specter of an unstoppable
technology that threatens to overwhelm our lives and our very souls.

Both Mr. Stone and Mr. Wagner have been more than a little disingenuous when
asked to explain "Wild Palms" and the meaning of, just to skim the surface, its
eye-gouging grandma, murderous child and disappearing rhino with its ties to
unicorns and the poetry of William Butler Yeats. There are also unsettling hints
in the Japanese sequences of that old racial bugaboo, the Yellow Peril. In one
magazine interview, Mr. Wagner maintains that the series is really about
nothing, adding with Synthiotics-like seduction that "I'm hoping viewers will
get wrapped up in the look of the show."

But alarms about science and technology have been sounded steadily throughout
most of this century. In a New York Review of Books critique of Brian
Appleyard's antiscience book, "Understanding the Present: Science and the Soul
of Modern Man" (Doubleday), Timothy Ferris recalls how in 1933 Bertrand Russell
was worrying about what life might be like in "the world which could result if
scientific technique were to rule unchecked." And that, Mr. Ferris notes, was
"before the ante was upped by innovations like the global deployment of 50,000
nuclear weapons, the depletion of atmospheric ozone by CFC's and the erosion of
literacy by television."

What would Russell have made of today's scene with its superhighways of
technology leading to wonders like the ability to reach someone rapidly by means
of messages on a wristwatch? Of course that same watch could be viewed as a
monitoring device similar to those already used to control the whereabouts of
criminal suspects and parolees. The disquieting truth about "Wild Palms" is that
its supposed science fiction is only millimeters away from science fact.

Virtual-reality experiments in laboratories are already taking place, and
development is being pursued intensely. This is not something that might happen;
it will happen, just as surely as Nintendo is mesmerizing children around the
world, just as surely as Barry Diller, rhapsodizing about his expanding business
of shopping by television being "so new and so fresh," will realize his vision
of making shopping stores obsolete.

Like Aldous Huxley's "Brave New World" and its "feelies" television, "Wild
Palms" confronts us with a future in which citizens are seduced into lives in
which there are no moments of privacy. Impossible? Listen to the debates today
over who should have access to computerized files of personal records and credit
information. Watch those people on the street or in their cars, who, seemingly
terrified of a moment in thoughtful repose, chatter constantly into cellular
phones.

Some of my reviewing colleagues, especially the ones who think television
entertainment should not try to reach beyond the excellence of a "Seinfeld" or a
"Simpsons," give "Wild Palms" the ultimate dismissal: It's weird, like the
self-destructing "Twin Peaks." So what. Television is, or at least should be,
big enough to encompass weird. Even commercial television can claim landmarks in
the area with "Twilight Zone" or "Mary Hartman, Mary Hartman" or "Soap."

So, what's it all about Ollie? Something more than the equivalent of a pothead's
party punch laced with acid? You bet.

LOAD-DATE: May 17, 1993

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo: Bebe Neuwirth and Ben Savage portray actors projected via
holographic television into viewers' living rooms in "Wild Palms." (Bob
D'Amico/ABC) (pg. C16)

TYPE: Review

                   Copyright 1993 The New York Times Company


                              161 of 312 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                  May 18, 1993, Tuesday, Late Edition - Final

U.N. Official Warns Europe on Ethnic Strife

BYLINE: By STEPHEN KINZER,  Special to The New York Times

SECTION: Section A; Page 6; Column 4; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 694 words

DATELINE: BELGRADE, Yugoslavia, May 17


The departing chief of the United Nations refugee program in the former
Yugoslavia has warned that ethnic conflicts like those in the Balkans could
erupt in other parts of Europe.

Interviewed last week as he prepared to take up a new post in Brussels, the
refugee official, Jose-Maria Mendiluce, said his 19 months here had taught him
that "people can be transformed into hating and killing machines without too
much difficulty."

"There is an attitude in the West that war is raging three hours from Venice
only because Balkan people are fundamentally different from other Europeans,"
Mr. Mendiluce said. "That is a very dangerous mistake, because it is leading
Europeans to become immobilized and to think only about their new cars and their
beach holidays.

'Blood and Atrocities'

"When I look at far-right groups emerging in various European countries,
including some that have enjoyed electoral successes, I realize that
Yugoslavia-type conflicts could easily break out there. All it takes is an
economic crisis and a few cynical politicians who blame it on immigrants or poor
people or people who are somehow different."

"Here you see how easy it is for cynical leaders to stir up hatred by spreading
lies in the media and fomenting provocations on the ground," he said. "The rest
of Europe is not immune to this kind of manipulation. It could happen in Britain
or France or Germany or Spain."

As special envoy of the United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees, Mr.
Mendiluce, a 42-year-old Spaniard, has supervised the spending of about $1
billion in aid since the Bosnian war began 13 months ago, feeding, clothing,
sheltering and providing medical care for more than three million refugees and
displaced people.

In his new post in Brussels, Mr. Mendiluce will be the refugee commissioner's
representative to NATO, the European Community, and the Governments of Belgium,
Luxembourg and the Netherlands. His replacement here will be Nicholas Morris, a
Briton who has been overseeing efforts to resettle Afghan refugees.

Because he has insisted on personally witnessing the carnage of the Bosnian war,
Mr. Mendiluce has become something of a casualty himself. A robust figure who
formerly directed refugee operations in Angola and Central America, he suffered
a cardiac collapse in mid-February and was placed under intensive care at a
hospital in Zagreb, the Croatian capital.

"I will never be the same person after this war, that is for sure," Mr.
Mendiluce said in the interview. "You have to digest blood and atrocities. It
has been very, very difficult. I am very close to having that traumatic stress
syndrome that veterans of Vietnam and other wars suffer from."

"Of everything I saw, maybe the expressions in the eyes of old people who have
lost everything affected me most," he said. "There is a lot of talk about how
children suffer in war, and all of that is quite true, but children have
futures. We take them out of some horrible place, and then a couple of days
later they are laughing and playing on the street. But old people know they will
never have time to rebuild their lives. The experience of holding these people
in my arms and understanding their hopelessness is really terrible."

Early End to War Doubted

Mr. Mendiluce said the war in Bosnia is unlikely to end soon, and he pointed to
recent clashes between Croatian and Muslim forces as "another enormous
catastrophe" that illustrates the intensity of hatred in this region.

"Even those who have signed peace agreements don't change their behavior," he
said. "I don't expect them to become prophets of peace and love, but at least to
stop hating and killing. This has not happened."

Mr. Mendiluce considers the relief effort here to have been largely successful.
But he added:

"Maybe our greatest success here has been that for the first time we have
established the principle that the world community has the right to humanitarian
intervention in a country during wartime. We are using all the tools we have to
penalize those who use force against others. We aren't doing enough, but we have
established a very important new direction."


LOAD-DATE: May 18, 1993

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1993 The New York Times Company


                              162 of 312 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                  May 18, 1993, Tuesday, Late Edition - Final

Death Toll From Allies In Warfare May Be 15%

BYLINE: By MALCOLM W. BROWNE

SECTION: Section C; Page 11; Column 1; Science Desk

LENGTH: 665 words


UNITED STATES Army analysts have concluded from a new study of historical
medical records and other evidence that some 15 percent of the casualties
sustained in modern wars have been fratricidal, and that many of the Americans
who would be called upon to fight a future war would again be exposed to lethal
fire from their own side.

Military leaders formerly believed that the average fratricidal casualty rate in
past wars was about 2 percent, although fratricidal casualties in the Persian
Gulf war were known to be about 17 percent of the total. But a newly disclosed
analysis by the Army's Office of the Surgeon General has caused a sensation
among Pentagon planners: it appears that the "normal" rate of fratricidal
casualties in recent American wars has been closer to 15 percent than 2 percent.

The author of the study, Col. David M. Sa'adah, commented in the report he
delivered at an Army Operations Research Symposium that the fratricide problem
"has been ignored by our leaders," and that anti-fratricide policy "remains to
this day contrary to the best information we have."

The Army was stung by this harsh criticism from one of its own, but many combat
veterans acknowledge that Colonel Sa'adah's analysis merely confirms what they
had suspected all along: that far more of the Americans who fell in wars during
this century died from "friendly fire" than officials were willing to admit.

5 Campaigns Scrutinized

The new Pentagon candor in its gloomy assessment of fratricide stems largely
from Colonel Sa'adah's analysis of four American campaigns from which unusually
comprehensive casualty records survive. The inference to be drawn from these
records, he said in an interview, is that 15 percent of all American casualties
in all wars were caused by American fire.

While the United States Army has not uniformly classified its casualties in any
war of the 20th century, he reported, unusual circumstances made four campaigns
-- and only four -- useful for a comparative analysis of fratricidal casualties.

From an exhaustive survey of medical records (including autopsies), and by
interviewing many commanders and veterans, Colonel Sa'adah, a medical doctor
with a special interest in epidemiology, picked these battles for further
analysis: the 1943 guerrilla campaign inside Japanese-occupied Burma by the
5307th Composite Unit (Provisional), or "Merrill's Marauders"; two separate
studies of the United States beachhead defense of Bougainville Island in the
South Pacific in 1944; an exhaustive study of United States casualties in
Vietnam from 1967 to 1969, and the Persian Gulf war.

Each of these studies included details of individual dead and wounded, and in
many cases, positive identification of the weapons that caused the casualties.
This information was particularly useful, because a wound caused by a weapon
used only by friendly forces was considered as evidence of fratricide.

For example, a fragment of depleted uranium in the body of a Gulf war casualty
was evidence of a hit by an American, since only American weapons fire
uranium-core projectiles. Similarly, wounds in Vietnam caused by Claymore mines
and M-79 grenade launchers were considered likely to be fratricidal.

Estimates for Battles

The results of Colonel Sa'adeh's analysis suggest that fratricidal casualties in
the Burma campaign were at least 14 percent, in Bougainville some 24 percent,
and in Vietnam 11 percent. The analysis confirmed earlier studies that showed
that fratricidal casualties in the Persian Gulf campaign came to 17 percent.

Even training exercises in which no real bullets or shells are fired seem to
confirm estimates of high fratricide rates.

In the late 20th century it is no longer possible to wait "until you see the
white of their eyes" before opening fire; opposing tanks generally start
shooting at each other from ranges greater than one mile, and aircraft pilots
may not see their targets at all, except on radar displays.


LOAD-DATE: May 18, 1993

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1993 The New York Times Company


                              163 of 312 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                  May 18, 1993, Tuesday, Late Edition - Final

Review/Television;
New Made-for-TV Murders Of Assorted Loved Ones

BYLINE: By JOHN J. O'CONNOR

SECTION: Section C; Page 18; Column 3; Cultural Desk

LENGTH: 672 words


Relationships are murder. Literally. At least in based-on-fact television
movies.

The latest illustration can be found in "When Love Kills: The Seduction of John
Hearn," a two-part four-hour movie on CBS at 9 tonight and tomorrow. Adapted
from a portion of Ben Green's 1992 book "The Soldier of Fortune Murders," this
excursion into pathetic lives stars Gary Cole ("Midnight Caller") as Hearn, a
decorated Vietnam veteran drifting through a series of jobs and marriages in and
around Columbia, S.C. Devoted to his young son (Jon Paul Steuer), John yearns
for some financial security. In 1985 he tries to start a bodyguard service and
runs an ad in Soldier of Fortune magazine.

The calls start flowing in from what John calls "a network of loonies -- most of
them are flakes, or they don't have any money." One voice does grab his
attention. It turns out to belong to Debbie Banister, who works for a bank in
Gainesville, Fla. Portrayed by Marg Helgenberger ("China Beach"), Debbie is a
gorgeous manipulator who soon has John helplessly dazzled. It's only a matter of
time, and lots of panting passion, before Debbie has persuaded John to kill her
brother-in-law and husband. Naive John does balk occasionally, but he's no match
for conniving Debbie.

The sordid story of John and Debbie comes on the heels of NBC's four-hour "Woman
on the Run: The Lawrencia Bembenek Story," which was broadcast Sunday and
yesterday. Ms. Bembenek, a former Playboy bunny and policewoman, was convicted
in 1981 of murdering her husband's ex-wife. She has always maintained her
innocence. In 1990, with the help of a new boyfriend, she escaped from prison
and fled to Canada. Eventually extradited to the United States, she was set free
in December 1992 after pleading no contest to a reduced charge.

"Woman on the Run" fully accepted Bembenek's innocence, and strongly suggests
that with the cooperation of her husband, Elfred Shultz, she had probably been
set up by members of the Milwaukee Police Department, against which she had
earlier filed a sex-discrimination charge. Tatum O'Neal's performance in the
title role steadily conveyed the impression of a virtuous woman undone by
diabolical men. Not all of the defense arguments tracked persuasively,
especially its explanation of why Bembenek's once-best friend suddenly turned up
as a witness for the prosecution. In the end, though, viewers were treated to
still another pointless turn on the treachery of relationships.

CBS's "When Love Kills" even throws in the creepy dividend of John Black, who
wants to hire John Hearn to kill his wife. Played with relish by Michael Jeter,
a sniveling Black is having a torrid affair with a teen-age girl and he simply
has to dispose of his wife because, he says, "my 15-year-old son would never
forgive me if I divorced her." Needing some money, Debbie pushes Hearn to take
the job. "I can't believe this," he cries. "Does everybody in the world suddenly
want somebody else killed?"

Looks that way, if you believe what you see on television.

When Love Kills
The Seduction of John Hearn
CBS, tonight and tomorrow night at 9
(Channel 2 in New York)

A two-part drama written by Gregory Goodell with a story by William Bayer and
Mr. Goodell. Larry Elikann, director; Terry Donnelly, supervising producer;
Harvey Kahn, producer; Patricia Clifford, James McGillen, Les Alexander and Don
Enright, executive producers. A production of Harvey Kahn Productions and
Alexander-Enright and Associates in association with McGillen Entertainment.
Based on the book "The Soldier of Fortune Murders" by Ben Green.

John Hearn . . . Gary Cole
Debbie Banister . . . Marg Helgenberger
Alice Hearn . . . Julie Harris
Detective Whalen . . . Charles Hallahan
Joe Banister . . . Gregg Henry
Bob Black . . . Michael Jeter
Edna Larson . . . Shirley Knight
Detective Votel . . . Nick Searcy
Detective Gerst . . . Stan Shaw
Detective Keefe . . . Stephen Tobolowsky
Cheryl Pearce . . . Kathleen Wilhoite
Ray Larson . . . Bill Smillie

LOAD-DATE: May 18, 1993

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Review

                   Copyright 1993 The New York Times Company


                              164 of 312 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                  May 18, 1993, Tuesday, Late Edition - Final

NIXON TAPE SHOWS A VENDETTA OF '72

BYLINE: By NEIL A. LEWIS,  Special to The New York Times

SECTION: Section A; Page 15; Column 1; National Desk

LENGTH: 588 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, May 17


The clashing styles of Caspar W. Weinberger and George P. Shultz that were so
much a part of the Reagan Administration policy battles had an earlier life in
the Nixon White House, according to a new batch of tape recordings of Mr.
Nixon's conversations released today.

According to the tapes released by the National Archives, Mr. Nixon wanted to
retaliate against the Massachusetts Institute of Technology by refusing to renew
the school's Government contracts. The university's offense is unclear, but the
tapes hint that it had to do with a lack of support for Mr. Nixon's policy in
Vietnam.

Mr. Nixon is heard in a telephone conversation from Camp David on a May 18,
1972, tape, telling his chief of staff, H. R. Haldeman, that his other chief
aide, John D. Ehrlichman, had not acted quickly enough to cut off funds to the
university in Cambridge, Mass. Mr. Nixon blames Mr. Ehrlichman's foot-dragging
on Mr. Shultz, who at the time was the Director of the Office of Management and
Budget.

A Cutback Formula

He orders that the task be given to Mr. Weinberger, who was set to succeed Mr.
Shultz at the budget agency. On a tape from the following day, Mr. Ehrlichman
reports that "Cap," as Mr. Weinberger is known, has come up with a formula to
slash the contracts while making it difficult for Mr. Nixon's opponents to
charge that the action was taken as retribution.

Mr. Weinberger, reached in Maine today, said that the conversation sounded like
nonsense to him. He suggested that Mr. Ehrlichman and Mr. Haldeman may have used
his name as a way to appease a president who was apparently boiling mad at
M.I.T.

"People were always furious with somebody over at the White House," Mr.
Weinberger said. "It's absurd that anybody called me and asked me to come up
with a plan to punish M.I.T.

On the May 18 tape, Mr. Nixon tells Mr. Haldeman over the telephone that Mr.
Shultz has delayed the cutoff of M.I.T.'s contracts by Mr. Ehrlichman. "You get
a hold of Weinberger," he tells Mr. Haldeman, "and say I want the goddamn funds
cut and I want them to know it now."

Told to Go Ahead

The following day, in the Oval Office, Mr. Ehrlichman tells the President: "And
I just wanted to let you know that, on M.I.T., that Cap has come up with a
formula that I think does the job you want to do with a minimum of political
damage. And so, I've told him in your name to go ahead."

When Mr. Nixon asks how the political damage is to be minimized, Mr. Ehrlichman
responds: "I mean the money dries up but we don't make a big show of it. We
don't let them pin it on you as retribution. And what we do is we quietly pass
the word to the agencies that those contracts are not to be renewed."

Mr. Nixon responds forcefully, "I mean, do it!" And Mr. Ehrlichman adds, "Yeah,
but don't get caught at it."

Hint of a Motive

On the tape, Mr. Nixon says that if M.I.T. officials, "come in whining around
about it," he will ask them why they did not support his efforts in Vietnam.

It is unclear whether the university actually suffered any contract losses. The
Watergate break-in was a month later, so Mr. Nixon and his aides soon became
greatly distracted.

The tapes also show that Mr. Nixon did not anticipate being so preoccupied with
Watergate.

"Now the purists probably won't agree with that but I don't think you're going
to see a great, great uproar in the country about the Republican committee
trying to bug the Democratic headquarters," he said on June 21, four days after
the break-in.



LOAD-DATE: May 18, 1993

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1993 The New York Times Company


                              165 of 312 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                  May 18, 1993, Tuesday, Late Edition - Final

Bomb the Serbs. Now.

BYLINE: By Dennis DeConcini;  Dennis DeConcini is a Democratic Senator from
Arizona.

SECTION: Section A; Page 21; Column 1; Editorial Desk

LENGTH: 657 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON


Now that the Bosnian Serbs have defied the international community by burying
the Vance-Owen peace plan under the rubble of new artillery attacks, President
Clinton and our allies must take further steps, including military force, to
stop the genocidal slaughter of civilians.

But there are deep divisions in Congress and in our military -- not only over
what these steps should be but also over why the U.S. should get involved at
all. The reasons, in fact, are far more crucial to our national interests than
than those that led us to send 500,000 soldiers to defend the dictatorship and
the oil of Kuwait.

First, we must act because our moral integrity as the leader of the democratic
world is at stake. The West must not turn its back once again on genocide in
Europe.

Further, our national security is inextricably linked to the stability of Europe
as it struggles to adjust to the downfall of Communism. Democracy is by no means
secure in Central and Eastern Europe. Allowing the invasion of the sovereign
nation of Bosnia to go unpunished would send a dangerous signal to those who are
determined to undermine democratic progress, for example, in the former Soviet
Union.

Twice in this century, because of Europe's inertia, we have had to go to war to
save that continent. For much of this century, our children have lived under the
threat of Communism and American taxpayers have financed hundreds of billions of
dollars in military spending. The West must do everything in its power now to
insure that democracy takes hold throughout Europe. If we don't, the
consequences could be disastrous.

Finally, we must not forget that Europe represents America's largest trading
partner. An unstable Europe could damage our own economy. And, after several
fact-finding trips over the past three years to the former Yugoslavia, there is
no question in my mind that this conflict, if left unchecked, will soon
intensify and spread into neighboring countries.

Weighing these critical factors convinces me that America can no longer afford
to sit on the sidelines. The international community's only option is military
intervention.

The President has said, correctly, that we must act in concert with our allies,
and he has sent Secretary of State Warren Christopher to develop a decisive
policy with them. U.S. military planners are drafting several options, from
limited air strikes to participation in a significant NATO ground force.

I have, for example, been advocating air strikes on Serbian supply depots and
the lifting of the arms embargo on Bosnia and Herzegovina. The purpose of allied
air strikes would be to inflict punitive damage on the Serbian militants in
Bosnia, and to send a powerful message to would-be aggressors throughout the
world. At the same time, allied air power could provide cover for the Bosnians
while they acquire arms to defend themselves. Others believe that a much larger
effort must be made; I am not opposed to that if a strong case can be made.

To those who believe that any U.S. military solution is a prelude to a Vietnam
-type disaster, I can only ask: Have we learned nothing from the past? How long
will we remain paralyzed by previous mistakes?

The Air Force chief of staff, Gen. Merrill McPeak, recently testified before
Congress that the "relatively scarce and unsophisticated surface-to-air weapons
available to the [Bosnian] Serbs" would permit an aerial campaign that would
pose "virtually no risk to ourselves." If the United States, with the finest
military in the world, cannot stem resurgent fascism, what are we, the only
superpower, all about?

Those who are urging no involvement may sound like they are giving wise counsel.
In fact, they are advocating a policy that is much riskier to our national
security. We must act now, through NATO, to stop the killing. Further delay
could leave us no choice but the kind of military involvement that none of us
want.

LOAD-DATE: May 18, 1993

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Drawing

TYPE: Op-Ed

                   Copyright 1993 The New York Times Company


                              166 of 312 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                  May 18, 1993, Tuesday, Late Edition - Final

Theater in Review

BYLINE: By STEPHEN HOLDEN

SECTION: Section C; Page 17; Column 3; Cultural Desk

LENGTH: 518 words



Washington Square Moves
Primary Stages
354 West 45th Street
Clinton

By Matthew Witten; directed by Seth Gordon; production stage manager, Christine
Catti; production manager, Andrew Leynse; assistant director, Laurel Springer;
set by Bruce Goodrich; lighting by Deborah Constantine; costumes by Amanda J.
Klein. Presented by Primary Stages Company Inc., Casey Childs, artistic
director.

WITH: Angela Bullock, Bert Goldstein, Dion Graham, Dawn McClendon, Joe Quintero,
Ascanio Sharpe and Jack Stehlin.

Matthew Witten's play "Washington Square Moves" is an earnest attempt to
dramatize the nearly unbridgeable gap between New York City's middle class and
its street life in a way that is compassionate without being foolishly
idealistic.

Al (Dion Graham), the main character, is a 32-year-old black man who has been in
and out of prison. He earns a few dollars a day as a chess hustler in Washington
Square Park. His frequent opponent, Bobby (Jack Stehlin), is a mentally unstable
Vietnam veteran, incapable of work, who scrapes by on the income from a meager
trust fund.

It was in prison that Al learned to play chess and became a champion. His
prowess has elevated his self-esteem from zero to a shaky realization of his
intellectual potential. Although his situation seems hopeless, he daydreams
about going to college.

One day, Randall (Ascanio Sharpe), a former chess opponent from prison, appears
in front of his table. Randall, who is nattily dressed, explains that while
working as a messenger, he talked his way into a consulting job for an
advertising agency marketing jeans to blacks. Randall comes up with a scheme
that could conceivably turn Al's life around: if Al and Bobby could play chess
for more than 200 hours, they could break the world records for the longest
match.

Randall fantasizes about major media coverage for such a match and comes up with
the idea of a foundation that would teach chess to young black people. He
enlists the help of Margie (Angela Bullock), a childhood friend of Al's who once
interviewed the two of them on National Public Radio.

"Washington Square Moves" has a setup that could make for a nifty satire on
upward mobility, middle-class guilt and media voracity. Instead, Mr. Witten and
the director, Seth Gordon, go for a warm-hearted urban realism that focuses more
on character than on social structures.

The production half succeeds. Mr. Witten shows a good ear for street talk but
softens the profanity, and there are too many speeches. The story, while
ingenious, is resolved in a completely predictable way.

The production is buoyed by superior acting. As a successful radio personality
who rose from poverty, Ms. Bullock portrays the conflict between wanting to help
and self-preservation with an aching immediacy.

The performance on which the production turns is Mr. Graham's. Brilliant but
deeply disturbed and self-hating, with no good reason to trust anyone, he
creates a complex and ultimately troubling portrait of someone with the odds
stacked against him grasping at a very thin, possibly illusory lifeline.

LOAD-DATE: May 18, 1993

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Review

                   Copyright 1993 The New York Times Company


                              167 of 312 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 May 19, 1993, Wednesday, Late Edition - Final

NEWS SUMMARY

SECTION: Section A; Page 2; Column 5; Metropolitan Desk

LENGTH: 985 words



International A3-11

DANES BACK TREATY ON EUROPE
Bringing sighs of relief from Denmark's own Government and its European
Community partners, Danish voters strongly ratified the Treaty on European Union
that they had narrowly rejected in June.  A1

BANKER ACCUSED OF PLAGIARISM
Jacques Attali, the flamboyant French technocrat, is accused of taking over 40
passages in his book from a planned work by Elie Wiesel and President Francois
Mitterrand.  A3


CLINTON RECOGNIZES ANGOLA
Ending years of hostility by American governments that included support of a
guerrilla insurgency, President Clinton decided to recognize Angola's
Government.  A1

PRESSURE ON CHINA'S PEASANTS
Tensions are rising in China as peasants are being squeezed by rising costs,
illegal taxes and corrupt officials. And in a country with a 4,000-year history
punctuated by peasant rebellions, signs of peasant discontent are taken
seriously.  A1

RUSSIA SEEKS U.S. ROLE
Insisting that Serbia's President still backed the peace plan for Bosnia,
despite its rejection by Bosnian Serbs, Russia's Foreign Minister said he hoped
that the United States would yet agree to a Security Council meeting to carry
out the plan.  A10

CONTAINMENT POLICY ON BOSNIA
New analysis: The Clinton Administration has dropped its campaign to turn the
Balkan war into a fair fight and has set a much more limited goal of containing
the war within Bosnia's borders.  A10

SERBS CALL FOR SEPARATISM
Serbian nationalist leaders said that outside powers should accept the
inevitability of a separate Serbian state on Bosnian territory.  A10

The U.N. says voting in Cambodia will proceed despite threats.  A7

An international police force is being planned for Haiti.  A3

Russian judges suspended the trial against coup leaders.  A5

Srinagar Journal: A descent from Paradise in Kashmir.  A4

National A12-16

RISE OF UPSTART AIRLINES
New airlines like Kiwi and Reno are suddenly looking healthy, thanks to the
demise of some large carriers and cutbacks by others.  A1

CLINTON LOOKS WEST FOR SUPPORT
From his morning jog near San Diego to his afternoon visit to Los Angeles's
riot-torn South-Central section, President Clinton set out to make the West
Coast his political stronghold, much as the South was for President Ronald
Reagan.  A12

TRIAL REVEALS CULTURAL GAP
Two worlds are colliding in criminal court in Louisiana, the result of a
shooting last fall that has reinforced a cultural gulf between the United States
and Japan.  A12

FAT'S LINK TO CANCER UNCLEAR
A new study has failed to find a clear-cut connection between dietary fat and
breast cancer. But researchers cautioned that it was too early to rule out a
link.  A13

HAWAII HEALTH PLAN CALLED MODEL
Hawaii's universal health-care system, which insures 96.5 percent of the state's
residents, could serve as a national model, officials from Hawaii say in a new
report.  A13

FRICTION IN DEMOCRATIC RANKS
House Democratic leaders scrambled to quash a challenge by three party
conservatives to add strict controls on Medicare and Social Security spending to
President Clinton's economic package.  A14

FIGHTER WINS, BUT NOT AT HOME
A nurse from Ohio helped persuade the Clinton Administration to rethink its
rules for the nation's hazardous waste incinerators. But her work did not stop
an incinerator in her own backyard.  A14

NEW PLAN FOR GAY SOLDIERS
A homosexual Congressman proposed a plan to allow gay men and lesbians to serve
in the military and be open about their sexual orientation off duty, so long as
they keep it private while on duty.  A14

'CHAOTIC' QUOTES REARRANGED
The writer Janet Malcolm said Jeffrey Masson's exuberance led her to rearrange
some of the "chaotic" things he said.  A16

Dade County repealed its English-only law.  A16

Education Page A17

MOVEMENT TOWARD 'INCLUSION'
A growing number of public schools are teaching severely handicapped children in
regular classrooms. Some call it a breakthrough. Others say some children's
needs are being sacrificed in a crusade.  A1

A nurse takes charge at Penn.  A17

Metro Digest B1

NEW YORKERS SPLIT ON DINKINS
Black New Yorkers continue to express overwhelming approval of Mayor Dinkins's
stewardship of the city, while whites overwhelmingly disapprove, according to a
New York Times/WCBS-TV poll.  A1

HIGHER TURNOUT IN SCHOOL VOTING
Acknowledging that it had erred in its early estimates, New York City's Board of
Elections said the turnout in this month's local school-board elections had in
fact been the largest in two decades of such voting.  A1

Business Digest D1

Living Section C1-10

Fresh, healthful food (on a plane?).  C1
At lunch with Alan King.  C1
Wine Talk C1
A culinary gulf between the U.S. and Europe: innards.  C3

Health Page C13

Arts/Entertainment C15-20

New poet laureate named.  C15
Theater: "On a Clear Day You Can See Forever." C18
Music: Decline of the Debut.  C15
Folk at the Y.  C15
The Pop Life C17
Gonzalo Rubalcaba.  C17
American Composers.  C18
Dance: Tribute to Sir Kenneth
MacMillan.  C15
Books: Novels on Vietnam.  C19
Book Notes C20
Television: Culture channel planned for cable.  C20

Sports B6-13

Baseball: Mets lose again.  B9
Yanks defeat Twins.  B9
Basketball: Knicks eliminate Hornets.  B7
Column: Vecsey on the Montreal Forum.  B7
Hockey: Canadiens beat Islanders in double overtime.  B7

Obituaries D21

Editorials/Op-Ed A18-19

Editorials

Time to discipline the Democrats.
Violence in the post office.
Cambodia: the critical tests.

Letters

Anna Quindlen: Quote unquote.
Itamar Rabinovich: Smile when you say peace.
Indran Amirthanayagam: Rogue elephants, deadly tigers.

LOAD-DATE: May 19, 1993

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Summary

                   Copyright 1993 The New York Times Company


                              168 of 312 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 May 19, 1993, Wednesday, Late Edition - Final

Books of The Times;
Two Visions of Vietnam, At War and Afterward

BYLINE: By HERBERT MITGANG

SECTION: Section C; Page 19; Column 1; Cultural Desk

LENGTH: 987 words



Slow Walk in a Sad Rain
By John P. McAfee
239 pages. Warner Books. $18.95.
Paradise of the Blind
By Duong Thu Huong
Translated by Phan Huy Duong and Nina McPherson. 270 pages. William Morrow. $20.

The Vietnam War continues to haunt and guide American military thinking, from
Somalia to Bosnia. When puzzled by conflicting policies about whether to
intervene in warring corners of the world, it sometimes makes sense to turn to
fiction for another perspective. Novelists, particularly those who have
experienced war, allow their feelings to show without the pretense of fairness;
war remembered isn't a cool surgical strike but a heated emotion whose business,
in the end, is fighting and dying.

Like most of the original novels about the Vietnam War written by Americans,
there's an antiwar undercurrent in John McAfee's first novel, "Slow Walk in the
Rain." It's funny about the grunts, in the way that Joseph Heller's "Catch-22"
is funny about the flyboys in World War II, but behind the craziness of combat
Mr. McAfee's characters are also shivering in their boots. What makes this a
readable and revealing novel is that the author's enemy is not the Viet Cong but
the nature of war itself.

The author, like his protagonist, served as a captain with the Special Forces
during the Vietnam War. His unit lives behind razor wire in the jungle, close to
the Cambodian border. Nearby is a town made of thatched huts and roofs that the
Americans burned down, one of those places destroyed in order to save it.  The
Special Forces use a militant Buddhist sect of Vietnamese and Cambodian
mercenaries as their first line of defense outside the perimeter: men, women and
children to slow down any assault with their bodies. "We encouraged family
togetherness," the captain says, in the sardonic voice that runs all through the
novel.

The Special Forces unit is made up of young men going slightly mad, but they
aren't as crazy as the colonel, who, in order to keep their kill ratio the
highest in the Mekong Delta, wants to send them out on ill-advised missions.
American B-52's are supposed to bomb what the author half-respectfully refers to
as the other team rather than as the enemy. Instead, the Air Force bombs explode
10 yards from the Special Forces camp. And the Navy isn't much help either; in
trying to keep a nearby river open, it draws fire on the captain's unit.

While trying to keep himself and his men alive, and building up the body count
for our team, what does the captain in his bunker think of the expansion of the
war by the Nixon Administration? Speaking for his fictional captain, whose unit
is caught between Laos and the Cambodian border when American forces invade
Cambodia, the author writes:

"Here's how the invasion of Cambodia was planned: A President with no field
command experience, with the help of a German Secretary of State, planned an
invasion of Cambodia to look for COSVN, the mythical field headquarters of the
North Vietnamese. Since this magical kingdom was somewhere in Cambodia, all
available Americans were sent to Cambodia to find it.

"The search for a Communist grail, planned by the President, refined by the
Secretary of State and implemented by the Army high command.

"Larry, Curly and Moe."

At times, Mr. McAfee's tough novel sounds like a fictional version of William
Shawcross's "Sideshow: Kissinger, Nixon and the Destruction of Cambodia," told
from the point of view of a wised-up soldier trying to make it home in one
piece. Some of his companions survive only as names on the Vietnam Veterans
Memorial. In a poignant scene, the captain hopes that effects of the Agent
Orange he was exposed to aren't passed on to his son. "Slow Walk in a Sad Rain"
is an auspicious debut that picks up where fact ends about the spoor of war.

What makes Duong Thu Huong's "Paradise of the Blind" a special experience for
American readers is that it humanizes a Vietnamese family and turns its members
into individuals instead of lumping them together as the once faceless enemy. In
the novel, translated from the Vietnamese by Phan Huy Duong and Nina McPherson,
the time is the 1980's, but with a glance back to the past and the cold war. The
Vietnam War echoes as something that affected every family, but now the young
people want to move on with their lives.

The novel is told through the perspective of Hang, an intelligent Vietnamese
woman in her early 20's. Following Hanoi's victory, Communist land reform rips
apart the village where Hang lives with her mother and aunt. In the fields and
rice paddies, only chaos and misery are sowed. The family's problems are
multiplied because an influential but despised uncle who is a Communist cadre
leader during the reform period eventually falls out of favor.

Much of the novel is told in the form of a recollection by Hang on a long train
ride to Moscow. She has been forced to cut short her education and become a
hired worker in what was once the Soviet Union, an experience that leaves her
less than enamored of the Marxist system at home or abroad. Hang recalls the
time in the late 1970's when young people were arrested in Vietnam for wearing
"Western imperialist" bell-bottom trousers. After the Hanoi leaders realize that
harsh reforms aren't working in rural Vietnam, there is an official about-face
and a "Special Section for the Rectification of Errors" is created.

"Paradise of the Blind" describes the problems of ordinary people and the
contradictions of political reform openly. Because the author was a human rights
advocate, she was expelled from the Vietnamese Communist party in 1989 and
imprisoned without trial for seven months in 1991.  Duong Thu Huong continues to
live in Hanoi with her two sons, but an author's note says that all her novels
have been banned in Vietnam. Censorship is both a statement about a government
and a recommendation for a daring work of fiction.

LOAD-DATE: May 19, 1993

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo of John P. McAfee (Evan Bracken/Warner Books)

TYPE: Review

                   Copyright 1993 The New York Times Company


                              169 of 312 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 May 19, 1993, Wednesday, Late Edition - Final

Cambodia: The Critical Tests

SECTION: Section A; Page 18; Column 1; Editorial Desk

LENGTH: 477 words


Next week's elections in Cambodia won't look like the peaceful democratic
exercise prescribed by the 1991 Paris peace accords. More than a year of U.N.
supervision -- at a cost of close to $4 billion -- has failed to disarm the
competing military factions, secure all of Cambodia's territory or prevent
intimidation of potential voters.

Still, Cambodia is in many ways better off today than it was before the peace
agreements, and better off than it would have been without U.N. involvement.
Foreign forces have been withdrawn, more than 360,000 refugees repatriated and
millions of dollars in development aid committed.

The most critical tests lie ahead -- first the elections, and then the scheduled
departure of U.N. forces, now set for late summer. The Clinton Administration
can help insure peace by leaning on Thailand, Cambodia's most important
neighbor, to halt weapons and other contraband traffic over the border.

The gravest violations of the peace agreements have come from the Khmer Rouge,
still led by the same people who killed a million Cambodians a decade and a half
ago. American and Chinese maneuvering against Vietnam during the 1980's helped
the Khmer Rouge survive. Now, both Washington and Beijing fully support the
peace agreement, which calls for all factions to observe a cease-fire, surrender
weapons and participate in U.N.-monitored elections.

The Khmer Rouge has kept its weapons, forcing others to do likewise. And it is
not only boycotting the U.N.-monitored elections but doing its best to disrupt
them with ambushes, kidnappings and other terrorist actions. Meanwhile, the
Vietnamese-installed Government in Phnom Penh has also been intimidating its
opponents, particularly supporters of the monarchist party, now led by the son
of Prince Sihanouk.

Under these conditions, the pro-Government party is sure to do well, challenged
principally by the monarchists. Both parties have pledged to honor the election
results, and might even agree on a coalition afterward.

The Paris agreements provide for a constitution to be drafted and a new
government formed within three months after the vote. After that, most U.N.
forces are scheduled to be withdrawn. If that new government is to stand up to
the Khmer Rouge, the world, and particularly Thailand, will have to do a better
job of monitoring Cambodia's land and sea borders than it has done until now.

In violation of Security Council resolutions, guns, fuel, gems and logs continue
to cross Thai borders, allowing the Khmer Rouge to keep up its fighting
strength. Thailand values its military ties to Washington, and might respond to
the right kind of U.S. pressure.

Cambodia has been a sobering experience for those who imagined that the U.N. had
magical powers to create a dramatically better world. But a more modest success
is still worth working for.

LOAD-DATE: May 19, 1993

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Editorial

                   Copyright 1993 The New York Times Company


                              170 of 312 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                   May 21, 1993, Friday, Late Edition - Final

TV Weekend;
Cambodians' Turn for Children to Turn American

BYLINE: By WALTER GOODMAN

SECTION: Section B; Page 20; Column 3; Cultural Desk

LENGTH: 396 words


"Why did the Cambodian people have to leave their own country to live in this
strange, foreign land?" a woman asks at the start of "Cambodians in America:
Rebuilding the Temple." The question, not unfamiliar in the United States, is at
the heart of tonight's affecting hourlong report on the adapting pains of the
latest immigrant group to discover that the freedom, security and economic
opportunities that brought them to America carry a high price in the traditions
that sustained them at home.

The answer to "Why?" goes back to the Khmer Rouge, the Maoist-inspired Cambodian
guerrillas who killed a million of their own people in the 1970's. The 1980's
brought invasion from Vietnam and a civil war that keeps driving refugees to
Thailand and from there around the world. About 140,000 Cambodians have found
their way to the United States.

A favorite target of the Khmer Rouge was the Buddhist religion, Cambodia's main
faith, which most of the immigrants interviewed tonight agree is just as
difficult to reconcile with the American drive for success as with Maoist
doctrine. A Buddhist priest in Providence, R.I., says, "Buddhist people are very
gentle, very soft," but in America "it is not so soft, not so gentle." A
newcomer who sells insurance in New England laments the pressure "to be No. 1."

The program tells of efforts in several American cities to build temples and
even shows a young man having his hair shaved in preparation for becoming a
monk. But most young Cambodians are keeping their hair, and some are converting
to Christianity. Instead of learning to appreciate and perform classical dances,
the most revered of Cambodian arts, they are out discoing.

So families already struck hard by the Khmer Rouge are being further unraveled
as the young move into the American mainstream. The program's narrator does not
acknowledge how common the generational divide has been among immigrants, but
the fact that other groups have been shaken by America cannot be much
consolation to the latest people to find themselves between two cultures.



Cambodians in America
Rebuilding the Temple
PBS, tonight
(In New York, Channel 13 at 9)

Produced, written and directed by Claudia Levin and Lawrence Hott. Narrated by
Linda Hunt. A production of Florentine Films in association with the Wisconsin
Academy of Sciences, Arts and Letters.

LOAD-DATE: May 21, 1993

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Review

                   Copyright 1993 The New York Times Company


                              171 of 312 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                   May 21, 1993, Friday, Late Edition - Final

The Spoken Word

SECTION: Section C; Page 25; Column 1; Weekend Desk

LENGTH: 359 words



RADIO DISCUSSION, WNYC (820-AM). A series of recorded interviews and discussions
sponsored by the New York Public Library and WNYC continues with "The Poetry of
Three Wars: World War I, World War II and Vietnam," with the author Paul
Fussell. Sunday at 4 P.M.

PHILOSOPHICAL LECTURE, Tiffany Hall, 2 East 37th Street, Murray Hill. Stephen
Cox and David Kelley speak at a celebration of the 50th anniversary of Ayn
Rand's novel "The Fountainhead," sponsored by the Institute for Objectivist
Studies. Tomorrow at 1 P.M. Admission: $50; $25 for students. Information: (800)
374-1776.


WALKING TOURS AND PERFORMANCE, Lower East Side Tenement Museum, 97 Orchard
Street. "How We Lived: Life in a New York City Tenement," a lecture, Sunday at
11 A.M.; admission: $4; $3 for children. "Peddler's Pack: A Jewish Heritage
Tour," a walk through the Lower East Side, Sunday at noon; "La Dolce Via: An
Italian Heritage Tour," a walk to explore New York Italian culture, Sunday at 1
P.M.; "Streets Where We Lived: A Multi-Ethnic Tour," a walk through the Lower
East Side, Chinatown and Little Italy, Sunday at 2 P.M. Walking tours: $12; $10
for students and the elderly. Information: (212) 431-0233.

FICTION READING, New York Open Center, 83 Spring Street, SoHo. Spencer Holst,
Tuli Kupferberg, Ed Sanders, Taylor Mead and others read from Mr. Holst's work.
Tomorrow at 7:30 P.M. Admission: $10. Information: (212) 219-2527.

POETRY READING, Anseo, 126 St. Marks Place, East Village. Jennifer Blowdryer,
Todd Colby and Regie Cabico read from their work, part of the Burnt Words
poetry-reading series. Tonight at 8. Free. Information: (212) 982-0370.

POETRY READING, Nuyorican Poets Cafe, 236 East Third Street, East Village. Laura
Mullen, Arthur Nersesian, Edwin Torres and Indigo read from their work. Tonight
at 10. Admission: $5. Information: (212) 505-8183.

TALKS AT THE WHITNEY, Whitney Museum of American Art, 945 Madison Avenue, at
75th Street. "The 1993 Biennial Exhibition," by Vivian Bobka, tomorrow and
Sunday at 2 and 3:30 P.M. Free with museum admission: $6; $4 for students and
the elderly. Information: (212) 570-3676.

LOAD-DATE: May 21, 1993

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: List

                   Copyright 1993 The New York Times Company


                              172 of 312 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                  May 22, 1993, Saturday, Late Edition - Final

Kelly, a Savvy Insider, Remakes Police Force

BYLINE: By MICHAEL WINERIP

SECTION: Section 1; Page 1; Column 2; Metropolitan Desk

LENGTH: 2419 words


When people who monitor the New York City Police Department are asked what
impresses them about Commissioner Raymond W. Kelly's first seven months, they
mention an obscure bureaucratic move: the appointment of Assistant Chief Aaron
H. Rosenthal to evaluate the new community policing program.

"That little move with Rosenthal," says Michael E. Smith of the Vera Institute
of Justice, "caught me off guard totally."

That little move gave Chief Rosenthal, who is probably the most outspoken of the
police brass, the job of critiquing the extensive reorganization of the
department. The chief's assignment is to find bad news, and there is plenty as
the Commissioner tries to remake a bureaucracy of 30,000. Switching to community
policing means moving thousands of officers from patrol cars to foot beats. It
means selling them on the idea that the essence of good policing is not Miami
Vice; it's Andy of Mayberry.

Each week Mr. Kelly and Mr. Rosenthal meet and the Chief drops another little
bomb on the Commissioner. "People say to me, 'You really think he wants to hear
this stuff?' " said Chief Rosenthal. "If he didn't, he wouldn't have selected
me." Some of the Chief's reports have found their way into the newspapers,
embarrassing the Commissioner.

The rap when Mr. Kelly became Commissioner in October was that a 30-year veteran
was too much the insider to change anything. But to Mr. Smith and Thomas A.
Reppetto of the Citizens Crime Commission, the Commissioner could have only one
good reason for the Rosenthal move: Mr. Kelly is serious about remaking the
Police Department.

At a recent meeting, Chief Rosenthal explained to the Commissioner that in many
precincts where prostitution was a major problem -- like the 83d in Brooklyn,
the 104th in Queens and the 120th on Staten Island, -- few arrests were being
made by new beat cops and no arrests were being made on weekends. Why? To entice
reluctant officers to switch to a community policing foot beat, supervisors have
offered them more daytime hours and weekends off.

"So what exactly does this mean?" asked the Commissioner.

"If you want to be a prostitute," said Chief Rosenthal, "do it at night and on
the weekend."

The Commissioner reddened, squirmed more than usual, but said, "All right, we'll
look at it."

The Insider
Recruiting Efforts Earn High Marks

Many were not happy when word came that the city's first black mayor had
selected a white insider for the top police job. The Rev. Calvin O. Butts 3d of
the Abyssinian Baptist Church in Harlem, speculated that if Mr. Kelly had been
younger, he would have joined the 10,000 police officers, some yelling racial
slurs about Mayor David N. Dinkins, at an unruly union protest at City Hall last
fall.

Today Mr. Butts says, "I feel differently now." The 51-year-old Mr. Kelly is
getting good reviews from unlikely sources, including some prominent blacks ("I
was skeptical about a Caucasian at first, but I don't think you could ask for a
better commissioner," says the Rev. Charles Mixon of the Baptist Ministers'
Fellowship in Queens), some longtime critics of the police force ("A city
treasure," wrote Jimmy Breslin) and even some foes of the Dinkins administration
("I admire Kelly," says former Mayor Edward I. Koch).

In several respects, Mr. Kelly, the Irish-American insider, has made advances on
minority issues in ways his predecessor, Lee P. Brown, the African-American
outsider recruited from the Houston force, did not. Under Commissioner Brown,
recruiting was in disarray, according to several members of the department,
including Det. Robert Rivers of the Guardians, the black fraternal police group.
When Mr. Kelly took over in October there were just 16 recruiters; the drive
that started in July under Commissioner Brown signed up just 10,000 applicants
to take the police exam -- 1,800 of them black -- before a fall deadline was to
expire.

Mr. Kelly won an extension of the exam deadline, deployed 109 recruiters -- 86
of them black or Hispanic -- and visited dozens of black churches to get out the
message. The result: a record 57,366 signed up for the exam, 14,206 of them
black, 13,549 Hispanic, and for the first time, city residents will get a 5
point bonus on the test, which is graded on basis of 100.

Paul Shechtman, counsel to Manhattan District Attorney Robert M. Morgenthau,
says he has rarely seen the top person of a public agency as knowledgeable about
that agency as Mr. Kelly is about the police. "He knows the department inside
and out and understands God is in the details," said Mr. Shectman. "At the same
time he doesn't get lost in details. He's a great No. 1 guy." Mr. Shechtman
served on a domestic violence task force with Mr. Kelly. "I could not believe
his knowledge of patrol guidelines," Mr. Shectman said. "It made me think, 'Did
he write the patrol guidelines?' " (He did not.)

St. John's and Harvard

Mr. Kelly has a law degree from St. John's, and graduate degrees from Harvard
and New York University and is so well versed on the department, that when he is
bluffing, he is not likely to be caught. At a news conference last month after
two officers were shot by their prisoner in the bathroom of the 70th Precinct
station house, Mr. Kelly was asked by reporters if the officers had followed
procedures. They had removed the prisoner's handcuffs so he could go to the
bathroom, and the man had grabbed one of their guns.

"It's a practice," said Mr. Kelly. When reporters pressed, he said, "I'm telling
you as head of this agency I don't see a problem." That ended the discussion.

Later, away from the press, Mr. Kelly said he had supervised thousands of
arrests and sometimes you give a prisoner special treatment in hopes of turning
him into an informant. "I've seen that scenario many times in station-house
bathrooms. What they did was reasonable. Could there be a procedure that says
there's another way to do it? I don't know. Did they follow the procedure? I
don't know."

The Administrator
Knowing Officers By Their Names

Commissioner Kelly has taken control of the department in a way that has not
been seen around 1 Police Plaza in a long time. It is an enormous change from
his predecessor. Mr. Brown, President Clinton's choice for drug czar, is
internationally known, yet did not know New York City and traveled so frequently
during his two-year tenure, critics dubbed him "Out of Town Brown."

Mr. Kelly would have to be "Here Again Today Ray." In his first six months, he
worked seven days a week, typically 10-14 hours a day. This is a Commissioner
who grew up in New York, held jobs in six precinct houses spread across three
boroughs and knows his city so well he tells his driver the fastest route.

Mr. Brown met with his Chief for internal affairs once a week and did not
schedule regular meetings with his Chief of Detectives; Mr. Kelly meets with
each man daily. "You have to," he says. "Because the second you step out of
headquarters, you get ambushed."

Mr. Brown was rarely seen at headquarters with his suitcoat off and addressed
even close aides by their rank. Mr. Kelly peels off the coat as soon as he hits
his office and seems to be on a first-name basis with the entire officer corps,
although he says he personally knows "only" the 200 top officers plus "maybe 90
per cent" of precinct captains.

But does Mr. Kelly know the department too well? There are people who feel that
former Commissioner Brown was able to take the bold move of initiating community
policing precisely because he did not care about whose toes he stepped on.

A Persistent Criticism

The most persistent criticism of Commissioner Kelly is that he has not moved
fast enough on police corruption because he is too close to the force's top
people. Since the arrest last year of Michael Dowd and four other city officers
by Suffolk County police on charges of selling cocaine, questions of corruption
have dogged the New York force. Why did it take suburban police to crack the
case? Why did the Police Department's internal affairs unit fail to root out the
trouble given that complaints on Officer Dowd dated back to 1985? Was this the
tip of the iceberg?

The Mayor has appointed former Deputy Mayor Milton Mollen to investigate; the
Mollen Commission is expected to hold hearings in the fall.

Mr. Kelly himself produced a 161 page report last November describing an
internal affairs operation that was in total disarray. But despite his
exhaustive account of the foul-ups -- which was widely praised -- Mr. Kelly
concluded that no individual police supervisor was at fault, the problem was a
system that had deteriorated over many years.

Nor did Mr. Kelly find any police officers at fault in a report he prepared on
the trampling deaths of nine people at a City College gymnasium in December,
1991. In contrast, Deputy Mayor Mollen's report at the time on the same incident
found the police performance at the gymnasium "highly questionable" and singled
out the duty captain for extensive criticism.

If Mr. Mollen conducts hearings that produce significant disclosures on police
corruption, it could cost the Commissioner his job, and the Mayor re-election.
Fully aware of this, Mr. Kelly has taken increasingly high-profile steps in
recent months to head off potential damage, including appointing a civilian, a
former Federal prosecutor named Walter S. Mack Jr., to oversee the department's
internal affairs operation.

Former Commissioner Patrick V. Murphy, led the department through its last major
corruption scandal 20 years ago, during the Knapp Commission hearings and
believes Commissioner Kelly made a mistake by not singling out supervisors for
disciplinary action in the Dowd case. "In my first two years, I had a 90 percent
turnover in the executive corps," he said. "I'd say, 'Sure you're a friend and I
love you, but I need the vacancy.' The top structure of the department has
become very rigid now and needs more movement."

A Confident Note

Mr. Kelly sounds confident: "There is no systematic corruption," he says, "I
feel certain about that. What you always have is pockets of individual scores,
partly because of drugs and money." He says his restructuring of internal
affairs will correct the problems.

"Firing for the sake of firing is inherently unfair," says Mr. Kelly. "I just
got to come back to the Spike Lee quote -- you got to do the right thing. You
don't do it wildly or irrationally if the facts don't determine it."

This tack worked for him before. In 1985, he was sent by then-Commissioner
Benjamin Ward to clean up the 106th Precinct in Queens, where cops had tortured
drug suspects with stun-guns. Commissioner Ward removed 18 supervisors. "The
borough commander and chief of patrol left because of it and I felt they had
nothing to do with it," said Mr. Kelly. "I admire Commissioner Ward, but I felt
this was not fair. Then they wanted to transfer everyone out of the precinct and
I stopped that." Mr. Kelly's turning around of the 106th won praise inside and
outside the department.

The Cop and Politician
Trying to Do The Right Thing


Lopping off heads might have been right for the early 1970's, says Mr. Reppetto
of the Citizens Crime Commission, but not necessarily now. "You don't want a
1970's solution to a 1990's problem," he said. "Kelly has to do what Kelly has
to do."

Which is precisely what Kelly does. To follow him around is to see a guy, who
despite being on the hot seat daily, is enjoying himself immensely. "I am having
fun," he says. "I don't think about screwing up. I just try to do the right
thing every day and hope it works out."

Though he's been mentioned as a possible choice to run the Federal Bureau of
Investigation, he says he is "definitely" not interested because he already has
the best law-enforcement job in the country.

He has tremendous energy, rising at 6:30 and working out with weights most
mornings. He rarely sits behind the huge commissioner's desk, instead pacing
while he talks on the phone. He rushes into elevators and immediately rams the
"close door" button several times. (The "close door" button in his private
elevator has been hammered so often, it is upside down.)

He used to carry a pocket computer full of police data, but in classic Raymond
Kelly fashion, he overloaded the memory, losing everything. He now keeps all his
facts on note cards in a binder.

He has caught cops asleep on the job and initiated disciplinary action; drove
himself around the Washington Heights disturbances, and chatted up the Rev. Al
Sharpton at demonstrations.

He is as demanding of aides as he is of himself. Before a news conference on the
officers shot in the precinct house bathroom, an aide sent up a floor plan of
the bathroom. "Why are you sending a floor plan?" he barked. "That raises the
question of who was standing where. I don't know the answers to those
questions."

Visits to Hospital Beds

He visited both officers in the hospital every night for a week, using a side
entrance to avoid television crews camped out front. "Cops hate showboating on
this kind of thing," he said.

In retrospect, Mr. Kelly's life looks as if it was scripted for the
commissioner's job. He is a head shorter than his six chiefs, and if you were
casting someone to play him, you'd want to reach back for Jimmy Cagney in
"G-Men." He was in the department's first cadet class, graduated first in his
Police Academy class and made sergeant when he was just 26 -- despite serving
three years in the Marines, including a year in Vietnam. Sgt. Joseph Ferrara,
who grew up playing stickball with him in Queens and then served with him in the
23d Precinct in Manhattan in the early 1970's, says: "Way back then they joked
he'd be commissioner. He was a sergeant and lieutenants and captains would come
to him for advice."

Colleagues say while there is a fair amount of politician in Raymond Kelly (he
issued the permit for a gay group to sponsor the St. Patrick's Day Parade, then
marched in the traditional one) there is more cop. And if there's one thing a
cop knows, it is that just because you are well suited for a job, that doesn't
necessarily have anything to do with your getting it. "The fact I'm here in the
commissioner's office is surprising to me," he says, "but I'm not uncomfortable
with it. We're kind of getting a kick out it, my wife and I. We're just kind of
running with it. I come back at the end of the day, we talk about what happened
to me today."

NAME: Raymond W. Kelly

LOAD-DATE: May 22, 1993

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photos: Raymond W. Kelly, the New York City Police Commissioner,
walking along 125th Street near Lenox Avenue yesterday to assess the situation
of merchants peddling their wares on the sidewalk (pg. 1); A 30-year veteran of
the Police Department, Commissioner Raymond W. Kelly has demonstrated a
commitment to change, including community policing and new recruiting efforts.
He is shown in his office. (pg. 22) (Sara Krulwich/The New York Times)

TYPE: Biography

                   Copyright 1993 The New York Times Company


                              173 of 312 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                  May 22, 1993, Saturday, Late Edition - Final

Khmer Rouge Issue Warning on Election

BYLINE: By PHILIP SHENON,  Special to The New York Times

SECTION: Section 1; Page 3; Column 1; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 894 words

DATELINE: PHNOM PENH, Cambodia, May 21


The Khmer Rouge rebels warned today that internationally supervised elections
scheduled to begin on Sunday would "put fuel on the flames of war" in Cambodia
and accused the United States of plotting to destroy the Maoist guerrilla group.

The rebels, who are threatening to sabotage the United Nations-sponsored
elections with violence and who have already been blamed for the deaths of 10
United Nations peacekeepers, said the election results would serve only to give
legitimacy to the current Vietnamese-installed Government.

"We could not accept to be killed, swallowed and destroyed by the Vietnamese
occupation," a Khmer Rouge spokesman said at a news conference in rebel-held
territory in western Cambodia, a few miles from the border with Thailand. "Such
an election does not bring peace to Cambodia. It is organized in order to put
fuel on the flames of war."

The rebel threat to sabotage the elections has alarmed leaders of the
22,000-member United Nations peacekeeping force in Cambodia. They have warned
that the six-day election, in which Cambodians are supposed to select 120
members of a constitutional convention, will probably be marred by terrorism,
including Khmer Rouge attacks on polling stations.

Siem Reap Is Fearful

The fear of a Khmer Rouge attack is most palpable in the northwestern province
of Siem Reap, half of which is already under the control of the rebels.  United
Nations officials believe that Siem Reap, home to the fabled ruins of the
ancient Cambodian capital, Angkor, is the province most likely to be attacked by
the Khmer Rouge this weekend.

"It's quiet, too quiet," said Maj. Patrick Delort, a French policeman who is the
deputy provincial commander of the United Nations civilian police.  "We're
waiting for an attack."

He said that the Khmer Rouge forces in Siem Reap had ample ammunition, and that
there was almost nothing that the United Nations could do to forestall an
attack. "Whenever and wherever they want to attack, they can," he said.

More than 100 Cambodians from the province have taken refuge around Angkor Wat,
the 12th-century hand-carved mountain of stone that is Cambodia's national
symbol. They fled to the ancient temple after their homes were attacked and
burned by the Khmer Rouge.

For many, the Cambodian elections seemed a cruel abstraction. "I dream only
about the shelling," said Sok Borann, one of the refugees living in palm-leaf
huts in the shadow of Angkor Wat.

Under the leadership of Pol Pot, the Khmer Rouge were responsible for the deaths
of more than one million Cambodians when they controlled the central Government
in the 1970's. After the invading Vietnamese Army toppled Pol Pot in 1979, the
Khmer Rouge returned to the Cambodian jungle and took up arms as insurgents.

U.S. Is Accused

As recently as last year, the Khmer Rouge sought friendly relations with the
United States, apparently believing that Washington shared their hatred of
Vietnam. But today the Khmer Rouge dropped even the pretense of cordiality,
accusing the United States of a scheme to arm Vietnam and the Cambodian
Government against the Cambodian rebels.

The Khmer Rouge spokesman, Mak Ben, said the "U.S. and its allies have had a
policy to eliminate" the Khmer Rouge since the signing of the 1991 United
Nations-brokered peace treaty that was supposed to end Cambodia's civil war. The
Khmer Rouge joined in signing the treaty but later pulled out of the peace
process, asserting that thousands of Vietnamese troops had remained in Cambodia
in violation of the agreement.

"We would like to tell the U.S. that with this scheme to help Vietnam and its
puppets fight the resistance and D.K.P. forces, they are making a strategically
wrong move," Mr. Mak Ben said, using the acronym for the Democratic Kampuchea
Party, as the rebels are formally called. "The Cambodian people have every right
to defend themselves."

An American diplomat in Phnom Penh, the Cambodian capital, described the Khmer
Rouge assertions as "laughable."

Eighteen years after the end of the Vietnam War, the United States has yet to
restore diplomatic relations with Hanoi or to lift a trade embargo. In the
1980's Washington provided military aid to rebel groups that battled alongside
the Khmer Rouge in their campaign to topple the Cambodian Government installed
by Vietnam.

In Siem Reap, United Nations peacekeeping troops and civilian officials braced
for what many of them fear will be a frightening election in which the Khmer
Rouge may well use terrorism to disrupt the voting.

"It's enough for them to shell anywhere, and voters will be too afraid to make
the walk to vote," said Major Delort, the French policeman, who like several
United Nations officials stationed in Siem Reap seemed to believe that an attack
could come at any moment and that there was nothing to be done to prevent it.

Lieut. Col. Paul W. O'Toole, an American who is in the province as a United
Nations military observer, acknowledged that polling stations were vulnerable to
terrorist attacks, although he said he was still optimistic about the elections.

"Our job is to maximize the number of voters, and minimize the number of lives
lost," he said, describing recent reports of widespread Khmer Rouge violence in
the province as exaggerated. "We have full confidence here in the ability to
hold the elections."

LOAD-DATE: May 22, 1993

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Map of Cambodia showing location of Siem Reap.

                   Copyright 1993 The New York Times Company


                              174 of 312 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                  May 22, 1993, Saturday, Late Edition - Final

New York City's 32 School Boards Get New Faces but Not New Views

BYLINE: By SAM DILLON

SECTION: Section 1; Page 1; Column 2; Metropolitan Desk

LENGTH: 1633 words


Amid the ideological warfare over teaching about sexuality and related matters
in New York City's schools, voters elected more new faces to community school
boards than ever before. But despite a complement of dissenting voices, the
ideological cast of those boards is unlikely to change.

With the results of the May 4 vote almost complete, an analysis shows that about
50 of the winners were candidates whose views were championed by the Christian
Coalition, Pat Robertson's group. But they will mostly sit on boards whose
prevailing views were already conservative on social issues.

Dozens of other victorious first-time candidates were backed by gay and other
liberal organizations, and three will become the city's first openly gay school
board members. But these newcomers, too, are not likely to radically shift the
political complexion of the boards they join.

"Conservative districts stayed conservative, and liberal districts got more
liberal, with the whole system moving a little more toward the extremes," said
Judith Baum, a spokesman for the Public Education Association, a nonprofit group
that conducted a citywide get-out-the-vote drive.

In the heat of the campaign, some political consultants had speculated that the
school vote might suggest which way the city is leaning in a mayoral election
year. But Mayor David N. Dinkins and his two main challengers said there were no
clear lessons.

"People have a right to say, our side won," said Leland T. Jones, Mr. Dinkins's
spokesman. "But it's hard to use this particular election as a test of whether
the tide is coming in or going out on a particular ideology."

Dissenting Voices

Still, dissenting voices have been added in many districts, and that could mean
a proliferation of the curriculum disputes that have consumed the energies of
many of the city's 32 local boards and that polarized the school elections with
factional campaigning by an array of special interest groups.

"Too many people have too much influence on the community school boards who
don't have education at the top of their agenda," said John C. Fager,
co-chairman of the Parents Coalition, a citywide group that advocates parent
involvement in the schools. "That is truer than ever after these elections."

Preparations for the campaign began six months ago, when the city was embroiled
in the battle over Schools Chancellor Joseph A. Fernandez's multicultural
curriculum. Many of Mr. Fernandez's opponents, aroused to activism, became
first-time candidates for community school board, and Pat Robertson's group and
the Roman Catholic Archdiocese of New York later nurtured their candidacies by
distributing 500,000 voters guides.

At the same time, gay-rights advocates and many other liberal organizations,
expressing fears that conservatives would take control of the schools, also
mobilized. The ideological confrontation brought the most hotly disputed
campaign since the school system was decentralized in 1970 and the largest
turnout, measured in sheer numbers: more than 425,000 voters cast ballots May 4,
12.5 percent of the registered voters. The next largest vote was in 1970, when
416,000 people voted, 14 percent of those then registered.

Seventeen days later, ballot-counting continues in two districts, but winners
have been declared for 283 of the 288 seats on the city's 32 boards. The results
are so complex that nearly every group involved has rushed forward to claim
victory of one sort or another. But neither side gained first-time control of
any board.

The Christian Coalition, a nationwide organization that opened its first New
York City chapter last year, did not formally endorse candidates, but mailed all
the candidates a questionnaire and used the responses to profile the candidates'
views in a voters' guide that made clear the group's ideological backing for
about 90 candidates.

Of those, about 50 were elected, 19 of whom were incumbents. These included
candidates like Jerry Cammarata and Mary A. Cummins, who led their boards, in
districts 31 on Staten Island and 24 in Queens, in opposition to the
multicultural curriculum, and who would have won election with or without the
Christian Coalition.

30 Newcomers

About 30 other candidates who triumphed with the backing of the Christian
Coalition, however, were newcomers, and they join boards in all five boroughs.
Some of these boards already had a conservative cast. One candidate, for
instance, Ralph Lanzetta, won in District 29 in southeastern Queens, where the
board earlier this year caused controversy by implementing a "moment of
reflection" that some advocates of the separation of church and state viewed as
disguised school prayer.

Other newcomers backed by the Christian Coalition will likely be dissenters.
Linda Garcia, a parent of a child at Public School 110 on Manhattan's Lower East
Side, for instance, won a seat in District 1. That board will be controlled by a
slate that includes Angelica Rovira, who campaigned as a lesbian, and several
onetime anti-Vietnam War activists.

Ralph Reed, the executive director of the Christian Coalition, based in Virginia
Beach, Va, called the results a "tremendous victory," and he indicated that his
group is already planning for future elections.

"There will now be a large group of officials that will be credentialed because
they are in charge of school systems, and there will be an infrastructure for
future victories," Mr. Reed said.

But gay and liberal groups found satisfaction in the results, too, especially in
Districts 1 and 2 in Manhattan and 15 in Brooklyn, where there were clear
faceoffs between slates of candidates supporting and opposing the multicultural
curriculum and where the curriculum's supporters prevailed, some by wide
margins. Jon Nalley, a gay former teacher who ran in Manhattan's District 2,
received 8,921 votes, apparently more than any other school board candidate in
the city's history.

Rainbow Curriculum Backers

Several groups worked to elect supporters of the Rainbow curriculum, including a
political action committee called SchoolPac, backed by several of Mayor
Dinkins's advisers, and People for the American Way, a group that tracks
conservative initiatives. And in Harlem and several Brooklyn neighborhoods, the
Rev. Al Sharpton endorsed slates of candidates, more than half of whom won seats
on boards.

Empire State Pride Agenda, the state's main gay lobbying group, channeled
campaign funds to gay candidates and proved especially influential in some
neighborhoods. Citywide, the group endorsed 71 candidates in 19 districts, and
43 of those candidates were elected. Of the winners, 31 will be newcomers to
their boards.

Most of the gay lobby's winning candidates ran in Manhattan and Brooklyn's
District 15, which includes Park Slope. But the group also helped two candidates
who support the multicultural curriculum win election on Staten Island, Ira
Goldstein and James Chin. There, they will likely bring dissenting voices to
school board business.

How vigorously the new crop of dissenters, from both sides of the political
spectrum, will pursue their agendas in their neighborhoods may determine how
smoothly the 32 school boards perform their duties, which include allocating
budgets, hiring administrators and other mostly mundane tasks.



MORE WINNERS IN SCHOOL BOARD VOTE

Following is a list of winners in the May 4 community school board elections
from additional New York City districts where counts were completed yesterday:

(i=incumbent)

District 13, Brooklyn Heights and Fort Greene, Brooklyn: Samuel Eric Blackwell,
William E. Frazier Jr., Audrey Jackman-Wesson, Sylvia Gail Kinard, Harry T.
Lyde, Abraham May Jr. (i), Marilyn D. Mosley (i), Chris Owens, Albert C.
Wiltshire (i).

District 14, Greenpoint, Williamsburg, Brooklyn: Isaac Brauner (i), Aniella P.
Della Iancono (i), Maria Gomez, Harold Klagsbald (i), Michael W. Laskowski,
Leopold Lefkowitz (i), Juan Martinez (i), Joseph V. Stefanizzi (i), Gil R. Vega
Sr.

District 20, Bay Ridge, Bensonhurst, Borough Park, Brooklyn: Charles
Capetanakis, Mafalda DiMango (i), Helene Gerber, Naftali Klagsbrun (i), Israel
E. Licht (i), James E. McCarthy (i), Ellen B. McGuinn (i), Carlo V. Mellace (i),
Frank A. Spadaro.

District 21, Coney Island, Brighton Beach, Midwood, Brooklyn: Lucille Katz,
Michael Chaim Nelson, Sheldon Plotnick (i), Marsha Rapaport, Domenic M. Recchia
Jr. (i), Carmine C. Santa Maria (i), Paul Spirgel (i), Edward J. Sutton, Ralph
Tarantino (i).

District 22, Midwood-Flatlands, Flatbush, Brooklyn: Abbe S. Blumenthal, Joseph
Dorinson (i), Anne K. MacKinnon, Saul Needle, Eileen M. O'Brien (i), Alfred J.
O'Hagan (i), Joseph Pascarella, Barbara Simmons (i), Eli Yeger.

District 24, Elmhurst, Glendale, Long Island City, Ridgewood, Queens: Frank M.
Borzellieri, Louisa M. Chan, Mary P. Crowley (i), Mary A. Cummins (i), Elizabeth
A. Gambino, John J. Garkowski (i), Jake LaSala, Catherine C. Anello Marlowe,
Linda Sansivieri (i).

District 27, Broad Channel, Far Rockaway, Howard Beach and Ozone Park, Queens:
James G. Adams, Richard J. Altabe, Shalom Becker, Ernest Brown, Donna Marie
Caltabiano, Geraldine D. Chapey, James B. Egan (i), Steven S. Greenberg, James
S. Sanders Jr. (i).

District 29, Rosedale, Queens Village, Cambria Heights, Laurelton, South
Jamaica, Queens: Joseph Albergo (i), George A. Branker (i), Barbara A. Felker,
Dolores L. Grant (i), Stephen Jones, Ralph A. Lanzetta, Thelma V. Prescott,
Ernestine Washington (i), Claudette M. Webb (i).

District 30, Astoria, East Elmhurst, Corona, Queens: Marvin J. Bentley, Giovanna
D'Elia, Zoraida T. Dooley, Irene L. McLaughlin (i), Julia Pappas (i),
Constantinos Prentzas, Donald P. Stewart (i), Catherine Fitzgerald Volpe (i),
Dorothy Wilner.

LOAD-DATE: June 11, 1993

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo: Jon Nalley, a gay former teacher who ran in Manhattan's District
2, received 8,921 votes, apparently more than any other school board candidate
in the city's history. He stood in a playground on Bleeker Street. (Philip
Greenburg for The New York Times)(pg. 22)

                   Copyright 1993 The New York Times Company


                              175 of 312 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                   May 23, 1993, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

A Race to Satisfy TV Appetites in Asia

BYLINE: By PHILIP SHENON

SECTION: Section 3; Page 12; Column 1; Financial Desk

LENGTH: 1760 words

DATELINE: SINGAPORE


SCENES from the satellite-television revolution in Asia:

* In Hanoi, officials of the Vietnamese Communist Party and foreign guests in
some of the city's larger hotels watch the BBC's hourly news, beamed live by
satellite from London.

* In Hong Kong, stock traders end their day in the office by flipping on Cable
News Network to catch the opening share prices half a world away in Europe,
while at home their children sit glued to a Madonna video festival on MTV.

* In Indonesia, rice farmers on the island of Sumatra gather around a communal
television set to watch the American soap opera "The Bold and the Beautiful" --
they don't understand the English script, but they seem to enjoy it anyway.

* Here in the prosperous city-state of Singapore and north across the Gulf of
Thailand to Bangkok, viewers pay a monthly fee to enjoy recent Hollywood films
on a new pay television service, Home Box Office Asia.

Satellite television has arrived in Asia, and it is altering the viewing and
spending habits of a continent that is home to two-thirds of the world's
population and some of its fastest-growing economies.

A handful of large American companies, including Viacom, Time Warner, Turner
Broadcasting and Capital Cities/ABC, have already entered the race in Asia,
facing a tough competitor in the region's largest satellite service, Hong
Kong-based Star TV. Among the large American advertisers now familiar to Asian
satellite-television viewers are Coca-Cola, McDonald's, A.T.& T., American
Express and Merrill Lynch.

In some Asian nations -- and not just the affluent ones -- parabolic dishes are
becoming as common a sight as rice paddies. The satellite-viewing audience in
Asia is expected to grow exponentially as the dishes become smaller and more
affordable, and as satellite broadcasters offer more programs in Asian
languages.

"Asia as a market has tremendous potential," said William G. Hooks, the managing
director of HBO Asia, the continent's first English movie subscription service.

HBO Asia, a division of Home Box Office, itself a subsidiary of Time Warner,
made its debut last year in Singapore, now serves Thailand and will begin
service this month in the Philippines. Mr. Hooks said he is optimistic HBO will
be available in Taiwan and Hong Kong by year-end and in most of Southeast Asia
by the end of 1994. His goal? "The HBO brand will become as well known in Asia
as it is in the United States," he said.

The HBO signal is bounced off the Indonesian Government's Palapa satellite,
which has a signal, known as a footprint, capable of reaching 40 million Asian
households with television. "And a very modest penetration of that number will
make for a very nice business," Mr. Hooks said.

The first major American company to enter the satellite-television race in Asia
was Cable News Network, a division of Turner Broadcasting System Inc. It started
beaming its signal to Japan in 1982 and is now in 23 countries and territories
in Asia and the Pacific.


LAST year, CNN opened news bureaus in Bangkok and New Delhi -- it already had
Asian bureaus in Beijing, Manila, Seoul and Tokyo -- and now broadcasts a daily
program on Asian business news.

ESPN, the American sports network that is controlled by Capital Cities/ABC Inc.
and the Hearst Corporation, is available in the Philippines and Thailand, and is
planning to produce programs geared to Asian audiences as it expands satellite
service across the continent.

The world's largest cable television company, United States-based
Tele-Communications Inc., has joined with regional television companies in New
Zealand and Singapore to begin a Pan-Asian satellite business-news channel later
this year. Like HBO Asia, the business channel is setting up its studios in
Singapore, which is trying to depose Hong Kong as Southeast Asia's
communications hub.

The Japanese have begun limited satellite ventures outside Japan, including
rebroadcasts across Asia of the evening newscast of the giant NHK network.
Australian Television International, or ATVI, began broadcasting this year in
Southeast Asia, with entertainment shows and news programs that focus on the
region.

Kirk C. Sweeney, a communications specialist and research director at Lehman
Brothers in Hong Kong, said he was "surprised all this didn't happen sooner,"
given the limited -- and often low-quality -- offerings of government-controlled
television networks in Asia.

"There are only two traditional broadcasters in Hong Kong," he said. "There are
only three in Malaysia, one in Singapore. I won't say that the Asian market is
ready for a number of new satellite channels today, but I think it will be ready
over the next five years."

But the American entrants face an entrenched rival in Star TV, short for
Satellite Television Asia Region. Star, a $300 million venture that began
service in 1991, already has five free 24-hour channels: MTV Asia, which
includes Asian music videos but is much like its American cousin; an
entertainment channel that reruns popular American and British television shows;
a sports channel; a Chinese-language channel, and BBC World Service Television,
the British competitor to CNN.

Star is owned jointly by the Hong Kong conglomerate Hutchison Whampoa Ltd. and
by the family of Hutchison's billionaire owner, Li Ka-shing, and it beams off
the three-year-old Asiasat 1 satellite, which has a larger footprint than
Palapa. Unlike its Indonesian competitor, Asiasat 1 reaches across China and
India and into the Middle East.

Although it is almost impossible to count satellite audiences, Star says its
market research shows that it reaches more than 11 million households in 38
countries. It estimates that nearly half of those viewers are in China, where
satellite dishes are illegal but easily purchased.

Julian Mounter, chief executive and president of Star, said pay television
services are coming this fall, including an English-language movie channel to
compete with HBO. Hindi- and Chinese-language movie channels are also planned.
Viewers will be able to see the pay channels by renting Star-approved
descrambling devices or by subscribing to local cable television.

Although Star has yet to sign a deal with an American studio for the Pan-Asian
rights to films, Mr. Mounter said he expected to this summer. "We cover such a
big footprint, places where HBO doesn't reach, that I think a lot of film
producers will want to do a deal with us," he said.


BUT Mr. Hooks of HBO Asia said his company had a headstart over Star, with
arrangements to buy films from Warner Brothers, Paramount Pictures and a dozen
other studios.

"Notwithstanding its obvious accomplishments, I just don't see Star's ability to
go and license the amount of product needed to begin a pay TV service," he said.

Mr. Hooks, a 19-year HBO veteran, said that although company rules prohibited
him from revealing the number of subscribers or revenues, HBO Asia was "doing
well within our original, conservative business plan," and that he had high
hopes for two of Asia's most affluent markets, Taiwan and Hong Kong.

He conceded, however, that HBO Asia would not be profitable for some time. "It
will take a minimum of five years to really, successfully establish the business
here," he said.

All HBO Asia films are now shown in English, but Thai- and Chinese-language
subtitles are expected to be added this year. HBO's movie offerings in Asia are
tamer than its American fare, a reflection of the more conservative standards of
the Asian nations it most wants to serve. "Actually, I wouldn't use the word
tame," Mr. Hooks said. "I would say sensitive and cautious."

HBO Asia's home, Singapore, is an especially strict censor, and HBO has already
been forced to make program changes on the signal it transmits over Singapore's
Government-controlled cable system, which is separate from its satellite feed
for the rest of Asia.

The acclaimed American film "Goodfellas," directed by Martin Scorsese, was
removed from HBO's schedule in Singapore because of heavy censorship and
replaced with "PT 109," starring Cliff Robertson.

Mr. Hooks shrugs when asked whether censorship would severely limit HBO's
offerings in Asia. Despite his experience with "Goodfellas" and a handful of
other films, "I have been more than surprised by the lack of significant editing
so far," he said, reminding a visitor that censorship is not limited to Asia.
"Movies are censored on airplanes," he said. "Movies are censored in the United
States of America."

Some Countries Curb Signals

 WHILE some Asian governments welcome satellite television, others see it as a
threat to their cultural identity and even their political stability.

The power of satellite television was proved last year in Thailand, where street
clashes in Bangkok between pro-democracy demonstrators and Thai soldiers helped
bring down the military government.

Although the Government censored local television broadcasts of the violence, in
which scores of unarmed civilians were gunned down, satellite-dish owners
videotaped the scenes of violence shown on BBC and CNN. The tapes were
distributed within hours across Thailand, fueling the public's anger and
hastening the Government's downfall.

Singapore and Malaysia restrict private ownership of satellite dishes. Viewers
there can see satellite-channel programs only as rebroadcast over tightly
controlled government television. The Singapore cable broadcasting service
carries CNN and HBO Asia, but not Star TV. The Malaysian Government bars
satellite receivers, saying it fears a "cultural invasion" by the West.

Although Indonesia has a more authoritarian government than Singapore and
Malaysia, it does have an "open skies" policy that allows satellite dishes to be
purchased freely, with few limitations on what signals can be grabbed from the
sky.

The dishes are everywhere in that vast archipelago nation, sprouting from
rooftops of the fanciest condominium buildings in the capital, Jakarta, and from
gardens in tiny farming villages on remote islands. Farmers who cannot afford a
dish sometimes pool their money for a communal one.

Geography may explain why Indonesia supports the satellite industry.. Because
the nation is made up of more than 13,000 islands spread across thousands of
miles, it is much easier to send TV signals by satellite than by traditional
broadcasting.

China and Vietnam also bar private ownership of satellite dishes, but the laws
are often ignored. China may have more viewers of Star TV than any other
country.

LOAD-DATE: May 23, 1993

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo: William G. Hooks, managing director of HBO Asia. (Pat Kim for
The New York Times)

                   Copyright 1993 The New York Times Company


                              176 of 312 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                   May 23, 1993, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

Diplomacy's Goal In Bosnia Seems Not Bold Action But Avoiding It

BYLINE: By R. W. APPLE Jr.

SECTION: Section 4; Page 1; Column 1; Week in Review Desk

LENGTH: 1112 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON


THE parade of Foreign Minis ters passes through Washing ton Andrei Kozyrev of
Russia, Alain Juppe of France, Douglas Hurd of Britain -- but less is happening
inside the offices of the high and mighty than it seems. Once again, there is no
agreement on what to do about poor, bleeding Bosnia. The Europeans emerge, full
of their age-old complaints about American naivete. The Americans accuse the
Europeans of timidity and disunity.

One will not act without the other. "In the last analysis, it is a European
problem." "When you come down to it, only the Americans can lead." After you,
Alphonse; no, after you, Gaston.

After hundreds of hours of consultations, the best the allies could muster was a
stopgap plan, announced here Saturday, to set up a half-dozen "safe havens" that
they hope will afford some protection to civilians. Gone with the wind, as far
as anyone could tell, is any idea of rolling back the territorial gains made by
the Bosnian Serbs in 14 months of fighting.

The suspicion grows, and no one bothers to deny it with much fervor, that each
side is just as happy, all things considered, to put its proposals on the table
and let the other reject them. That way, each is absolved of the blame for
inaction in the Balkans, a perilous place where both suspect there is little
outsiders can achieve.

Inaction has its uses, of course. The big powers don't get sucked into a war
they cannot end, which is what President Clinton clearly fears at the moment. He
is skeptical about any intervention, he keeps saying, and unwilling to put
American troops into "a shooting gallery" like "Cyprus, Lebanon or Northern
Ireland" -- or Vietnam.

For the man in the street, whether the street is in Paris or Chicago or
Frankfurt, that may be just as well. Opinion polls show no public clamor for
military action, although they show plenty of anger at "ethnic cleansing" and
sympathy for the battered Bosnian Muslims.

But inaction also has its costs, and many will have to pay, if not as dearly as
those in Sarajevo. At a time when he looks less than sure-footed on domestic
matters, Mr. Clinton would have liked to have looked as resolute and consistent
on Bosnia as he did in his handling of Boris Yeltsin and the crisis in Russia.
Instead, he looks befuddled. He cannot escape from the fact that he promised to
take tougher military measures against the Bosnian Serbs and did not, and that
he proclaimed himself, repeatedly and disingenuously, to be close to an
agreement with Europe on what those measures would be.

George Bush left him a miserable legacy, true. A less passive American policy a
year or so ago might have made a big difference. All the same, however, Mr.
Clinton has failed to deliver on his promises, talking loudly and leaving his
stick on his shoulder. The next time he voices threats, they will have less
credibility.

'A Bad Model'

The Europeans, whose prime ministers and foreign ministers come to office only
after extensive experience in foreign affairs, have been slightly dubious of Mr.
Clinton from the start. That is one reason he chose to surround himself with
foreign-policy veterans. But in the Bosnian episode, the marching orders the
President gave his Secretary of State, Warren Christopher, invited failure; he
was sent abroad to listen, not to persuade, and came home empty-handed.

Watching all of this, Erhard Busek, the shrewd Austrian Vice Chancellor, whose
country lies just outside the Balkan cockpit, finds every reason for
discouragement.

"It is a bad model for the post-cold war era," he said the other day during a
visit to Washington. "The actions of the Serbs will encourage other nationalists
to try to change the borders of Europe, by force if necessary. The attitude of
the European Community -- you Americans were better, but not much -- will give
them every reason to think they can get away with it."

In fact, the demise of the Soviet empire and the threat that it posed to the
West has left the Atlantic alliance with no clear definition of where its common
security interests lie, let alone how or through what organization they might
best be defended.

There is a murky perception of new threats from Islamic militancy to the south
and renascent nationalism in the East. But would the interests of the United
States or Britain be threatened, as Washington and London believe they were in
Kuwait, by a Hungarian attempt to reclaim Transylvania from Romania or a
Romanian attempt to regain the part of Moldavia that belonged to the old Soviet
Union?

Is it strictly a question of Realpolitik, where oil matters and morality does
not? How much does the cost count in the equation of policy-making? Is the goal
stabilization ("containment" was the vogue word in Washington last week), or is
it punishing malefactors?

The European Community, which is finding economic unification far more difficult
than it had expected, remains years if not decades removed from strategic
unanimity. NATO, having lost its old enemy, has yet to find a way to play a new
role as guarantor of European stability. The Group of Seven industrial nations,
formed for economic purposes, including Japan but not Russia, is at best a
makeshift mechanism.

That leaves the United Nations, which has been trying to keep a peace that does
not exist and to succor the suffering. But as Sir Brian Urquhart, the retired
United Nations Under Secretary General, concedes in an article in the current
issue of The New York Review of Books, "the tragedy of Bosnia has shown that
international organizations are not able to deal effectively, and when necessary
forcefully, with violent and single-minded factions in a civil war."

To avoid such impotence in the future, he proposes the creation of a small,
highly trained force of volunteers from many nations, "willing and authorized to
take combat risks and representing the will of the international community."

Soul-Searching

Whether or not it leads to such a radical departure as a United Nations legion,
the Bosnian struggle has already prompted soul-searching in many Western
capitals. The French are discussing the possibility of a major international
conference to develop a new definition of European security, and in Washington,
there is a growing realization that new methods are needed to deal with future
Bosnias.

In some ways, the most destructive aspect of the last month has been the
clumsily public nature of the allies' dealings with each other, and a senior
Clinton Administration official commented, "We have to find ways to function
more like a diplomatic alliance, which does its fighting in private, and less
like a fractious family."

LOAD-DATE: May 23, 1993

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Drawings

                   Copyright 1993 The New York Times Company


                              177 of 312 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                   May 23, 1993, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

THE NATION;
Waiting for the Appointment: Who Will Be the Arts Chief ?

BYLINE: By WILLIAM H. HONAN

SECTION: Section 4; Page 16; Column 1; Week in Review Desk

LENGTH: 1085 words


PEOPLE in the arts know that President Clinton has had his hands full lately
with Bosnia, gays in the military and the tax bill, but last week the National
Council on the Arts could contain its frustration no longer about the
Administration's foot-dragging on the chief appointment for the National
Endowment for the Arts.

The council members, all of whom were appointed during the last two
Administrations and who advise the arts endowment chairman, unanimously adopted
a resolution informing the Administration how "disturbed" it was that a chairman
had not yet been named. The chairman oversees the allocation of $175 million to
artists and art institutions.

"Inaction sends the wrong signal," said Harvey Lichtenstein, president of the
Brooklyn Academy of Music, who proposed the resolution. The Administration has
not yet replied, he said.

One well-connected arts administrator, who spoke on condition of anonymity,
speculated about the reason for delay. With all the problems President Clinton
is facing, this person said, he has no desire at the moment to appoint a
chairman for the arts endowment when he knows that a nominee, regardless of
credentials, would come under fire both from those who think the endowment has
promoted obscenity and sacrilege and from those who believe it has been cowed by
shrill attacks from conservatives and now stifles free expression. Appointing a
new chairman for the arts endowment now, said the administrator, would be a
great way to throw away votes for, say, homosexuals in the military.

A White House staff member who also spoke on condition of anonymity was more
reassuring: "I know you've heard this before," the aide said, "but we're close
to a decision -- perhaps next week."

In a move that alarmed many artists and arts administrators, the Department of
Justice last month appealed the decision of a Federal judge in Los Angeles that
had declared unconstitutional the so-called decency standard which required the
arts endowment to "take into consideration general standards of decency" when
awarding grants.

The decency standard was written into law three years ago by Congress as part of
a compromise that terminated a long, scratchy debate over the future of the arts
endowment, which had been prompted by the Federal agency's sponsorship of shows
displaying works by Robert Mapplethorpe and Andres Serrano. The decency standard
mollified conservatives but outraged many liberals who thought it amounted to
censorship. A White House staff member said the Justice Department was prompted
to act only because of a legal technicality, not from any commitment to the
standard.

Artists Challenge Decency Standard

The constitutionality of the statute had been challenged by four performance
artists who asserted that their arts endowment grants had been canceled on
grounds of indecency.

Norma P. Munn, chairwoman of the New York City Arts Coalition, a public policy
group, said she is so angered by the Administration's support for the decency
standard that she hopes whoever is offered the arts endowment chairmanship will
publicly decline the offer.

Underlying these frustrations is the fact that President Clinton has yet to
spell out his Administration's policy on the arts. That could not possibly put
an end to every quarrel over whether a specific work of art is beyond the pale
for Federal subsidy, but it could rally a demoralized constituency and provide
footing for Mr. Clinton's eventual choice to head the arts endowment. A policy
statement could also guide the debate on reauthorization of the endowment in
September.

Unfortunately, when it comes to arts policy, previous Administrations do not
offer much guidance. In fact, for at least 60 years, arts administrators say,
Federal arts policy has been a hasty improvisation, dodging the tough issues and
frequently doing the right thing for what many consider to be the wrong reason.

Under the New Deal in the early 1930's, artists were hired by the Government
simply to reduce the number of unemployed. In the early days of the cold war,
the rationale for supporting artists through cultural exchanges was for America
to outshine the Communists.

Put to such use, artists were expected to entertain, and the notion that they
might provoke or even shock was officially discouraged. This attitude was
typified by President Harry S. Truman when he attended an art exhibit arranged
by the State Department and stopped in front of a painting of a circus performer
with exaggerated features. "If that's art," President Truman remarked, "I'm a
Hottentot!"

During the Kennedy and Johnson Administrations, the goal of promoting
"excellence" was put forward as a more sophisticated rationale for Federal
subsidy. When Congress created the arts and humanities endowments in 1965, their
purpose was stated as the pursuit of "artistic and humanistic excellence."

Yet, to excel is to do better than others, suggesting a competitive rather than
a creative accomplishment. Consciously or not, the quest for excellence was a
further extension of cold war rivalry.

In the Administration of Richard M. Nixon, the budget for the arts endowment,
which was $8 million in 1969, climbed to a princely $75 million five years
later. According to aides, Mr. Nixon believed that the country's artists and
intellectuals might soften their opposition to the war in Vietnam if flushed
with Federal money.

During the 1980's, the economic impact of the arts was rediscovered.  A study
showed that cultural activities attracted $5.6 billion to the New York-New
Jersey area. The study was used to encourage governments, corporations and other
donors to support the arts as a matter of enlightened self-interest.

In recent years, the cry has been that the arts are entitled to Federal dollars
because they "advance civilization," providing uplift and affirmation. But this
notion is based on a false, sanitized concept of the arts, inconsistent with the
confrontational styles that play a large part in today's art scene.

The challenge before Mr. Clinton, then, is to explain why the Government should
support this often screechingly provocative expression.

Given his current problems, Mr. Clinton may deem it politically expedient to
repeat the old cliches, half-truths and obfuscations.

On the other hand, he could do worse than argue that the arts, like health and
education, are a social good and, even if sometimes painful, they deserve to be
fostered by the Federal Government.

LOAD-DATE: May 23, 1993

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Drawing

                   Copyright 1993 The New York Times Company


                              178 of 312 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                   May 23, 1993, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

THE NATION;
The Cold War Freezer Keeps Historians Out

BYLINE: By TIM WEINER

SECTION: Section 4; Page 5; Column 1; Week in Review Desk

LENGTH: 1102 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON


HISTORIANS of the cold war say they know little of how the long struggle began.
They know little of how it ended. And they know little of what happened in
between. Their ignorance, they say, stems from the system of keeping Government
documents secret, itself a creature of the cold war.

Behind double-locked steel doors with classified combinations, among countless
cartons of documents stamped top secret, are answers to fundamental questions
about the $10 trillion arms race, the United States intelligence community and
paramilitary operations carried out from Afghanistan to Zaire. Scholars,
reporters and ordinary citizens hammer at the vaults in vain.

Because the Central Intelligence Agency, the Pentagon and the State Department
have refused to declassify millions of their records, those who seek the history
of the cold war are like medieval map-makers trying to chart an unknown world.

They file thousands of requests for documents under the Freedom of Information
Act, a 1966 law designed to give Americans access to Federal files. But most
requests are futile, marked by decade-long delays, ending in denials on the
grounds that disclosure would gravely damage national security.

"The system is without a sense of decency or democracy," said Barton J.
Bernstein, director of Stanford University's international relations program,
who recently was denied records from the 1940's on national-security grounds.

With archives in Moscow and Beijing disclosing secret documents, pressure for
openness is building in Washington. The vault may be opening a crack. President
Clinton told the national-security bureaucracy this month that with the end of
the cold war, it was time to revise the system that keeps history under seal.

More is at stake than a cold-war concept of national security. The release of
the documentary history of the cold war could help dispel a pervasive public
belief that the Government has lied about matters ranging from the assassination
of John F. Kennedy to prisoners of war in Vietnam to the existence of flying
saucers. (More than a few people believe that the Government is covering up the
1947 crash of an alien spacecraft in New Mexico.)

But Mr. Clinton's request for increased openness must be carried out by the same
intelligence and military officials who create secrets. They dominate a task
force led by the bureaucrat in charge of the classification system, Steven
Garfinkel, the man who oversees the restrictive secrecy code still in effect. It
is they who must answer questions posed by Mr. Clinton: How can documents be
declassified as quickly as possible? How can excessive classification be
avoided? And, most important, what really needs to be kept secret?

Mr. Garfinkel, the director of the Information Security Oversight Office, said
he has no idea how many secret documents exist. "Perhaps billions," he said.
"But the actual number of real secrets is much, much smaller and that is the
real issue. The idea that every one of these documents is a real secret is
absurd."

Record Riddled With Holes

What still needs to be kept secret? The designs of weapons systems and
intelligence technologies. The details of ongoing treaty negotiations. The names
of espionage agents. But not much else, historians argue. Certainly not a 1948
evaluation of the United States intelligence services nor the pet names assigned
by scientists to 1950's nuclear-weapons tests -- all still classified in the
name of national security.

"It has become ridiculous," said John Lewis Gaddis, a leading cold-war scholar
who sits on a C.I.A. committee that is declassifying records at a glacial pace.
"When you have an excessively capacious definition of secrecy, you lose control
in your own mind of what really needs to be kept secret."

While the record remains riddled with holes, historians cannot know the minds of
the Americans who led the cold war. "We don't know how we got into an arms race
that caused both sides to spend themselves into ruin," said Priscilla McMillan,
a fellow at the Russian Research Center at Harvard.

No one really knows how the United States decided to send half a million
soldiers to Vietnam; the heart of the story remains classified, said John
Prados, who has written extensively about national security. "The American
people not only have a need but a right to know their history," Mr. Prados said.

History can be falsified when documents disappear. Warren Cohen, a professor of
history at Michigan State University, resigned from the State Department
historical committee that he headed in 1990 to protest the deletion from the
official Government history of American foreign relations all mention of the
C.I.A. coup that put Shah Mohammed Riza Pahlevi in power in Iran in 1953.

"Secrecy enables the Government to put out an account which is a half-truth,"
said Mr. Cohen. "The lies have undermined public faith in Government."

And that is exactly what happened in the former Soviet Union, said David
Holloway, a political scientist who has spent months in Moscow reading recently
unearthed records. "Secrecy cost the Soviets enormously," he said. "The people
knew the public version of history was a lie. That led to a belief that
Government is never going to tell you the truth."

Americans, too, grew to mistrust their Government during the cold war.
Presidents from Eisenhower to Reagan lied to the public about crises like the
U-2 spy plane affair, the so-called "missile gap" between the Soviet Union and
the United States, the conduct of the Vietnam War, Watergate, the sale of
weapons to Iran. As the official versions crumbled and were replaced by a
half-revealed record, conspiracy theories flourished.

If the national-security bureaucracy carries out President Clinton's order, the
hidden history of the cold war will eventually be revealed, and the credibility
gap between the official version and the truth will narrow. But historians
remember that an earlier promise of openness by a President proved empty.

"The many abuses of the security system can no longer be tolerated," read a
Presidential proclamation to strengthen the Freedom of Information Act.
"Fundamental to our way of life is the belief that when information which
properly belongs to the public is systematically withheld by those in power, the
people soon become ignorant of their own affairs, distrustful of those who
manage them, and -- eventually -- incapable of determining their own destinies."

The promise was made in 1972 by Richard M. Nixon, whose Presidency would fall
two years later upon the sword and shield of secrecy.

LOAD-DATE: May 23, 1993

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Drawing

                   Copyright 1993 The New York Times Company


                              179 of 312 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                   May 23, 1993, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

CONFLICT IN THE BALKANS;
Exuding Confidence, Serbian Nationalists Act as if War for Bosnia Is Won

BYLINE: By JOHN F. BURNS,  Special to The New York Times

SECTION: Section 1; Page 12; Column 1; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 1416 words

DATELINE: PALE, Bosnia and Herzegovina, May 20


Bordering the "war road" that winds along the shoulder of Trebevic Mountain
overlooking Sarajevo, Serbian nationalist gunners were outside their log cabins
in the sunlight this week, playing poker on tables fashioned from ammunition
boxes, tossing back shots of slivovitz from thimble-sized glasses, or strolling
beneath the fragrant plum and cherry blossoms.

Few bothered to carry rifles.

Not quite 14 months after they began fighting, the Serbian fighters were
behaving as though for them, at least, the war for Bosnia was all but over.

Close to the guns, below minefields that guard the artillery and tanks that have
devastated the Bosnian capital, the mostly Muslim fighters of the Bosnian Army
remained in their redoubts, eager to punch a breach through the Serbian lines.
But the Serbian forces seemed nonchalant.

After a month that began with fears of American air strikes, the Serbian
nationalists appear to have concluded that the only force that ever threatened
their hold on 70 percent of this former Yugoslav republic, NATO firepower, is
not going to be aimed at them. In Pale, the Serbian headquarters town outside
Sarajevo, the mood has swung from hostility towards something approaching
smugness.

Serbs Cites Vietnam War

"You Americans couldn't even win in Vietnam," said a 26-year-old soldier who
gave his name as Zoran, inviting reporters into a log cabin on Trebevic, close
to the bobsled run built for the 1984 Olympic winter games. A board tacked to
the cabin identified it as the "Chetnik Cafe." Chetniks are the bearded
paramilitary fighters who have been the shock troops of "ethnic cleansing,"
bombarding Muslim and Croatian communities in Bosnia, then forcing survivors to
flee to create "pure" Serbian communities that could eventually be annexed to
Serbia.

As Zoran spoke, the roar of jet engines could be heard, apparently from one of
the NATO aircraft patrolling the no-flight zone imposed to stop Serbian aircraft
from attacking Muslim and Croatian areas.

Zoran laughed and pointed to the skies. "You see," he said, "they dare not get
anywhere close to us. They try to frighten us with their noise, but that's all
it is, noise. That's all America has ever been good for here, noise."

Outside the Chetnik Cafe, a World War II era 50-caliber Browning machine-gun
stood idle in a sandbagged revetment, along with a mortar tube positioned to
fire into Sarajevo. From positions like these, Serbian gunners have killed at
least 10,000 people in the city, and wounded more than 50,000.  Now, the weapons
are fired less frequently.

"We fire only when we need to teach the Muslims a lesson," Zoran said.

A similar confidence is common throughout the parts of Bosnia seized by the
Serbian forces. The Serbian nationalist broadcast network has chronicled each
shift in the policy pronouncements from Washington, London and Moscow. Like
investors tracking the trends on Wall Street, even gas-station attendants and
supermarket clerks keep track of the risks of western intervention. For now, the
sense is that the risks are close to nil.

The Serbs know that President Clinton has backed away from the tough talk of
only three weeks ago.


In Pale, Mr. Clinton's shifting resolve appeared to have encouraged moves that
carried Bosnia closer than ever to dismemberment. Emboldened by a referendum
last weekend in which 96 percent of nearly 1.2 million voters were said to have
voted against a peace plan for Bosnia and in favor of an independent "Republic
of Srpska," the name nationalists have given to the lands seized in the war. Its
self-styled parliament approved measures aimed at consolidating the breakaway
state and making it a province of Serbia.

Government Is Set Up

Already, it has a government, headed by the Serbian nationalist leader in
Bosnia, Radovan Karadzic, now referred to by aides as President Karadzic. It has
an army of perhaps 85,000 men, and paramilitary police. Its parliament has
approved 700 statutes and decrees, many identical to the laws of Serbia.

The state has issued its own currency, and it announced this week that it has
its own postage stamps, too, even if the only country that will accept them is
what remains of Yugoslavia.

At a checkpoint outside Sarajevo, where Serbian-held territory abuts an area
controlled by Bosnian Croats, Serbian police officers have established an
"international frontier" where rigorous "customs checks" are enforced.


Within days of President Clinton's threat of military force, Dr. Karadzic, 47, a
former Sarajevo psychiatrist, signed an international peace plan that would have
granted Serbian forces only 43 percent of Bosnian territory. It would have been
governed as part of a Bosnian state.

But from the start of the war, Dr. Karadzic has been a poker player, bluffing
negotiators, folding his hand when pressures became too great, all the while
preserving and increasing his chips, the lands seized by Serbian forces. As the
referendum results came in, it seemed clearer than ever that the Serbian
nationalist leader never intended to surrender any of the seized lands.

Appearing before a succession of news conferences, Dr. Karadzic spoke with
contempt for the very idea of Bosnia as a sovereign state.

"Bosnia never existed, and it will never exist," he said at one point. At
another, he added: "There will be a Republic of Srpska once and for all. Anybody
who wants to deal with us has to take into account that Serbs have decided to
have their own province that will be independent."

On military matters, the parliament declared that "the Srpska Republic no longer
considers itself at war" and urged the United Nations to send additional troops
to Bosnia to assist in separating the opposing forces along the 750 miles of
"confrontation lines" that run like a fretwork across the Bosnian map.

There was a palpable confidence, too, that there was nothing to fear from the
embargo purportedly imposed by Slobodan Milosevic, the President of Serbia.

Mostly, Serbs questioned about the embargo seemed to consider it a ruse adopted
to distance Serbia from the dismemberment of Bosnia.

Announcing the embargo after Dr. Karadzic's signature on the Athens accord was
repudiated by the Srpska parliament, Mr. Milosevic said that "reasons no longer
exist" for Serbia to furnish Serbian nationalists in Bosnia with "money, fuel
and raw materials." But, far from being squeezed, the Serbian nationalists seem
eager to demonstrate their largesse. Stores in Pale, virtually empty in January,
boast shelves loaded with processed food from Serbia.

But the surest sign that the Serbian leaders are not worried about the embargo
comes from the ample supplies of fuel in Pale and elsewhere, where even foreign
reporters were allowed tofill their tanks.

Antipathy for Muslims, and hostility toward anybody suspected of having sympathy
for them, is widespread. Allied to the suspicion is a conviction, belied by
every fact of the war, that Serbs have been its principal victims. On Monday,
nationalist officials organized a trip to the village of Fakovici to what
officials said had been a "massacre" of Serbian civilians by Muslim fighters. On
arrival, reporters found forensic experts from the military hospital in
Belgrade, the Serbian capital, at open-air tables examining the remains of 20
Serbs said to have been killed on June 21, 1992. At least seven were males
wearing military uniforms.

Mosques Reduced to Rubble

The event appeared to have been presented for political purposes. Grieving
relatives said the bodies had been buried soon after the villagers were killed,
then exhumed, exhibited to reporters, and reburied. The deputy commander of the
Serbian nationalist forces, Gen. Milan Gvero, presided.

Reporters driving to the event had traveled for 35 miles down the Drina Valley,
past houses that been blasted by tank fire, mosques that had been reduced to
rubble, and tractors blown up by the roadside. At every stop, there was nothing
but silence.

But one point that Serbian officials were keen to make seemed uncontrovertible
-- that Serbs who live in the valley are implacably opposed to living with
Muslims again, much less to surrendering political control to Muslims, as
required by the peace plan.

General Gvero put it bluntly: "We say everybody has to live on his own
territory, Muslims on Muslim territory, Serbs on Serbian," he said. "This is
pure Serbian territory, and there is no power on earth that can make us
surrender it."

LOAD-DATE: May 23, 1993

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo: A Serbian nationalist soldier hugging his mother after she was
freed in an exchange of detainees in Gradacac, Bosnia and Herzegovina.
(Associated Press)

Map of Bosnia and Herzegovina

                   Copyright 1993 The New York Times Company


                              180 of 312 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                   May 23, 1993, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

Asian Countries, in Shift, Weigh Defense Forum

BYLINE: By DAVID E. SANGER,  Special to The New York Times

SECTION: Section 1; Page 16; Column 3; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 1037 words

DATELINE: SINGAPORE, May 22


Spurred by an arms race that is spreading from China to Indonesia, Japan and
other Asian nations have warily begun talks to set up their own regional
security forum, a fundamental change in defense policy for countries that have
never been able to form alliances and have always relied on the United States to
keep peace in the Pacific.

In a meeting here over the last few days, with the blessing and participation of
the Clinton Administration, senior government officials from throughout the
region met for the first time to talk about threats to the area's stability,
from an outbreak of piracy in the South China Sea to the containment of North
Korea and the Khmer Rouge in Cambodia.

But Asian officials said the new talk of cooperation was also being driven by
growing distrust of China's growing economic power and the military buying spree
it has touched off. Their fear is that Japan, rattled by China's action and
fearful of North Korea's nuclear program, will drift toward rearmament itself.

Since World War II, Asian countries have relied on the United States to keep
Asia's many powers in check. That approach was reinforced by the Bush
Administration, which talked often of a "hub and spoke" series of alliances with
America at the center, and saw little need for additional security structures.
Now many Asian leaders are coming to the opposite conclusion.

'A Dramatic Departure'

"What we are seeing now is a dramatic departure, really a revolution, in the way
Asian countries have dealt with each other," said Chan Heng Chee, Singapore's
former delegate to the United Nations and now the director of the Institute of
Southeast Asian Studies here. "Until now, we have only cooperated with each
other on economic matters. But perceptions of the changing nature of the
American role is making us begin to think that we must change also."

Over the last two weeks, Winston Lord, the State Department's top official for
Asia, has traveled to all of the region's major capitals to repeat the message
that the Clinton Administration plans to remain "fully engaged" in the region.
And William J. Perry, the Deputy Secretary of Defense, told South Korean and
Japanese officials last week that troop reductions in Asia were unlikely to go
much further than those already announced.

No one yet knows exactly what form the new Asian mutual security framework will
take, or even whether it will move much beyond a forum for dialogue. The first
meeting simply resulted in a series of declarations of concern, especially about
the violence in Cambodia and the intransigence of North Korea.

"We're a long, long way from considering collective action," a participant said.
Indonesia, for example, has said it is opposed to any agreement that would bind
members to go to the defense of another.

Alliances Elude Region

Asia has never had an alliance resembling NATO, or even a loose forum akin to
the Conference on Security and Cooperation in Europe. The Southeast Asian Treaty
Organization, set up in 1954 after the French defeat in Indochina, dissolved
after about 20 years and was driven mostly by the United States, Australia and
European powers.

With the distances across the Pacific so vast, and national interests so
divergent, it was always assumed any move toward collective Asian security would
fail. Even today many doubt whether the new initiatives will be able to surmount
the lingering bitterness from wars past, the continuing suspicions of Japan, or
any number of territorial disputes.

But the ideological divisions that once divided Asia along Communist and
non-Communist lines, leading to the Korean and Vietnam wars, have effectively
blurred into oblivion. Instead, the members of the Association of Southeast
Asian Nations, or Asean, now say that the chief motive for assuring regional
security is simply to protect the world's fastest-growing economies.

Asean is made of Singapore, Thailand, Brunei, Indonesia, Malaysia and the
Philippines and was formed to accelerate economic progress and stability in the
region.

At the meeting here in Singapore there was even preliminary talk about bringing
two of the remaining Communist powers, China and Vietnam, into the security
framework, though there were sharp differences over how. Money from the rest of
capitalist Asia is pouring into factories and other investments in both
Communist countries at such an astounding pace that many politicians and
business executives are calling for mechanisms to defuse any security tensions
before they could threaten profits.

But the Japanese and others are reluctant. "We want to hear what China has to
say, but on the other hand China is still a totalitarian nation," a senior
Japanese offiical noted recently. "It is not one of us."

On Arms Buying Spree

In many ways, wealth has suddenly become as destabilizing as the threat of
spreading Communism ever was. Suddenly able to afford just about anything in the
world's weapons catalogues, countries throughout Asia have gone on an
unparalleled arms buying spree over the last year, one that the rest of the
world has been only too happy to feed.

The initiative for the new security forum came from an unlikely source: the
Japanese. Looking for a non-threatening way to increase its regional political
role, Tokyo suggested organizing regular top-level security conferences. The
Bush Administration's enthusiasm for the idea, however, was only lukewarm, and
former Secretary of State James A. Baker III angered Japanese officials when he
spoke of maintaining the "hub and spokes" series of bilateral relationships,
with the United States at the hub, but said nothing of regional security.

The Clinton Administration also believes in hubs and spokes, but sees much room
for other security arrangments as well. That thinking has been reinforced as
South Korea, Japan and the United States -- and more haltingly, China -- have
worked together in recent months to force North Korea to give up its nuclear
weapons project.

"It has been a critical experience for all of us, and it has changed the way we
relate to each other," a senior Japanese Foreign Ministry official said recently
of North Korea's nuclear arms program.


LOAD-DATE: May 23, 1993

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1993 The New York Times Company


                              181 of 312 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                   May 23, 1993, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

Hope and Violence as Cambodian Election Begins

BYLINE: By PHILIP SHENON,  Special to The New York Times

SECTION: Section 1; Page 1; Column 2; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 1975 words

DATELINE: PHNOM PENH, Cambodia, Sunday, May 23


After decades of oppression that have brought genocidal terror, wrenching
poverty and a civil war, the future of Cambodia may finally be decided by the
millions who have suffered quietly for so long and who are being invited today
to vote.

As the voting began at 8 A.M., there were no reports of violence, although
United Nations peacekeepers held to their prediction of attacks by the Khmer
Rouge, the Maoist rebels who have threatened to sabotage the six-day election.
United Nations military observers said there was fighting Saturday night between
the rebels and Government soldiers in some areas of the northern countryside.

Here in the capital, voters turned out by the tens of thousands in an early
morning drizzle for the chance to vote -- for most of Cambodia's 4.7 million
registered voters, the first chance in their lives to pick their own government.
Cambodians say it is a sign of good fortune when it rains on an important day.

Soy Sina, a retired tailor, lined up an hour and a half before the voting booths
opened.

"I came early because I want peace to come very fast to Cambodia," she said,
clutching the laminated United Nations voting card that displayed her photograph
and signature. "I did not think it would be dangerous to vote because I knew the
United Nations would protect us." Several feet away, a peacekeeping soldier from
Ghana paced nervously, his hands tight around an M-16 rifle.

The threat that some voters would face violence was underscored on Saturday when
two Chinese soldiers with the United Nations force were killed in an early
morning raid in central Cambodia. The United Nations blamed the Khmer Rouge for
the attack.

Elsewhere on the eve of the voting, at least one man died when the offices of an
opposition political party were attacked with grenades in the central province
of Kratie, and United Nations electoral officials renewed their warning that
polling stations might become the targets of Khmer Rouge rockets.

"I want to vote," said Srei On, a 28-year-old farmer. "Everybody in my family
wants to vote, even though we will be afraid." With her husband, Mrs. Srei On
tries to grow rice and mangos on a plot of scrubby land in the central province
of Kompong Cham, where the Khmer Rouge have stationed thousands of fighters and
where the two Chinese peacekeepers were killed.

Twenty political parties are on the ballot to pick a 120-member national
assembly, which will be charged with writing a new constitution. But the
election is expected to come down to a contest between the governing Cambodian
People's Party and the royalist opposition party founded by the nation's former
monarch, Prince Norodom Sihanouk.

If the governing party is victorious, it is likely to intensify its military
campaign against the Khmer Rouge.

Prince Sihanouk, who at 70 is without doubt the most beloved figure in Cambodia,
claims neutrality in the elections and has turned over leadership of the
royalist party to his eldest son, Prince Norodom Ranariddh, 49. The party is
known as Funcinpec, the French acronym for the National Front for an
Independent, Neutral, Peaceful and Cooperative Cambodia.

If the party wins the election, Prince Ranariddh is expected to ask his father
to form a coalition government that might include the Khmer Rouge -- despite the
movement's murderous past. When the Khmer Rouge controlled the Government from
1975 to 1979, more than one million Cambodians died from starvation, disease and
execution as the Khmer Rouge tried to force Cambodia back to an agrarian "Year
Zero."

Prince Sihanouk Returns

At the urging of the United Nations, Prince Sihanouk returned home on Saturday
from Beijing, where he maintains a home and where he is said to have been
receiving medical treatment for several weeks.

"I am very happy to be with my people," he said on his arrival at Phnom Penh's
international airport. "Really, they need me. I am very happy to be with them to
support the electoral process, to support the new democracy."

United Nations peacekeepers say that while they predict violence during the
six-day election that begins today, they still expect to be able to set up
polling stations in at least 80 percent of the country. Most Cambodians live in
the southern half of the country, which has been comparatively peaceful. The
vote count is supposed to be completed by the end of next week.

"We have the minimum acceptable conditions for free and fair elections -- not
the maximum, far from it," said Yasushi Akashi, the head of the 22,000-member,
$2 billion peacekeeping force in Cambodia, on which the United Nations has
staked its prestige. It is the biggest peacekeeping operation in United Nations
history.

"But we can feel there is a deep and widespread aspiration among the Cambodian
people for peace," Mr. Akashi said in a meeting on Saturday with reporters.
"Cambodians must now try to become masters of their own country."

United Nations officials say that if the election is free and fair -- and if
Cambodia's political parties live up to their promise to accept the results --
the nation's new masters will be the voters who, despite Khmer Rouge threats of
violence, turn out to cast ballots this week.

Most Have Never Voted Before

Most of the registered voters, indeed most of Cambodia's eight million people,
are small farmers whose belongings rarely include much beyond a small patch of
land, a house of sticks and palm leaves and perhaps a cow and a few chickens.
They are among the poorest people on earth.

Most have never voted before, and until the United Nations arrived here as part
of a 1991 peace treaty, they were largely unfamiliar with multiparty democracy
or secret balloting. Most Cambodians are illiterate, so the logos of Cambodia's
20 political parties will be printed on the ballot.

The outcome is likely to come down to whether Cambodian voters accept the idea
tht they enjoy a free choice -- an elusive concept among people whose survival
has often depended on their absolute obedience to authority.

The village of Malua in the central province of Kompong Speu, about 40 miles
southwest of Phnom Penh, is a sad collection of several dozen palm-leaf huts,
the leaves cracked and faded from the unrelenting sun.

There, the villagers say without hesitation that they will vote for the
Cambodian People's Party, the party of Prime Minister Hun Sen. It is difficult
to know whether they are telling the truth or whether they feel that it is
simply too dangerous to acknowledge that they support someone else.

The Cambodian People's Party has conducted a large-scale campaign of
intimidation, often gathering voters together in small groups in the countryside
to warn them that their ballots will not be secret and that they face
retaliation if they vote against the governing party. In some provinces the
party has been linked to the slayings of opposition leaders.

'They Saved Us'

"Of course we will vote for the Cambodian People's Party," said Noy Hou, 38, who
struggles to raise corn in the dry red soil of the village, and whose one-room
home is decorated with a small calendar with photographs of Prime Minister Hun
Sen and the party chairman, Chea Sim. "The People's Party is our party -- they
saved us from the Khmer Rouge."

Her husband, Sat Seun, 40, leaning back on a frayed bamboo mat, said he believed
the governing party's assertion that the royalists were in a secret alliance
with the Khmer Rouge and would help return the Khmer Rouge to power in Cambodia.
"I think Funcinpec and the Khmer Rouge are the same thing," he said.

At a Funcinpec office a few miles down the rutted dirt road from Malua, a party
organizer, Han Sou Pheap, said that while many Cambodians supported the party,
they dared not admit it.

"Only a few people will tell you the truth," said Mr. Han Sou Pheap, who said he
had received several visits from armed Government soldiers who had threatened to
burn down the office or spray it with gunfire unless he took down photographs of
Prince Sihanouk.

Cambodia is a victim of geography, squeezed between two historically voracious,
much larger neighbors, Vietnam and Thailand. It was colonized by France in the
19th century, and during World War II, its Vichy French administrators passed
over the likeliest candidate for the throne and selected a teen-age prince,
Norodom Sihanouk, to be the nation's new King.

Coup, Then Communist Victory

Prince Sihanouk eventually won full independence for Cambodia and ruled the
country until 1970, when he was overthrown in a coup led by his Prime Minister,
Gen. Lon Nol. Cambodia became a battlefield as the Vietnam War spilled over the
border, and in 1975 the Lon Nol Government, like the South Vietnamese
Government, fell to Communist forces.

The Communist leader in Cambodia, Pol Pot of the Khmer Rouge, then launched a
peasant revolution intended to turn this nation into a giant agricultural
commune. He plunged Cambodia into a reign of terror from which its people have
not recovered.

In 1979 the Khmer Rouge were overthrown by the Vietnamese Army, and Pol Pot and
his forces fled back into the jungle, where they regrouped as insurgents and
launched a civil war against the Government installed by Vietnam. That
Government remains in power today, now led by Mr. Hun Sen, a Khmer Rouge
commander who defected to Vietnam in the 1970's.

Pol Pot remains the supreme leader of the Khmer Rouge and is said to be living
in jungle camps in western Cambodia. In 1991 the Khmer Rouge joined in the
United Nations-brokered peace treaty for Cambodia but withdrew last year,
asserting that thousands of Vietnamese troops remained in Cambodia.

The fear of what the elections may bring was most evident Saturday in the
northwestern province of Siem Reap, the scene of almost continuous fighting
between the Khmer Rouge and the Cambodian Army since the treaty was signed in
October 1991.

Violence Feared in Siem Reap

The rattle of gunfire and the rumble of nighttime shelling have been routine for
weeks. United Nations military officials say Siem Reap is one of the provinces
most likely to be attacked by Khmer Rouge guerrillas during the voting.
Peacekeeping troops assigned to the provincial capital, also called Siem Reap,
stationed themselves on Saturday in makeshift bunkers in Buddhist temples, known
as wats, which will be used as polling places.

Keng Borin, 28, an unemployed laborer in Siem Reap who is one of nearly 370,000
Cambodian refugees who returned home from border camps in Thailand over the last
year under the auspices of the United Nations, wondered again what sort of
country he had come home to.

"In Phnom Penh, people think there will be peace after the elections," he said.
"In Siem Reap, everyone thinks that after the elections the fighting will begin
again."

In the village of Somrong Year, on the outskirts of the city of Siem Reap, Yuit
Sinni, 33, said she had abandoned her home in the city earlier this month
because of the constant threat of Khmer Rouge attacks. "I do not sleep easily
now because I am afraid the Khmer Rouge will come during elections," she said.
"I will vote, for Hun Sen because he helped liberate us from Pol Pot and kept
Pol Pot away."

In the southern Cambodian province of Kampot, unidentified gunmen ambushed a
train on Saturday, killing three people.

But the graceful, tree-lined streets of the Cambodian capital were notably calm
on the eve of the elections, though many of the capital's residents still feared
violence. Hundreds of Buddhist monks and nuns, some from as far away as the
United States, marched down a major thoroughfare, many clutching bundles of
incense wrapped in jasmine garlands, while others held signs that read in Khmer,
"Please, Peace Come to Cambodia."

Crowds lined the street to welcome the procession.

LOAD-DATE: June 9, 1993

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photos: Monks marching for peace in the streets of Phnom Penh on the
eve of six days of elections in Cambodia. (Agence France-Presse) (pg. 1); Sat
Seun, a farmer in Phum Mala village in southwest Cambodia, at home with his
children. Mr. Seun believes the royalists were in a secret alliance with the
Khmer Rouge and would help return the Khmer Rouge to power. "I think Funcinpec
and the Khmer Rouge are the same thing," he said. (David Portnoy for The New
York Times) (pg. 10)

Chronology: "23 Years of Clashes and Terror"

1970: Civilian and military officials overthrow the Government of Prince Norodom
Sihanouk and turn over power to Prime Minister Lon Nol, an American-backed
general. The Cambodian monarchy is abolished.

1975: Communist guerrillas of the Khmer Rouge seize the capital and oust Lon
Nol's Government after victories in provincial cities. The Khmer Rouge impose a
brutal reorganization of society in which more than a million people will die in
three years. Prince Sihanouk, a virtual captive, is declared titular head of
state.

1976: Prince Sihanouk resigns and goes to Beijing. The shadowy leader of the
Khmer Rouge, Pol Pot, emerges to become Prime Minister.

1978: Vietnamese troops invade in December.

1979: Vietnam installs a new Government in Phnom Penh led by Heng Samrin.

1982: With encouragement from China and the United States, the three Cambodian
rebel factions form a government in exile with Prince Sihanouk as president,
Khieu Samphan of the Khmer Rouge as vice president and Son Sann of the
conservative Khmer People's Liberation Front as prime minister.

1987: Prince Sihanouk withdraws from the coalition and holds talks in France
with Hun Sen, now Prime Minister in Phnom Penh. Talks over the next 18 months
prove inconclusive.

1988: Under Chinese pressure, Prince Sihanouk returns to lead the rebel
coalition.

1989: Vietnam announces that all its troops will leave Cambodia by the end of
September.

1990: The United States, Russia, China and other permanent members of the United
Nations Security Council draft a peace plan calling for an interim
administration made up of the four factions to run the country under United
Nations supervision until free elections can be organized. The factions agree in
principle to accept the plan, which also calls for mutual disarmament and a
United Nations buffer force.

June 1991: The Supreme National Council agrees to an indefinite cease-fire.

October 1991: Cambodia's warring factions and 18 nations sign a peace treaty in
Paris, ending the civil war.

November 1991: A mob of Cambodians attacks the nominal leader of the Khmer
Rouge, Mr. Samphan, with sticks and fists in a villa in Phnom Penh.

March 1992: The United Nations starts deploying a peacekeeping force of 22,000
soldiers and civilians to oversee the transition to elections.

June 1992: Peacekeepers begin disarming, but the Khmer Rouge refuse to yield
weapons.

December 1992: After months of sporadic attacks, the Khmer Rouge begin taking
United Nations troops hostage for brief periods. Over the next five months, they
kill 10 peacekeepers and wound at least 40.

January 1993: The Khmer Rouge say they will boycott the vote.

April 1993: The Khmer Rouge pull out of the capital and regroup in strongholds.
Clashes escalate.

May 23, 1993: The date set for elections under United Nations supervision. (pg.
10)
; Chart: "The Main Players in Cambodia"

Although 20 parties will be on the ballot, the transition leading to Cambodia's
elections has been dominated by a handful of politicians and rebel leaders:

Prince Norodom Sihanouk, the nation's monarch and titular head of state. He is
believed to be ready to form a coalition government if Funcinpec, the party led
by his son, is victorious in the election.

Prince Norodom Ranariddh of the United Front for an Independent, Peaceful and
Cooperative Cambodia, known by the French acronym Funcinpec. The party has
called for the creation of a coalition government that could include the Khmer
Rouge. Its chief promise is an end to the 14-year civil war.

Hun Sen of the Cambodian People's Party, the newly created party of the
Vietnamese-installed Government. It has suggested that it would use victory at
the polls to destroy the Khmer Rouge once and for all.

Khieu Samphan, the nominal leader of the Khmer Rouge rebel movement, which
presided over the deaths of more than a million people in a brutal restructuring
of society in the 1970's. The Khmer Rouge have withdrawn from the peace process,
are boycotting the election and have threatened to sabotage the voting with
violence. (pg. 10)

TYPE: Chronology

                   Copyright 1993 The New York Times Company


                              182 of 312 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                   May 23, 1993, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

The Boomers' Babies

BYLINE: By Andrew Leonard;  Andrew Leonard is a staff writer for The San
Francisco Bay Guardian, a weekly newspaper.

SECTION: Section 7; Page 9; Column 1; Book Review Desk

LENGTH: 726 words



13TH GEN
Abort, Retry, Ignore, Fail?
By Neil Howe and Bill Strauss with Ian Williams.
Illustrated by R. J. Matson. 229 pp. New York:
Vintage Books. Paper, $10.

REVILED as apathetic, cynical and just plain dumb by both its elders and itself,
the generation born between 1961 and 1981 has, understandably enough, an
inferiority complex bordering on the pathological. But guess what? It's not
their fault. So write the baby boomers Neil Howe and Bill Strauss in "13th Gen."

After all, how can you blame a generation weaned on Vietnam, Watergate,
stagflation, oil embargoes, disco and Reaganomics for being just a trifle un
inspired? Consider the statistics presented in "13th Gen": child poverty,
employment, wages, home ownership, arrest records -- in every category, this
generation, the 13th since the American Revolution, is doing worse than the
generation that came before. Indeed, for the first time since the Civil War, the
authors of "13th Gen" keep reminding us, young people are unlikely to surpass
the affluence of their parents.

"13th Gen" seems to be intended as a nonfiction version of such twentysomething
texts as the film "Slacker" and the novel "Generation X." Striking a
self-consciously post-modern tone, the authors -- Mr. Howe is an economist and
historian, Mr. Strauss is the director of a political satire troupe called
Capitol Steps -- make their case by interpolating into their main text lots of
charts and graphs, margin-ensconced tidbits, cartoons by The New York Observer's
R. J. Matson, and even an intermittent dialogue with Ian Williams, a genuine
member of the "13th gen" and a computer hacker, who surfs into the text from
cyberspace.

But instead of coming across as an exciting hard-copy version of MTV designed to
seduce the minuscule attention spans of suburbia's mall-hopping "13ers," this
book's compendium of run-amok generalizations has all the flair and
provocativeness of a social studies textbook. The authors have managed to
capture the contrived glibness of post-modernism while missing just about all of
its essential irony.

Actually, "13th Gen" isn't so much a book about this generation at all as a
diatribe against the generation responsible for the breakdown of contemporary
America into what the authors regard as a fragmented, polarized, chaotic
society. All those parents who got divorced, encouraged "open" schooling and
neglected their children while indulging themselves are the real villains.

Mr. Howe and Mr. Strauss make sense when they decry previous generations for
standing by and watching, and often cheering, as their leaders plunged the
nation into a morass of "mounting budget deficits, unfunded benefit liabilities,
dwindling savings rates, lackluster R & D, crumbling highways and deepening
foreign import penetration." And they rightly point out that given those
realities, it is unsurprising that 13ers feel powerless and resentful. But as
the authors relentlessly attack the iniquitous "child-abusive culture" of the
1960's and 70's and exult in heaping insult after insult on their own generation
-- they caricature baby boomers as countercultural, long-haired, sex-obsessed
hedonists -- their real agenda begins to surface.

That agenda becomes clear in part of their wish list for how the 13th generation
may influence the future: "13ers will reverse the frenzied and centrifugal
cultural directions of their younger years. . . . They will clean up
entertainment, de-diversify the culture, reinvent core symbols of national
unity, reaffirm rituals of family and neighborhood bonding, and re-erect
barriers to cushion communities from unwanted upheaval."

Sounds like some people are feeling just a mite threatened by the churning wake
of what Douglas Coupland, the author of "Generation X," labeled "an accelerated
culture." De-diversify the culture? Tell that to the women, immigrants, members
of minority groups, lesbians, gay men and others whose laborious struggles were
in part responsible for all that "unwanted upheaval." Technology keeps on
chugging, the world keeps on shrinking, tensions keep on building and
deceleration looks a long way off. It's awfully hard to see how a generation
whose iconic symbols include punk skateboarders, tattooed and nose-ringed bike
messengers and rebellious computer hackers is going to start slowing it all
down.

LOAD-DATE: May 23, 1993

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Drawing

TYPE: Review

                   Copyright 1993 The New York Times Company


                              183 of 312 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                   May 23, 1993, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

Bosnia -- Their War, Not Ours

BYLINE: By Ronald Steel;  Ronald Steel is professor of international relations
at the University of Southern California.

SECTION: Section 4; Page 15; Column 1; Editorial Desk

LENGTH: 1137 words

DATELINE: LOS ANGELES


For months, the Clinton Administration has wobbled between pity for the civilian
victims of a merciless war and fear of plunging the nation into a conflict it
neither understands nor can resolve.

Under relentless pressure by influential legislators and journalists -- many of
whom insisted that we had no national interest in Vietnam or Kuwait -- to "do
something," the President prodded the European allies to join in military action
against the Bosnian Serbs. But European refusal has apparently now led to second
thoughts about the wisdom of such a policy.

Indeed, with the participation of Russia, which has a historic and geopolitical
concern with any conflict in the Balkans, a path may be opening that could
contain the violence and protect the Muslim minority. It is a striking sign of
how far we have left the cold war behind us that the U.S. has recognized that a
viable Yugoslav settlement requires Russian involvement.

Mr. Clinton is right to resist pressure to intervene militarily. Now he should
explain why this is the prudent, even the humane, course.

While the causes of this war are complex, the reasons for nonintervention are
not. First, one country did not invade another; this is a civil war among the
three ethnic groups of Bosnia, aided by their cousins in Serbia and Croatia. In
many ways it continues the Yugoslav civil war, suspended in 1945 by the iron
hand of Communism. It is intensified by borders that do not correspond to ethnic
realities.

Second, Bosnia-Herzegovina became independent in 1992 in a referendum bitterly
opposed by the Serbian one-third of the population and with only tactical
support by the Croatian one-fifth. It was hastily and irresponsibly granted
international recognition under Germany's prodding, as Croatia had earlier been,
despite the absence in both countries of real guarantees to Serbian minorities.
The survival of a state created under such conditions -- opposed by more than
half its citizens -- does not involve a high moral principle.

Third, while "ethnic cleansing" is an ugly policy of forced population transfer,
intensified by a brutality endemic to Balkan wars, it is not genocide and not
the Holocaust. The Holocaust was a systematic effort to eradicate a whole people
from the face of the earth. The Bosnian conflict is about the demand of ethnic
groups to control the territory they live in. It is too bad that Bosnia is not a
"gorgeous mosaic" (as Mayor David Dinkins would say) of happy tribes, but we
cannot create it for them.

Fourth, this war, like others, is the conduct of politics by other means. The
politics of the Bosnian Serbs and Croatians is to dismember the state and attach
the relevant parts to the motherland. The politics of the Muslims is to dominate
the state and get the Americans and Europeans to do for them what they cannot do
for themselves. The Bosnian foreign minister recently declared the intention of
the Muslim-dominated government to reclaim the entire territory by force.


That is the Muslims' political objective. What is ours? The victory of the
Muslim minority over the Serbs and Croatians of Bosnia who want to dismember the
state? Forcing Serbia and Croatia to accept a state whose own citizens do not?
Guaranteeing the present frontiers? Stopping the killing and then going away? Or
maintaining a permanent army of occupation, which will make us the target of all
three factions? No one is answering these questions. Yet we are being urged to
risk American arms and lives without a clue as to what kind of a settlement is
workable or worth the costs.

Fifth, "clean hands" intervention through U.S. air strikes or arming the Muslims
won't solve the problem. The former will kill innocent people and make little
impact on those who believe they are fighting for their ethnic survival. It
certainly will not yield any political settlement. Further, there is the problem
of where to draw the line. Do we bomb only Bosnian Serbs but not Bosnian
Croatians, who are doing their own "ethnic cleansing"? And if the Muslims gain
the upper hand and commit atrocities do we bomb them?

The other "clean" course, arming the Muslims, is worse. It will expand the
killing, since that is its purpose, fortify the Bosnian Croats, through whose
territory any overland arms shipments must pass, flood the area with Iranian and
Afghan "freedom fighters" trained in regional wars, quite possibly bring the
Serbian and Croatian armies into the fighting and perhaps touch off an Albanian
uprising in Kosovo. In an effort to "level the field" without dirtying our
hands, we could end up igniting war throughout the region.

Small wonder that the Europeans, who know more about Balkan wars than we do,
resist this "solution."

It is not the job of the U.S. to guarantee a state whose own citizens refuse to
live together. We must not send Americans to become targets of ethnic hatred in
Bosnia as we did so disastrously in Beirut and the British continue to do in
Northern Ireland. Ultimately Bosnia, which from the beginning was based on
wishful thinking and cynical manipulation by politicians, will have to be
partitioned: one part to Serbia, another to Croatia and a Muslim principality --
a Balkan Monaco or Lichtenstein -- centered on Sarajevo.

This is not an idealistic solution. It will require a transfer of populations
that will involve considerable hardship for many. Yet such transfers are not
unprecedented in modern European history. In 1945, millions of Germans were
expelled from Poland and Czechoslovakia to provide territorially secure states.
International guarantees should be extended to this Muslim enclave, either
through a small U.N. force or through NATO. It should not be protected by an
American army, just as the prestige of the U.S. must not be engaged in the
hopeless task of trying to enforce a settlement that the participants themselves
refuse to live with.

For too long, the President has allowed himself to be pushed by
interventionists, pummeled by headlines and TV images, reduced to evasions and
tossed about by events. What he can do is limited: intensify nonmilitary
pressures on the Serbs and Croatians, such as sanctions, and support a political
settlement that will end the slaughter, even if it does not resolve the dispute.

To move much beyond that would bitterly divide the nation, imperil his
Presidency and unleash furies in the Balkans of which the current war is only a
pale harbinger.

Morality and national security are not incompatible, but neither are they
self-evident. We look to the President to distinguish between the nation's needs
and the world's demands. The issue in Bosnia is not the President's courage --
ordering planes into battle is easy -- but his wisdom and sense of proportion.
More than the ethnic feuds of the Balkans hinge on that.

LOAD-DATE: May 23, 1993

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Op-Ed

                   Copyright 1993 The New York Times Company


                              184 of 312 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                   May 24, 1993, Monday, Late Edition - Final

Hanoi to Admit Companies

BYLINE: Reuters

SECTION: Section D; Page 2; Column 5; Financial Desk

LENGTH: 223 words

DATELINE: HANOI, May 23


Sev eral big United States companies Citibank, General Electric, Philip Morris
and I.B.M. -- will soon receive licenses to open offices in Vietnam, Government
officials said Friday.

Their applications are part of a growing wave of United States business
interests in Vietnam despite a United States Government economic embargo.

The officials also confirmed a report in the Vietnam Investment Review, a
business weekly, that the heavy-equipment maker Caterpillar Inc. had been
granted a license to open an office in Hanoi.

Citibank would be the second United States bank authorized to open a
representative office, after Bank of America. They join about 20 foreign banks
represented in Hanoi or Ho Chi Minh City, the former Saigon.

Vietnam, seeking to adapt its Communist economy to market principles, has
welcomed United States businesses despite the embargo, which it hopes President
Clinton will soon lift.

As a condition for dropping the sanctions, the United States has insisted on
maximum Vietnamese cooperation in helping to close the files on missing United
States servicemen from the Vietnam War.

Former President George Bush relaxed the embargo last year to allow United
States companies to open offices, make contacts and sign contracts to go into
effect if the ban was lifted. The embargo was imposed in 1964.

LOAD-DATE: May 24, 1993

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1993 The New York Times Company


                              185 of 312 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                   May 24, 1993, Monday, Late Edition - Final

In Yonkers, an Effort to Take Tarnish Off Badges

BYLINE: By JOSEPH BERGER,  Special to The New York Times

SECTION: Section B; Page 4; Column 1; Metropolitan Desk

LENGTH: 1301 words

DATELINE: YONKERS, May 18


Physically, this city's bunker-like police headquarters and its ornate City Hall
sit facing each other on separate grassy hills. But the character of the police
and of the city administration have never been as separate as the geography
might suggest.

Until recently, officials here say, promotions to detective or assignments to
leisurely beats could be lubricated by "kissing the ring" of the Democratic or
Republican leader with the most sway at City Hall. One Democratic boss held
court at restaurants like Pagliaccio's and Reggia Morelli, and candidates for
police captaincies regularly dropped by his table along with other job seekers.

"If you had a political godfather, you could get promotions faster,"
acknowledged Angelo R. Martinelli, who was Mayor from 1974 to 1979 and 1982 to
1987.

So those who try to explain why the Police Department has recently suffered a
series of chafing humiliations -- the bombing of the Police Commissioner's car,
charges that the police beat two handcuffed Irish immigrants, the fabrication of
an assault by a fictitious black man -- say that at least part of the answer
lies in the historic politics of City Hall and the way it undercut the morale of
the department.

Lingering Old-World Politics

As a rule, political interference "diminishes the discipline of a department" by
undermining the authority of top commanders. So say national experts in policing
like Jerry V. Wilson, Chief of the District of Columbia force from 1969 to 1974
and now chairman of the Crime Control Institute, a research group.

In Yonkers, in an effort to reassert authority and re-establish citizen trust,
Mayor Terence M. Zaleski and Police Commissioner Robert K. Olson announced today
that they would create an eight-member committee to review complaints of police
brutality and misconduct.

The gritty core of this city of 188,000 is more a slice of Brooklyn than the
sanitized ideal of the suburbs. Tall housing projects and smokestack factories
are hard by wood or brick row houses in blue-collar neighborhoods that are
ethnic stews of Polish, Arabs, Portuguese, Italians, blacks and Latin Americans.
The enclaves of Tudors and Colonials are remote both in distance and in their
influence on the city's soul.

'It's like Yugoslavia'

"It's like Yugoslavia," said Assemblyman Richard L. Brodsky of Greenburgh, who
once represented part of Yonkers. "It's tribal. There are fiefdoms. There are
warlords."

Municipal leaders often fight for the narrow interests of the 13 political wards
rather than for a wider civic vision that might, for example, endure the expense
of invigorating the decaying waterfront.

Yonkers, critics say, too often seeks to conserve a place that last existed in
the 1950's rather than adjust to the new realities of a city where 31 percent of
the people are Hispanic or black, where manufacturing is dying and the per
capita income is only $14,306, where crime and drugs are steady intruders.

The revelations about police perjury and brutality come as a scandal swirls
around the old city administration.

Michael Calvi, a former Planning Commissioner and a Republican ward leader, has
been indicted on Federal and state charges of taking or soliciting almost
$50,000 in bribes, some said to be rewards for steering contracts for the
renovation of the ancient jail. And The Yonkers Herald Statesman recently
disclosed that higher city officials are also being investigated for jail-linked
kickbacks.

An Attempt to Revamp

Partly because of periodic scandals, the citizens of Yonkers voted in 1990 to
revamp their government from one that was run by a city manager controlled by
the City Council to one that relied on a strong elected mayor with appointive
and budgetary powers. A city manager, many felt, had to make deals with Council
members just to survive.

As its first strong mayor, Yonkers voted in Mr. Zaleski, an earnest, 40-year-old
former science teacher and lawyer, after a three-way race that included Mr.
Martinelli. A Democrat, Mr. Zaleski had campaigned on a promise to run
government professionally, and oust much of the old Democratic machine that had
been led by Ralph Arred.

Mr. Zaleski's administration has not escaped the taint of bare-knuckles
politics. There has been a nasty battle over furtive tape recordings.

An Out-of-Town Influence

Even before Mr. Zaleski took office, the city, under the prodding of a report
critical of police management, brought in a police commissioner from out of
town, Mr. Olson, who was raised in Omaha and had been chief in Corpus Christi,
Tex. Though impressed by the dedication of many officers, Mr. Olson said he was
appalled by what he learned about the entanglement between City Hall, the
political parties and the 524-officer department.

Mr. Olson learned that he had 16 captains in a department that he said needed
10. His radio-dispatch room had seven lieutenants, most of them superfluous, he
said. He disbanded a six-officer special investigations unit because he could
not figure out what it did.

Mr. Olson has tried to shake up the department's fortress ethos, moving to
acquaint officers with the people on their beats and initiating training in
sensitivity to the city's newer cultures. But, he said, there lingers a
political culture where the police ask: "Who's watching out for us, who's going
to back us up?"

He blames that culture for the coverup engineered in March by a half-dozen
officers to mask a fistfight among their own. They attributed the injuries to an
imaginary black man.

A Measure of Praise

Mr. Olson, 47, a compactly built Vietnam veteran, has even told friends that he
believes the rigged grenade that destroyed his car and injured his leg last
Election Day may have been set by a disgruntled police officer.

Many Yonkers civic leaders believe the highly publicized incidents of late are
aberrations. "I think we've got a fine police force," said Leonard N. Spano, the
Republican leader since 1991. Mr. Martinelli, the former Mayor, said, "The
majority of the member of the Police Department are good, hard-working
citizens." And law-enforcement officials praise the Yonkers force as one of the
few in Westchester County that has the experience to tackle intricate crimes.

The plot that has been alleged in the Calvi case also bristles with the rough
ways of this city -- two meetings in the Yonkers Raceway Diner, where the
renovation of the city jail was discussed and $5,000 in cash was passed.

Mr. Calvi's lawyer, Richard Fulfree, maintains that his client is innocent and
that the alleged plot is a fabrication by a disappointed bidder with the
cooperation of a politically motivated Mayor Zaleski.

Extra Caution Required

Nevertheless, even Mr. Fulfree, who was the Corporation Counsel during the
1950's, concedes that politics here is played in the old-fashioned way. He says
he was almost dismissed five times as the city's lawyer because he refused to
drop cases or take other actions at the request of "the political bosses." When
he learned from his brother that there was a "contract out to kill me" by
organized-crime figures, he decided to quit.

As Mr. Zaleski and Mr. Olson go about trying to straighten out the corruption
they inherited, they tread carefully. This is a city where loyalty is still a
prized currency, one that smooths the running of the city itself. Mr. Martinelli
says the police have been demoralized by Mr. Zaleski's reneging on a promised 6
1/2 percent pay raise and Mr. Olson's failure to back up officers against
charges by outsiders.

Indeed, Mr. Zaleski conceded that changing the customary ways of doing business
in Yonkers required caution.

"This is an extraordinary difficult catharsis," he said. "We're trying to do a
remake of a city, a total remake."

LOAD-DATE: May 24, 1993

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1993 The New York Times Company


                              186 of 312 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                  May 25, 1993, Tuesday, Late Edition - Final

Innis Campaign for Mayor: A Quixotic Quest?

BYLINE: By JONATHAN P. HICKS

SECTION: Section B; Page 3; Column 1; Metropolitan Desk

LENGTH: 1439 words


In his quixotic candidacy for mayor of New York City, even Roy E. Innis himself
reluctantly acknowledges what many political pundits take as a forgone
conclusion: that his chances of being elected are slim. But that appears to
matter very little to the 58-year-old Mr. Innis, who seems to thrive on whatever
attention he can get in a candidacy that is as unconventional as its candidate.

He has raised little money and his campaign for the Democratic nomination
operates on a shoestring. But what matters most, Mr. Innis says, is that his
views are now getting an airing. "My aim is to give a voice to the silent
majority in both the white and black communities," Mr. Innis said. "I want to
give them a focal point to rally around. I bring to this campaign the passion,
skills and personality of leadership."

His critics contend that his candidacy is another attempt, bereft of a credible
philosophical basis, to gain the spotlight, and solidifies his position as an
opportunist and one of the city's most mercurial personalities.

Once an Independent

If nothing else, Roy Innis is a study in incongruity. He heads the Congress of
Racial Equality, a 51-year-old civil rights organization. But Mr. Innis, a
registered Democrat since the mid-1980's -- and an independent before that --
has made a point of courting leaders of the Republican Party. And now he is
running to unseat a fellow Democrat, David N. Dinkins, the first black mayor New
York has had.

But the constraints of that campaign, pitting him against Mr. Dinkins and City
Council President Andrew J. Stein, have forced him to try to hone his message to
a cohesive formula for facing the issues.

Mr. Innis calls for cutting city spending by at least 5 percent to balance the
budget. And in a constantly repeated theme, he wants to substantially reduce the
number of parking tickets issued throughout the city. "Most of the cars that are
towed are of people of limited means," he said.

On homelessness, Mr. Innis says he would separate "the indolent from the
indigent." People who truly need help, like poor mothers, would get it. But
panhandlers would be arrested.

'A Clear Choice'

Mr. Innis, who calls Mr. Dinkins "not a bad man but a bad leader," criticized
the Mayor for "caving in to pressure groups and being unable to deal with
pressure from his own race."

Since his earliest days in the civil rights movement, Mr. Innis has popped into
the public consciousness in glaring ways. Whether through his televised scuffle
with the Rev. Al Sharpton in 1988 on the Morton Downey Jr. program or his call
to black Vietnam War veterans in the 1970's to assist anti-Communist forces in
Angola Mr. Innis's shoot-from-the-hip oratory has made him decidedly
controversial.

The civil rights group he heads, the Congress of Racial Equality, has also been
a lightning rod for controversy, both for its sharp philosophical shifts and
because of questions about its finances and fund-raising.

And he has adopted positions that have made him the darling of conservative
talk-show hosts and a villain to other civil rights leaders. He testified in
favor of Robert H. Bork when he was nominated to the Supreme Court, he offered
passionate support to Bernhard H. Goetz, the subway gunman, and he is a board
member of the National Rifle Association.

Campaigning is clearly something Mr. Innis relishes. He bounces from one event
to another, radiant at the sight of a television camera or microphone. He hugs
and kisses people readily, whether the man on the street or a political insider.
A man with an affinity for both boxing and opera, he is always ready, no matter
the subject, to provide a perspective to anyone who will listen. Despite the
stern image he has developed from his numerous television appearances, Mr. Innis
is quick to laugh and crack a joke, often at his own expense.

'More Than Once'

The one topic he is unwilling to discuss is his family. He will say only that he
is now married, declining to disclose his wife's name or any information about
her. When asked how many times he has been married, he said only: "More than
once and fewer times than Elizabeth Taylor."

Over the course of several relationships, Mr. Innis has had a total of 10
children. Two of his sons were killed -- one at age 13 in 1968 and another at
age 26 in 1982 -- by black assailants. And another son was stabbed by a group of
youths in 1981 at age 13. He survived the attack.

Mr. Innis said the violence affecting his sons profoundly affected his views on
public policy. "It sharpened my focus on where the primary danger for black
children lies," he said. "I learned that black parents should stop being
paranoid about the racism outside -- because racism has been defeated
substantially -- and look more closely at the enemy within."

Roy Emil Alfredo Innis was born in St. Croix in the Virgin Islands. His father
was a police officer and his mother a homemaker. His father died when Mr. Innis
was 6, and his mother moved the family to New York when he was 13, settling in
Harlem. After graduating from Stuyvesant High School, he served in the Army and
then entered City College, where he earned a degree in chemistry in 1958.

He worked in pharmaceutical research for the Richardson-Merrell Corporation in
the division that made Vicks cough products and went on to work in medical
research at Montefiore Hospital in the Bronx in 1960.

Worked His Way Up

An infatuation with a woman who worked for CORE led him to the civil rights
organization. "The only way I could see her was to go to the CORE offices, so I
started going," he said. Mr. Innis began overhearing political discussions among
CORE officials, and eventually he joined and worked his way up through the
leadership.

Founded as an interracial, nonviolent civil rights organization, CORE found
itself under attack in the late 1960's by many of its black members for being
too accommodationist. Mr. Innis, a passionate disciple of Marcus Garvey,
advocated a decidedly more black-nationalist position. As an assistant to CORE's
chairman, Floyd McKissick, he traveled the country working with the
organization's chapters and forging political alliances within the local
branches. In 1968, he was elected chairman.

It was his stewardship of CORE that began much of the controversy surrounding
Mr. Innis. He moved quickly to change the direction of the organization,
striking references to nonviolence and being interracial from its bylaws. Soon
thereafter, national conventions in which delegates elected officers ceased, and
critics charged that Mr. Innis's leadership was becoming more autocratic.

By the late 1970's, Mr. Innis's views began to shift. He became decidedly more
conservative in his views and began forging relationships with figures on
opposite poles from the civil rights community.

Then came questions about the organization's fund-raising practices. In 1981,
New York State accused CORE of illegal fund-raising activities, charging it with
misusing $500,000 and misrepresenting itself in soliciting contributions. CORE
agreed to a settlement in 1981 under which Mr. Innis would admit no wrongdoing
but contribute $35,000 to the organization over three years.

Today, CORE is a substantially smaller organization and Mr. Innis is less than
specific when discussing the number of chapters. "We have what could pass for
100 chapters in different degrees of activities," Mr. Innis said, although he
claims to have a membership of 100,000.

In 1986, he ran for Congress against Representative Major R. Owens in Brooklyn,
but lost by a 3-to-1 margin.

To his allies, who range from Dan Quayle to such New York figures as Rabbi Avi
Weiss, national president of the Coalition for Jewish Concerns, and Phil Caruso,
head of the Patrolmen's Benevolent Association, Mr. Innis is a clear-thinking
champion of common sense.

But many of his harshest critics are black people. Calvin O. Butts 3d, the
pastor of the Abyssinian Baptist Church in Harlem, said he once had high regard
for Mr. Innis because of his advocacy of black Americans' creating ties with
Africa. "But I don't know what happened to him," Mr. Butts said. "I think I
reflect the opinion of a lot of the black community, who are just sick of him."

In a recent poll by The New York Times and WCBS-TV, Mr. Innis was viewed
unfavorably by 53 percent of the black respondents, compared with 22 percent of
the white respondents who viewed him unfavorably.

Mr. Innis attributes the disparity to what he calls the "distortion of my
positions by the media."

"That," he said, "will clear up as the campaign goes on."

NAME: Roy E. Innis

LOAD-DATE: May 25, 1993

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo: "I bring to this campaign the passion, skills and personality of
leadership," said Roy E. Innis. But the CORE leader's critics contend that his
mayoral campaign is something less lofty than that. (Ozier Muhammad/The New York
Times)

TYPE: Biography

                   Copyright 1993 The New York Times Company


                              187 of 312 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                  May 25, 1993, Tuesday, Late Edition - Final

Top Prize at Cannes Is Shared

BYLINE: By VINCENT CANBY,  Special to The New York Times

SECTION: Section C; Page 13; Column 2; Cultural Desk

LENGTH: 752 words

DATELINE: CANNES, France, May 24


As if unable to make up its mind, the jury at the 46th Cannes International Film
Festival tonight split the Palme d'Or, the festival's top prize, between two
films: "The Piano," Jane Campion's romantic comedy set in New Zealand in the
1850's, and "Farewell to My Concubine," Chen Kaige's epic covering approximately
50 years of recent Chinese political and cultural history.

The awards were presented in the Festival Palace at closing ceremonies with
Jeanne Moreau as the host.

Although the Palme d'Or has been shared in the past, this year's jury set two
precedents. This is the first time the Palme d'Or has gone to either a woman or
a Chinese film maker. Holly Hunter, the American star of "The Piano," received
the award as best actress for her performance as a young Scots widow who goes to
New Zealand to marry a man she doesn't know.

The best-director prize went to Mike Leigh, the English film maker, for "Naked,"
a bitter, brutal film about emotional disconnection in today's England. David
Thewlis, the star of "Naked," was named best actor for his performance as the
film's sardonic central character.

The Jury's Grand Prize, which is, in effect, the festival's second prize, was
presented to Wim Wenders for his German entry, "Far Away, So Close," which
brings back the characters introduced in his "Wings of Desire." He received the
1986 Cannes award as best director for the earlier film.

The Kinds of Surprise

In this fashion this year's international jury, headed by Louis Malle, the
French director, managed to cite each of the four films that had been rumored to
be the leading competitors for major prizes. The surprise tonight was not in the
names of the winners but in the specific awards they received. The jury also
managed to give recognition to two films that were not shown until the weekend
and about which there were no rumors at all.

The Jury Prize, which is the festival's third prize and is given only at the
jury's discretion, was shared by two popular entries: Ken Loach's English
"Raining Stones," a forlorn yet sometimes very funny tale of an out-of-work
Manchester husband and father who becomes involved with loan sharks, and Hou
Hsiao-hsien's "Puppet Master," a beautiful, austere Taiwanese film that
crosscuts between interviews with Tien Lu Li, an 85-year-old actor and
puppeteer, and scenes from his life recreated by actors.

The Camera d'Or, presented each year to the best first feature, went to Tran Anh
Hung's "Scent of Green Papaya," a leisurely memoir about growing up in Vietnam
in the 1950's. Though the film has sometimes been identified as Vietnamese, it
is French, having been shot entirely in a big, very authentic-looking set inside
a movie studio in Paris. Mr. Tran, who is Vietnamese, lives in France.

From South Africa

The Camera d'Or jury, headed by Micheline Presle, the actress, also voted a
special mention to Elaine Proctor's "Friends" from South Africa. It is a
melodrama about the close relationship of three young women, one English, one an
Afrikaner and one a black South African.

The Palme d'Or for best short subject was won by Jim Jarmusch, the American film
maker better known for his features ("Stranger Than Paradise," "Night on Earth,"
among others). His "Coffee and Cigarettes (Somewhere in California)" is a kind
of 12-minute black-and-white takeoff on "My Dinner With Andre." Tom Waites and
Iggy Pop sit drinking and smoking in a bar and talk about roadside surgery,
Abbott and Costello and other arcane matters.

The prize for best technical achievement in images and sound was shared by Jean
Gargonne and Vincent Arnardi for their work on the French "Mazeppa," directed by
a new film maker named Bartabas. The same award for a short subject went to
Grant Lahood of New Zealand for "The Singing Trophy."

In addition to winning the Palme d'Or, "Farewell to My Concubine" received the
International Critics' Prize for "its incisive analysis of the political and
cultural history of China and for its brilliant combination of the spectacular
and the intimate."

Though there were some boos when Mr. Wenders's award was announced early in the
ceremonies, the audience at the Festival Palace was well behaved. Sam Neill, one
of the star's of "The Piano," accepted the Palme d'Or on behalf of Ms. Campion,
who is seven and a half months' pregnant and returned to Australia on Friday.
The evening ended with the out-of-competition screening of "Toxic Affair," a new
French film starring Isabelle Adjani.

LOAD-DATE: May 25, 1993

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo: The Cannes International Film Festival awarded its top prize
yesterday to two films. Holly Hunter, left, was named best actress for "The
Piano"; Sam Neill, center, accepted the Palme d'Or for Jane Campion, the
director. Chen Kaige, right, who directed "Farewell to My Concubine," accepted
his own award. (Associated Press)

                   Copyright 1993 The New York Times Company


                              188 of 312 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                  May 27, 1993, Thursday, Late Edition - Final

NEWS SUMMARY

SECTION: Section A; Page 2; Column 5; Metropolitan Desk

LENGTH: 1032 words



International A3-15

GERMANY ACTS ON ASYLUM LAW
The lower house of Germany's Parliament agreed to tighten the nation's asylum
law, barring entry to thousands of foreigners who arrive each week to seek
asylum. Approval in the upper house of the Parliament is considered certain.  A1


U.S. SEEKS TO ISOLATE IRAN
The Clinton Administration is seeking to weaken Iran by persuading reluctant
allies to cut off loans, investment and arms sales to what American officials
regard as a permanently hostile Government.  A1
King Hussein of Jordan has openly broken with Iraq.  A15



SIHANOUK REJECTS KHMER ROUGE
Prince Norodom Sihanouk, Cambodia's head of state, said he had abandoned plans
to set up a coalition government that included the Khmer Rouge guerrillas.  A3

PAKISTAN RESTORES PREMIER
Pakistan's Supreme Court overturned a presidential order dismissing the
Government of Prime Minister Nawaz Sharif, the first time in the country's
46-year history that a civilian government had been ordered restored to power.
A3

U.S. MAY ENTICE NORTH KOREA
Washington said it was prepared to make concessions to North Korea if it agreed
to rejoin a treaty requiring the Communist Government to allow inspection of its
nuclear sites.  A6

CHINA OFFERS U.S. OLIVE BRANCH
China freed a prominent democracy advocate who had spent the last 12 years in
solitary, and the move appeared to be an olive branch to President Clinton just
before he decides on extending trade benefits.  A5

GUATEMALA CHIEF UNDER ATTACK
The President of Guatemala's seizure of authoritarian powers came under widening
attack by politicians and former military leaders and was declared null by the
country's constitutional court.  A7

Brazil's President is trying to reduce inflation with a Cabinet shuffle.  A9

MANDELA GROUP IS UNDETERRED
The African National Congress said it would press ahead with talks on ending
white rule in South Africa, despite the widespread arrests of black
nationalists.  A11

American blacks and Africans are seeking stronger cooperation.  A10

NATO FAILS TO BACK BOSNIA PLAN
NATO defense ministers failed to endorse a plan to create six safe enclaves for
Bosnian Muslims. Britain, supported by the U.S., pressed for a communique
expressing approval, but Germany balked.  A12

Bosnia's President wants a U.N. plan that rolls back Serbian gains.  A12

AN ARMENIA-AZERBAIJAN ACCORD
Armenia and Azerbaijan agreed to a plan to end five years of war over
Nagorno-Karabakh, a mostly Armenian area in Azerbaijan.  A14

Tokyo Journal: Seeking victory in the court of history.  A4

National A16-24, B9

CLINTON LOBBIES FOR BUDGET
President Clinton, Cabinet members and Congressional supporters spent the day
trying to persuade uncommitted House Democrats to vote for his budget bill this
afternoon.  A1

Lawmakers were in the back room preparing for the budget vote.  A22

FIRST LADY ATTACKS 'PROFITEERS'
Hillary Rodham Clinton offered a preview of her sales style for the new
health-care plan in a speech assailing industry members who have "made too much
money." A1

A cigarette tax could raise millions for health care.  A20

FIGHTING BACK FOR A BEST FRIEND
White House memo: Harry Thomason and Linda Bloodworth-Thomason are taking the
blame for damage to the image of their "best friend," President Clinton.  A1

COURT SHOWS LOVE OF SECRECY
News analysis: The most striking aspect of the release of Justice Thurgood
Marshall's papers is the anguish it has caused the members of the Supreme Court.
A1

LIBRARIAN STANDS HIS GROUND
The Librarian of Congress defended his decision to open Thurgood Marshall's
papers.  A24

2 FINALISTS FOR HIGH COURT
White House aides have narrowed their search for a Supreme Court Justice to two
Federal judges from New England.  A1

FOUND: EDGE OF SOLAR SYSTEM
Two American spacecraft have found the first physical evidence of the boundary
between the solar system and interstellar space.  A1

SAILOR EXPLAINS BEATING DEATH
Airman Terry Helvey told a military court that a shipmate's homosexuality was
not the reason he beat the man to death.  A16

LIFE IN TORNADO ALLEY
Those who live in the heart of "Tornado Alley" in Oklahoma agree on two things:
another twister will eventually appear, and there's no point worrying about it.
A16

The President will speak at the Vietnam Memorial on Monday.  A23

A Chilean and Teledyne were indicted in the sale of arms to Iraq.  A20

Metro Digest B1

Business Digest D1

Home Section C1-11

Here comes summer. Lighten
 up.  C1

Away from home with Anita
Roddick.  C1

"Instant" gardens with a wild
look.  C1

Hiring a home contractor.  C2

Relax! There's still time to shop for a summer camp.  C2

Currents C3

Parent & Child C11

Arts/Entertainment C12-20

On all the waffling at Cannes.  C13

A huge job vacancy at the International Center of Photography.  C13

Theater: "Sharon." C17

Film: "Children of Fate." C13

Music: Bang on a Can.  C13

Dance: By Balanchine.  C16

Julie Kent as head swan.  C20

Books: Adapting to retirement.  C18

Television: Home Video C12

More "Rumpole of the Bailey." C18

World money lenders.  C18

Sports B10-16

Baseball: Mets rally to beat
 Phils.  B11

Orioles defeat Yanks.  B13

Basketball: Just where are the Bulls?  B11

Knicks confident heading into Game 3.  B11

Column: Anderson on Michael Jordan.  B11

Obituaries D27

Joseph Pulitzer Jr., chairman of the Pulitzer Publishing Company.

Editorials/Op-Ed A26-27

Editorials

Can the Democrats govern?

Guatemala's do-it-yourself coup.

Wheels and deals in New Jersey.

Topics: Kantor's mystery guests.

Letters

William Safire: The lemonade stand.

Crystal Nix and Sheryll D. Cashin:
Library of Congress or a scandal?

Robert M. Solow and James Tobin: Down to the wire on the deficit.

Chronicle B6

Bridge C12

Crossword C14

LOAD-DATE: May 27, 1993

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Summary

                   Copyright 1993 The New York Times Company


                              189 of 312 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                  May 27, 1993, Thursday, Late Edition - Final

Joseph Pulitzer Jr. Is Dead at 80; Publisher Was Avid Art Collector

BYLINE: By DENNIS HEVESI

SECTION: Section D; Page 27; Column 1; National Desk

LENGTH: 1074 words


Joseph Pulitzer Jr., chairman of the Pulitzer Publishing Company and owner of
one of the world's finest collections of modern art, died yesterday at his home
in the Central West End of St. Louis. He was 80.

Mr. Pulitzer died of colon cancer, the publishing company said in a news
release.

Tall, elegant and reserved, Mr. Pulitzer had, for the last seven years, served
primarily as chairman of Pulitzer Publishing, which owns three newspapers, seven
television stations and two radio stations. He had led Pulitzer Publishing and
its flagship publication, The St. Louis Post-Dispatch, for 38 years, serving for
31 of those years as editor and publisher of the newspaper.

Mr. Pulitzer relinquished his positions with the paper in 1986 to devote his
attention to the company, which went public that year. From 1955 to 1986, he
served as chairman of the board of the Pulitzer Prizes, the highest awards in
journalism, which were established by his grandfather.

Avid Collector of Art

Though principally identified with journalism, Mr. Pulitzer was widely
recognized for the art collection he began as a student at Harvard University, a
collection that ultimately became one of the most important and generously
shared in the world.

Art News magazine called Mr. Pulitzer's acquisitions "one of the most brilliant
and comprehensive collections of modern art in the country," and John Russell of
The New York Times described it as "one of the most discriminating" in the
nation, saying it was "as remarkable for range as for quality."

Born on May 13, 1913, Mr. Pulitzer was baptized in the Episcopal Church as
Joseph Pulitzer 3d, but he later adopted the junior designation, which his
father had dropped after the death of the first Joseph Pulitzer.

Mr. Pulitzer graduated from St. Mark's School in Southborough, Mass., in 1932,
and went on to earn his bachelor's degree in fine art from Harvard in 1936. His
newspaper career began with a stint as a cub reporter for The San Francisco News
in 1935, the summer before his senior year at Harvard. After graduating, he
joined The Post-Dispatch news staff and helped cover the Roosevelt-Landon
campaign of 1936.

'Illuminate Dark Places'

Over the next 20 years, he worked in every department of the paper, including
periods as editor of the daily magazine and editor of the Sunday rotogravure, or
pictorial. In 1948, he became associate editor, a position he held until he
became editor and publisher on the father's death in 1955.

In an editorial he wrote on the day he took over the paper, a week after his
father's death, Mr. Pulitzer pledged that The Post-Dispatch would maintain its
tradition as one of the nation's great crusading papers. "We will not only
report the day's news but illuminate dark places, and, with a deep sense of
responsibility, interpret these troublous times," he wrote.

At the time, besides the newspaper, Pulitzer holdings included only a radio and
television station in St. Louis. But under Joseph Jr.'s guidance, the company
bought The Arizona Daily Star in Tucson and The Southtown Economist in Chicago,
six other television stations and another radio station.

In 1986, the Pulitzer company faced its greatest financial challenge. It had
accrued a large debt, and a group of dissident relatives who owned stock in the
privately owned company found a buyer, A. Alfred Taubman, a Michigan real estate
developer, who offered $625 million for the company. The company successfully
resisted the takeover bid, going public with the stock in order to offset its
debt.

In 1989, the company faced another challenge when Ralph Ingersoll 2d began
publishing The St. Louis Sun. Although that newspaper failed after only seven
months, its presence spurred the staid Post-Dispatch to improve its coverage.

A Litany of Firsts

During Mr. Pulitzer's tenure as editor, The Post-Dispatch won five Pulitzers,
including prizes for commentary and editorial cartooning. In 1987, Mr. Pulitzer
received a special citation from the Pulitzer Prize board, citing his
"extraordinary services to American journalism and letters."

The Post-Dispatch was one of the first newspapers in the country to oppose the
war in Vietnam, and it was also one of the first to publish excerpts from the
Pentagon Papers, the secret history of the war.

It was also the first paper in the country to replace the old letter-press
printing process with offset cold-type printing, which allowed high-quality
color printing. "Color was of special interest to an art connoisseur like Mr.
Pulitzer," the company's statement yesterday said, "and at his insistence The
Post-Dispatch moved early into color publication."

Hobby Became a Passion

Mr. Pulitzer's art collecting began simply enough in 1936 when as an
undergraduate he bought Modigliani's "Elvira Resting at a Table." Three years
later, at an auction in Lucerne, Switzerland, he bought "Bathers With a Turtle,"
by Matisse for $2,400, a piece that is now easily worth 10,000 times that
amount.

Mr. Pulitzer's father had no enthusiasm for modern art and sometimes took his
friends into his son's room to ridicule the purchases. "He was convinced that I
had been fleeced by shrewd and unscrupulous New York dealers," Mr. Pulitzer said
in a speech earlier this year.

Later, when his father realized the value of his collection and asked where he
learned so much about art, Mr. Pulitzer told him that the knowledge had been
acquired at Harvard and that the elder Pulitzer had footed the bill.

The Pulitzer Collection came to include 86 pieces, all of which were shown at
the Fogg Art Museum in Cambridge, Mass., in 1988. The collection could have
included Picasso's seminal work "Demoiselles d'Avignon," but Mr. Pulitzer had
bought it before World War II and then donated it to the Museum of Modern Art.

Mr. Pulitzer always insisted on anonymity when lending his works to museums.

His collection included Vuillard's "Self Portrait," and "Head of a Man" by
Degas, one of Monet's "Water Lilies," as well as works by Braque, Picasso and
Miro.

Mr. Pulitzer's first wife, Louise Vauclain, died in 1968. He married again in
1973, to the former Emily S. Rauh, who at the time was curator of the St. Louis
Art Museum.

He is survived by his son, Joseph Pulitzer 4th; his half brother, Michael of St.
Louis, two sisters, Kate Davis Quesada of Hobe Sound, Fla., and Elinor
Hempelmann of Rochester, and four grandchildren.


LOAD-DATE: May 27, 1993

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo: Joseph Pulitzer Jr. (Bill Cunningham, 1987)

TYPE: Obituary (Obit); Biography

                   Copyright 1993 The New York Times Company


                              190 of 312 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                  May 27, 1993, Thursday, Late Edition - Final

Clinton to Go to Vietnam Memorial Despite Protest

BYLINE: By RICHARD L. BERKE,  Special to The New York Times

SECTION: Section A; Page 23; Column 1; National Desk

LENGTH: 645 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, May 26


The White House announced today that President Clinton would deliver remarks at
the Vietnam Veterans Memorial on Monday, despite the risk that the visit could
revive the debate over his draft record, which dogged his campaign.

Administration officials said the White House had received postcards from
veterans as part of what the officials called an organized protest. The veterans
charged that Mr. Clinton would "engage in hypocrisy" if he visited the memorial.

But the officials said it was important for the President to go forward with his
plans for Memorial Day, which also include a breakfast with veterans and a
wreath-laying ceremony at the Arlington National Cemetery.

"He's aware of the protests, of course," said Dee Dee Myers, the White House
press secretary.

George Stephanopoulos, the White House communications director, said: "He is the
President of all the people. He believes it's important to show his respect for
the veterans who served in all our wars, and that's exactly why he's going to
go."

Some White House officials said Mr. Clinton had decided to make the visit to
silence public doubts about his mettle as Commander in Chief and to divert
attention from the controversies that had consumed the White House for several
days.

Distractions Keep Mounting

But as Mr. Clinton sought to make an all-out push in the House for his economic
program today, the White House faced a fresh round of distractions: more
assaults by Ross Perot, questions about Peter Tarnoff, the Under Secretary of
State for Political Affairs, who suggested that the United States might have to
retreat from its past leadership role, and even complaints by a New Hampshire
news anchor, who said she had been asked to apply makeup to the President's face
before she interviewed him.

Mr. Perot, in a television interview taped on Tuesday, attacked Mr. Clinton with
relish about the dismissal of the White House travel staff and about the
expensive haircut that the President got aboard Air Force One as the plane sat
on the runway at Los Angeles International Airport last week.

"What we have here is a person who does not have the background or experience
for the most difficult job in the world, which we, the American people, have
elected him to fill," Mr. Perot said. "If you were interviewing him for your
company, and you had a medium-sized company, you wouldn't consider giving him a
job anywhere above middle management."

In an Interview for the PBS program "Talking with David Frost," Mr. Perot said
the President was "still doing things the Arkansas way, like trying to give the
travel business as a political payoff."

Leadership 'Undiminished'

Asked to respond, Mr. Clinton said, "Well, we know he doesn't like my state, but
he spent several million dollars to bad-mouth it last year, but that doesn't
have much to do with America."

In another effort to tamp down potentially damaging comments, Secretary of State
Warren Christopher distanced the Administration from Mr. Tarnoff's assertions
about a weakened leadership role for this country. Mr. Tarnoff had spoken to
reporters at a Tuesday lunch on background, a common Washington practice meaning
they had agreed to identify him only as a senior official. No reporter from The
New York Times attended the lunch, but the source of the remark became known
around Washington within hours.

"I think the U.S. responsibility for leadership is undiminished in this new
post-cold-war period," Mr. Christopher said in an interview today, adding that
the aide's remarks were "inconsistent with my policy and the President's
policy."

Ms. Myers also said that White House officials had apologized to Nanette Hansen,
the anchorwoman of WMUR-TV in Manchester, N.H.. She said she had been asked by a
White House aide to apply the President's makeup because no make-up person was
available.

LOAD-DATE: May 27, 1993

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1993 The New York Times Company


                              191 of 312 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                  May 27, 1993, Thursday, Late Edition - Final

A Photo Center With a Huge Job Vacancy

BYLINE: By CHARLES HAGEN

SECTION: Section C; Page 13; Column 1; Cultural Desk

LENGTH: 1441 words


Although not wholly unexpected, Cornell Capa's announcement last week that he
intended to step down as the director of the International Center of Photography
in June 1994 took many people by surprise. The ebullient Mr. Capa, who founded
the center in 1974 and has been as closely identified with it as Joseph Papp was
with the New York Shakespeare Festival, recently turned 75, and he remains a
seemingly tireless advocate for photography.

In an interview shortly before his announcement, though, Mr. Capa said he had
grown weary of the administrative and fund-raising aspects of his job and was
resigning to spend more time with his wife, Edie.

His departure will close another chapter in his own long and colorful career,
which began in the 1930's in Paris, where he made prints for his brother, the
celebrated photojournalist Robert Capa. But it also signals the beginning of
what may be a difficult transition for the center, which must find a director
resourceful enough to build on Mr. Capa's considerable achievements while moving
the institution beyond his very long shadow. Indeed, it is a problem not unlike
that faced by the Shakespeare Festival, which has gone through unsettled times
since Papp's death.

Mr. Capa, however, is very much alive and is in every way the International
Center of Photography's driving force. Under his leadership the center has grown
into one of the foremost photography institutions in the country, if not the
world. With a staff of 65 and an annual budget of $5.7 million, it offers major
exhibitions both in its main building, a Georgian-style mansion on Fifth Avenue
at 94th Street, and at I.C.P. Midtown, on the Avenue of the Americas at 43d
Street. It attracts over 250,000 people a year to its programs and has built a
permanent collection of more than 25,000 prints.

All in all, Mr. Capa seems to be leaving his successor a stable institution. The
center has weathered the recession and has balanced its budget for the last 10
years. Moreover, it owns its main building outright and has a lease from the
Eastman Kodak Company to rent its midtown space until 1999 for a dollar a year.

In some ways Mr. Capa is like a marvelous chef, with the center his ultimate
souffle. "For 18 years I could do what I wanted," Mr. Capa said. "The shape of
the programming, the exhibitions -- it's mine."

A very real question, though, is whether the next director will be able to keep
this rich concoction on the rise. The center has no endowment and every year
must raise nearly half its budget from corporate and individual sources,
including American Express, Chase Manhattan Bank and Mobil.

The center also faces increased competition from other institutions in the city.
When Mr. Capa began his venture, only the Museum of Modern Art, among the city's
major museums, showed much interest in photography. But in recent months both
the Whitney and the Guggenheim museums have begun to collect and exhibit
photographs, joining the Modern and a revitalized program at the Metropolitan
Museum of Art.

"With glamorous institutions like the Met and the Guggenheim getting involved in
photography," Mr. Capa said, the center faces heavy competition for attention
and support. "We have to be as attractive as they are, and that's difficult.
What is our niche?"

With Mr. Capa's departure, the center will have to confront questions about its
very identity. The center presents an eclectic mix of exhibitions, but it has
always given special emphasis to documentary and commercial photography. In the
last two years it has exhibited Roman Vishniac's photographs of Jews in Eastern
Europe before World War II and a retrospective of work by Dmitri Baltermants,
the Russian photojournalist, as well as exhibits by the portraitist Yousuf
Karsh, by Sheila Metzner and Joyce Tenneson, the fashion photographers, and by
Lois Greenfield, the dance photographer.

This emphasis on presenting photography that does not fit into current
definitions of art reflects Mr. Capa's own prejudices. "I don't like the gallery
art of photography as I see it now," he said. "The photography I'm interested in
is urgent. It's humanistic and concerned."

Nevertheless, other staff members have organized shows that feature work by a
new generation of art photographers. "Special Collections," shown last year,
included work by John Baldessari, Christian Boltanski and other well-known
artists; "Commodity Image," at I.C.P. Midtown through July 18, presents photos
by such 80's gallery stars as Cindy Sherman, Richard Prince and Barbara Kruger.

Exhibitions of this sort are more in keeping with shows put on by the Modern,
the Met and the Whitney, which tend to view photography as part of contemporary
art. Depending on one's point of view, I.C.P.'s eclectic programs can be seen as
a celebration of photography's diversity or as a confused attempt to blend
essentially incompatible directions in the field.

A basic question the center has never adequately addressed, though, is whether
exhibitions are the most appropriate form in which to present journalistic or
commercial photographs. Out of the context of magazine layouts and
advertisements, they risk being seen simply as esthetic objects, with their
social message obscured.

The immediate task facing the center is to find someone to fill Mr. Capa's
capacious shoes. Many of the decisions in that process will fall to the board,
which has been headed since 1989 by Jill Rose, a photography collector and the
wife of Marshall Rose, the chairman of the New York Public Library. Not
surprisingly, though, Mr. Capa himself will have a big say in choosing his
successor. At its meeting last week the board formed a search committee, with
Mr. Capa and Mrs. Rose among its members. A prime criterion in selecting a new
director, Mr. Capa said, will be to find "someone who can operate by the seat of
his or her pants, someone capable of showing us how to live in the new world" in
which photography finds itself today.

Both Mr. Capa and Mrs. Rose expressed their determination to continue the
center's focus on documentary photography. That emphasis, Mrs. Rose said, is
"the concept that we began with and that sets us apart from other institutions."

In some ways the center can be seen as the ultimate proof of Mr. Capa's devotion
to his brother. In 1954 Robert Capa was killed while on assignment in Vietnam.
"From that day," Mr. Capa said, "I was haunted by the question of what happens
to the work a photographer leaves behind, by how to make the work stay alive."

Born into a middle-class Budapest family, the brothers were remarkably close, to
the point of sharing the same pseudonym. After following his brother to Paris in
1936 Mr. Capa dropped the family name, Friedmann, and adopted his brother's new
last name, which was based on the name of the movie director Frank Capra.

Mr. Capa also followed his brother into photography, printing for him in Paris
and New York, and then picking up a camera himself. He worked as a staff
photographer for Life magazine from 1946 until 1954, when he joined Magnum, the
photojournalists' cooperative. He continued to shoot assignments around the
world until founding I.C.P. in 1974.

But the question of how to preserve the images of his brother and other
photographers remained. In 1966 Mr. Capa set up the International Fund for
Concerned Photography to promote the work of photojournalists and documentary
photographers, and by the early 1970's he had begun to look for a permanent base
for his activities in support of photography that is characterized, as he termed
it, by a "concern for mankind."

When a landmark red-brick Fifth Avenue mansion built in 1915 for Willard
Straight, the founder of The New Republic, became available in 1974, Mr. Capa
was able to scrape together a down payment on the bargain-basement purchase
price of $550,000.

The new institution opened that November amid a splash of publicity, including a
Talk of the Town item in The New Yorker written by Jacqueline Onassis, whom Mr.
Capa had photographed in the 1960's and described as "a very good neighbor."
With that glitzy send-off, I.C.P. was well launched into the often tricky world
of New York museums.

The thought that the center might now have to become an institution, with the
stability and staidness that the term implies, does not sit well with Mr. Capa.
"I'm afraid it may be true," he said. "But I'll do my best not to let it
happen."

"We have to remain different," Mr. Capa added. "We are not just another museum."
Whatever happens after he leaves, he said, he hopes the center will remain "an
alternative something."

LOAD-DATE: May 27, 1993

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo: Cornell Capa, director of the International Center of
Photography, will resign next year. He said he is weary of the administrative
and fund-raising aspects of his job and will spend more time with his wife,Edie.
(Yousuf Karsh)

                   Copyright 1993 The New York Times Company


                              192 of 312 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                   May 28, 1993, Friday, Late Edition - Final

Paris Journal;
The Barricades of '68: Now That Was Very Heaven

BYLINE: By ALAN RIDING,  Special to The New York Times

SECTION: Section A; Page 4; Column 3; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 961 words

DATELINE: PARIS, May 27


It was a time of student unrest and student dreams around the world, yet somehow
the revolt that shook Paris in May 1968 stood out, perhaps because it seemed
more romantic than others, perhaps because it came so close to forcing none
other than General de Gaulle out of office.

"Not all generations have a chance to live such a moment of freedom and joy,"
said Marc Kravetz, then a 25-year-old student leader, now the 50-year-old news
editor at Liberation. "It was a huge collective fiesta. It was a very happy
moment for me."

Jean-Marcel Bouguereau, then 21, now also a journalist, remembers the excitement
of the barricades well. "It was the most extraordinary experience to know that
we were threatening the established power," he said. "We had the feeling we
could change the world."

Indeed, for an entire generation of former Marxists, Maoists, Trotskyists and
rebels now comfortably installed in journalism, politics, teaching and the arts,
it was a personal watershed, an explosion of idealism that with the passage of
time took the form of nostalgia for the impossible.

Left in Retreat

But for all of May 1968's profoundeffect on France and beyond, the 25th
anniversary of the student movement has gone almost unnoticed here. It could be
because the left feels defeated on all fronts. It could be simply that France's
economic and social crisis is so much more serious now than in 1968.

"I find the silence very worrying," said Marin Karmitz, a former Maoist who is
now a successful film producer. "France has trouble dealing with its past. It
tries to forget World War II, Indochina, Algeria. But those were moments of war
and death; 1968 was a moment of renewal, of hope."

The revolt itself came suddenly and unexpectedly. In late March, students
attacked an American Express office to protest the war in Vietnam and occupied a
university building at Nanterre. Then, after a lull over Easter, the movement
reappeared in early May, accelerating quickly as students occupied large areas
of the Left Bank to cries like "It is forbidden to forbid!"

For three weeks, students had the initiative, first winning over the likes of
Jean-Paul Sartre, then gaining the sympathy of many ordinary Parisians and
finally prompting some 10 million workers to go on strike across France. At one
point, de Gaulle even left Paris for Germany, supposedly to prepare French
troops to restore order.

At the end of May, the uprising collapsed as quickly as it had begun. The
Government granted emergency wage increases that ended the strike, while de
Gaulle summoned 500,000 supporters to march down the Champs-Elysees. And, in
general elections in late July, the Gaullists were returned with a solid
majority.

In hindsight, the movement's leaders said it failed because it was too
spontaneous to define clear objectives. "At one point, we thought of seizing
City Hall," Mr. Bouguereau said. "It would have been easy. But then what would
we do? O.K., we would go onto the balcony to address the crowd. But what would
we say?"

Maurice Grimaud, Prefect of Paris in 1968, is now remembered warmly for averting
excessive police repression. "We've had lots of revolutions in France," he said.
"The students knew their history and they were living a theater in which they
played the roles of 19th-century heroes. They might even have toppled the
Government, but this wasn't a revolution."

While the revolt appeared to achieve little, however, many French now believe
that it quickened the modernization of French politics and society. "More
intelligent people in the political class saw the need for change," Mr. Kravetz
said, "and they brought it about slowly in the 1970's. Many changes, though, had
their roots in 1968."

In the France that emerged, other former leaders of 1968 also found their place:
Roland Castro, once a Maoist, became a well-known architect; Serge July, another
former Maoist, now edits Liberation; Bernard Kouchner and Brice Lalonde were
ministers in Socialist Governments, and Jacques Sauvageot heads the Fine Arts
School at Rennes. Daniel Cohn-Bendit, the Danny the Red of 1968, now sits on the
Frankfurt city council.

Alain Krivine did not change, but the 51-year-old Trotskyist leader conceded
there was little to celebrate this month. "We had the failure of the left on the
streets in 1968 and then the failure of the left in government," he said,
referring to the Socialist Government swept out of office this spring. "These
failures fed cynicism about the possibility of change."

Alain Robert, then a young rightist fighting the revolt, now a senior Interior
Ministry official in the new conservative Government, was more blunt. "How can
they celebrate?" he asked. "All their beliefs have failed, all their myths have
collapsed. Everything they loved -- Vietnam, China, Cuba -- let them down."

At the Sorbonne, the headquarters of the revolt 25 years ago, students seemed to
have little time to remember 1968 as they prepared for exams this month. "What
can we do?" Serge Gaye, a sociology student, asked. "Socialism and Marxism
didn't work. Now it's all market, market, market. The collective Utopia has been
replaced by the individual Utopia."

So would a new revolt be possible today? "Not by students because they're too
worried about the future and the lack of jobs," Mr. Grimaud, who is now 80,
said. "But we have a time bomb ticking in our cities with unemployment. In 1968
there were 300,000 without jobs. Now there are over three million."

Strangely, though, it was Mr. Robert who had the last word of nostalgia for
1968. "I was of course not on the side of the majority," he said, "but it was a
very important moment. I'd like youths today to be able to live a moment like
that. What an adventure!"

LOAD-DATE: May 28, 1993

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo: The 25th anniversary of the 1968 student rebellion in Paris,
which at its height prompted some 10 million workers to go on strike across
France, has gone almost unnoticed there. "I find the silence very worrying,"
said Marin Karmitz, a former Maoist. "France has trouble dealing with its past."
(Bruno Barbey/Magnum, 1968)

                   Copyright 1993 The New York Times Company


                              193 of 312 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                   May 28, 1993, Friday, Late Edition - Final

Excerpts From Clinton's Question-and-Answer Session in the Rose Garden

BYLINE: Special to The New York Times

SECTION: Section A; Page 14; Column 1; National Desk

LENGTH: 1971 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, May 27


Following are excerpts from President Clinton's meeting today in the White House
Rose Garden as transcribed by Federal News Service. The moderators were Harry
Smith and Paula Zahn of "CBS This Morning."

PRESIDENT CLINTON There was an agreement made last night that I had been
supporting for a good long while, sponsored by the conservative Democrats,
essentially to put a mechanism in the budget to force us every year to make the
budget cuts that we say we're making in this five-year budget; that is, it's
obviously very hard to predict what will happen in every year for the next five
years.

If you had to do a family budget for five years, it might not be possible, or a
business budget or a farm budget. So these numbers are as good as we can make
them. But this amendment actually says that every year, if we miss the deficit
reduction target, the President has to bring in a plan to meet it and the
Congress has to vote on it. And if they want to change it some, they can, but
we've got to meet the deficit reduction target.

                                    .  .  .

MS. ZAHN What happens if you don't get this through in the House today?

A.  We keep working until we get a budget through. The real problem is -- I
think that there are two problems. One is that the details of the plan have been
lost in the rhetoric. The second is that a lot of the Republicans who might
otherwise want to vote with us got into a position where they said they wouldn't
vote for any tax.

Over 60 percent of this money, of the tax money, over 60 percent comes from
people with incomes over $200,000. Seventy-four percent of it comes from people
with incomes over $100,000, people whose taxes went down in the 80's while their
incomes went up. People with incomes under $30,000 are protected even from the
B.T.U. tax. And next year, people in the middle will pay about a dollar, and it
goes to $7 a month and then about $15 month. I think that -- but a lot of -- we
have to get all of our votes apparently from the Democrats this time. I hope it
won't happen anymore.

                                    .  .  .


'What Went Wrong?'

MR. SMITH I just want to see a raise of hands this morning -- and don't be
intimidated just because you're in the Rose Garden.  . . . Do you feel like
there's been a gap between the promises of the campaign and the performance thus
far? If you think so, raise your hand. So a lot of folks feel that way. What
went wrong?

A.  First of all, I don't know that anything went wrong except I'm glad nobody
found out about the manicure I got in California.

                                    .  .  .

What went wrong was I was not able to keep the public focus on the issues that
we're working on after I gave the State of the Union address, even though that's
what we kept doing. Now, look, we've been here four months and look what's
happened in four months. They give you a four-year term. Look what's happened in
four months.

We had a major foreign policy challenge in Russia right after I got in office.
If Yeltsin had gotten beat in Russia and a militant regime had returned, we
would have had to turn around with the defense budget. A lot of bad things could
have happened to America. The United States went to work, organized the rest of
the world, supported Yeltsin. He won the election. We're back on track there
making this world a safer place. That's my No. 1 job. I think that's pretty
impressive.

The Congress passed a resolution committing to do a budget that reduced the
deficit by $500 billion on time for the first time in 17 years. Congress passed
the family leave bill they've been fooling around with for eight years to
guarantee people some time off without losing their jobs. They passed the
motor-voter bill they'd been fooling around with for years. No one now asks, Are
we going to reduce the deficit? The question is, How much, and how? No one now
asks, Are we ever going to do anything about health care? The question is, When,
and exactly what are we going to do? I think that's a pretty good record for
four months.

                                    .  .  .

MS. ZAHN But the fact is, you've also had to do a lot of fighting with Democrats
of your own party. And I think a lot of people were hoping with a Democratic
President and a Democratic Congress that things were going to move more
smoothly. Do you think issues like the haircut and the problems in the travel
office have made it harder for you to get this economic plan through?

A.  No. I think this economic plan is tough. I think it does, because if you
publicize something like that -- and people don't know, for example, on the
haircut, that I asked whether anybody would be held up or inconvenienced, and I
was told no. I asked twice and I was told no. And I would never do that, not in
100 years, not ever.

                                    .  .  .


Travel Office Dismissals

MR. SMITH You know what? We need to talk about this -- travelgate. Who knew what
when? And why was the F.B.I. called in? And why did you hire your cousin? And
why did you have a firm from Arkansas take over this business? And --

A.  First of all, let's get back to the beginning, O.K.? Let's talk about my
cousin. She's about my fifth or sixth cousin who worked in the campaign and ran
the travel operations. But we had a very efficient travel operation. Every
operation of the White House was reviewed because I said I was going to cut the
White House staff by 25 percent. That's not easy to do.

                                    .  .  .

We found out that there were seven people working in the travel office,
primarily to book travel for the press, and that the press was complaining that
the cost was too high. So there were all of these recommendations made to change
it. But nothing was done until an accounting firm came in and reviewed the
operation and found serious management questions in terms of unaccounted-for
funds and things like that. So then, the person in charge of that made the
decision to replace them.

                                    .  .  .


Relations With China

Q.  My name is Eleanor Philips. I'm from Tarzana, Calif. I've been going to
China since 1980 -- seven or eight times. I've lived and worked in China for two
years. I'm very concerned about what you're going to do with the . . . most
favored nation.

                                    .  .  .

MR. SMITH Is this a done deal, your decision on this?

A.  I think it is a done deal for the next year. Let me explain the issue here.
In order for a country to trade with us, they have to get what's called 'most
favored nation status' in order to have big trade. China is a huge trading
partner of ours. We have our, I think now, our second biggest trading deficit
with China, just behind Japan. They've got one of the fastest growing economies
in the world. They're moving away from Communism to market economics very
quickly. They still put political prisoners in jail. They still, we think, have
used prison labor to make products. And we have some other problems with them.

The issue is, should we revoke that or should we put conditions on it. I
basically have decided to extend most favored nation status for a year because I
want to support modernization in China. And it's a great opportunity for America
there. But I want to make it clear to them that there has to be some progress on
human rights and the use of prison labor. Our trade disputes and our disputes
about arms sales, I'm going to take out of this issue and negotiate directly
with them.

                                    .  .  .


Health-Care Plan

Q.  My name is Dan Beeman. I'm from Springfield, Mo. . . . I work for a company
that has less than 500 employees. I pay $50 a month for a health plan, a dental
plan, life insurance. Our health plan is self insured. I am concerned -- I don't
want to pay more money for health care individually. I'm concerned that my
employer may be taxed and have to pay more money and I would receive less
benefits than I'm receiving, as well as I want to keep my self-funded health
plan. How would the change in health care, how would it affect me as an
individual?

A.  Well, let me say, first of all, one of the decisions that has not been
finalized yet, at least in our original report, is to what extent any companies
of any size should be able to, in effect, continue their self-insurance efforts.
And that's a tough issue, because what we're trying to do is to get these pools
of insurance big enough for small businesses to have affordable health care,
because that's been a back-breaker for a lot of small businesses.

The requirement that they're working on in terms of financial contribution would
not be a tax over and above what people are paying now. They're trying to hit
the national average, maybe even a little below the national average of what
employers are paying now. And many, many employers and employees in this country
will actually save money if the health-care plan comes into effect.

                                    .  .  .


Homosexuals in the Military

Q.  Mr. President, my name is Bill Roberts. I'm the senior Pastor at Christ
Chapel in Woodbridge, Virginia. . . . Allow me to ask the question . . . about
the issue of gays in the military, if I may. I'm concerned about the degradation
of morality in our nation and our society in the military as a whole.

                                    .  .  .

A.  There are and always have been homosexuals in the military. The question is
whether they should be kicked out, not because of what they do but because of
who they are. My view is, people should be judged on their conduct. I have not
called for any change in the Uniform Code of Conduct. I simply believe if people
work hard, play by the rules and serve, they ought to be able to serve. That
does not imply that the rest of the society agrees with the life style, but you
just accept as a fact that there are in every country, and always have been,
homosexuals who are capable of honoring their country, laying down their lives
for their country, and serving. And they should be judged based on their
behavior not their life style.

                                    .  .  .

Most Americans believe if you don't ask and you don't say and you're not forced
to confront it, people should be able to serve. Most Americans believe that the
gay life style should not be promoted by the military or anybody else in this
county. The issue is a narrow one: should you be able to acknowledge, if asked,
that you are homosexual? And if you don't do anything wrong, should you be
booted from the military?

We are trying to work this out so that our country does not -- I understand what
you're saying -- so that our country does not appear to be endorsing a gay life
style, but we accept people as people and give them a chance to serve if they
play by the rules. I think that is the tough issue for us. And I think we're
very close to resolving it here.

MS. ZAHN Could you be satisfied with 'Don't ask, don't tell, don't investigate?'
Might that be where you might end up?

A.  Well, we might end up that way as long as it doesn't lead to a whole range
of deliberate outings. Do you know what I mean? We don't want to make it worse.
I think we're very close to a compromise along those lines. And I think most
Americans will agree when it works out that people are treated properly if they
behave properly without the Government appearing to endorse a life style. I
think that's what you're concerned about, and it's a legitimate concern. But I
have to deal with people as people. And I've had so many people in the military
come up to me and say that they have served with homosexuals who served bravely
in Vietnam and other places, who were good people who did not violate any rules.
It is them that I am trying to protect.

LOAD-DATE: May 28, 1993

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Text

                   Copyright 1993 The New York Times Company


                              194 of 312 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                   May 28, 1993, Friday, Late Edition - Final
                              Correction Appended

Memorial Day Weekend Events

SECTION: Section C; Page 27; Column 1; Weekend Desk

LENGTH: 1597 words


Here is a sampling of Memorial Day Weekend events in the New York metropolitan
region:

NEW YORK CITY

Today

FLEET WEEK, Intrepid Sea-Air-Space Museum, Pier 86, 46th Street at the Hudson
River, Manhattan. Demonstrations of helicopter sea-air rescue missions begin on
the Intrepid's flight deck at 1 P.M. Public boardings of the aircraft carrier
John F. Kennedy and other vessels, including a Russian destroyer, 1 to 4:30 P.M.
Visitors can also board four Coast Guard ships. Free. Today through Monday. The
museum's exhibit is "The Battle of the Atlantic." Hours: 10 A.M. to 5 P.M.
Admission: $7; $6 for the elderly; $4 for children 6 to 12; under 6 free.
Information: (212) 245-0072.

BASEBALL: METS VS. REDS, Shea Stadium, Flushing, Queens. Tonight at 7:40;
tomorrow and Sunday at 1:40 P.M. Tickets: $6.50 to $15. Information: (718)
507-8499.


BASEBALL: YANKEES VS. WHITE SOX, Yankee Stadium, the Bronx. Tonight at 7:30;
tomorrow and Sunday at 1:30 P.M. Tickets: $6.50 to $16.00. Information: (212)
293-6000.

BEACHES, city beaches open today and remain open through Labor Day: BRIGHTON
BEACH-CONEY ISLAND, from 15th to West 37th Street, Brooklyn; MANHATTAN BEACH,
Oriental Boulevard from Ocean Avenue to Mackenzie Street, Brooklyn; ORCHARD
BEACH and Promenade, Pelham Bay Park, the Bronx; ROCKAWAY, Beach Ninth Street to
Beach 149th Street, Neponsit, Queens; MIDLAND BEACH, Lower New York Bay, Fort
Wadsworth to Miller Field, New Dorp, S.I.; WOLFE'S POND BEACH, Hylan Boulevard
and Cornelia Avenue, Prince's Bay, S.I.

Tomorrow

ACT-UP WAVERLY PLACE FESTIVAL, Waverly Place between Broadway and University
Place, Greenwich Village. 10 A.M. to 7 P.M. Sponsored by Act Up.

LIVABLE WEST SIDE STREET FESTIVAL, Broadway between 72d and 86th Streets. 11
A.M. to 6 P.M. Sponsored by the Coalition for a Livable West Side.

WASHINGTON SQUARE ART EXHIBIT, sidewalks surrounding Washington Square Park,
Greenwich Village. Noon to 7 P.M. Sponsored by the Washington Square Outdoor Art
Exhibit.

"PEEP SHOW," Alley Pond Park, Douglaston, Queens. A look at spring peepers, tiny
frogs that make a great deal of noise; led by Urban Park Rangers. Meets at 7
P.M. at the schoolyard of Public School 213, 233d Street and 67th Avenue.
Information: (718) 699-4204.

"ONE FISH, TWO FISH," Pelham Bay Park Environmental Center, Section 2, Orchard
Beach, the Bronx. A shoreline walk around Pelham Bay with a discussion of
blackfish, bluefish and flounder. 2 P.M. Information: (718) 548-7070.

"LITTLE RED LIGHTHOUSE," Fort Washington Park, Manhattan. A tour of the historic
lighthouse of storybook fame on the Hudson River, which has been recently
renovated; led by the Urban Park Rangers. Free. Information and meeting place:
(212) 427-4040.

Sunday

FIREWORKS, South Street Seaport, Pier 16, at the East River, lower Manhattan.
Fireworks display by Grucci, orchestrated to music from WQEW-AM. 9 P.M.

EIGHTH AVENUE FESTIVAL, Eighth Avenue between 14th and 23d Streets, Chelsea. 10
A.M. to 7 P.M. Sponsored by Chelsea Visiting Neighbors.

"ROCK AROUND THE PARK," Central Park. A walk to look at rocks indigenous to the
city, led by the Urban Park Rangers. Meets at 2 P.M. at 72d Street and Central
Park West. Information: (212) 427-4040.

"EARLY MORNING BIRD WALK," Great Kills Park, Gateway National Recreation Area,
S.I. A walk focusing on waterfowl led by Ed Johnson, a curator of science at the
Staten Island Institute of Arts and Sciences. Meets at the entrance to the park
at Hylan Boulevard; call for time. Information: (718) 727-1135.

"THE WATERING HOLES," Kissena Park, Flushing, Queens. A look at the difference
between lakes and ponds, led by Urban Park Rangers. Meets at 2 P.M. at the
Kissena Nature Center, Rose Avenue and Parsons Boulevard. Information: (718)
699-4204.

EASTERN REGIONAL CHAMPIONSHIP 20K RACEWALK, Central Park. A 20K racewalk for
men, sponsored by Park Racewalkers. 9 A.M. Registration and information: (212)
628-1317.

"LILLIAN WALD'S NEW YORK," Lower East Side. A tour from the Henry Street
Settlement, once home to Lillian Wald, a national leader in health care reform,
to the Episcopal church where she was married, to Seward Park Public Library
where she studied; led by Joyce Mendelsohn, an urban historian. Sponsored by the
92d Street Y. 1 P.M. Fee: $15. Information and meeting place: (212) 996-1100.

NATIONAL TAP DANCE DAY, Haft Auditorium, Fashion Institute of Technology, 227
West 27th Street. Tap dancing by the Copasetics, the American Tap Dance
Orchestra and others; part of Tap Extravaganza 93. 7:30 P.M. Admission: $22 to
$27. Information: (212) 279-4200.

Monday

BROADWAY MERCHANTS FAIR, Broadway between Steinway Street and Crescent Street,
Astoria, Queens. 10 A.M. to 7 P.M. Sponsored by the Broadway Merchants and
Professionals.

MEMORIAL DAY PARADE, Broadway from 72d to 86th Street, to Riverside Drive to
90th Street. Begins at 10 A.M. Sponsored by New York City County American
Legion.

MEMORIAL DAY PARADE, Bay Ridge, Brooklyn. Third Avenue and 80th Street to Fourth
Avenue and 101st Street. Begins at 10 A.M.

BASEBALL: YANKEES VS. INDIANS, Yankee Stadium, Bronx. 1 P.M. Tickets: $6.50 to
$16.00. Information: (212) 293-6000.

"NEW YORK IN WAR AND PEACE," Lower Manhattan. A walking tour past New York
City's own versions of the Boston Tea Party and Boston Massacre (known as the
battle of Golden Hill, 1770); includes the city's Vietnam Memorial. 1 P.M. Fee:
$9; $7 for students and the elderly. Sponsored by Big Onion Walking Tours.
Information and meeting place: (212) 439-1090.

NEW JERSEY

Tomorrow

AMERICAN INDIAN ARTS FESTIVAL, Rankokus Indian Reservation, Rancocas Road,
Westhampton, Burlington County. American Indian artists and entertainers from
around the country. Saturday, Sunday and Monday, 11 A.M. to 6 P.M. Admission:
$6; $3 for children and the elderly. Information: (609) 261-4747.

Sunday

MEMORIAL DAY POLKA PARTY, Action Park Festival Tent, Route 94, Vernon. Nonstop
polka entertainment, with food and crafts. Admission: $10. Information: (201)
827-2000.

Monday

MEMORIAL DAY PARADE, from Livingston Avenue, New Brunswick, to Raritan Avenue,
Highland Park. Begins at 11 A.M. Sponsored by Veterans Alliance of Raritan
Valley.

WESTCHESTER

Today

COUNTY BEACHES, Glen Island Park in New Rochelle and Playland Park in Rye. Glen
Island Park is open tomorrow through Monday, 10 A.M. to 6 P.M. Admission: $3;
$1.25 for children 5 to 11; under 5 free. Parking: $2.25 per car. Playland Park
is open tomorrow and Sunday 12:30 P.M. to midnight; Monday, noon to 11 P.M.
Swimming fees: $3.25; $1.50 for children 40 inches tall and above; free for
those under 40 inches. Parking: $5 tomorrow and Sunday; $6 on Monday.
Information for both: (914) 285-7275.

Tomorrow

ANIMALS AND ACROBATS, Van Cortlandt Manor, South Riverside Avenue,
Croton-on-Hudson. A celebration of the early American circus, which originated
in Westchester County; exotic animals, elephant rides, musicians, marionettes
and rope walkers. 10 A.M. to 5 P.M. Through May 31. Admission: $6; $3 for
children 6 through 17; under 6 free; $5 for the elderly. Information: (914)
631-8200.

LONG ISLAND

Tomorrow

MOZART FESTIVAL TOUR, Planting Fields, Oyster Bay. A train and bus tour to the
Mozart Festival at the Planting Fields Arboretum, with the Sea Cliff Chamber
Players, arts and crafts exhibitions; lunch available at the Mozart Cafe. Train
departs Penn Station at 10:36 A.M. and returns at 6:35 P.M. Tickets: $31; $12
for children 5 through 11; children under 5, free. Information: (718) 217-5477.

BEACH EXCURSIONS, Jones Beach, Long Beach and Fire Island. Round-trip excursions
on Long Island Rail Road. Starting tomorrow, weekends through Labor Day. Leaves
from Penn Station; Flatbush, Brooklyn; Jamaica, Queens. Round-trip fare: $10.50
to $16. Information: (718) 217-5477 or (516) 822-5477.

MEMORIAL WEEKEND FESTIVAL, 108 Sound Avenue, Palmer Vineyards, Aquebogue. A wine
festival with live music. Saturday, Sunday and Monday, noon to 5 P.M. Free.
Information: (516) 722-9463.

Monday

JOINT VETERANS ASSOCIATION MEMORIAL DAY PARADE, Beech Street and Park Avenue,
Long Beach. 9:30 A.M.

MEMORIAL DAY PARADE, Forest Avenue, School Street and Glen Street, Glen Cove.
Noon.

MEMORIAL DAY PARADE, Main Street, East Rockaway. 10 A.M.

CONNECTICUT

Tomorrow

LOBSTERFEST, Mystic Seaport Museum, 50 Greenmanville Avenue, Mystic. A New
England lobster bake served on the banks of the Mystic River, with a
re-enactment of an 1890's Memorial Day. 9 A.M. to 5 P.M.; food served 11 A.M. to
3 P.M. Through Monday. Information: (203) 572-5317.

MEMORIAL DAY CRAFTSMEN WEEKEND, Cornwall Bridge Pottery Store, Route 128, West
Cornwall. Demonstrations of wood carving, jewelry making and pottery making.
Saturday, Sunday and Monday, noon to 4 P.M. Free. Information: (203) 672-6545.

Sunday

FAMILY FUN NIGHT, Waterford Speedbowl, Route 85, Waterford. Monster truck
racing, demolition derby, auto stunts and fireworks. 6 P.M. Admission: $5;
children under 12 free. Information: (203) 442-1585.

STRAWBERRY FESTIVAL, Brookfield Historical Society, junction of Routes 25 and
133, Brookfield. Live banjo music and strawberry shortcakes. 2:45 to 4 P.M.
Free. Information: (203) 740-9408.

Monday

MEMORIAL DAY PARADE, Main Street, Middletown. 10:30 A.M.

MEMORIAL DAY PARADE, Main Street, Torrington. 9:30 A.M.

LOAD-DATE: May 28, 1993

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

CORRECTION-DATE: May 29, 1993, Saturday

CORRECTION:

A listing in Weekend yesterday about Memorial Day events misstated the starting
time for the Memorial Day Parade in Manhattan and misidentified its sponsor. The
parade is to begin at 9 A.M. on Monday at Broadway and 72d Street; it is
sponsored by the Manhattan chapter of the Vietnam Veterans of America.


TYPE: Schedule

                   Copyright 1993 The New York Times Company


                              195 of 312 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                  May 29, 1993, Saturday, Late Edition - Final

Envoys Fear a Cambodia Power Grab

BYLINE: By PHILIP SHENON,  Special to The New York Times

SECTION: Section 1; Page 3; Column 1; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 796 words

DATELINE: PHNOM PENH, Cambodia, May 28


On the last day of voting in what has been an unexpectedly peaceful election in
Cambodia, United Nations officials and diplomats warned today of new concerns
that the incumbent Government would try to hold on to power even if its
political party was defeated at the polls.

A senior United Nations official said Yasushi Akashi, the director of the
22,000-member United Nations peacekeeping force in Cambodia, had received daily
complaints from the Government this week of purported irregularities in the
voting.

"We're concerned that the S.O.C. is laying the groundwork to claim that the
election was unfair, and then to hold on to power by force," said an Asian
diplomat, using the initials for the State of Cambodia, the formal name for the
Vietnamese-installed Government. "They do seem worried that they are going to
lose what has been a very fair election."

The state-controlled radio network has begun carrying news reports about what it
said were irregularities, which are reported to include possible ballot-box
tampering during the six days of voting.

Charges Called Worrisome

United Nations peacekeepers, diplomats and international election monitors say
the charges are groundless but are still worrisome because they suggest that the
Government may refuse to accept the election results.

Opposition parties have not made similar claims of election irregularities.
Indeed, the election's director for the leading opposition party described this
week's vote as "probably the fairest election that Cambodia has ever seen." He
said the party, known as Funcinpec, the acronym in French for National United
Front for an Independent, Neutral, Peaceful and Cooperative Cambodia, would
abide by the election results.

"We will not contest the results," said Ung Huot, the election's director. But
he added, "I think Funcinpec will win by a landslide."

By the end of the voting today, nearly 90 percent of Cambodia's 3.7 million
registered voters had cast ballots, which United Nations officials and diplomats
described as an remarkable turnout given the widespread belief a week ago that
many Cambodians would be too frightened to vote because of threats of violence
by Khmer Rouge rebels.

Praise for High Turnout

Boutros Boutros-Ghali, the United Nations Secretary General, said in a statement
made public here today:"The spectacularly high voter turnout is eloquent
testimony to the confidence that Untac has inspired among the people of
Cambodia, as well as to their deep yearning for participatory democracy."

Untac is the acronym for the peacekeeping force, the United Nations Transitional
Authority in Cambodia.

A delegation of international election observers led by Andrew Peacock, a former
Foreign Minister of Australia, said in a statement, "It is clear to us that the
poll has been as fair and free as could reasonably be expected and, as such, is
a clear expression of the will of the Cambodian people."

The ballot count begins Saturday, and United Nations officials say they hope to
have the final tally sometime next week.

"I'm delighted by everything I've seen in this election," said Charles H.
Twining, the senior American diplomat in Cambodia. "By all appearances, it
certainly in our view meets the qualifications of being a free and fair
election."

'Tantamount to Peace'

"For the first time since I arrived here in 1991, I've seen Cambodians who are
happy," said Mr. Twining, who speaks the Khmer language and interviewed voters
throughout the country during the election. "Wherever I went, I always heard the
same thing: peace. They saw the vote as tantamount to peace."

Mr. Twining said in an interview that he hoped that the Government of Prime
Minister Hun Sen would live up to its promise of a peaceful transfer of power if
its political party, the Cambodian People's Party, loses the election.

At the same time, Mr. Twining said, there are "worries, naturally, that a party
that loses will react in some way." If the Government party is defeated, he
said, "Does the S.O.C. use their police, their secret police, their military, to
reinforce their dissatisfaction?"

During the election campaign the Government and its political parties were
linked by the United Nations to a massive campaign of voter intimidation that
included the murder of opposition political leaders.

Most of the harassment was directed against Funcinpec. The party was founded by
Prince Norodom Sihanouk, Cambodia's head of state, and is now led by one of his
sons.

The incumbent Government was installed by Vietnam in 1979 after the Vietnamese
Army invaded Cambodia and toppled the Khmer Rouge, the Maoist guerrillas whose
four-year reign of terror left more than a million Cambodians dead from
starvation, disease and execution.

LOAD-DATE: May 29, 1993

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1993 The New York Times Company


                              196 of 312 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                  May 29, 1993, Saturday, Late Edition - Final

Once Off-Limits, Now Destinations With an Edge

BYLINE: By EDWIN McDOWELL

SECTION: Section 1; Page 33; Column 3; Financial Desk

LENGTH: 1261 words


Declaring that tourism produces "a very big income," Col. Muammar el-Qaddafi of
Libya proposed in a recent televised speech that his country encourage mass
tourism. And Colonel Qaddafi is not alone in assuming that travel and tourism
can aid struggling economies.

Destinations as diverse as Croatia and Peru are struggling to repair their
war-torn tourist infrastructures. Egypt is cracking down on radical Islamic
fundamentalists, and one reason officials give is that the terrorists' campaign
is harming the country's $3 billion tourist industry, Egypt's largest source of
foreign revenue. And the hope of luring tourists with hard currency is why China
and Cuba are racing to build hotels, restaurants and other amenities of the
travel trade.

Their view is supported in a recent report by the World Travel and Tourism
Council, a Brussels-based coalition of chief executives from more than 50
travel-related corporations in many countries.


It's Not Always Easy

"A buoyant travel and tourism sector will employ more people" and create new
jobs and careers faster than any other industry, said the report, compiled by a
group of international economists. It added, "Unlike many industries, there are
no lengthy time lags before new jobs, foreign exchange and extra purchasing
power filter into the economy."

But luring tourists to trouble spots, or what they perceive to be trouble spots,
is no simple matter.

For example, officials in Croatia and Slovenia, in what was formerly Yugoslavia,
are eager to restore what had been a thriving tourist trade, but find foreigners
confuse their areas with war-wracked Bosnia and Herzegovina.

"Slovenia and Croatia are both perfectly safe," said Rose Pace-Bogdanic, the
senior vice president of Sterling Cruises and Tours of Austin, Tex. "They just
suffer from an identity crisis."

She and Damir-Dodo Bogdanic, her Croatian-born husband, used to promote tours to
all of Yugoslavia, until age-old hatreds between Serbs and Croats fragmented the
country in 1990 and plunged it into civil war. Last year, Sterling began
offering tour packages to the castles, mountains and beaches of Slovenia, which
declared its independence in 1991. And later this year it plans to offer tours
to Croatia, which has suffered far less damage than some other parts of the
former Yugoslavia.

Toward that end, Sterling opened a branch office last month in Ridgefield, N.J.,
staffed by a former executive of Yugotours International in Belgrade.

"Not everyone's going to rush out and go there on a tour," Mrs. Pace-Bogdanic
said. "So we plan to start on a limited basis."

But some Americans are visiting Slovenia. "The view in North America may be that
it's an unsafe place, but it's not as though you're traveling to
Bosnia-Herzegovina," Scott Schnipper, an American traveler, said by telephone
from London last week shortly before his departure. "It has a modern
infrastructure and modern communications."

Cuba has an improving tourist climate, including hotels under construction, but
is unlikely to rake in Americans' dollars so long as United States law bars most
citizens from spending money there.

Nor have tourists been flocking to Libya so far, and Colonel Qaddafi sidestepped
any mention of United Nations sanctions against Libya for harboring suspected
terrorists -- sanctions that include a ban on travel to his country.

Another indication that Libya is unlikely to reap a tourist bonanza anytime
soon, at least from English-speaking visitors, is the reluctance of Lonely
Planet Publications to add a Libyan travel guide to its book list, which
includes guides for such difficult or dangerous destinations as Iran, Myanmar,
Yemen, Peru, Vietnam, Sri Lanka, Cambodia and Bangladesh.

"Nobody's knocking down our door for a book on Libya," said Carolyn Miller,
promotions manager for Lonely Planet in Oakland, Calif. "In fact, I don't think
I ever heard of any tourist wanting to go there."

Other countries eager for tourism also have a lot to learn about visitors'
expectations. In "Falling Off the Map," a book published this month by Alfred A.
Knopf, a travel writer, Pico Iyer, notes that North Korea is building the
world's largest tourist hotel, 105 stories high -- although few tourists visit
the country, which remains one of the world's most regimented and closed
societies.

Similarly, Vietnam is not most Americans' idea of a vacation paradise, even
though Hanoi designated 1990 as the "Year of Tourism." That same year, it began
to remodel all of its hotels. It still offers few other amenities for tourists,
and visitors say the Vietnamese appear to have unrealistic expectations of what
the tourist traffic will bear.

"What would be, at most, a three-star hotel by our standards, costs around $200
a night," said Dianne Yamamoto of Los Angeles, who recently returned from a
10-day trip to Vietnam and Cambodia. "It was an incredible visit, but you have
to be prepared to rough it, because there's very little tourist infrastructure."

 In contrast to Vietnam, Egypt has well-developed tourism operations, and
intrepid travelers continue to visit the Pyramids and cruise the Nile despite
attacks by Islamic extremists.

"Reports of problems in Egypt affected our business," conceded Aza Hussein,
operations manager for Naggar Tours in San Francisco, a wholesale travel
operator specializing in Egypt. "But groups are still traveling there."

John Yee, a tour leader with Asian Discoveries, a travel agency in Kensington,
Calif., branched out to take about 20 people to Egypt last month for 12 days.
"Only two people in our group canceled for safety reasons," he said. "And they
missed out on a great visit. Besides, there were no lines at tourist sites."

Few tourist destinations have been as devastated as Peru, which in the 1980's
attracted tens of thousands of visitors to Inca sites like Machu Picchu and
Cuzco. But a terrorist war that broke out in Ayacucho in 1980 spread through
much of the nation, claiming an estimated 25,000 lives, and a cholera epidemic
two years ago claimed another several thousand. Tourists stayed away in droves.

Now, with the founder of the Shining Path terrorists, Abimael Guzman Reynoso,
serving a life sentence, officials in Ayacucho and Lima are eager to revive
tourism. And that prospect may not be as farfetched as it sounds.

"The last couple of years you could have called me two days before Christmas,
and I could have booked a room for you at the Machu Picchu Hotel de Turistas,,"
said Luis Vasquez, owner of M.I.L.A./Peru Tours in Wadsworth, Ill. "But it's
already sold out for Christmas this year, and tourism to the rest of Peru has
been picking up for the last few months."

Tourism is also rebounding in China following sharp declines after Government
troops killed protesters around Tiananmen Square in Beijing in 1989. More than
300,000 Americans and 600,000 Japanese visit China each year, and Beijing hopes
to raise those numbers significantly. Thus, it recently joined the Pacific Asia
Travel Association, a San Francisco-based organization of airlines, cruise
ships, hotels and tour operators from both the private and public sectors.

Michael Justice, a Los Angeles photographer who recently returned from China,
said he had been uneasy about visiting the country after its suppression of
protesters.

"But a visit isn't an endorsement," he said. "You go to see what's real in a
country, before they put up lots of fast-food restaurants."

He added, "Besides, my mother was quite happy to see me leave Los Angeles for
someplace safer."

LOAD-DATE: May 29, 1993

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo: Some of the new travel brochures aimed at enticing tourists to
stray from beaten paths.

                   Copyright 1993 The New York Times Company


                              197 of 312 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                  May 29, 1993, Saturday, Late Edition - Final

William P. Collins, 47, Energy Aide to Reagan

SECTION: Section 1; Page 9; Column 2; National Desk

LENGTH: 212 words


William P. Collins, a former Undersecretary of Energy in the Reagan
Administration, died Wednesday at Fairfax County Hospital in Virginia. He was
47.

Mr. Collins, a resident of Alexandria, Va., died of a heart attack, his sister,
Nancy Collins, said.

A native of Washington, Mr. Collins grew up in Hamilton, Mont., and graduated
from Hamilton High School in 1964. He earned a bachelor's degree in history from
the University of Montana at Missoula in 1968. Later that year, Mr. Collins
enlisted in the Army and, as a lieutenant, served two tours of duty in Vietnam.

After his discharge, Mr. Collins returned to Washington and became involved in
Republican politics. He worked as an aide to Representative Ron Marlenee of
Montana and as a staff member of the Congressional Environment Study Committee.
Later, he served as director of the Political Action Committee of the National
Association of Homebuilders.

In 1983, Mr. Collins was appointed an Undersecretary of Energy, serving
concurrently as assistant secretary of conservation and renewable energy and as
head of the Office of Alcohol Fuels. Since leaving public service, Mr. Collins
had headed his own public relations company in Washington.

He is survived by his sister, who lives in Manhattan.

LOAD-DATE: May 29, 1993

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Obituary (Obit); Biography

                   Copyright 1993 The New York Times Company


                              198 of 312 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                  May 29, 1993, Saturday, Late Edition - Final

Olympia Mediator Is Named

BYLINE: By JEANNE B. PINDER

SECTION: Section 1; Page 33; Column 6; Financial Desk

LENGTH: 693 words


Former Secretary of State Cyrus R. Vance was named by a Federal bankruptcy judge
yesterday to mediate a struggle over control of the United States holdings of
Olympia & York, the distressed Canadian real estate company.

Mr. Vance, who recently ended 19 months of efforts to negotiate a settlement to
the fighting in the former Yugoslavia, is expected to meet early next week with
the parties to the Olympia & York battle. He will try to help stave off a
potential crisis that some company creditors have said could result in
bankruptcy for the American wing of the company.

The ruling yesterday by Judge James L. Garrity Jr. of Federal Bankruptcy Court
in Manhattan was the latest step in the fight for control of about 18 million
square feet of New York City office space. The owner, Olympia & York USA, is the
city's largest commercial taxpaper.


Motion From Citibank

Judge Garrity ruled in connection with a motion by Citibank, a creditor of
Olympia & York USA, to reduce the power that a court-appointed administrator for
the bankrupt Canadian parent holds over the United States branch.

When the Canadian parent, Olympia & York Developments Ltd., declared the
Canadian equivalency of bankruptcy in May 1992, its United States wing continued
to function while negotiating with creditors on restructuring its debt-laden
operations under the management of its president, John E. Zuccotti.

Citibank asserted that the Canadian administrator, Robert E. Lowe of the
Canadian branch of the accounting firm Coopers & Lybrand, had insisted on the
right to hire and dismiss members of a governing board to be set up to advise
Mr. Zuccotti on his actions. Citibank held that Mr. Zuccotti found the Canadian
control unacceptable and might leave, with the potential of throwing the entire
proceeding into bankruptcy court.

Mr. Lowe argued that his actions were necessary to protect the interests of the
remaining creditors of the Canadian parent. The case is in Judge Garrity's court
because 80 percent of the United States company is owned by a wholly owned
subsidiary of the Canadian parent that sought Chapter 11 protection.


Appointment Is Welcomed

Citibank and representatives of Mr. Lowe and Mr. Zuccotti expressed satisfaction
yesterday with Mr. Vance's appointment to mediate the dispute. As a Chapter 11
examiner, Mr. Vance has what Judge Garrity described as a mandate for resolving
the deadlock by "implementing a protocol calculated to harmonize the Canadian
and U.S. proceedings." The judge called for the protocol to take into account
United States creditors' concerns about keeping Mr. Zuccotti in the organization
and "striking the balance necessary to achieve a board of directors that will be
able to function independently."

Judge Garrity said he would hold a hearing on June 10 for a progress report on
Mr. Vance's efforts, suggesting that if no headway was being made, other avenues
would be tried.

A representative of Coopers & Lybrand, Paul W. Currie, said he and his
colleagues were pleased with the appointment.

Citibank's chief lawyer, George J. Wade of Shearman & Sterling, said, "We are
very pleased with the selection, and we look forward to working with him towards
a resolution." Bruce Zirinsky of Weil, Gotshal & Manges, representing Olympia &
York USA management, was also enthusiastic on the appointment.


Planned to Practice Law

When Mr. Vance, 76, ended his Yugoslavia tour this spring with an ill-fated plan
to end the war in Bosnia and Herzegovina, he said he planned to return to his
law practice at Simpson Thacher & Bartlett, which he joined in 1947.

Mr. Vance was Secretary of State in the Carter Administration, from 1977 to
1980, and has held several other Government posts, including Secretary of the
Army and Deputy Secretary of Defense in the 1960's, negotiator at the Paris
peace conference on Vietnam in 1968-69, and special envoy to President Lyndon B.
Johnson in the Cyprus crisis of 1967 and in Korea in 1968.

He is a member of a number of panels, commissions and boards, including the
boards of The New York Times Company and the General Dynamics Corporation.

LOAD-DATE: May 29, 1993

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1993 The New York Times Company


                              199 of 312 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                  May 29, 1993, Saturday, Late Edition - Final

Corrections

SECTION: Section 1; Page 2; Column 5; Metropolitan Desk

LENGTH: 51 words


A listing in Weekend yesterday about Memorial Day events misstated the starting
time for the Memorial Day Parade in Manhattan and misidentified its sponsor. The
parade is to begin at 9 A.M. on Monday at Broadway and 72d Street; it is
sponsored by the Manhattan chapter of the Vietnam Veterans of America.

LOAD-DATE: May 29, 1993

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Correction

                   Copyright 1993 The New York Times Company


                              200 of 312 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                  May 29, 1993, Saturday, Late Edition - Final

Observer;
Like Lead To the Romans

BYLINE: By RUSSELL BAKER

SECTION: Section 1; Page 19; Column 1; Editorial Desk

LENGTH: 717 words


Happening more or less simultaneously, Michael Jordan's midnight visit to the
gambling hell of Atlantic City and the bombing of the Uffizi Gallery in Florence
dramatize the modern quarrel about how best to destroy civilization.

Some say fire will do the trick, and some say ice, or so the poet wrote. The
modern dispute, however, is between those who favor bombs and those who believe
law can do the job quieter.

Metaphorically speaking, bombs may be nothing more than fire and law no
different from ice, but who speaks metaphorically these days? Certainly not
bombers. When General LeMay hankered to bomb Vietnam "back to the Stone Age," he
wasn't dabbling in poetical expression. He didn't mean "bomb them back to the
pre-industrial era," or "to the Dark Ages," or "to the Bronze Age." He meant the
Stone Age.

The bombing classes really believe in the Stone Age. Some among them think being
bombed back to the Stone Age may have salubrious long-term effects on humanity
by compelling the survivors to adopt the high-minded views of those who bombed
them back there.

Lawyers aren't much for metaphorical speech either. Their favorite rhetorical
device is simile. "Like shouting 'Fire!' in a crowded theater" -- that's about
as close to poetry as lawyer talk ever comes. And that's an antique from the
early part of the century.

Since then lawyers have invented "the billable hour," which sounds at first as
if it might be a metonym but which turns out to be the legal profession's device
for siphoning the profits out of large corporations. Charging by "the billable
hour" has had a bloating effect on lawyer talk.

If a modern lawyer tried to invent the fine old simile about shouting in a
crowded theater, he would say "deleteriously comparable to excessively audible
vocalizations purporting to be expressive of the excessively audible vocalizer's
putative knowledge in reference to the existence of a conflagrational, and
potentially devastating, conflationary process of combustible oxidation
occurring in the confines of a place licensed for the presentation of drama,
both comical and tragical, in addition to performances of musical, cinematical,
vaudevilliac, televisualistic . . ."

It is not lawyers' decline into mumbling incoherence that interests us, however.
It is non-lawyers' passion for suing, as illustrated by Michael Jordan, the
basketball player. All sports-crazed humanity was scandalized the other day by
reports that Mr. Jordan had been gambling in Atlantic City at 2:30 Tuesday
morning.

You must ask someone more sports-crazed than I to learn whether the scandal was
his gambling or his being out late on the eve of an important game. Mr. Jordan
obviously thought it was about being out late, for he made the following threat
to the sports-crazed press:

"Let me see one person say I was there at 1 o'clock [in the morning] and they'd
have a lawsuit."

Now why in the world would Mr. Jordan, a young, healthy and extraordinarily rich
man with years and years of a wonderful life before him, want to spend the best
years of that life tied up with lawyers because some wretched newspaper hack
says he was in Atlantic City after 1 o'clock in the morning?

Because Mr. Jordan is infected with the deadly lawsuit mania, that's why. At
lunch the other day with a publisher who was being sued, I wasn't surprised by
his grousing about the ceaseless sleet storm of lawsuits in which publishers,
and practically everybody else, lives these days.

But when he said, "Litigation is destroying America," I realized he was speaking
a deep, terrible truth. It is the unsuspected phenomenon that destroys a
civilization. Some say the Roman Empire was destroyed by lead poisoning, the
result of the Romans cooking food in lead pans.

The British Empire was almost surely destroyed by the swagger stick. It made
imperial Britain's military men look so hatefully arrogant to the rest of the
world that the Empire was doomed. Yes, I thought, anthropologists of the year
A.D. 4001 excavating ten billion depositions will have to conclude that ours was
a civilization that sued itself to death.

As for the bombers, how pathetically futile they are. Nothing was ever bombed so
utterly as Germany, except Japan. When will our terrorists ever learn, the
stupid blockheads?

LOAD-DATE: May 29, 1993

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Op-Ed

                   Copyright 1993 The New York Times Company


                              201 of 312 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                   May 30, 1993, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

IN SHORT: FICTION

BYLINE: By Anne Barnard

SECTION: Section 7; Page 14; Column 1; Book Review Desk

LENGTH: 233 words



PARADISE OF THE BLIND
By Duong Thu Huong.
Morrow, $20.

Hang, the young Vietnamese heroine of "Paradise of the Blind," is an "exported
worker," forced by poverty to labor in a Russian factory -- and haunted by
memories of her country. Not surprisingly, her creator, Duong Thu Huong, whose
four novels have been banned in Vietnam because of her activities on behalf of
political reform, draws the dramatic tension of her narrative from the enormous
and opposing demands of the Communist state and the Confucian conception of
family responsibility. Hang's mother, whose brother's ambitions to rise in the
Communist Party led to her husband's death, battles with her sister-in-law,
Hang's paternal aunt, for the young woman's loyalty, and the struggle is
ferocious. But the American reader grasps its stakes and emotions only in
sudden, searing glimpses. At times, the narrative reads like a primer --
somewhat in the style of Laura Ingalls Wilder -- on Vietnamese life. In spots,
the book becomes downright confusing, possibly a fault of the translation by
Phan Huy Duong and Nina McPherson. Typical of the book's mix of pitfalls and
pleasures is the cliche of a familiar tune dredging up Hang's homesickness,
sending "the chill of exile under my skin," followed by an image humming with
intensity: "The song resonated like the thinnest thread of silver lost in the
blue of the sky."

LOAD-DATE: May 30, 1993

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Review

                   Copyright 1993 The New York Times Company


                              202 of 312 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                   May 30, 1993, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

THE NATION;
In the Military, Bolder Talk of Acceptance

BYLINE: By ERIC SCHMITT

SECTION: Section 4; Page 4; Column 1; Week in Review Desk

LENGTH: 1069 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON


AS the Clinton Administration struggles to find a compromise to allow
homosexuals to serve in the armed forces, more and more soldiers, sailors and
pilots are bucking the early tide of outrage in the ranks and quietly saying,
"Let's get on with it."

"As long as we don't back down on discipline and a code of conduct, people can
accept it," said Brig. Gen. Lester L. Lyles of the Air Force, commander of the
Ogden Air Logistics Center in Utah.

General Lyles's views are by no means a majority opinion in the military, but a
new undercurrent of pragmatism has emerged in comments by dozens of members of
the service in congressional testimony, public letters and interviews across the
country in recent weeks.

Traditionally, the armed services have been an effective, if unusual, laboratory
for social change. The chain of command and military code of justice, which do
not offer soldiers the same rights and freedoms due civilians, are powerful
tools for molding behavior and attitudes that are not available to city
governments, universities, corporations or other civilian bureaucracies.

From the integration of blacks in the 1950's to wider roles for women in the
1970's, the military has often outpaced civilian society.

"The military was a decade ahead of the civil rights movement," said Martin
Binkin, a military manpower expert at the Brookings Institution in Washington.
"There have been difficult transitions, and I'd expect when and if the gay ban
is removed, you'll have difficulties as well.  But there's not much question the
military has been far ahead of other institutions."

It has not been easy. Race riots broke out on Navy ships during the Vietnam War,
20 years after President Harry S. Truman ordered the services integrated. As a
result, the Navy, under Adm. Elmo Zumwalt, created stiff new rules against
exhibiting racial bias and ordered senior officers to uphold them or be
dismissed.

Beating Death

This month Col. Fred Peck, a Marine Corps spokesman, said he would not want his
gay son to serve, largely because he feared bigots would hurt or kill him. Last
week, a Navy sailor, Airman Apprentice Terry M. Helvey, was sentenced to life in
prison for beating a gay shipmate to death in Japan. Witnesses testified that
he'd said he'd done it because he hated homosexuals.

When ordered by Congress or the President, though, the military has demonstrated
it can salute smartly and swiftly enforce a policy it once opposed. Less than
two years ago, for example, Adm. Frank B. Kelso 2d, the Chief of Naval
Operations, urged the Senate to keep restrictions that prevented women from
flying combat planes or going to sea on anything but supply or repair ships. A
few weeks ago, seeing change in the wind, the same admiral proposed an ambitious
plan to let women fly combat missions and serve on almost all warships.

In the wake of the Tailhook scandal, the armed services now require all
personnel to take sensitivity courses. In the last year, the Navy alone has
discharged 41 officers and sailors for sexual harassment. Many more may face
charges when the Tailhook prosecutions are complete.

But no change proposed recently has raised as many hackles as the issue of
ending the policy of drumming homosexuals out of the ranks. Last week, Mr.
Clinton endorsed a compromise that would allow homosexuals to serve but "does
not appear to endorse a gay life style," he said. The approach, "don't ask,
don't tell," is still undefined, but would end investigations into the sexual
preferences of personnel who break no military rules.

In January, following the very public lead of Gen. Colin L. Powell, most service
members voiced outrage when Mr.Clinton restated his campaign promise to lift the
ban.

Now, four months later, tempers have calmed somewhat, and arguments on both
sides are heard. Many service men and women have stepped forward and spoken up.

In testimony before Congress this month, Stevens R. Amidon, a heterosexual chief
petty officer with 18 years of Navy service, said he had served on submarines
with declared homosexuals who worked well with their shipmates.

Grad School Changes Views

Chief Amidon said in a telephone interview that he had felt compelled to testify
even though it might hurt his career because "there are a lot of very
professional, dedicated people out there who are suffering a lot of hurt." Chief
Amidon said his views toward homosexuals have changed dramatically since he met
gay classmates in a graduate program at Goddard College in Vermont.

And in a letter to The Washington Post last week, Maj. C. R. Myers, a Marine
Corps Harrier jet pilot, defended letting women into combat and homosexuals
serve.

"The military has a natural resistance to change," Major Myers wrote. "It's a
male-dominated kingdom afraid to admit a few ranks that don't necessarily fit
the mold."

"Let's not forget that the military won't be overrun with women wanting to fly
fighter and gays pounding at the doors to get in," he continued. "During these
times of force reductions, the military will be able to be more selective of new
recruits and officer candidates. If a woman or a gay person is the most
qualified candidate, let her or him in."

In a telephone interview Major Myers said that he was not "a crusader, an
activist or a publicity hound -- I just prefer not to judge people by their
sexual preference, but by their qualities as individuals."

It's a view some service members voice openly -- and many others seem to concur
with privately.

"I don't think it'll make a big difference," said Navy Lieut. Chris Chop, who
flies a Super Sea Dragon helicopter and is based at the Alameda Naval Air
Station in California. "People aren't going to throw away their careers over
this. They'll continue to work hard and cope."

Capt. William R. Graner, commander of the Navy's mine warfare forces on the West
Coast, agreed: "It'll be disruptive at first, but then we'll get used to it."

Since his testimony, Chief Amidon said many shipmates have taken issue with his
position. But he's been surprised by how many others agree with him. "The
reaction to this whole issue has been blown grossly out of proportion," he said.
"It also underestimates the ability of non-commissioned officers to deal with
situations that might arise. If that means supervising sailors who are gay,
that's what we'll do. I'll guarantee you that."

LOAD-DATE: May 30, 1993

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo: Stevens R. Amidon, a heterosexual Navy petty officer, testified
before Congress against banning homosexuals. With him was Margarethe
Cammermeyer, a National Guard colonel discharged for acknowledging that she is a
lesbian. (Paul Hosefros/The New York Times)

                   Copyright 1993 The New York Times Company


                              203 of 312 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                   May 30, 1993, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

Clinton Mends Military Fences At West Point

BYLINE: By THOMAS L. FRIEDMAN,  Special to The New York Times

SECTION: Section 1; Page 1; Column 5; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 1108 words

DATELINE: WEST POINT, N.Y., May 29


Seeking to quell simmering doubts within the American military about his
leadership, President Clinton assured the graduating class of West Point today
that when it comes to cutting the military budget "there is a limit beyond which
we must not go."

But the President also could not resist getting in a plug for his budget plans,
cautioning the 1,003 members of the United States Military Academy class of 1993
that "just as our security cannot rest on a hollow army, neither can it rest
upon a hollow economy."

Speech Warmly Received

Standing erect in a cool morning breeze, moving stiffly, and keeping a somber
look on his face at all times, Mr. Clinton seemed to be trying to strike just
the right demeanor for a Commander in Chief as he delivered his remarks, which
were warmly received by the cadets and their families.

"The changes of recent years allow us to be hopeful," Mr. Clinton told the
cadets. "But common sense reminds us to be prepared. One way we must be prepared
is by insuring that our forces have what they need to get the job done -- the
equipment and the quality people needed to insure that we can achieve decisive
victory should we be called to battle once again."

"The budget cuts that have come at the end of the cold war were necessary, even
welcome, appropriate in light of the collapse of the Soviet Union and other
changes," Mr. Clinton continued.  "But we must be mindful, even as we try so
hard to reduce this terrible national deficit, that there is a limit beyond
which we must not go. We have to insure that the United States is ready, ready
to win and superior to all other military forces in the world."

Many cadets said there was a certain degree of tension and wariness about the
President's visit before Mr. Clinton arrived. His legacy of having avoided the
Vietnam draft, his reduction of the military, his support for homosexuals in the
armed forces, and rumors that uniformed officers were made to feel unwelcome by
some White House staff had left many at West Point curious about Mr. Clinton at
best and resentful at worst, cadets said.

But his speech and tour of West Point barracks seemed to go a long way toward
dispelling some of that. The cadets and their families gave the President a
standing ovation for his remarks, and many said later that maybe he was not
quite the anti-military 1960's radical they had imagined.

"I had this impression before that maybe he didn't see the military as a real
American institution," said Cadet Bradley Helton, 20. "It is kind of a strange
thing for us -- his generation and how they related to the military. But I think
he came across really well today. He showed respect for the past in his remarks.
I was surprised. It was reassuring. Look, all of us want to see the President do
well because we want to see the country do well."

Top Marks for Haircuts

Mr. Clinton seemed to endear himself most to the audience with some
self-deprecating humor and self-criticism. Looking out on the sea of closely
cropped cadets, he began his address by remarking, "You have met high standards
for discipline, for physical fitness, for academics, and I must say, I am
impressed by your haircuts."

That line received huge applause and seemed to cut some of the tension in the
air at Michie Stadium, as did Mr. Clinton's comment that, "No one is perfect, as
even the President demonstrates from time to time."

Cadet Jeffery Sutton, who is 18, said: "It is kind of neat for him to make a
joke about the haircut thing. He said, 'Hey, I make mistakes.' For me to see him
do that makes him likable to me over all. It was kind of tense before he came,
people were really wondering about him. It was good to see him step up to it and
say, 'I may not be the best military man for the job, but I'm going to do the
graduation.' "

After the commencement speech, Mr. Clinton mingled with the cadets and their
parents. He was swarmed by outstretched hands and voices yelling "Hang in
there."

Today's appearance at West Point is part of a blitz by the President to try to
overcome his uneasy relations with many in the military by addressing them head
on. On Monday he will speak at a Memorial Day service at the Vietnam War
Memorial in Washington, despite protests by some Vietnam veterans that he should
not come at all.

Economics, not military strategy, seemed uppermost in the President's mind
today. He pointed out to the cadets and their families gathered in the stadium
bleachers that "what ultimately enabled us to prevail in the cold war was the
simple fact that our free political and economic institutions had produced more
prosperity and more personal human happiness than did the confining institutions
of Communism."

Assures Cadets on Cuts

Mr. Clinton's budget calls for trimming the defense budget -- by reducing
troops, closing bases and restructuring the armed forces to smaller, more mobile
units -- by $88 billion more over the next five years than proposed by the Bush
Administration. But just a few words from Mr. Clinton that he understood that
there was a limit beyond which he could not cut seemed to ease the minds of the
young cadets now going off to serve in the field.

"There was a lot of concern that we were cutting back too far and too fast,"
Cadet Samuel Amber said. "He really reassured us that nothing drastic will
happen. It shows me that after the first 100 days he is adjusting."

Cadet Tony Renne, said that in his view Mr. Clinton would still have "to work a
little harder to overcome some of the doubts."

"But I think his presence here, talking to military people -- that's good," he
added. "I think now more than before he is starting to realize that there is
genuine place for the military."

Cadet Layne Phillips said Mr. Clinton took her by surprise with his remarks.

"It is reassuring to hear it from him," she said. But she quickly added with the
wariness of one who has heard a few speakers from Washington tell the military
what it wants to hear, "We'll see what happens now."

There was one cheer for Mr. Clinton, though, that was definitely unreserved. It
came from the upper decks of Michie Stadium, where all the underclassmen were
sitting in their dress white uniforms. It erupted when Mr. Clinton announced
that as Commander in Chief he was ordering an "amnesty" for disciplinary actions
resulting from all minor violations of cadet rules like tardiness or messy
rooms. The Clinton amnesty, a tradition of visiting Presidents, forgives the
"walking tours" that require cadets to march back and forth for a specified
number of hours while wearing their dress uniforms and carrying rifles.


LOAD-DATE: May 30, 1993

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photos: A cadet salutes his Commander in Chief at the United States
Military Academy graduation at West Point. (Agence France-Presse) (pg. 1);
President Clinton gave the commencement address yesterday for the 905 men and 98
women who graduated as cadets from West Point. (Suzanne DeChillo/The New York
Times) (pg. 16)

                   Copyright 1993 The New York Times Company


                              204 of 312 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                   May 30, 1993, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

Sihanouk Party Gets Early Vote Lead

BYLINE: By PHILIP SHENON,  Special to The New York Times

SECTION: Section 1; Page 12; Column 1; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 957 words

DATELINE: PHNOM PENH, Cambodia, May 29


The first returns from Cambodia's first multiparty election in more than two
decades showed an early lead today for the opposition party associated with
Prince Norodom Sihanouk.

Although the United Nations released incomplete vote counts from only 4 of
Cambodia's 21 provinces and warned against early predictions of the final
outcome, the returns were consistent in each province. They showed the royalist
opposition party in first place by a sizable margin, followed by the governing
Cambodian People's Party, with the 18 other parties far behind.

Today's results, representing slightly more than 1 percent of the 4.2 million
ballots cast nationwide, were released here as diplomats and United Nations
officials raised fresh concerns that the incumbent Vietnamese-installed
Government might try to hold on to power by force even it lost at the polls.

At a meeting today among long-warring factions in Cambodia's 14-year civil war,
Prime Minister Hun Sen and a group of grim-faced deputies failed to give a clear
promise that the Government would honor the election results. Mr. Hun Sen said
instead, "We are awaiting the election results with the hope that the count of
votes would proceed in strict conditions."

Vietnam Installed Government

The Government was installed in 1979 by Vietnam after the Vietnamese Army
invaded Cambodia and ended a four-year reign of terror by the Maoist-inspired
Khmer Rouge, who were responsible for the deaths of more than one million
Cambodians in the 1970's.

The Khmer Rouge, now leading an insurgency against Mr. Hun Sen's Government,
boycotted this week's United Nations-sponsored elections but did not carry out
their threat to sabotage the voting with violence.

At today's meeting in Phnom Penh, Prince Sihanouk, the 70-year-old head of
state, congratulated the director of the United Nations peacekeeping operation
in Cambodia, Yasushi Akashi, on a "tremendous, historic achievement" in carrying
out the unexpectedly peaceful election.

But the Prince, who is believed to be maneuvering to form a coalition
government, warned that the period after the election might hold new threats of
violence.

"I don't say the period following the election will be absolutely calm and
quiet," he said. "We might face difficulties, even in the military field."

Role of the Khmer Rouge

After suggesting that the Khmer Rouge be included in a coalition, Prince
Sihanouk told a visiting delegation of European legislators on Wednesday that
the group had no place in a new government.

The election, the centerpiece of a $2 billion United Nations operation intended
to end Cambodia's civil war, will choose a 120-member constituent assembly,
which is to write a new constitution.

Each province is assigned seats in the assembly based on population. The
election results in each province will determine how the seats are divided among
parties. The vote count is expected to be completed within a week.

The results released today by the United Nations -- 47,119 votes out of nearly
4.2 million votes cast during the six-day election period, which ended on Friday
-- showed the royalist opposition party leading in the capital and in the three
other provinces that reported partial returns today: Kratie in eastern Cambodia,
Pursat in the west and Sihanoukville in the south.

The royalist party is known as Funcinpec, the French acronym for the National
United Front for an Independent, Neutral, Peaceful and Cooperative Cambodia.

The party was founded by Prince Sihanouk and is now led by one of his sons.
While he now says he is a neutral figure in politics, millions of Cambodians
continue to associate the party with Prince Sihanouk, whose face appeared on
Funcinpec campaign posters.

Most Popular Figure

The Prince was toppled from power in a 1970 coup and has spent much of the last
23 years in exile, but he remains the nation's most popular political figure.

While cautioning that it was "much too early" to predict an opposition victory,
Raoul Jennar, a Belgian academic who is an authority on Cambodian politics, said
in Phnom Penh today that he was surprised by the early election results --
especially those from Kratie Province, which has long been considered a
stronghold of the governing People's Party.

He said the results there suggested that "people were confident in the secrecy
of the ballot" and that they "wanted a change." The Government is widely
unpopular, its authoritarian leaders tied to corruption and rampant human rights
abuses, including the killing of opposition politicians.

With about 15 percent of ballots counted from the 109,000 registered voters in
Kratie, Funcinpec received 64.3 percent, followed by the People's Party, with
22.7 percent.

In Phnom Penh, with 13,692 ballots counted of those cast by 499,000 registered
voters, Funcinpec had 53.8 percent of the vote, followed by the People's Party
with 31.1 percent.

Government Resistance Feared

Mr. Jennar said that like many diplomats and United Nations officials, he feared
that the Government would try to find a way to hold on to power if it lost at
the polls.

"What I fear is the shock of the reality," he said. "I hope they will accept the
results. I think Hun Sen is willing to accept the results. But the others in the
Government? I don't know."

The United Nations -- and several foreign countries, including the United States
and Japan -- have certified the election as "free and fair," the designation
required under Cambodia's 1991 peace treaty before a new government can be
formed.

"The outright winners in this election were clearly the people of Cambodia," Mr.
Akashi said today, calling the large voter turnout "a stinging rebuke to the men
of violence."


LOAD-DATE: May 30, 1993

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo: United Nations officials sorting ballots yesterday near Phnom
Penh, Cambodia. Early returns showed that the opposition party associated with
Prince Norodom Sihanouk was holding a lead in the elections. (Reuters)

                   Copyright 1993 The New York Times Company


                              205 of 312 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                   May 30, 1993, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

Yale, Class of '68: Time to Take Stock

BYLINE: By RICHARD BERNSTEIN

SECTION: Section 1; Page 34; Column 1; Metropolitan Desk

LENGTH: 1427 words


Nineteen sixty-eight. It is sometimes assumed that the year was different from
all others, more tumultuous certainly but also filled with the spirit of
make-the-world-over idealism.

But how much of that spirit actually stuck to the people who embarked on adult
life in that year? A partial but intriguing answer comes from a 477-page volume
of essays and autobiographies published recently by the Class of 1968 at Yale in
preparation for its 25th anniversary celebration this weekend. If a conclusion
can be drawn from the collective portrait that emerges from the book, it would
be this:

While student radicals at universities like California at Berkeley, Columbia,
Cornell and Harvard were grabbing the headlines and giving a generation a
revolutionary gloss, a certain privileged class of young men elsewhere was
preparing itself for generally privileged lives, far more taken up with the
private dramas of love and career than with public efforts to repair the world.

That does not mean that the Class of 1968 at Yale was unaffected by the turmoil.
Indeed, some of the essays go out of their way to put the class in the
revolutionary context.

Ron Rosenbaum, now a staff writer at Vanity Fair, most conspicuously makes this
effort, arguing that "1968 was a singularity among graduations, a turning point,
a cusp, a definitive punctuation mark if ever there was one." The '68ers were,
Mr. Rosenbaum asserts in his essay, "the Davey Crocketts of the baby boom, the
scouts of the generational tribe." When the Beatles sang "She was just 17," Mr.
Rosenbaum says, "we were 17."

Products of Their Time

There are certainly some repair-the-world elements in the '68ers' lives and in
their views. Quite a few served in the Peace Corps after graduation.  A summary
of their opinions and preferences, reflected in answers to a questionnaire,
shows them to be generally moderate but, on certain moral issues, like
environmentalism and abortion, products of their time.

Of the 563 who answered the questionnaire, 222 said they were Democrats and 159
Republicans. Solid majorities think that "the world environment is in danger"
and even more substantial majorities support free choice on abortion and the
women's movement.

But if a residue of singularity still adheres to the '68 consciousness, it is
sometimes difficult to perceive in the actual lives lived. Overall, most people
sought lives more in the Ozzie and Harriet mold than that of Janis Joplin or Bob
Dylan. The occupations of preference for the '68ers are law and medicine with
teaching a clear third and banking, investment counseling, business, and
financial services also significantly represented.

"I have a lovely wife, great kids and a successful career in a useful
profession," wrote Richard E. Anderson, a medical doctor who lives in Del Mar,
Calif. "My house is nice, I have a fast car, and I have seen and done many
things."

The members of the Yale class of 1968 may or may not be representative of other
members of their cohort.  For one thing Yale in 1968 was still an all-male club;
women were first admitted as undergraduates the next year. None of the women's
colleges in the region seem to have put out class volumes that might have
provided a basis for comparison with Yale.  There were also fewer minority-group
members at Yale than there are now at almost any major university, though the
volume provides no exact statistics on this.

Sense of Suspicion

But Yale is typical in that it did not erupt in 60's-era violence or calls to
"off the establishment," a fact that might have to do with the collective
personality of the Yalies but that some essayists in the anniversary book
attribute to the skillful leadership of the university's president, Kingman
Brewster.

This does not mean that the Yale class was unaffected by the larger-than-life
events of 1968: the assassinations of Martin Luther King Jr. and Robert F.
Kennedy, the Tet offensive in Vietnam, the Prague spring in Europe, the
demonstrations at the Democratic National Convention in Chicago, the sexual
liberation, the drugs, the music, the mood of cultural revolution.

One writer in the Yale volume, Daniel Yergin, pinpoints what may be the most
significant shift of his generation: the fact that "an alienation and suspicion
of American purpose in the world had become common in our generation."

In that sense the most representative member of Yale's Class of '68 may be
Oliver Stone, the filmmaker who turned the '68 ideology into several hit movies.
Mr. Stone, who provided what looks like a publicity office filmography for the
Yale anniversary volume, out '68ed other members of the class by dropping out,
going to Vietnam and film school at New York University and never going back to
Yale.

Other essayists in the Yale class have some thoughts about the way the meaning
of their year has changed with time. Michael Mandelbaum, now a professor at
Johns Hopkins, and Strobe Talbott, President Clinton's Ambassador at Large to
the former Soviet states, write about the ways they got the world wrong in 1968.


Hints of Pioneering

They thought 25 years ago that the central event of world politics was the
Vietnam War. Now they realize that the central event was the 1968 anti-Soviet
uprising in Czechoslovakia, which they saw years ago as "a distant ripple" but
one that became a "tidal wave" of global change. The two writers also allow that
in protesting the Vietnam War they were probably not so brave or original as
they thought. "It took more political and intellectual courage to support than
to oppose the policies of the Johnson Administration in Southeast Asia," they
write.

There are other hints of generational pioneering in the 1968 volume.  In a
prefatory essay, Armistead L. Robinson and Donald H. Ogilvie, the first a
professor at the University of Virginia, the second director of Redding
Consultants Inc., talk about the experience of being black at Yale:

"Whether we liked it or not, the black revolution of the 1960's, with its
mixture of political radicalism, student activism and cultural transformation,
imposed itself on our daily lives and on our imaginations so pervasively that
this media-declared revolution became the defining moment of our Yale
experience," they write.

The Yale volume also includes reflections on homosexuality at Yale, and that too
stands as an early tremor of the movement of gays and lesbian American for full
acceptance.

"The problem at Yale is that there just wasn't anybody to talk to about it,"
Steve Schulte, a former Mayor of West Hollywood, Calif., writes in another
essay. "When I look back at Yale and think about the loneliness, about being
condemned by the church and being told I had a mental health problem, I realize
it was an incredibly arduous time."

Of the approximately 1,000 members of the Class of 1968, 37 are listed in a
special "In Memoriam" page at the end of the book. Their causes of death are not
given, but members of the class say there were some suicides; there were some
accidents; there were some deaths by illness, including AIDS.

Ordinary Dramas of Life

Most of the short autobiographical essays by the Yale graduates deal with the
more ordinary dramas of life. They talk of marriage, divorce, children and
careers, quite often in that order. One writer talks about acquiring the courage
"to walk away from a million-dollar marriage of security." Another says that he
made a good deal of money in a publishing business and now devotes himself "to
more personal interests -- one of which is bridge."

A scattered few talk about devoting themselves to social or political causes.
Among the graduates are people like Robert Ardist Asadorian, an investor from
Redwood City, Calif., who concludes: "As the years passed and the family grew,
what mattered most was family and friends."

Underlying it all, despite the divorces, the deaths, the disappointments, is a
declared satisfaction with life. The tally shows 554 who say they are in good
health and only 3 who say they are not. A large majority agree with the
statement "I am happy with the quality of my life."

In the alphabetically last essay, Walter Stephen Zorkers of Wakefield, Mass.,
says he devoted himself to his career "in some fruitless attempt to succeed or
at the very least not screw up." But today, he says, "I left my work as an
environmental consultant uncharacteristically early in order to play with my
spectacular child, a 5-year-old boy named Stephen who aspires to be a fireman
and a Boston Bruin."

LOAD-DATE: May 30, 1993

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo: Daniel Yergin, a member of Yale's Class of 1968, pinpoints what
may be the most significant shift of his generation: the fact that "an
alienation and suspicion of American purpose in the world had become common in
our generation." He stood on the campus during the reunion yesterday. (Steve
Miller for The New York Times)

                   Copyright 1993 The New York Times Company


                              206 of 312 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                   May 30, 1993, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

U.S. Must Keep Promises to Veterans

SECTION: Section 4; Page 10; Column 5; Editorial Desk

LENGTH: 356 words


To the Editor:

You report President Clinton will attend the Memorial Day observance at the
Wall, the Vietnam Veterans Memorial, in Washington (news article, May 27),
despite a postcard campaign from some veterans charging he would "engage in
hypocrisy" if he visited the memorial for the war in which he did not serve.
That "controversy" is not worthy of discussion.

The hypocrisy is not in Mr. Clinton's appearance at the Wall on Memorial Day.
The hypocrisy lies in the fact that all entitlements for veterans are constantly
being slashed or eliminated in health care, education, housing and employment
programs by the same Government that promised these things to them when they
signed up for the armed services. Most of the cuts took place in the last 12
years.

What are the people who have been involved in this postcard campaign to prevent
President Clinton's appearance at the Wall on Memorial Day doing about any of
these issues?

In the 1960's and 70's, right after the senior prom, our sons, brothers and
fathers had to choose whether or not they were going to Vietnam to kill and be
killed in an undeclared, controversial war. Despite the draft, our laws gave
them options to help them make that decision. Some went, most did not. God
forgive us all for what we said and did 25 years ago.

It is not necessary to rehash how badly America treated those boys when they
finally did come home. Unfortunately, America is still confused about what to
do.

If you want to help honor all veterans, as well as those who paid the ultimate
price with their lives, don't waste your time with meaningless campaigns that
point fingers. Educate yourself about what is happening to veterans today, join
their organizations, write those people in Washington, insisting that veterans
get back the full entitlements they were promised so many years ago.

For the record, Hillary Rodham Clinton has received high praise from the
Disabled American Veterans for doing what she can to reinstate the health care
programs for veterans in her task force's new health care package.

SUSAN MERKER
Wappingers Falls, N.Y., May 27, 1993

LOAD-DATE: May 30, 1993

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Letter

                   Copyright 1993 The New York Times Company


                              207 of 312 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                   May 30, 1993, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

FILM;
Five Writers + One Star = A Hit?

BYLINE: By ALJEAN HARMETZ;  Aljean Harmetz is the author of "Round Up the Usual
Suspects: The Making of Casablanca."

SECTION: Section 2; Page 1; Column 1; Arts & Leisure Desk

LENGTH: 3453 words

DATELINE: LOS ANGELES


In Hollywood, nearly every one dreams of the big score. And, in the fall of 1991
when studios were making plans for the summer of 1993, the biggest imaginable
scores would be a movie "directed by Steven Spielberg" or "starring Arnold
Schwarzenegger."

Columbia Pictures got Mr. Schwarzenegger by paying five screenwriters more than
$2 million to create "Last Action Hero," a $70 million movie that opens June 18.
Since their work hooked Mr. Schwarzenegger, the writers -- Adam Leff and Zak
Penn, Shane Black and David Arnott, and the Academy Award-winner William Goldman
-- were probably worth double that amount.

Back on Nov. 1, 1991, when "The Last Action Hero," a script written on
speculation, was sent to producers at five studios, Mr. Schwarzenegger was,
unquestionably, the biggest movie star-fish in the Hollywood sea. In 1990,
American moviegoers had paid $118 million to see him in "Total Recall." A year
later, they paid $204 million to see him in "Terminator 2: Judgment Day," and
audiences in Asia and Europe had handed over another $150 million.

The studio that landed Mr. Schwarzenegger would have to pay him $15 million,
plus a large chunk of the profits. But since profits were almost guaranteed,
every studio was dangling scripts in front of him as bait. That Mr.
Schwarzenegger bit at "Last Action Hero" was a combination of timing,
coincidence, flattery, luck and -- most of all -- those five writers.

The original spec script, by 23-year-old Zak Penn and 24-year-old Adam Leff, had
so little to do with the final movie that the Writers Guild awarded screenplay
credit to Shane Black and David Arnott, and gave Mr. Penn and Mr. Leff a "story
by . . . " consolation prize. They wrote "The Last Action Hero" -- their
original script has lost its "The" as well as its villain and most of its
characters and dialogue -- as a calling card, a foot in the door, since they had
never sold anything before. "I thought it would definitely get us an agent,"
says Mr. Leff, "and maybe sell."

The two buddies from Wesleyan University had written two other scripts -- the
first about a giant rat devouring people in Central Park and the second about
blackmail and rich layabouts in East Hampton. The first script failed to even
interest an agent. "The smart thing we did," says Mr. Penn, "was having the
foresight not to send out the second one."

In preparing to write a male-buddy-action-adventure comedy in March of 1991, Mr.
Penn and Mr. Leff rented "Lethal Weapon" and three dozen other action films and
prepared a list of questions for themselves: "When does the second-most-evil bad
guy get killed?" "Do the hero's wife and child get kidnapped?" "Does he have a
Vietnam buddy? (Because your war buddy always betrays you.)" "What holiday is
the film taking place on?"

Reversing Woody Allen's "Purple Rose of Cairo," in which a movie character
stepped down from the screen, their plot sent a fatherless 15-year-old named
Danny through a rip in a movie screen to become the sidekick of a great action
hero, L.A.P.D. detective Arno Slater. Because of the boy's knowledge of action
films, he can predict who will be killed and who will betray Slater. That
concept would prove irresistible to a number of people.

Beginner's Luck
A Script Is Sold

In October 1991, Mr. Penn and Mr. Leff tried to pressure agents into reading
"The Last Action Hero" (then titled "Extremely Violent"). Several of their
friends organized a blitzkrieg of phone calls that intrigued Chris Moore at
Intertalent, an aggressive young agency. Mr. Moore read the script over one
weekend, and Mr. Penn and Mr. Leff had an agent. But Intertalent had a problem.
Carolco, which had paid top dollar for "Total Recall" and "Terminator 2,"
disliked the script and particularly the ending, in which the action hero threw
away his gun.

If word got out that Carolco hated the script, the project would be dead. So,
despite the fact that no sane agent would try to trigger an auction on a Friday
evening, Intertalent hurriedly sent the script to five producers, including
Steve Roth at Columbia.

Michael Cieply, Mr. Roth's vice-president, remembers sitting on a bench in front
of the agency, reading the first 60 pages and thinking, "We should buy this if
they don't do something stupid like kill the kid." He skipped to the last page
and discovered that the boy was still alive.

In his former life as an agent, Steve Roth had sold the successful movies "Foul
Play" and "Silver Streak." He felt the same "fingernails on the blackboard"
excitement when he read "The Last Action Hero." "It had a wonderful first act
when this disenfranchised kid is sucked into the movie," says Mr. Roth. Within
24 hours he had handed the script to Barry Josephson, Columbia's executive vice
president of production.

The Next Step
Attracting Arnold

Columbia offered to buy the script outright for $350,000. Intertalent wanted
$700,000. There were six nasty days of infighting between the only two bidders
-- Columbia and its sister studio, Tri-Star, also owned by Sony Pictures
Entertainment -- with Sony frowning on the sibling rivalry and both studios
eventually lowering their first offers. On Nov. 7, Columbia optioned "The Last
Action Hero" for $100,000 against a modest total of $350,000 if the movie were
made.

Intertalent couldn't whip up a bidding war because there seemed to be only one
actor who could star as the self-parodying action hero. Bruce Willis was on his
way down, Clint Eastwood was too old, Sylvester Stallone was heavy-handed and
had failed in everything except the "Rocky" and "Rambo" films. Even the hero's
name, Arno Slater, echoed the obvious choice: Arnold Schwarzenegger.  The odds
on getting Mr. Schwarzenegger were very long indeed.

Executives at two other studios told Mr. Josephson that Arnold Schwarzenegger
would never do the film. Nevertheless, Mr. Josephson sent the script to Lou
Pitt, Mr. Schwarzenegger's agent, asking if the actor might read it over
Christmas.

Mr. Pitt called Columbia before Christmas: "Come to lunch. Arnold is
interested."

Says Mr. Schwarzenegger: "Having a kid come into a movie awakened certain
fantasies I had as a kid in Austria. What would it be like to sit on John
Wayne's saddle, or have him come with this huge horse right out of the screen?
The script had a great concept, but it wasn't executed professionally."

In Hollywood, words don't necessarily have the same meaning that they do in the
real world. "Interested," in this case, meant that Mr. Schwarzenegger would
throw "The Last Action Hero" into his mix of 10 projects he was considering,
which included Tri-Star's "Cop Gives Waitress $2 Million Tip"; Warner Brothers'
"Sgt. Rock," based on a comic-book character; Ron Howard's "Curious George," and
"Sweet Tooth," in which he would play the Tooth Fairy.

To Columbia's advantage, "Last Action Hero" already fit certain of Mr.
Schwarzenegger's requirements.  The Los Angeles-based actor wanted to stay home
for a while, and he was trying to soften his image. "Last Action Hero" was an
action-comedy that could be made in Los Angeles and, despite the dead bodies,
get a PG-13 rating.

Lunch was very untrendy bratwurst and schnitzel on Jan. 6, 1992, at Schatzi on
Main, Mr. Schwarzenegger's restaurant in Santa Monica. The Columbia contingent
included Peter Guber, C.E.O. of Sony Pictures. Mr. Guber ranks No. 5 on Premiere
magazine's list of Hollywood's most powerful people, while Mr. Schwarzenegger is
only No. 8, but it was up to the studio to make the pilgrimage.

The actor refused to let the executives pay. But Columbia was about to pay in
other ways. In Hollywood, money is proof of sincerity. The studios vying for Mr.
Schwarzenegger's affection were bringing him the equivalent of candy and flowers
by spending up to a million dollars having scripts rewritten to his
specifications. As one participant says, "The best thing would have been if we
could have told Arnold, 'We have Jesus Christ rewriting this.' "

Rewrite 1
Keep Guns, Add Mayhem

Columbia settled for paying $1 million to Shane Black, who had written "Lethal
Weapon" when he was a 22-year-old U.C.L.A. graduate and who had subsequently
sold his script, "The Last Boy Scout," for $1.75 million. Hiring Mr. Black
showed that Columbia was serious.

Mr. Black in turn gave $250,000 to David Arnott, a film-school buddy, to
co-write the script. "Usually, someone wants you to rewrite something because
it's bad," says Mr. Arnott. "This script was a gold mine of an idea. The writers
played four variations on a theme. We thought, 'Wow, there are 400 more
possibilities.' "

What remains of the original Penn-Leff script is the central idea of a boy
joining his favorite fictional character in a movie (an idea first used in 1924
by Buster Keaton in "Sherlock Jr."); a scene in which the boy is mugged in real
life and another in which he daydreams of Slater (now named Jack) playing
Hamlet; a running gag in which detectives are teamed with inappropriate
partners, and the obscene-sounding nonsense dialogue screamed by Slater's boss,
Lieut. Dekker, including, "I've got the chamber of commerce doing cartwheels in
my cocoa factory."

"The trick," says Mr. Black, "is to take their kernel and make it yours."

In both versions, the screen is littered with dead bodies, but the Penn-Leff
script settles for guns and explosions, while the Black-Arnott script is a
roller-coaster thrill ride in which murder is committed by ice cream cone,
corpse and animated cat.

In neither script does the movie-within-the-movie make much sense. The Penn-Leff
version has to do with selling drugs. The Black-Arnott version deals with rival
gangsters. In Mr. Black and Mr. Arnott's favorite draft, Danny keeps pointing
out the absurdities of the movie-within-a-movie, in which tar doesn't stick to
superheroes and people appear out of nowhere with clean clothes. "Nobody's
bothered by this amazingly inconceivable coincidence?" Danny asks at one point.

In the Black-Arnott version, entrance to the film-within-a-film is by a magic
ticket. The ticket is what Alfred Hitchcock called a MacGuffin, an object that
the characters chase after. "Instead of a nebulous tear in the screen, we wanted
a MacGuffin which would set up a series of rules for us," says Mr. Black.

The golden ticket also allows the villains, followed by Slater and Danny, to
enter the real world -- where getting shot hurts and nothing works the way it
does in the movies. The original script returned to the real world at the end,
but nearly half of "Last Action Hero" now takes place in New York, where Jack
Slater must save the real Arnold Schwarzenegger.

When Mr. Black and Mr. Arnott started their rewrite on Feb. 25, 1992, Mr.
Schwarzenegger was still being wooed by other studios. While Mr. Arnott and Mr.
Black worked in a windowless office on the Columbia lot, Mr. Roth was getting
daily bulletins: Mr. Schwarzenegger had decided on the director Paul Verhoeven's
"Crusades" for Carolco. The actor had told Warner Brothers that "Count of Monte
Cristo" was "way out in front." The actor's wife, Maria Shriver, wanted him to
do "Sweet Tooth," but his gym buddies were teasing him about the Tooth Fairy.

Mr. Roth, however, was actually afraid of only one movie, a secret project by
James Cameron, who had directed "Terminator 2." (A few weeks ago, Mr.
Schwarzenegger agreed to make the Cameron action-comedy, "True Lies," a remake
of the French film "La Totale" in which a seemingly average man turns out to be
a spy.)

The Squeeze
The Seduction Continues

As Mr. Black and Mr. Arnott labored away during the spring of 1992, studios were
wooing Mr. Schwarzenegger with gifts of directors as well as writers. Assured
that Mr. Schwarzenegger was looking favorably at their projects, the director
Ron Underwood (whose credits include "City Slickers") waited patiently with
"Sweet Tooth," and John G. Avildsen ("Rocky") waited with "Cop Gives Waitress $2
Million Tip." "At one time, Arnold had five of the most popular directors parked
with projects he was supposed to do," says one participant.

One thing was certain. Mr. Schwarzenegger, who had not made a movie since
"Terminator 2," had to say yes by August if he wanted to hit the celluloid for
the summer of 1993.

"What everyone was desperately afraid of," says one person close to "Last Action
Hero," "was making Arnold angry." Or, as Mr. Josephson of Columbia said, in
April, "When you're dealing with Arnold Schwarzenegger, you go into a high stage
of alert, Def Con 1. You can't let anything fall between the cracks."

Columbia became so secretive that the studio printed huge code numbers on each
page of each script of "Last Action Hero." If the script reached an unauthorized
person, the studio would know which executive to fire.

In February, Columbia had offered the Penn-Leff script to John McTiernan, who
had directed Mr. Schwarzenegger in "Predator." Mr. McTiernan turned it down. "It
wasn't very good," he says. "It wasn't challenging or fascinating. It didn't
have a spark." In July, Mr. McTiernan changed his mind and signed on. "What drew
me," says the director, "is the wacko sense of humor Shane Black and David
Arnott brought. Shane had done enough service in the salt mines of action movies
to ridicule them in an acid way. The script had so much venom that I loved it. I
called Arnold and said: 'This thing is great. You have to read it.' Arnold was
about to commit to the Tooth Fairy, and he held up."

But both Mr. McTiernan and Mr. Schwarzenegger were unhappy with the last third
of the Arnott-Black script. Mr. Schwarzenegger says, "They had created rhythm
and pace and staggering action scenes. What I felt was missing was bonding
between this kid and his hero."

In addition, Mr. Black and Mr. Arnott had incorporated one questionable idea
from Mr. Penn and Mr. Leff: the kindly old projectionist turns out to be the
devil. "It was cruel and unpleasant," says Mr. McTiernan, "with blood oozing
from the walls of the theater."

Says Mr. Arnott, "I just went back and read some of our early drafts, and I
thought, 'Look at the mistakes we made.' "

Rewrite 2
For the Star, A Human Face

Mr. Schwarzenegger said he would star in "Last Action Hero" -- if the studio
could get William Goldman to add "emotion" to the script. Mr. Goldman, whose
credits include "Butch Cassidy and the Sundance Kid" and "Misery," is a
novelist, essayist and, most importantly in this case, Hollywood's premiere
script doctor. A few years earlier, he had rewritten "Twins" for Mr.
Schwarzenegger, and the actor felt comfortable with him.

Mr. Goldman said no. (He apparently found the script too brutal and bloody.) But
a few days later -- in late July -- Mr. Goldman sat on the edge of his bed and
took a conference call from Mr. Schwarzenegger, the actor's agent, and
Columbia's three top executives, starting with the studio's chairman, Mark
Canton. Columbia would give Mr. Goldman $750,000 to spend four weeks exploring
the emotional core between Jack Slater and Danny. If Mr. Goldman refused, there
would be no Arnold Schwarzenegger movie for the summer of '93.

Paying Mr. Goldman $750,000 was cheap if hiring the writer caused Mr.
Schwarzenegger to commit. It did.

What Mr. Black and Mr. Arnott had written was 85 pages of inventive bloodbaths,
broken by emotional moments. As Mr. Arnott describes it: "Our script was a
little less warm, fuzzy thing. Shane and I were trying to do too much. I always
thought that, if you can juggle nine balls in the air and not drop them, isn't
that more interesting than juggling six? No, it's too much. William Goldman took
away three of our balls and made the movie less harsh."

Mr. Goldman was the fifth but not the last screenwriter on "Last Action Hero,"
since Mr. Black and Mr. Arnott later rewrote some of his material, and in turn
were rewritten by other hands. Mr. Arnott is philosophical about the process:
"It's such a myopic business, screenwriting. You never get a sense of the
overall scheme of things. It's 'We need this scene to be fixed.' 'We need a line
here.' 'We can't afford this location, so change something.' "

Mr. Goldman changed a number of things. He rewrote the demonic projectionist
(played by Robert Prosky) into Danny's best friend, and made the film's
secondary villain (Charles Dance) into the main villain. He eliminated some
supernatural elements, including Danny's telephone call to his dead father. Mr.
Schwarzenegger had played opposite a tough teen-ager in "Terminator 2" and
didn't want to do it again, so Mr. Goldman made the boy 11 instead of 15,
allowing him a vulnerability he hadn't had before. Mr. Goldman also made Jack
Slater more vulnerable.

Says Mr. McTiernan, the movie's director: "Goldman gave Arnold a character to
play, and he excised 150 toilet jokes."

In one Goldman scene (later modified by Mr. Black and Mr. Arnott) the action
hero is confused:

Slater: "I keep getting into these crazy adventures, but the craziest thing? I
keep surviving." (beat) "Meanwhile, they're getting harder. More dangerous,
every time!"

Danny: "They have to, audiences expect it. That's what keeps 'em coming back.
Relax, you'll make it. You're the hero."

Slater: "I don't want to be the goddamn hero! I'm tired of getting shot and
kicked and thrown out of planes. It hurts. You try it!!"

In the end, even five writers were not enough. Larry Ferguson (the screenwriter
of "Hunt for Red October") contributed several lines to the shooting script. Mr.
Dance wrote most of his own dialogue. And a woman writer, who asked not to be
identified, was brought in to supply four scenes for Danny's mother, played by
Mercedes Ruehl.

On Oct. 29, 1992, almost exactly one year after the script by Mr. Penn and Mr.
Leff was auctioned, "Last Action Hero" went into production.

Endgame
Taking Credit

Success, it is said, has a thousand fathers, and this movie is not expected to
fail. Therefore, everybody wants acknowledgment, except for Mr. Goldman, who did
not seek a screenwriting credit.

Mr. Leff and Mr. Penn, with only their "story-by" credit, now have the cachet of
being hot screenwriters.  They have a deal at Fox, and New Line has bought
"Central Park," their screenplay about the giant rat.

Mr. Black and Mr. Arnott were forced out of their windowless Sony office in
April, to be replaced by film editors desperate to finish the movie for its June
opening.

Because Steve Roth was shrewd enough to buy "Last Action Hero," he will get a
producer's credit, even though the project was completely taken over by
Columbia.

Barry Josephson has a memento of the year -- the typewriter ribbon on which Mr.
Black and Mr. Arnott wrote their rough draft.

In addition to starring in "Last Action Hero," Arnold Schwarzenegger is
coproducer and has final approval over publicity, advertising and promotion. In
July, he is scheduled to begins shooting "True Lies," for release next summer.
Meanwhile, in a tent in Baluchistan, some nameless, would-be screenwriter may be
dreaming up the plot for Mr. Schwarzenegger's next movie.



TINSEL TALK

The essential element? A no-brainer. Without Arnold Schwarzenegger, "Last Action
Hero," a spec script written as a calling card by two unknowns who ended up with
a story-by credit, would never have been made. Mr. Schwarzenegger has such clout
that half a dozen A-list directors parked themselves next to other movie
projects in which he was said to be interested. Why? Such is the power of a
megastar.

Need a translation? Read on.

Element: The basic building block of Hollywood, without which any project is
simply empty space pierced only by the phone calls of agents. Elements may be
actors, directors, occasionally producers. They are never writers.

Spec script: A script that has not been commissioned; the writer spends six
months eating Spaghetti-O's in hopes of spending the rest of his life eating at
Spago.

Calling card: A script that gets you through the studio door, into meetings and
out of poverty. Most often, a calling card is a script that everybody wants to
read but nobody wants to make.

Story-by credit: A credit that often goes to the star for a two-sentence idea;
sometimes given to the original writers, whose script has been changed beyond
recognition.

Clout: Whatever Arnold wants, Arnold gets.

A-list: You know who they are, and, even if you don't, they do.

Parked: A parked director is like a car up on blocks, waiting for a star to come
along and start the engine.

Project: A Hollywood molecule: elements bound together by the weak force of
creativity and the strong force of money.

Megastar: Anyone whose payment for a movie routinely includes a Learjet.

LOAD-DATE: May 30, 1993

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photos: Arnold Schwarzenegger in "Last Action Hero" -- Interested in
softening his image, the actor had to choose between "Action Hero," "Sgt. Rock,"
"Curious George" and a movie called "Sweet Tooth." (Zade Rosenthal/Columbia
Pictures)(pg. 1); William Goldman -- Without his help, there would be no movie.
(James Gray/Camera Press); Shane Black, left, and David Arnott -- Their job was
to add venom, acid and a wacko sense of humor. (Bart Bartholomew for The New
York Times)(pg. 19); Zak Penn, left, and Adam Leff -- Two buddies from Wesleyan
University with a gimmick that would prove irresistible to many people. (Bart
Bartholomew for The New York Times)(pg. 18)

                   Copyright 1993 The New York Times Company


                              208 of 312 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                   May 30, 1993, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

Serbian Barbarism -- and Ours

BYLINE: By Peter Schneider;  Peter Schneider is author, most recently, of "The
German Comedy," a collection of essays. His forthcoming novel is "Couplings."
This was translated from the German by Leigh Hafrey.

SECTION: Section 4; Page 11; Column 1; Editorial Desk

LENGTH: 1454 words

DATELINE: BERLIN


No one denies the facts. In the midst of Europe, within sight and sound of
Italy, Austria and Greece, a war is being waged with the explicit goal of
driving out and destroying civilian populations. The civilian victims are not
just the necessary cost of carrying out military operations. The aggressors view
them as the real enemy they need to defeat. They intend as best they can to
"free" the conquered territories of undesirable minorities.

Night after night, television brings scenes of starving, maimed, raped, mangled
civilians into the living rooms of Europe. These images of war are even more
horrific than those that sent millions of Europeans into the street 25 years
ago. Whatever the language, whatever the ideology, in those days the slogan was
simple: Stop the war in Vietnam! These days, the outrage is limited to a low
sigh before the TV screen.

European politicians are numbing their citizens' revulsion with declara-tions
that lead nowhere. We've lost count now of all the truces and peace accords
violated before the ink was dry by new acts of conquest and murder. The
all-too-belated attempt by the United States to unite its European allies for
joint military action against the Serbs has run afoul of a European inclination
that diplomats would politely call "agreeing to disagree" -- "cynicism" might be
a more appropriate word.

Mesmerized, the world hangs on the lips of a Serbian leader who until recently
swore he wasn't supplying weapons to his Bosnian clansmen and now swears he will
halt these shipments immediately.

The joint plan of action agreed on by the United States and Europe on May 24
shows them bobbing in the wake of the former Soviet Union, whose policies
traditionally placed might over minority rights. The program of action no longer
invokes the Vance-Owen plan; it amounts to a de facto recognition of Serbian
territorial gains and the confinement of the Muslim population to so-called safe
havens.

It can't really be pure chance that the conquerors were the first to welcome the
plan: For the Serbs, bluffing is a safe technique when there is no one there to
call your bluff. Since the birth of European union at Maastricht, in the
Netherlands, Europe has turned its face to the future -- the baby face of a
faun, smiling only on those who already have what they need.

The Germans stand out among their European partners in disinclination only on a
couple of odd points, points uniquely theirs. One wouldn't have to make much of
these matters if the Germans were really and primarily interested in the
practicalities of intervention: What goals could be achieved? How many United
Nations troops would be necessary? Why would German participation be
counterproductive?

Yet every argument you have, and for that matter half the politicians'
statements on TV talk shows, prove that these aren't the real questions.

The terms of the debate are set by moral guidelines, supposed lessons from the
past, that shape our view of the possibility of intervening. And it's hard to
miss the claim that Germany should play a special role, set a moral example.
Horst Eberhard Richter, a leader of the peace movement and a professor of
psychology, put it most succinctly in a television talk: Because of the special
burden of their past, Germans have an opportunity to show the world the
impossibility of solving today's problems through war.

In a heated debate with an opponent of intervention who had just celebrated his
60th birthday, I reached the point of asking him whether Germans have any
principle they ought to be willing to defend with their lives.  His only
response was to hum a Nazi song that celebrated the spilling of blood for folk
and Fatherland. He had had to learn it when he was a schoolboy. His hummed
response seemed to speak for itself. The man with the mustache, the life-hater,
had used phrases of that kind to lead Germans into a bloodbath that cost 50
million lives.

No more war, no more uniforms, no more weapons -- to the children of those who
had prosecuted the war, this seems the only viable response to their elders'
jingoism. The message seems so obvious that people overlook the flaw in it: it
is incomplete.  The victims of Nazi aggression and their children -- Jews,
Poles, Russians, Czechs, French, Britons -- never could or would draw the same
conclusion from their wartime experiences. Their parents had no choice but to
take up arms and wage war against the German aggressors.


Only in the land of the aggressor can one share in the widespread inclination to
lump aggression and the armed struggle against aggression in a simple, catch-all
rejection of "war." As a philosophy, it doesn't square with the experiences of
those who fought Fascism.

The Israeli author Amos Oz shocked members of the German peace movement by
commenting that aggression, not war, was the ultimate evil. My guess is that the
moral confusion and lameness of many Germans can be explained by the fact that
they haven't lived Amos Oz's comment: We Germans learned only from our parents
-- the aggressors -- not from their victims.

Is this really the lesson to be learned from Nazi Fascism, that since we are
responsible for the worst war crimes in history, we have the moral duty (and
privilege) to restrict ourselves for all eternity to taking care of business,
leaving other people to offer their lives for human rights? It just doesn't
happen very often in history that the most convenient and least threatening
stance -- ringing one's hands over a massacre -- turns out to be morally the
most noble.

At this point in the debate, someone invariably sounds the warning that
effectively stops all thought and feeling: One can't and shouldn't compare the
Bosnian horror to the crimes of the Nazis. A curious argument, only half-right:
If Auschwitz is our standard of measurement, there's no point intervening
anywhere in the world, because none of the crimes currently being committed
against human rights attains the scale of Auschwitz,

On the 50th anniversary of the Warsaw Ghetto uprising, its last surviving
commander, Marek Edelmann, noted that "in Bosnia, we are witnessing mass
slaughter, and Europe is behaving the way it did toward the resistance in the
Ghetto." When a survivor of Nazi mayhem can say that, cautionary statements by
guilt-ridden Germans sound rather odd. Even the distress caused among German
intellectuals by the admittedly problematic comparison of Saddam Hussein to
Hitler can be explained by a kind of negative megalomania: How dare anyone
compare this upstart, mustachioed Arab sheik to our own incomparable monster,
Hitler!

Even the often-expressed opinion that we don't know friend from foe in Bosnia
turns out to be a feeble excuse for inaction. This much we do know: Not only the
Serbs, but to a lesser extent the Croats, and in some cases even the Muslims are
carrying out ethnic cleansings in their ancestral lands or in the lands they
have conquered.

Like most wars, the war in what was once Yugoslavia doesn't permit a clear
distinction between good and evil, but it does allow us to distinguish between
criminal aggressors and victims who also commit crimes.

The Serbs are waging a barbaric war of conquest and have vastly increased their
territory. The Croats have lost a considerable portion of their territory to the
Serbs and are now trying, by ever more brutal means, to increase their hold in
Bosnia at the expense of the Muslims.  The Muslims have lost almost everything.

Besides, the issue for Europeans has never been choosing between Serbs and
Croats. Now and always, we must side with the victims of aggression: first it
was the Croats; it was and still is the almost defenseless Muslims; it was and
is the civilian population on all sides. The first and most important assignment
in any intervention should be to separate the warring parties and stop the
killing. It worked in Cyprus. People seem to forget that the United Nations
still has troops in Cyprus. And it has become clear that we will not stop the
killing in Bosnia unless we send in ground troops who are free to stop the
aggressors by military means.

The cost of such intervention would be high, certainly higher than the Europeans
and Americans have so far been willing to contemplate. Not only Germans but
democracies the world over face the question of what it's worth to them to
re-establish democracy in a country where what needs defending is human rights,
not oil.

We can't ask others to answer for us. A supporter of intervention has to ask how
much he is willing to sacrifice. Those peoples who decide the risk is too high
ought also to say what they will tolerate: the triumph of barbarism in this part
of Europe.

LOAD-DATE: May 30, 1993

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Drawing

TYPE: Op-Ed

                   Copyright 1993 The New York Times Company


                              209 of 312 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                   May 30, 1993, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

OUT THERE: PHILADELPHIA;
From Muffin Shop to Salon

BYLINE: By John Marchese

SECTION: Section 9; Page 3; Column 1; Styles of The Times

LENGTH: 1022 words

DATELINE: PHILADELPHIA


Hard-core Philadelphia foodies might disagree, but some of the best fare served
up at the White Dog Cafe is talk.

Last Monday evening, for instance, Dr. Thomas Naff, a professor of modern Middle
Eastern studies at the University of Pennsylvania, strolled the few blocks from
his campus office to the restaurant and ate a dinner of grilled tuna with tomato
and black-olive vinaigrette, accompanied by crisp anise-flavored polenta fries.
He then rose to offer his theories about the Middle East peace talks,
particularly the role that hydropolitics play in the complicated process.

Nearly four dozen people, who paid $25 each, filled a dining room reserved for
the occasion. Among the group were lawyers from Philadelphia firms, a member of
the city's World Affairs Council and several graduate students. They chose from
among the tuna, oven-roasted chicken breasts glazed with rosemary and sage, and
vegetable ratatouille with linguine, herbed ricotta and Parmesan cheese. And
they listened.

Speaking loudly over the noise of a busy evening in the rest of the cafe, Dr.
Naff said he was only half-heartedly optimistic about the peace talks because
"access to water is a zero-sum, power- and prestige-packed issue that is
extremely difficult to resolve."

Although this was Dr. Naff's first lecture at the White Dog Cafe, it was not his
first meal. "I come here quite a bit," he said. "It's an interesting place, very
uniquely Judy."

Judy is Judy Wicks, 46, a former Vista volunteer and waitress who has become a
successful restaurant proprietor through an unusual combination of qualities: a
sharp business sense, a liberal outlook (she readily calls herself a "lefty")
and a wacky feel for the festive. All of this has led to events like an annual
New Year's Day brunch, when patrons are encouraged to dress in their pajamas.

Since it opened as a muffin shop 10 years ago, the White Dog Cafe has become not
only one of this city's most consistently popular and well-reviewed restaurants,
but also Ms. Wicks's Chautauqua.

Over the years, the muffin shop was transformed into the White Dog Cafe as Ms.
Wicks expanded the menu. She began the informal lecture series five years ago
when she suspected that diners might be interested in thinking as well as
eating. This year alone there will be two dozen speeches. Diners have already
heard the author Mark Lane discuss his conspiracy theories about the
assassination of the Rev. Dr. Martin Luther King Jr. Sheldon Hackney, Penn's
president and President Clinton's choice to run the National Endowment for the
Humanities, showed up another night for dinner and talked about the role of
universities in American cities. Earlier this month, Dr. Patch Adams, a doctor
who founded the Gesundheit Institute in West Virginia, a medical practice that
provides free care, spoke about humor and humanism in medicine. And in June,
another Penn professor, Dr. Houston Baker, will discuss racial diversity and
freedom of speech.

"I want this to be a cool place to hang out," Ms. Wicks said recently. "This is
a business, and a successful business. But that wouldn't be enough for me. It's
a neighborhood place, really. We could be someone's home."

It once was. The White Dog, at 3420 Sansom Street, got its name from an incident
in the life of Helena Petrovna Blavatsky, a Russian noblewoman and theosophist
who lived in the building in the late 1800's. According to legend, Madame
Blavatsky once cured her infected leg by having her white dog lay on it.

Ms. Wicks lives above the cafe, which occupies two connected row houses, built
in 1871, on the eastern edge of the University of Pennsylvania campus. She and
her husband won the right to purchase the buildings in 1983 after a 15-year
legal battle with the university over its plans to raze the entire block. Ms.
Wicks now shares an apartment filled with antiques with her two children, a
white poodle named Emily that frequently pads through the restaurant and a black
cat named Shiva that is the official mascot for the Black Cat, Ms. Wicks's
equally eccentric antiques and gift shop adjacent to the cafe.

With Madame Blavatsky long gone, Ms. Wicks has preserved her spirit in the
restaurant's decor, which is filled with dog figurines and canine art. Even the
restrooms have dog murals on the walls.

Ms. Wicks admits to a limited sophistication about food, so she leaves it in the
hands of Kevin von Klause, 36, who worked at a Philadelphia restaurant called
Apropos. Since he took over in 1986, the White Dog, "leads the pack of local
restaurants doing new-style American cooking," a restaurant reviewer for
Philadelphia magazine wrote.

In January, Mimi Sheraton, thefood editor for Conde Nast Traveler magazine,
named the White Dog Cafe as one of 50 American restaurants worth a journey. Ms.
Wicks said that she recently fed New Yorkers who had hired limousines to visit
the White Dog.

Ms. Wicks has made a few journeys of her own. She was in New York last Monday
night to attend a meeting of the Social Venture Network, a group of business
people, to discuss plans for a 10-day trip to Cuba with 18 of her restaurant
patrons. (They left last Thursday.) It is the latest chapter in what she calls
her "sister restaurant project," in which she, Mr. von Klause and others visit
restaurants in countries that are diplomatically distant from the United States.
Ms. Wicks and some of her devoted diners have also been to Nicaragua, El
Salvador, Vietnam and Lithuania.

"It's person-to-person diplomacy," she said. "We call it 'eating with the
enemy.' "

Ms. Wicks will be back from Cuba in time for the next dinner lecture, on
ecotourism, scheduled for June 27, and for the White Dog's annual Fourth of July
block party, which spills out of the restaurant and onto Sansom Street. At some
point during the party, as she has done for years, Ms. Wicks will bring her bed
down from upstairs, put a beach ball under a Colonial-era dress, and then act in
a skit in which she gives "birth" to Liberty and Justice -- actually,
tap-dancers who perform "Yankee Doodle Dandy."

It is, like her restaurant, very Judy.

LOAD-DATE: May 30, 1993

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo: A choice of tuna, chicken or ratatouille is served with a
lecture by Dr. Thomas Naff. (David Fields for The New York Times)

                   Copyright 1993 The New York Times Company


                              210 of 312 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                   May 31, 1993, Monday, Late Edition - Final

An Expert on Cities, at Home in the World

BYLINE: By MICHAEL KIMMELMAN,  Special to The New York Times

SECTION: Section 1; Page 15; Column 1; Cultural Desk

LENGTH: 1578 words

DATELINE: TORONTO


Jane Jacobs is lost in Toronto. Among the world's pre-eminent "foot people," as
she termed urbanites like herself in "The Death and Life of Great American
Cities," she is riding in the passenger seat of a car, looking
uncharacteristically puzzled.

More than three decades have passed since Mrs. Jacobs, now 77, wrote "The Death
and Life of Great American Cities." Many books are hyped as "seminal." Few
books, certainly few books written in the second half of this century, can be
said to have truly affected the way large numbers of people think and live.
"Death and Life" is one.

It was published when the full, combined weight of government and academe was
behind the wholesale destruction of old neighborhoods and their replacement with
highways and housing projects. Mrs. Jacobs's book was an impassioned liberal
response to the liberal urban-planning establishment, written in lively,
jargon-free prose, based not on abstract theories but on the observation of how
cities actually operate. "Clinging as closely to reality as a squirrel to a nut"
is one way her approach has been described. Even now -- the book has lately been
reissued as part of Random House's Modern Library series, which includes
classics by the likes of Tolstoy, Joyce and Proust -- what Mrs. Jacobs observed
about cities 30 years ago rings astonishingly true.

Dear? Sweet?

The book, like much else she has done as a writer and community advocate, was
incendiary. But she certainly doesn't look like a rabble-rouser, dressed in
poncho and sneakers. She greets a visitor warmly, with a quick, friendly laugh
that can bring to mind Margaret Rutherford in the old Miss Marple movies. Only
slowly does she reveal the stubborn, self-assured determination that once
prompted Roger Starr, a former adversary as the executive director of the
Citizens Housing and Planning Council in New York, to say: "What a dear, sweet
character she isn't."

Mrs. Jacobs has proved herself to be nothing if not fearless in the face of
authority. She took on Marx and John Maynard Keynes in "Cities and the Wealth of
Nations" and Adam Smith in "The Economy of Cities." She argued for the breakup
of Canada in "Quebec and the Struggle over Sovereignty." The latest of her five
books, "Systems of Survival" (Random House), is a revaluation of morality in the
form of a Platonic dialogue among a group of often testy New Yorkers.
("Originally I placed them in Toronto but people here are so polite -- it's one
reason I like it here -- that I couldn't get the characters to argue properly,"
she says. "People in New York are blunt, even downright rude.")

Each book has led naturally to the next: from writing about how people function
within cities, she analyzed how cities function within nations, how nations
function with one another and, finally, how everyone functions in a world of
conflicting moral principles. Invariably, the problems she tackles are almost
ridiculously sweeping. Yet her home-grown prescriptions never are. Mrs. Jacobs
prefers diversity to conformity, decentralization to centralization, natural
growth to drastic change.

An Observant Child

By her own account, she has been a contrarian from childhood. As a schoolgirl in
in Scranton, Pa., whose downtown she recalls lovingly, she was "told in fourth
grade that cities originated near waterfalls because that was where mills could
be built."

"But this was obviously untrue in Scranton," she said, "and I said so to my
teacher. There was a scenic waterfall in the area, but the city certainly wasn't
there."

Mrs. Jacobs skipped college and went to work in New York City. When, as an
editor of Architectural Forum, she began writing "The Death and Life" on a grant
from the Rockefeller Foundation, a group of urban planners from Harvard and the
Massachusetts Institute of Technology summoned her to Cambridge, Mass. "They had
it all figured out, that I should be writing on the results of a questionnaire
on middle-class housing projects," she said. "I was so grateful to be
independent of the academic establishment. I thought, how awful it would be to
have my future hinge on such people and such decisions."

Mrs. Jacobs's independent-mindedness has been especially apparent since she made
herself a thorn in the side of New York City officials in the 1960's by
spearheading a group that blocked William Zeckendorf, the developer, in
collaboration with those officials, from tearing down a large stretch of her old
West Village neighborhood to make way for a new high-rise complex. In 1968 -- as
a 51-year-old mother of three children -- she was arrested on charges of
second-degree riot and criminal mischief for disrupting a public meeting on the
proposed construction of an expressway that would have sliced across lower
Manhattan and displaced hundreds of families and businesses.

And in 1969, shortly after she moved to Toronto with her husband, Robert H.
Jacobs, an architect, and their children, in protest over the Vietnam War, Mrs.
Jacobs joined the opposition to a highway that would have cut into the middle of
the city, as it happened along the street, Spadina, on which her family then
lived.

She was also among those who in 1972 disrupted a wrecking crew while it was on
the verge of destroying the place she is trying to find by car as we talk, a
building that today functions as the Dundas Sherbourne Community House. It is
"where the revolution started," Mrs. Jacobs says, by which she means the
revolution to overthrow local planning moguls who wanted to tear down old
structures like that one in the name of progress. The struggle to save the
Dundas Sherbourne Community House was the Boston Tea Party of Toronto's urban
revolution, Mrs. Jacobs says.

What Makes a City

But it is not easy for her to find at first. After almost passing it by, Mrs.
Jacobs spots it: a pleasant, unpretentious, old yellow-brick two-story affair
with a ramshackle porch -- a neighborhood favorite -- although not obviously the
sort of building to provoke a revolution.

Yet that is, in a way, Mrs. Jacobs's point: cities, healthy cities, at least,
are not made up simply of grand statements and coherently designed suites of
buildings, as the failures of one utopian scheme after another has often
painfully demonstrated, but rather of quotidian, unpredictable, even anarchic
assortments of structures. The Dundas Sherbourne Community House, knitted into
the complex fabric of the street, is special precisely because it is so average.

Mrs. Jacobs contends that Toronto is realizing the dreams that she once had for
New York City but that she says as often as not failed to come true there:
examples of safe, lively neighborhoods that mix businesses and residences and
one ethnic group with another; of renovations that have given life to once dead
parts of town, and of new housing gracefully meshed with old, as on Sherbourne
Street. There, in response to the protests of Mrs. Jacobs and others, new
houses, instead of replacing old buildings like the Community House, have been
tucked so discreetly behind the existing low-rise structures that they can't be
seen from the sidewalk. Toronto may not be the most beautiful city, but to Mrs.
Jacobs it is among the most livable, open-minded and optimistic.

And no place here better illustrates Mrs. Jacobs's ideal conception of city life
than her own neighborhood, in the area known as the Annex. The Jacobses' house,
on a quiet residential street, is modest and comfortable, a place lived in but
not designed, with its 1960's-ish white furniture surrounding the fireplace in
the living room and a basket full of empty cereal boxes for kindling.

A Community of Differences

Her son lives up the block, and as Mrs. Jacobs walks down the street she is
greeted by neighbors: a banker delivering a box of checks to her, a woman living
in a rooming house nearby. The Annex is full of people of different incomes,
different nationalities. Bloor Street, the busy thoroughfare at the corner, is
crowded with offices, stores and restaurants, including a few Hungarian ones
that date back several decades to when this was a Hungarian enclave.

In the 1950's, the houses on Mrs. Jacobs's block were almost torn down to make
way for a development; Mrs. Jacobs proudly recounts the story of the housekeeper
whose employers bequeathed her their home, which she refused to sell to the
developer, even though she didn't even live in it. Thanks to this kindred
spirit, Mrs. Jacobs says, the neighborhood was saved.

Up the street near Bloor is a development that for once Mrs. Jacobs fought for
when others in the community were against it. The development consists of a
suite of differently designed, multi-family homes in what used to be a derelict
park. It is the sort of in-fill housing that blends seamlessly into the
neighborhood.  Mrs. Jacobs directs the car past an unlikely site, the Sky Dome,
where the Blue Jays play baseball. Because the Sky Dome is amid downtown office
buildings with ample parking and easily accessible by public transit, it did not
require the sort of vast parking lots that turn the areas surrounding most
stadiums into wastelands. The Sky Dome also incorporates stores and hotels that
make it active even during the off season.

"Before it was built, I had thought that would be a terrible site for a stadium,
blighting the area like other stadiums," Mrs. Jacobs admits. "But I was wrong. I
am wrong plenty of times, you know."

NAME: Jane Jacobs

LOAD-DATE: May 31, 1993

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo: More than 30 years have passed since Jane Jacobs wrote "The
Death and Life of Great American Cities." The book has been reissued as part of
Random House's Modern Library series. (Michael Morissette for The New York
Times)

TYPE: Biography

                   Copyright 1993 The New York Times Company


                              211 of 312 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                   May 31, 1993, Monday, Late Edition - Final

Sihanouk Role Seems Crucial to Cambodia's Fate

BYLINE: By PHILIP SHENON,  Special to The New York Times

SECTION: Section 1; Page 3; Column 1; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 1085 words

DATELINE: PHNOM PENH, Cambodia, May 30


When Cambodians voted last week in what is likely to be remembered as the first
free election in the history of this tormented nation, many admitted that they
did not really understand the concept of a secret ballot or political parties or
democracy.

They said they wanted to vote simply because they knew that this was their
chance to demonstrate loyalty to Samdech -- the King. They were referring to
Prince Norodom Sihanouk, who is still called the King by millions of his former
subjects, and who may be on the verge of reclaiming at least some of the power
that was stripped from him in a coup 23 years ago.

The United Nations, which managed the election as part of its biggest
peacekeeping operation, said today that the second day of the vote count showed
no clear winner between the governing Cambodian People's Party and the royalist
opposition party that many Cambodians associate with Prince Sihanouk and his
family.

With about 20 percent of the votes counted, the People's Party had 384,635
votes, or 44.4 percent. The opposition party, known as Funcinpec, had 328,150
votes, or 37.8 percent. About 4.2 million voters cast ballots in the six-day
election, which ended on Friday.

Strong Support in Provinces

The count is expected to be completed some time this week, and diplomats say the
margin between the two main parties will likely narrow when results are
announced from provinces where the opposition is expected to make a strong
showing. Voters are selecting a 120-member constituent assembly, which is to
write a new constitution.

Whatever the final vote count, the 70-year-old Prince is thought likely to end
up with an important role -- and if the opposition wins, the leading role -- in
forming Cambodia's new government and in trying to end the long civil war.

"Prince Sihanouk is vital to the success of the peace process," said Charles H.
Twining, the senior American diplomat in the capital. "We have great confidence
in him."

Other diplomats, and a number of Cambodians, are not so confident about the
prospects of this war-shattered nation with Prince Sihanouk once again in
command. They worry that the Prince's chronic unpredictability and his
willingness in the past to align himself with the leaders of the Khmer Rouge
rebels -- men he himself has accused of genocide -- make him unsuitable to lead
Cambodia.

Prince Was Ousted in 1970

He is without doubt the most popular political figure in a country that has
known only civil war or mass murder since his ouster in 1970, and his 29-year
rule in Cambodia is the last era that many Cambodians remember anything like
peace in this country.

If the Prince gets what he is seeking in the new government -- perhaps as
president, perhaps even again as king -- he will have proved himself the
greatest political survivor in the modern, tragic history of Indochina. He will
have brought full circle a career that began in 1941, when the Cambodia Vichy
French picked the pliable teen-age Prince to be the nation's monarch.

His life has since become tightly woven into the postwar history of Cambodia. In
1953, he negotiated Cambodia's independence from the French. In 1955, he
abdicated and went on to be Cambodia's civilian leader for 15 years. In 1970, he
was toppled in a coup led by Gen. Lon Nol and then aligned himself with the
Khmer Rouge in seeking to overthrow the American-backed Lon Nol Government.

In 1975, he was imprisoned in his gilded palace in Phnom Penh after the Khmer
Rouge came to power and began an agrarian revolution that took the lives of more
than one million Cambodians, including many in the royal family. In 1979, he was
freed when Vietnam invaded Cambodia and ended the Khmer Rouge reign of terror.

Former Ally of Khmer Rouge

In the early 1980's, he aligned himself again with the Khmer Rouge, despite the
evidence of genocide, in seeking to overthrow the Vietnamese-installed
Government that is in power today. In 1991, he helped negotiate a treaty
intended to end the civil war.

Prince Sihanouk is now back in the palace, a shimmering architectural confection
bathed in shades of gold and green set close to the banks of the languorous
Mekong River. He spends his days weighing proposals from the United Nations and
from his advisers for the makeup of a new government.

And he again enjoys the trappings of a national leader. The stern-faced,
gray-suited bodyguards, who follow him everywhere, are North Koreans, a gift
from the Prince's close friend President Kim Il Sung of North Korea.

Son Vows to Yield to Father

While Prince Sihanouk's name was not on the ballot, many Cambodians assumed that
they were voting for him by casting ballots for Funcinpec, as the royalist party
is known, for the French acronym for the National United Front for an
Independent, Neutral, Peaceful and Cooperative Cambodia.

It was founded by Prince Sihanouk but is now led by his son Prince Norodom
Ranariddh. Prince Sihanouk quit the party after he signed the peace treaty,
which was brokered by the United Nations in 1991, and then became the ceremonial
head of state.

While Prince Sihanouk insists that he is a neutral figure in Cambodian politics,
Prince Ranariddh vowed during the election campaign to turn over all state
powers to his father should the party win the election. For many Cambodians,
that is the promise they have long waited to hear.

"There was peace when the King ruled," 80-year-old Chan Mok said. "And there was
no peace without the King. There were only terrible things."

If the governing People's Party wins, the Prince is still likely to be given an
important role, although a more limited one, in the new government. The
Government of Prime Minister Hun Sen has said Prince Sihanouk is a symbol of
"national reconciliation," and the People's Party has already suggested that it
will endorse Prince Sihanouk if he chooses to run this year in a proposed
presidential election.

The vote count also suggests that Prince Sihanouk may be the mediator between
the leading parties in forming a coalition government if neither side wins a
clear majority of the vote.

Although Prince Sihanouk insisted last week that the election was a historic
defeat for the Khmer Rouge and that he had abandoned a proposal to include them
in a government, diplomats say he will probably accept the guerrillas in a
coalition if that will end the war.

"He has told me that he wants to die in this country, with the country at
peace," a senior Asian diplomat said.

LOAD-DATE: May 31, 1993

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo: Prince Norodom Sihanouk, who is still called the King by
millions of his former subjects in Cambodia, greeting Buddhist monks last week
outside of the Royal Palace in Phnom Penh. If the royalist opposition party wins
the election, the Prince may receive an important government role. (Agence
France-Presse)

                   Copyright 1993 The New York Times Company


                              212 of 312 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                   May 31, 1993, Monday, Late Edition - Final

Driver's License Gives Veterans Lease on Life

BYLINE: By KIRK JOHNSON,  Special to The New York Times

SECTION: Section 1; Page 28; Column 1; Metropolitan Desk

LENGTH: 974 words

DATELINE: ROCKY HILL, Conn.


Ernest Parrish survived two years as an Army medical corpsman during some of the
worst fighting of the Vietnam War. But contend with the state Department of
Motor Vehicles? Uh-uh.

Years of alcoholism and homelessness, Mr. Parrish said, had left him unable to
face this. The stress, the bureaucracy, the long lines, not to mention the lack
of a permanent address, all made the thought of regaining the driver's license
he let expire upon entering the service seem unattainable.

"I'd get all confused standing up there waiting," he said. "The longer you have
to wait to do something, the more jittery and the more nervous you get -- with
me that would have flunked me automatically right there."

But last month Mr. Parrish, who is 50 -- and steadfastly sober, he said, since
Aug. 12, 1992 -- got back the license that in society says so much about a
person's identity and independence and place. He cherishes it.

Removing an Albatross

How this came about for Mr. Parrish and some 56 other troubled and for the most
part formerly homeless veterans is perhaps even more startling: The Department
of Motor Vehicles, an agency synonymous with rigid rules and deadening delays,
actually came to them. Volunteers, all veterans themselves, taught
driver-education classes, and department employees then came and administered
the tests here at the Veterans Home: written examinations in a small classroom,
driving test out in the parking lot. They bused the newly minted drivers to the
Motor Vehicles office for thei license portraits.

The idea is not so much to put people back on the highways as to help them get
back on their feet, said the state's Commissioner of Veterans' Affairs, Hamilton
D. Harper Jr. As such, a license is not seen as just a means toward greater
mobility, and perhaps a job, but as a way to help restore some feeling of
legitimacy for people who gave to their country but somehow ended up on the
margins.

"When you're homeless, you've got an awful lot of problems -- the whole process
of just getting a driver's license is overwhelming," Mr. Harper said. "It's a
big, big albatross sitting over their shoulders."

The program, which veterans' affairs experts say may be the only statewide
effort of its kind in the nation, got under way at a two-day gathering of
homeless veterans at the Veterans Home last October. Since then, it has expanded
and evolved into a sort of tough-love combination of hand-holding and bootstrap
self-improvement, with two class sections of 20 men each that have been held so
far. And while not everyone graduated, those who did speak in tones of pride
that even a car-obsessed teen-ager might be embarrassed to admit.

"I don't want nothing to happen to this -- I value this," said Otis Robinson, a
49-year-old former Army radio parts specialist who served in Vietnam. "A friend
of mine, he's got a car. It's not registered, not insured. He wanted me to drive
him someplace because I got a license. I said,'No, no, no.' "

Aiding Self-Reliance

The Department of Veterans Affairs estimates that about one-third of the
nation's homeless population is made up of military veterans. And while the
legions of problems that some of these people face might make a driver's license
seem irrelevant, participants in the Connecticut program disagree strongly.

Michael P. Stagon, a 45-year-old Army veteran who owns a driving school and
donated his time to teach, said: "The big thing with these people is to get them
back into society. To get back into society, they've got be self-sufficient. And
to be self-sufficient, they need a license."

In a population plagued by emotional and psychological problems often brought on
by homelessness, drugs and alcohol, who gets into a program like this? And who
decides?

In Connecticut, the first step was a court hearing. The state convened a mobile
branch of State Superior Court, which held business here at the veterans'
retreat in October, to reconsider old suspensions and minor driving infractions,
or fines that might be forgiven. The court review also culled out former drivers
with the worst histories -- for drunken driving, for example, or reckless
driving, or those who had the most serious psychological or substance-abuse
problems.

Those who made the cut then had to stay free of drugs and alcohol, and survive
record-checking for out-of-state driving infractions, then, of course, pass the
tests.

"For a lot of them it had been 30 years since they took a test -- they were
pretty high strung, anxious," said Tom Wollenberg, a Vietnam-era Navy veteran
who also helped teach the classes with his father, Albert, an Army veteran who
was wounded in World War II. But Tom Wollenberg said his students were also the
most intense he had ever taught. "They didn't want another failure or a
disappointment," he said. "This was, for them, a lease on life."

But simply being legal behind the wheel is only part of the equation. The other
half is having somewhere to go, and that still eludes some graduates.

Stanley Steinbach, a 49-year-old former Army infantry man in Vietnam who said he
suffers from post traumatic stress disorder, drove for years without a license,
always watching his rearview mirror for the police. But still he felt unable to
go to the Motor Vehicles Department and get a license.

Now he owns a 1964 Dodge Dart he bought from his aunt and he can drive to the
Veterans Administration Hospital in West Haven for treatment. But as for where
he will go beyond that, he is not sure. "I really haven't given it that much
thought," he said. "I really don't know."

But he is giving away his car. His son Tory, who will be 18 on July 31, has been
promised the prized Dodge -- less than 80,000 miles and the original upholstery
-- as a birthday gift. Mr. Steinbach shrugs. He'll get by somehow, he said.

LOAD-DATE: May 31, 1993

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo: Years of alcoholism and homelessness had made it almost
impossible for Ernest Parrish, a Vietnam veteran, to obtain a driver's license.
A program by the Department of Motor Vehicles in Connecticut has helped Mr.
Parrish and other troubled and homeless veterans get their licenses. (Steve
Miller for The New York Times)

                   Copyright 1993 The New York Times Company


                              213 of 312 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                   May 31, 1993, Monday, Late Edition - Final

Disputed Isles Topic of Talks

BYLINE: AP

SECTION: Section 1; Page 3; Column 2; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 90 words

DATELINE: MANILA, May 30


Nations pushing rival claims to the Spratly Islands will begin talks on Monday,
expected to center on possible cooperation in exploring the resources of the
island chain, believed to be rich in oil. The islands in the South China sea are
claimed all or in part by Brunei, Malaysia, the Philippines, Taiwan, Vietnam and
China. Indonesia, Singapore and Thailand are also expected to join the three-day
conference. Tensions rose in February after China passed a law claiming all the
Spratlys and reserved the right to defend them with force.

LOAD-DATE: May 31, 1993

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1993 The New York Times Company


                              214 of 312 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                  June 1, 1993, Tuesday, Late Edition - Final

For Veterans, a Time for Memories;
A Hospital's Small Celebration Turns Into a Day for Sharing

BYLINE: By IVER PETERSON,  Special to The New York Times

SECTION: Section B; Page 1; Column 2; Metropolitan Desk

LENGTH: 861 words

DATELINE: LYONS, N.J., May 31


In a veterans hospital, the wars sometimes never end, and memories are carried
deep in lasting wounds and lost years.

"Memorial Day is different when you get in here," said Andy Giannone, who came
back from the dark terror of the Vietnam jungle as a heroin addict 25 years ago
and who spent his first sober Memorial Day in years at a small celebration here
today.

"Listen," he said, "I spent 11 months in the woods over there. But it wasn't
until I got here that I realized what all the guys did in Vietnam. Before I hit
bottom and came here, Memorial Day was just another long weekend to party. Now
it's like I'm remembering for the first time."

Like Mr. Giannone, the 1,000 residents of the Veterans Affairs Hospital here and
the veterans who came from nearby towns for a short ceremony and a picnic did
not kid themselves about how the rest of the country was spending the first warm
three-day holiday weekend of the year. A high school in Hunterdon County was
even going to hold classes today, before Anna Hoffman, a World War II veteran of
the Women's Army Corps, fixed her unblinking blue eyes on the school board and
made it back down.

"The future is always in doubt," said Mrs. Hoffman, warning against
forgetfulness. "The best protection for this country is remembering what these
people went through."

Each war produced its own set of shared memories that mingle and compete for
attention in a soldiers' home. Bob Bonnaviat, a retired Morris County postal
worker who was shot down after 46 bombing raids over Italy, remembers World War
II, the good war. He came here today to help with the celebration.

Norval Sims, shot in the head at Inchon in Korea and reduced to an electric
wheelchair and permanent residence in the hospital, is stuck between the
unblemished glory of the war against Hitler and the ambiguity of Vietnam.

"Wounded and forgotten," he said grimly. "Went from World War II to Vietnam, a
bunch of crybabies. Forgot about us. We don't get a memorial. But it beats the
hell out of a park bench."

History and Balance

Mr. Sims's grudging view of the Vietnam-era men who share the hospital with him
rests on a sense that history has been unbalanced in its appreciation of
suffering. The Vietnam War veterans got an acclaimed war memorial in Washington,
while the Korean War veterans are still begging funds for theirs. The Vietnam
veterans eventually got a high level of public sympathy for the agony of their
war, as though combat could be graded from easy to hard.

The Vietnam veterans even got a complicated name for what they suffered,
post-traumatic stress syndrome, something the Korean War veterans called shell
shock, when they called it anything.

"A Korean War veteran died in the street in front of the White House," Mr. Sims
said angrily. "Nobody knew and nobody cared until they found out he had a Bronze
Star. Reagan put him in Arlington." A little more help while his dead comrade
was still alive, Mr. Sims seemed to have been saying, would have been more
welcome than honors after he was dead.

At this hospital, many of the Vietnam veterans live in the domiciliary, the Dom,
where they get drug and alcohol rehabilitation and a respite from the outside
world while they learn to bury their nightmares. Mr. Giannone is one of these,
an enrollee in the hospital's program for post-traumatic stress syndrome.

Ken Lewan, a Coast Guard veteran of the Vietnam era, mourns the lost years of
drug abuse that washed him up here, H.I.V.-positive and knowing that his biggest
battle is still ahead of him.

"I know most of the people outside of places like this forget about the
veteran," he said. "I did it too, for 20 years. It doesn't bother me. Once you
come in here, though, it's like getting your memory back. It's what makes being
in a hospital bearable."

The veterans see themselves as guardians of the memory. But they do not always
agree, any more than forgetful civilians, on what is best for the country.

"I wouldn't give Clinton a salute," Robert Stoffer, the veteran of an Army mess
hall in Long Binh, said when the President's lack of a military service record
came up.

Mrs. Hoffman said, "He should have served, instead of running off."

Mr. Bonnaviat, the World War II bombardier and easily the most cheerful of these
veterans today, said, "Service or not, I feel he was elected by the whole
people, and we owe it to him to give him our best wishes."

New Friendships

Now, the veterans warn, the civilian world outside has seen the great enemies of
past wars vanquished. But it should not grow complacent. "There will never be
peace," said Mr. Stoffer, who came into the Dom two years ago as a homeless man.

Mr. Stoffer has embraced the new friendships that have come to him in the Dom.
The comradeship of Vietnam, so intense in the war, quickly evanesced. He spent a
day in Queens in 1968 drinking with Vinnie DiGennaro, another mess-hall cook,
but the war stories that made the rounds were all exaggerated, the civilians at
the party could not care less, the friendship was forced.

"I had forgotten the friendship," Mr. Stoffer said. "I came here, and then I
remembered."

LOAD-DATE: June 1, 1993

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo: Bob Bonnaviat, a retired Morris County postal worker who was
shot down after 46 bombing raids over Italy, attending a Memorial Day ceremony
at the veterans hospital in Lyons, N.J. (Monica Almeida/The New York Times) (pg.
B4)

                   Copyright 1993 The New York Times Company


                              215 of 312 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                  June 1, 1993, Tuesday, Late Edition - Final

Books of The Times;
The Way Universities Profit by War Research

BYLINE: By HERBERT MITGANG

SECTION: Section C; Page 15; Column 3; Cultural Desk

LENGTH: 864 words



The Cold War and American Science
The Military-Industrial-Academic
Complex at M.I.T. and Stanford
By Stuart W. Leslie
Illustrated. 332 pages. Columbia University Press. $42.

In "The Cold War and American Science," Stuart W. Leslie, a professor in the
department of the history of science at Johns Hopkins University, takes off from
the theme of President Dwight D. Eisenhower's only memorable phrase: his warning
against the unwarranted influence of "the military-industrial complex." Mr.
Eisenhower used the words in his farewell address on Jan. 17, 1961, just before
leaving the White House, but its significance echoes to the present time of
big-power peace.

Professor Leslie extends the Eisenhower phrase to include the major universities
that depend on Pentagon contracts for their research laboratories: the
"military-industrial-academic complex." (He credits Senator J. William Fulbright
of Arkansas, an early opponent of the Vietnam War, for adding the word
"academic.") The author argues that with the end of the cold war, there's even
less reason for the universities to put their brainpower to work for the
Pentagon and the arms merchants.

"For better and for worse, the cold war redefined American science," Professor
Leslie writes. "In the decade following the second World War, the Department of
Defense became the biggest single patron of American science, predominantly in
the physical sciences and engineering but important in many of the natural and
social sciences as well. Driven by the politics of national security and by the
Pentagon's belief in the competitive advantages of high technology, spending for
defense research and development surpassed its wartime peak (already 50 times
higher than prewar levels) by the end of the Korean War, then climbed to
dizzying heights after Sputnik, reaching $5.5 billion a year by 1960."

In the next two decades, the Defense Department's share of Federal Government
research and development spending decreased, but this didn't mean that America's
scientific professoriate was going out of the military business. The Pentagon's
declining share reflected the fact that other agencies -- the National Science
Foundation, the National Aeronautics and Space Administration and the National
Institutes of Health -- contributed to ever-greater increases of the military
presence in American science. The defense buildup of the 1980's, the author
says, actually pushed military research and development spending past the record
levels of the Vietnam War.

To prove his theme, Professor Leslie concentrates his own research on the two
universities that profited most from the Federal Government's largesse: the
Massachusetts Institute of Technology and Stanford University. But he also notes
that among other universities, the California Institute of Technology, Harvard,
Johns Hopkins (his own university) and Columbia (whose university press is his
book's publisher) also received Government research-and-development contracts.

Professor Leslie writes that the Massachusetts Institute of Technology "profited
enormously" from its military connections and the financing sources they
provided. With this money, the university put together highly regarded
engineering programs that were "financially and intellectually" successful. But
even among those who benefited, there was a growing awareness that "the price of
that success might be higher than anyone had imagined: a pattern for engineering
education set, organizationally and conceptually, by the requirements of the
national security state."

Stanford quickly caught up with M.I.T. in the contest of winning defense
contracts for its research and teaching programs. "Electronics at Stanford, as
at M.I.T.," the author says, "predominantly meant military electronics, from the
actual hardware prototypes produced in classified laboratories to the most
'basic' theoretical research, which made them possible, and from the academic
laboratories and classrooms that trained future electronics engineers to the
local defense contractors that hired most of them."

Professor Leslie's book would have been stronger had he included spokesmen for
the military-industrial-academic complex: Pentagon officials, defense
contractors and professors who, rightly or wrongly, believed they were making a
contribution to the national defense and economy in the cold war years. Even if
one agrees with his theme that what was good for the Pentagon and arms
manufacturers wasn't necessarily good for the universities or the country, the
other side might well have been heard from.

Inevitably, the cold figures of cold war costs are lacking in authorial
sexiness; they're about as exciting as Ross Perot's charts. That's one reason
the subject of Pentagon and other Federal agency support for military research
in the universities has not been adequately reported in the press, on television
or in books. Professor Leslie deserves credit for opening up the subject. "The
Cold War and American Science" helps tell why the transition from a
quasi-wartime economy to the hobbled peacetime economy the Clinton
Administration inherited is so daunting and necessary.

LOAD-DATE: June 1, 1993

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Review

                   Copyright 1993 The New York Times Company


                              216 of 312 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                  June 1, 1993, Tuesday, Late Edition - Final

U.N. GETS PROTEST ON CAMBODIA VOTE

BYLINE: By PHILIP SHENON,  Special to The New York Times

SECTION: Section A; Page 9; Column 1; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 850 words

DATELINE: PHNOM PENH, Cambodia, May 31


With new vote totals showing a neck-and-neck race between Cambodia's ruling
party and the royalist opposition founded by Prince Norodom Sihanouk, the
Government protested to the United Nations today what it said were
"irregularities" in last week's elections.

Although the United Nations, several foreign governments and a variety of
independent poll monitors have certified the voting as free and fair, diplomats
in Phnom Penh warned that the Government was laying the groundwork for a claim
that the election results should be annulled and that it might try to hold power
even if it lost at the polls.

As the United Nations continued the vote count tonight, the state-television
network interrupted a broadcast of a Charlie Chaplin film with a "special
announcement" that it would stop releasing preliminary election results because
of Government concerns over how the vote had been conducted.

Small Lead for Opposition

The United Nations said today that with 1.7 million votes counted -- or slightly
more than 40 percent of the 4.2 million votes cast -- the royalist oppositon
party founded by the nation's former monarch, Prince Norodom Sihanouk, had about
43 percent of the vote, followed by the People's Party with 40 percent. The rest
of the vote was divided among the 18 other parties in the election.

The election for members of Cambodia's new national assembly is the centerpiece
of a United Nations peacekeeping operation meant to bring an end to Cambodian's
14-year civil war.

The war seemed far from over with the announcement by the United Nations that
Khmer Rouge guerrillas were being blamed for the daylight ambush today of a
United Nations convoy in the central province of Kompong Cham. One Uruguayan
peacekeeping soldier was killed. The Maoist rebels, who boycotted the election,
were also accused of staging a Sunday night attack on a market in the southern
province of Kandal, in which two Cambodians were killed.

The incumbent Cambodian Government was installed in 1979 by Vietnam after the
Vietnamese army invaded Cambodia and ended a Khmer Rouge reign of terror that
had left more than 1 million Cambodians dead from starvation, disease and
execution.

Protest by Government

At a news conference today to announce the Government's protest to the United
Nations over the voting procedures, a senior People's Party spokesman, Sok An,
said, "We ask Untac to postpone the proclamation of the votes of the election.
The reason is that there are irregularities in the conduct of the election."
Untac is the acronym of the United Nations Transitional Authority in Cambodia,
the peacekeeping force.

Mr. Sok An did not go so far as to say that the Government would refuse to
accept the final election results, but he said that the People's Party had
requested urgent discussions with the United Nations about the charges of
irregularities. And he said the Government had demanded that the United Nations
stop releasing preliminary poll results until the dispute is resolved.

He cited several "irregularities," ranging from possible tampering with the
plastic seals used to prevent ballot box tampering, to the indelibility of the
ink placed on voters' fingers to prevent them from voting twice.

The United Nations has said that any irregularities in the conduct of the voting
were minor -- some of the plastic seals did break during transit of the ballot
boxes, for instance -- and that other safeguards in the voting process had
prevented cheating.

Request for Secrecy Rejected

United Nations rejected the request of the People's Party that preliminary
election results be withheld from the public. The chief United Nations spokesman
in Cambodia, Eric Falt, said that since party agents were allowed to observe the
vote-counting and had access to the preliminary figures, the results should also
be released to the public in support of "openness and transparency in the
conduct of the elections."

The royalist party, the National United Front for an Independent Neutral
Peaceful and Cooperative Cambodia, is known as Funcinpec from its French
acronym. The party was founded by Prince Sihanouk but is now led by one of his
sons, Prince Norodom Ranariddh.

Funcinpec officials said today that they expect their lead over the People's
Party will grow this week with fresh results from some of the nation's largest
provinces, particularly Kompong Cham, the most populous province, which will
send 18 delegates to the 120-member national assembly. The assembly will be
charged with writing a new constitution.

The party said preliminary figures from its workers in Kompong Cham showed that,
with about 10 percent of the votes counted, Funcinpec had almost twice as many
votes as the People's Party -- 44,000 to 23,000. The United Nations, which
expects to complete the nationwide vote count within the next week, has not yet
released any figures for the province.

Ung Huot, the election manager for Funcinpec, said today that he was withdrawing
his prediction that the party would win by a landslide. "But we will win," he
said.


LOAD-DATE: June 1, 1993

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1993 The New York Times Company


                              217 of 312 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                  June 1, 1993, Tuesday, Late Edition - Final

Transcript of Clinton Speech At Vietnam War Memorial

BYLINE: Reuters

SECTION: Section A; Page 14; Column 5; National Desk

LENGTH: 687 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, May 31


Following is a transcript of President Clinton's Memorial Day speech at the
Vietnam Veterans Memorial here:

Thank you, thank you very much. General Powell, General McCaffrey and my good
friend Lou Puller, whom I did not know was coming here today, I thank you so
much.

To all of you who are shouting, I have heard you. I ask you now to hear me. I
have heard you.

Some have suggested that it is wrong for me to be here with you today because I
did not agree a quarter of a century ago with the decision made to send the
young men and women to battle in Vietnam. Well, so much the better. Here we are
celebrating America today. Just as war is freedom's cost, disagreement is
freedom's privilege. And we honor it here today.

But I ask all of you to remember the words that have been said here today, and I
ask you, at this monument, Can any American be out of place? And can any
Commander in Chief be in any other place but here on this day? I think not.

Many volumes have been written about this war and those complicated times, but
the message of this memorial is quite simple: These men and women fought for
freedom, brought honor to their communities, loved their country and died for
it.

They were known to all of us. There's not a person in this crowd today who did
not know someone on this wall. Four of my high school classmates are there, four
who shared with me the joys and trials of childhood and did not live to see the
three score and 10 years the Scripture says we are entitled to.

Let us continue to disagree if we must about the war, but let us not let it
divide us as a people any longer.

No one has come here today to disagree about the heroism of those whom we honor.
But the only way we can really honor their memory is to resolve to live and
serve today and tomorrow as best we can and to make America the best that she
can be. Surely that is what we owe to all those whose names are etched in this
beautiful memorial.

As we all resolve to keep the finest military in the world, let us remember some
of the lessons that all agree on. If the day should come when our service men
and women must again go into combat, let us all resolve they will go with the
training, the equipment, the support necessary to win, and, most important of
all, with a clear mission to win.

Let us do what is necessary to regain control over our destiny as a people here
at home, to strengthen our economy and to develop the capacities of all of our
people, to rebuild our communities and our families where children are raised
and character is developed. Let us keep the American dream alive.

Today let us also renew a pledge to the families whose names are not on this
wall because their sons and daughters did not come home. We will do all we can
to give you not only the attention you have asked for but the answers you
deserve.

Today I have ordered that by Veterans Day we will have declassified all United
States Government records related to P.O.W.'s and M.I.A.'s from the Vietnam War
-- all those records except for a tiny fraction which could still affect our
national security or invade the privacy of their families.

As we allow the American public to have access to what our Government knows, we
will press harder to find out what other governments know. We are pressing the
Vietnamese to provide this accounting not only because it is the central
outstanding issue in our relationship with Vietnam, but because it is a central
commitment made by the American Government to our people. And I intend to keep
it.

You heard General Powell quoting President Lincoln: "With malice toward none and
charity for all, let us bind up the nation's wounds."

Lincoln speaks to us today across the years. Let us resolve to take from this
haunting and beautiful memorial a renewed sense of our national unity and
purpose, a deepened gratitude for the sacrifice of those whose names we touched
and whose memories we revere and a finer dedication to making America a better
place for their children and for our children, too.

Thank you all for coming here today. God bless you, and God bless America.

LOAD-DATE: June 1, 1993

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photos: President Clinton's appearance at the Vietnam memorial
yesterday continued the war's history of protest. (Reuters); Visitors took a
name from the Vietnam Veterans Memorial with them by making a rubbed impression.
(Paul Hosefros/The New York Times)

TYPE: Text

                   Copyright 1993 The New York Times Company


                              218 of 312 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                  June 1, 1993, Tuesday, Late Edition - Final

Forsaken Frontier: Revisiting the Oregon Trail -- Last of three articles.;
150 Years Later, Indians Bitterly Cope With Results of Whites' Arrival

BYLINE: By TIMOTHY EGAN,  Special to The New York Times

SECTION: Section A; Page 12; Column 1; National Desk

LENGTH: 2863 words

DATELINE: PENDLETON, Ore.


The map of the American West in the first big year of the Oregon Trail showed a
sea of open space, and carried warnings about the people who were living on much
of it. The Pawnee, Cheyenne, Arapaho, Sioux, Shoshone, Crow, Nez Perce, Ute,
Spokane, Cayuse, Chinook, Umpqua -- these tribes were as prominent as any
landmark on the migrants' guide of 1843.

Moving west along the old Oregon Trail today, a traveler who wanders off the
interstate can still find the American Indian bands that both sustained and
threatened the wagon trains. The people live inside straight lines on the map,
nations within a nation. They are mostly off the road and out of sight.

But there is an undeniable stirring around the reservations in this 150th
anniversary of the Oregon Trail's first wave of migrants -- the trespassers, as
some native people call them. For a select group of Indians, primarily those
near cities, 1993 is the best year in more than a century, thanks to an economic
renaissance that has come from the fount of gambling.

Economic Resurgence for Some

Relegated to some of the least productive land in the nation and eulogized as a
dying and defeated people, Oregon Trail Indians have turned to what some call
their last best hope -- their sovereignty -- and have used it to build bingo
halls and casinos. It has revived tribes that had all but disappeared,
particularly at the terminus of the old wagon train route in Western Oregon.

But some of the larger native groups, cut off from gaming's lucre by
geographical isolation or the moral misgivings of conservative state
governments, are rummaging through their past in search of the key to an
economic future.

These Indians, who live alongside the trail that brought disease and
environmental ruin to their ancestors in last century, are using their treaties
and culture as a route to self-sufficiency. Their efforts are the latest in a
long line of attempts to bring some financial security to a people who have long
had a poverty rate that far exceeds the national average.

Artwork and Treaties

Dance, beadwork, jewelry, shamanistic totems, music videos of ancient rituals --
the products of a culture scorned by the settlers -- are some of the
best-selling items in the Western tourist trade. But even the reservations that
have profited from this trade have unemployment rates in excess of 35 percent.

At the same time, the treaties that guaranteed Indian access to traditional food
sources are being used to force the Federal Government into a
multimillion-dollar effort to bring back what used to be prolific Pacific salmon
runs, which have been all but wiped out by dams in Oregon, Idaho and Washington.
On the Snake River, one of the great fish highways of the last century,
returning salmon have diminished to a mere handful.

Although some tribes are counting on the salmon's return to revive their fishing
industry, it could end up being a largely symbolic improvement for many Indians.
Nonetheless, the effort will have far-reaching economic effects on whites: The
billion-dollar agribusiness that blossomed in the irrigation water from the
Snake and Columbia Rivers, and the fast-growing inland Northwest cities that use
cheap hydroelectric power from the dams, are facing rate increases and reduced
water flows as the Government moves to return salmon to the rivers.

'Doing Without'

"We have a lot of experience in doing without," said Antone Minthorn, council
chairman of the Umatilla Reservation in Eastern Oregon. "So when they start
shutting the timber down for the spotted owl, or cutting back on irrigation to
help fish, that's what happened to us Indians long ago. We know what it's like
to lose resources."

Mr. Minthorn wears a baseball cap with a Pendleton rodeo logo on the front and
works out of an office with a large, faded picture of a Nez Perce warrior -- the
tribe that fought one of the most remarkable series of battles in all the Indian
wars, evading Federal troops for 1,700 miles in 1877. Every day, the
consequences of those wars, the reduced reservations, the lingering distrust
between tribes that sided with whites and those who fought, are felt along the
old Oregon Trail.

"People talk about Vietnam veterans and post-traumatic stress syndrome --
Indians were born with that," Mr. Minthorn said. "We just got off the
battlefield. It takes time for these things to heal. But they are starting to
turn around."

Indians' Side of the Story

The Umatilla Reservation, in the midst of the cowboy culture of Eastern Oregon,
plans to build a $13 million historical center on tribal land next to deep wagon
ruts of the old Oregon Trail here. Conceived as the largest Indian interpretive
institute in the West, the center will tell the native side of an evolving
story.

"It's a chance to portray an accurate history of the tribes," Mr. Minthorn said.
"And it is an enormous economic opportunity."

In their diaries, the Oregon Trail migrants frequently made the observation that
the Indians would soon disappear altogether. Contrary to the circle-the-wagon
myth, there were only a handful of clashes between migrants and the tribes. The
Indians killed about 360 migrants and lost about 400 of their own in recorded
skirmishes, according to recent historical studies. The wars came later, after
treaties were signed and broken.

The diseases brought in by the settlers were far more lethal than any shootouts.
Smallpox, cholera, measles and other illnesses for which the Indians had no
immunity wiped out up to 90 percent of some tribes during the 20 years of the
Oregon Trail.

"The doom of extinction is over this wretched nation," wrote a Methodist
historian, Gustavus Hines, of the Oregon Territory Indians in 1850. "The hand of
Providence is removing them to give place to a people more worthy of so
beautiful and fertile a country."

Other settlers wished the extinction would hurry along. Coming upon the bodies
of three settlers, Jane Gould wrote: "Oh, it is a horrid thing! I wish all the
Indians in Christendom were exterminated."

So it is all the more remarkable, to some Indians, that they have not only
survived but in some cases even thrived.

Two Sides of Survival
Gambling Riches, Prairie Poverty

Further west of here, at the end of the 2,000-mile trail in Oregon, is a small
cluster of people, the Cow Creek band of the Umpqua tribe, who have survived a
century and a half of war, removal, termination of their tribal status by the
Government, and loss of all their land. They now exult in the success of the
casino they built in a small lot off Interstate 5.

"What has happened to us is nothing short of a miracle," said Susan Shaffer,
chairwoman of the 841-member Cow Creek band. "We have pulled ourselves up from
nothing. Something held this little tribe to the land, through all those awful
years, and now we have a springboard to prosperity."

Indian gambling has taken off since enactment of a 1988 Federal law that allowed
the tribes to operate any sort of gambling establishment that is allowed in the
state where the reservation is. So if a church can hold a Las Vegas night, a
tribe in the state can run a casino. The results can be spectacular.

A Packed Casino

Up the coast, when the Tulalip Reservation opened their casino north of Seattle
in April 1992, tribal leaders said they would consider it a success if they
could provide jobs for 100 Indians. Now, three times that number have jobs. The
casino is jammed every night with people playing blackjack, poker and craps.

The tribe is using its windfall to build a drug and alcohol rehabilitation
center -- something that had long been promised but never delivered by the
Federal Government.


But for some of the larger tribes near the Oregon Trail, those far removed from
the cities, the picture is much bleaker.

Bands of the Sioux, fiercely independent in the face of waves of settlement and
soldiers, figured prominently in the journals of Oregon Trail travelers. Now,
about 18,000 Oglala Sioux live amid corrosive poverty on the short-grass prairie
of South Dakota's Pine Ridge Reservation.

One of the counties in the reservation has the distinction of being the poorest
in America, with fewer than 3 out of 10 adults having jobs. The reservation was
the site of Wounded Knee, where as many as 300 Indians were killed by Federal
troops in 1890. It serves not as a tourist bonanza but a source of enduring
bitterness.

Like Indians elsewhere, the Oglala Sioux are pinning their hopes on gambling,
and have announced plans to build three casinos on the Pine Ridge Reservation.
But the proposal is being fought by some members of the tribe who are opposed to
gambling for philosophical and economic reasons.

To the west, on the wind-scraped high plains of the Wind River Reservation in
Wyoming, about 8,000 Northern Arapaho and Eastern Shoshone live on land without
any functioning economy. A few trading posts bring in tourist money. Some
Indians raise cattle on the barren ground of the 1.7 million-acre reservation.

"Right now it is really hard on all of us -- as bad as I've seen it," said
Roberta Spoonhunter of the Arapaho tribe.

The one glimmer of hope is a bingo hall. But central Wyoming is nearly a blank
space on the map, far away from state's tourism hot spots in the Teton Range.
Travelers today rush through it the same way the Oregon Trail migrants did on
their way to South Pass, the crossing of the Continental Divide.

The Nez Perce
Millions of Acres Become Handfuls

Indian country bordering the Oregon Trail was opened to settlement with the 1850
Donation Land Act, which granted each American family the right to 640 acres --
free. No lands had yet been ceded by treaty from the Indians to the Government.
It was trespassing, or theft, in simple legal terms.

By the time the first treaties were signed in 1855, more than 7,000 settlers had
already filed homestead claims on nearly three million acres, usually the best
valley land with the most benign climate.

Forced from their homelands to the arid open-air prison of the Oklahoma
Territory, some tribes rebelled and persuaded the Government to allow them to
return to their ancestral lands. They were given oddly drawn reservations --
rectangles and squares in a world of curving valleys and winding rivers.

After another set of treaties was signed and the wars ended, Indian lands shrunk
even more. The Dawes Act of 1887 allowed the Government to sell choice tracts of
reservation acreage, whatever was left after each Indian was given a small
parcel of the land.As a result, Indian land holdings went from 138 million acres
in 1887 to less than 50 million today.

The history of the the Nez Perce of Idaho, once considered one of the most
prosperous of Indian nations and a valued trading partner with Oregon Trail
settlers, demonstrates the diminishing fortunes of Western tribes.  They saw the
Government's promise of nearly three million acres shrink to less than a million
-- the main reason they went to war in 1877. The Dawes Act also took a toll, and
today, 89 percent of the reservation's 760,000 acres are in non-Indian hands.

"That is why it is so important that we get some gambling going," said Julia A.
Davis, a vice chairwoman of the Nez Perce. "We have no common resource base.
What else can we do?"

In the Mormon-dominated state of Idaho, where gambling is frowned upon, the Nez
Perce have not been able to negotiate approval for any casino operations. They
have joined other tribes in a lawsuit against the state, using the courts in an
effort to jump-start their reservation economy.

The Sho-Ban
Fighting to Revive Natural Resources

Some Indians say gambling is to natives today what the great bison herds were to
past generations. The 60 million buffalo were perennial sources of food, shelter
and clothing for the tribes that lived between the Mississippi River and the
Rocky Mountain crest. A single generation of Western settlers wiped out the
bison.

"The country before us thronged with buffalo," Francis Parkman wrote of his
Oregon Trail trip in 1846. "They were crowded so densely together that in the
distance their rounded backs presented a surface of uniform blackness."

Today, a shaggy-headed herd of buffalo, no more than 200, graze on the floor of
what was once the Fort Hall Army post in eastern Idaho. Fort Hall was a rest
stop and supply depot for the wagon trains. Now, it is part of the reservation
occupied by 3,378 members of the Shoshone and Bannock tribes. Through allotment,
the reservation shrank from 1.8 million acres to the present size of 544,000
acres.

Tourists gobble up buffalo burgers at the Fort Hall Trading Post, just off
Interstate 15. They crowd the aisles of the store, buying vases, paintings,
moccasins and beaded vests.

"Hey, we got a buffalo herd, couple hundred head, doing all right, and that's
something," said Kesley Edmo Sr., the tribal chairman. The tribe would like to
open a casino if Idaho would allow it. "We're sitting here in what is probably
the Mormon capital of the world and let me tell you they are dead-set against
gambling," he said.

Battling for Salmon

The Snake River, traditional home of these people, used to teem with salmon that
swam nearly 800 miles inland to spawn in the far reaches of Idaho, up to the
Continental Divide. The Sho-Ban, as members of the tribes call themselves, may
have lost two-thirds of the land promised to them, but they have used their 1868
treaty, in which the Government guarantees them perpetual access to salmon, as a
powerful weapon of retribution.

If the salmon runs are ever restored in the Northwest interior,
environmentalists say they will have the Indians of the Fort Hall Reservation to
thank. They were the ones who started legal action against the Federal
Government, forcing nearly a dozen agencies to put together a plan for saving
the fish.

And if the salmon return, it will help the Umatilla, the Nez Perce, the Yakima,
Chinook, Cayuse, the Shoshone and Bannock and dozens of other Indian bands that
used to have a healthy fishing economy.

But the Sho-Ban are not holding their collective breath that the great fat
Pacific salmon runs can ever return to the desert country of the Snake River,
bordering the Oregon Trail.

They say they want just enough to revive a cultural ceremony that virtually
every Northwest tribe celebrated: the First Fish ritual. A few salmon are caught
and raised to the sky in prayer; it's a way of thanking God for a bounty that
fed at least three millenniums of Indians. Biologists say they could be able to
see enough fish to perform the ritual in three years.

The Eagles
Where Culture Is a Moneymaker

Culture, the past as guide to the future, is what keeps the Eagle family going.
Full-blooded Lakota Sioux, Bruce and Marie Eagle and their six children live in
a trailer next to a farm bordering the dry channel of the Raft River, in
southern Idaho. They live where the Oregon Trail forked, the southern route
going to California, the northern way pushing to Oregon.

The Eagles are farmhands on the ranch of Lyle Woodbury. On a hot afternoon,
their pickup spitting up dust, they took a visitor out to the old fork, behind a
fence on the Woodbury farm. Wagon ruts are still visible, though overgrown with
grass.

"We find a lot of arrowheads over here," Mrs. Eagle said. "And there's some
pictographs on the cliff there."

She was asked about the Oregon Trail sesquicentennial, if it was important
enough to mark the occasion.

"It doesn't mean anything to me because I'm an Indian," she said. "It's just
white people moving to Indian land. What are you supposed to do? Celebrate?"

But her husband said he was thinking about putting up a tepee, something to lure
the tourists. And when they come, they will get to see the Eagles' 12-year-old
son, Jay, a champion Indian dancer, the family's pride and joy.

After listening to Bruce, Marie amended her statement. She has been doing a lot
of beadwork, and making dreamcatchers -- a woven object that is placed next to a
baby's crib to catch bad dreams. In this year of the Oregon Trail tourist swarm,
the trading post that sells her work cannot get enough.

Exquisite Artifacts

Back here on the Umatilla Reservation, the culture of a nearly vanquished people
has a similar hold on descendants of Oregon Trail pioneers. Sheldon Lieuallen,
68, has a cattle ranch on land he leases from the reservation.

His grandfather traveled the Oregon Trail in the 1860's as a 5-year-old. Mr.
Lieuallen is a fixture among the cowboys of Pendleton, one of the last ranchers
to drive cattle by horse to summer grazing ground in the Blue Mountains.

During a recent interview, he was asked if he had anything to show -- a precious
heirloom or two -- from his grandfather's days in the last century. He went to
the closet and pulled out a cardboard container.

Reaching inside the box, the Oregon Trail descendant beamed in pride and showed
off his family secret: a pair of "squaw gloves," leather hand coverings with
extensive beadwork, done by the Indians who were displaced by his grandfather.

LOAD-DATE: June 1, 1993

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photos: Descendants of the Indian tribes that lived along the Oregon
Trail carry the tales about the disease and environmental ruin brought to their
lands by white settlers. Antone Minthorn, council chairman of the Umatilla
Reservation in Eastern Oregon, stood next to tepee poles used on ceremonial
occasions. "We have a lot of experience in doing without," he said.; William
Burke, the tribal treasurer of the Umatilla Reservation, walks on his ancestral
land, where his grandmother told him that she saw wagons as a young girl in the
1850's. (Photographs by Jim Wilson/The New York Times)

Map of Oregon showing locations of Indian tribes along the Oregon Trail.

TYPE: Series

                   Copyright 1993 The New York Times Company


                              219 of 312 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                  June 1, 1993, Tuesday, Late Edition - Final

SECTION: Section A; Page 2; Column 6; Metropolitan Desk

LENGTH: 35 words


"I ask you, at this monument, can any American be out of place? And can any
Commander in Chief be in any other place but here on this day?" -- PRESIDENT
CLINTON, at the Vietnam Veterans Memorial. [A14:4.]

LOAD-DATE: June 1, 1993

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1993 The New York Times Company


                              220 of 312 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                  June 1, 1993, Tuesday, Late Edition - Final

NEWS SUMMARY

SECTION: Section A; Page 2; Column 5; Metropolitan Desk

LENGTH: 1030 words



International 2-9

REPRESSION EASING IN CHINA
Nearly four years after the brutal suppression of the Tiananmen Square
demonstrations in Beijing, repression persists in China but seems to be easing.
A1

DOWNSIZING A STRONGMAN
Life President Hastings Kamuzu Banda of Malawi has long occupied his own quirky
niche: part African, part Victorian, part Mussolini, part Monty Python. Now his
hold on the country is being challenged.  A1



YUGOSLAV PRESIDENT IS OUSTED
President Dobrica Cosic of Yugoslavia was ousted by Parliament, accused of
violating the Constitution. But the vote was seen as a maneuver by
ultranationalists who perceive him as too moderate.  A8

CAMBODIA CHALLENGES ELECTION
With vote totals showing a neck-and-neck race between Cambodia's ruling party
and the royalist opposition, the Government has protested to the United Nations,
saying there were irregularities in voting.  A9

ISRAELI LEADER UNDER PRESSURE
With a Cabinet shuffle, Prime Minister Yitzhak Rabin of Israel put a political
crisis behind him, but he still has to contend with criticism of his leadership
style.  A3

Israel allows a pilgrimage to Jerusalem by a Libyan group.  A3

PRESSURE ON CHRISTOPHER
Despite the Administration's foreign-policy burdens, Secretary of State Warren
Christopher says he's never been happier.  A3

Churchill's grandson raises ire with an anti-immigrant speech.  A2

Youth arrested in German arson, but protests continue.  A2

Opposition to the Guatemalan President grows more defiant.  A7

Hohenau Journal: A Paraguayan town that sheltered Mengele.  A4

National A10-15, D10

CLAIMS OF AIDS BIAS
Faced with the loss of medical benefits that keep them alive, an increasing
number of people with AIDS are accusing their health insurance plans of
discrimination.  A1

TAX ON HOSPITALS IS WEIGHED
The President is considering a new tax on hospitals to help finance medical care
for people who currently have no health insurance.  A1

PEROT ORGANIZATION DIVIDED
Ross Perot's political organization is in turmoil, riven by disputes that are
beginning to cost it some of its most committed volunteers.  A1

CLINTON VISITS VIETNAM MEMORIAL
The President, who avoided the Vietnam War, confronted his past and thousands of
veterans at a ceremony at the Vietnam Veterans Memorial, asking that the war
"not divide us as a people any longer." A1

PRESSURE MOUNTS FOR BENTSEN
Even though the Senate will not take up the President's economic plan for
another week, Lloyd Bentsen has already been rattled by questions about why his
legislative savvy has not been enough to steer the plan safely through Congress.
A11

AN ENTERTAINMENT MECCA IS BORN
Branson, Mo., once a sleepy Ozarks town but now a major vacation center, is a
reminder about the gulf between those who presume to define culture on the
coasts and those who consume it in between.  A10

OFFICIALS WARN NUCLEAR PLANTS
The Nuclear Regulatory Commission warned 34 nuclear reactors around the country
that the instruments that they use to measure the level of water in the reactor
could give false readings.  A10

TRIBES SEE ECONOMIC RESURGENCE
Relegated to some of the least productive land in the nation, Indians along the
Oregon Trail have turned to building bingo halls and casinos, reviving tribes
that had all but disappeared.  A12

A NEW LOOK AT JUVENILE JUSTICE
Because of a growing belief among juvenile justice experts that detention homes
encourage criminal behavior, Maryland and other states are turning to a broad
array of programs, including boot camp and group and foster homes.  D10

Metro Digest B1

A SUBURBAN-URBAN AGENDA
New Haven, like other old industrial cities across the north, is grappling with
how to reconnect the city with the suburbs that encircle it, to become the
equivalent of Houston, Phoenix and other younger Sun Belt cities that have grown
by annexing their suburban areas.  A1

Business Digest D1

Science Times C1-10

M.R.I. techniques makes brain an open book to elated scientists.  C1

Physiology of champion athletes among the animals.  C1

A question of conduct, scientific freedom and life itself.  C1

A formula for when the world will end, or anything else.  C1

A planned park in India enrages a group of longtime herders.  C4

Planet X fades as the evidence fails to stand up.  C8

Science Watch C5

Peripherals C6

Q&A C9

Personal Computers C9

Fashion Page B6

Beene looks beyond clothes

Patterns

By Design

Arts/Entertainment C11-16

Chita Rivera bounces back.  C11

Music: Cliburn Competition.  C11

Recitals by two organists.  C12

Dance: "Harlequinade." C11

More Balanchine.  C13

Books: "The Cold War and American Science." C15

Television: Tame zoo, wild zoo.  C11

Sports B7-13

Auto Racing: Restart strategy lifts Fittipaldi.B13

Baseball: Yanks rout Indians.  B9
Mets defeat Cubs.  B9

Basketball: Bulls beat Knicks and even series.  B7

Knicks looking for seven games.  B10

Sonics' Perkins smells title.  B11

Columns: Vecsey on Jordan B7

On Pro Basketball B7

Hockey: Brooks resigns from Devils.  B13

Gretzky enters prime time.  B13

Horse Racing: Ibero wins Metropolitan.  B11

Lacrosse: Syracuse takes N.C.A.A. title.  B9

Sports People B11

Tennis: Courier outmuscles Muster.  B9

Obituaries D14

Edouard Morot-Sir, ex-French diplomat and cultural emissary.

Editorials/Op-Ed A16-17

Editorials

Nuclear peace for Pyongyang?

Janet Reno's independent stand.

Showdown on gay rights.

Mr. Colon, call home.

Letters

A. M. Rosenthal: The constant hearts.

Russell Baker: Tonsorialitis.

James R. Kincaid: Purity, pederasty and a fallen heroine.

Bruce G. Blair: Lighten up on Ukraine.

Richard C. Reynolds: Make health reform work. Draft doctors.

Chronicle B4

Bridge C13

Chess C16

Crossword C16

LOAD-DATE: June 1, 1993

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Summary

                   Copyright 1993 The New York Times Company


                              221 of 312 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                  June 1, 1993, Tuesday, Late Edition - Final

Clinton, Saluting Vietnam Dead, Finds Old Wound Is Slow to Heal

BYLINE: By THOMAS L. FRIEDMAN,  Special to The New York Times

SECTION: Section A; Page 1; Column 3; National Desk

LENGTH: 1307 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, May 31


President Clinton, who avoided the Vietnam War, confronted his own past and
thousands of veterans today at a ceremony at the Vietnam Veterans Memorial.
Framed by the 58,044 names of the Vietnam War dead etched in black granite on
the wall behind him, Mr. Clinton asked that differences over the war "not divide
us as a people any longer."

The raucous, divided reception that was accorded Mr. Clinton as he addressed the
crowd and knelt before the memorial wall to make a rubbed impression of the name
of James Herbert Jeffries, a boyhood friend killed in the war, seemed to
underscore the realization that despite his appeal for reconciliation, Vietnam
remained a national wound that would not heal. [Transcript of Mr. Clinton's
speech, page A14.]

For the most part, the President received a polite reception. But for every few
cheers, there was a boo; for every few peace signs flashed in solidarity, there
was a clenched fist raised in anger; for every few welcoming hands, there was a
thumbs down; for every few claps, there was a curse; and for every few American
flags held high in approval, there was someone who waved at the President a
rubbed impression of a loved one's name taken off the wall.

As Mr. Clinton rose to speak on this balmy Washington afternoon on Memorial Day,
he was greeted with a cacophony of enthusiastic applause, peppered by catcalls
of "Draft dodger!" "Liar!" and "Shut up, coward!"

Many veterans in the audience, some wearing their green war fatigues and
crumpled jungle hats, turned their backs when Mr. Clinton began his remarks. But
many more seemed to perk their ears to hear what he would have to say and they
tried to hush protesters who threatened to drown out the President. Just as Mr.
Clinton took the stage, one young woman near the rostrum, whose father is listed
as missing in action, let out a wail. "I want him back," she screamed.

'Freedom's Privilege'

"To all of you who are shouting," Mr. Clinton said, looking directly at the
protesters gathered behind a fence, "I have heard you. I ask you now to hear me.
I have heard you.

"Some have suggested that it is wrong for me to be here with you today because I
did not agree a quarter of a century ago with the decision made to send the
young men and women to battle in Vietnam. Well, so much the better. Here we are
celebrating America today. Just as war is freedom's cost, disagreement is
freedom's privilege. And we honor it here today."

In a move that certainly endeared him to the crowd, Mr. Clinton announced that
he had ordered that all American military documents pertaining to Americans
missing in action in Indochina be declassified and made public by Veterans Day,
"except for a tiny fraction" that he said would have to remain classified for
national security and privacy reasons.

Powell Quotes Lincoln

Such public disclosure has been a long-standing demand by groups supporting
families of men still unaccounted for in Southeast Asia. Many of these groups
have voiced suspicions that the Government is withholding information about
their loved ones. Most experts, though, believe it is unlikely that the
information will prove decisive in learning the fates of any of the missing.

Mr. Clinton, the first President in 50 years not to have served in the military,
was preceded on the rostrum by several speakers, including the popular decorated
Vietnam veteran and Chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff, Gen. Colin L. Powell,
and Derrick Thomas, the Kansas City Chiefs linebacker whose father was killed in
Vietnam.

Each of them underscored the appropriateness of Mr. Clinton attending the
ceremony, though he had avoided the Vietnam-era draft. Borrowing from Lincoln,
General Powell said, "With malice toward none and charity for all, let us bind
up the nation's wounds."

Although Presidents have always been invited, Mr. Clinton's visit marks the
first time a President has spent Memorial Day at the 12-year-old wall.
Presidents usually spend the day attending the remembrance ceremony at Arlington
National Cemetery.

Seated before the wall, the President's eyes glistened with emotion as he
listened to the speakers and singers tell of their fallen comrades and their
wartime experiences. But he came to appeal for unity, not to apologize for his
opposition to the war.

"Let us continue to disagree if we must about the war," he told the crowd. "But
let us not let it divide us as a people any longer.

"No one has come here today to disagree about the heroism of those whom we
honor. But the only way we can really honor their memory is to resolve to live
and serve today and tomorrow as best we can and to make America the best that
she can be."

Noting that the names of four classmates from his Hot Springs, Ark., high school
were etched on the wall, the President appealed to the crowd: "I ask you, at
this monument, can any American be out of place? And can any Commander in Chief
be in any other place but here on this day?"

With that line many of the protesters shouted back with pointed fingers: "You!
You! You!"

Everyone on the Mall seemed to have an opinion on Mr. Clinton's presence. There
were the veterans who had organized a post card campaign opposing Mr. Clinton's
visit. They camped out on the Mall hours before he arrived with signs saying,
"For Shame," "Disabled and Dead Accuse You," "The Truth Convicts You," "Kinda
Late Isn't It?" and "Slick Willie The Artful Draft Dodger."

There were the baby boomers of Mr. Clinton's generation, who identified with his
decision to avoid the war, and seemed to show up to provide a quiet
counterweight to the angry veterans.

And then there were the likes of Larry Pittman, a 42-year-old Vietnam veteran
who lives in a Washington shelter. He leaned against a tree overlooking the
wall, a panhandler's cup in one hand, drinking in the whole scene and dispensing
the wisdom of one who had seen so much craziness in Vietnam that he could no
longer sit in judgment of anyone who had served there or those who had avoided
the war.

"You know, in 1968, times were in real turmoil," Mr. Pittman mused. "I think
whatever Clinton did he had a conscientious reason for it. I can't judge him."

But not everyone was so generous.

"Personally, I don't want him here," said Dave Morris, a 40-year-old Ohio
native, who said he did two tours in Vietnam. "A lot of the names you see on
that wall were not fortunate enough, or had the money, to do what he did. I can
forgive him, but can the 58,000?"

Bob Oughton, a 43-year-old Vietnam veteran who said he served one tour in 1971,
got up at 7 A.M. to make sure he was in the first row to tell the President what
he thought.

"I think it is an absolute disgrace that this gutless wonder showed up here," he
said. "He should be crowned King of Chutzpah. When he had the opportunity to go,
he lied and lied and lied again to get out of the draft. He ran away when he had
a job to do."

Gordon Dalton, 45, who served in Vietnam from 1967 to 1969, seethed at the
thought of President Clinton's being honored at the wall.

"He should walk along that wall and look for the name of the person who took his
place," Mr. Dalton said. "It's up there somewhere."

But standing just a few feet away, Susan Johnson, 40, of Arlington, Va., said
she was proud the President had come.

"It was a major gut-check for him to show up" Ms. Johnson said. "More power to
him. As the Commander in Chief he should be here. I'd like to think we are
standing in front of something that put that war behind us."

But the feelings of many of those who admired Mr. Clinton for facing his past
was perhaps best expressed by 42-year-old Richard Naumann, who served two tours
in Vietnam from 1965 to 1969.

"I think it's a great thing," Mr. Naumann said. "He had his principles; I had
mine. But it's time to let bygones be bygones."

LOAD-DATE: June 1, 1993

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo: President Clinton in front of the Vietnam Veterans Memorial
yesterday in Washington. (Paul Hosefros/The New York Times)

                   Copyright 1993 The New York Times Company


                              222 of 312 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                  June 1, 1993, Tuesday, Late Edition - Final

SPORTS PEOPLE: PRO FOOTBALL;
Derrick Thomas Recalls His Father at Memorial

SECTION: Section B; Page 11; Column 1; Sports Desk

LENGTH: 117 words


DERRICK THOMAS, the Kansas City Chiefs' All-Pro linebacker, said yesterday that
he just wanted to live up to the courage of the father he never knew, a co-pilot
who was killed during the Vietnam War.

"It's very ironic that my father's last mission was named Linebacker 2," said
Thomas, who was among the speakers who joined PRESIDENT CLINTON at the Vietnam
Veterans Memorial in Washington. "It's very ironic that in college I had 52
sacks and my father flew a B-52."

"I was bitter for a long time," said the 26-year-old Thomas, who was 5 when his
father, Robert James Thomas, died. "I've spent the better part of my life trying
to find out what kind of man my father actually was." (AP)

LOAD-DATE: June 1, 1993

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1993 The New York Times Company


                              223 of 312 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                  June 1, 1993, Tuesday, Late Edition - Final

On My Mind;
The Constant Hearts

BYLINE: By A. M. ROSENTHAL

SECTION: Section A; Page 17; Column 1; Editorial Desk

LENGTH: 705 words


The decision to pick a public relations man for three Republican Presidencies as
the spokesman for the new Democratic Administration is an important step meaning
one or more of the following things:

1. The public and press are just as stupid as President Clinton obviously thinks
they are and have never seen a cynical political gimmick they would not buy.

2. Under pressure because of the nature of the Presidency and his own mistakes,
Mr. Clinton is losing his political rudder and his ship is swinging to port and
starboard.

3. He never had a political rudder.

4. The leftish messianic rhetoric, and matching appointments, are over.

5. Don't believe 4. In fact, with a Democratic Administration so rattled so
early as to lunge desperately for a Republican spokesman, it's best not to
believe anything for a while.

I am one of those Clinton voters who worry now about White House language and
appointments that smell of class or racial divisiveness. Also: We resent being
talked to as filthy rich exploiters of the poor as we work to pay off the
mortgage.

We want Mr. Clinton to move forward by moving back -- to the center where
America's future lies; we think. And that is where Mr. Clinton is telling us he
is going by mixing a famous Republican adviser into his White House blend; we
think.

But here I am with a sour face -- not because of the able and likable David
Gergen himself but because of a matter of constancy, that lovely word. What does
the President understand that word to mean, for himself, and the people he
chooses to be close around him? If we do not know that, we cannot know him.

The Republican Administrations Mr. Gergen represented so well had specific
positions that helped the country understand what they stood for. Among them
were their positions on Vietnam, abortion, the rights of homosexuals, civil
liberty laws, taxation, health care, government's role in shaping the American
economy and society, military strength and spending, financial help to the
cities and, perhaps most important, how to deal with racial divisions.

Certainly Mr. Gergen must have agreed with his Republican chiefs on most of
those issues, close to all. How would any self-respecting senior adviser serve
or speak for an administration if he did not agree so much of the time as to
make occasional disagreement unimportant?

But on all of those issues, and a lot more, Mr. Clinton has positions ranging
from sharply different to opposite. He ran on those differences. He was elected
because enough people agreed with him, not his Republican opponent or
predecessors.

Now Mr. Gergen will have to explain and defend positions directly contrary to
those of his former bosses, Presidents Nixon, Ford and Reagan. Conversion and
repentance are all very well but I trust he will be asked when they took place
on each separate matter.

Each time, did he tell his Republican Presidential employers? Or did all these
epiphanies take place since Mr. Clinton's election?

If he will not tell us, can we trust him as much as we did when he got paid for
speaking for Republican Presidents? We are talking constancy -- not able and
likable.

Mr. Gergen's constancy is not as important as a President's. If I had wanted to
vote Republican in 1992, as I have whenever I wished, I would have done so.

But Mr. Clinton convinced me it was time for the Democrats to show their new
stuff. Fool that I am, it never entered my mind that Mr. Clinton would come to
think so much of Republican positions that he would select as his top spokesman
a man who had represented them so well for years. If he had told me, I might
have chosen the real thing.

Those White House kids are not fashionable anymore. They are taking the rap,
good and hard, because the President did not figure out that he and his barber
were still on the ground or wonder how come.

Too bad; I am more conservative than the kids but I was getting to like some of
them. George Stephanopoulos told me no secrets, but he told me no lies. But of
course people like that have to go -- they are so young and inexperienced they
only know how to speak out of one side of their mouths.

But I will bet that George will never go to work for Dan Quayle.

LOAD-DATE: June 1, 1993

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Op-Ed

                   Copyright 1993 The New York Times Company


                              224 of 312 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 June 2, 1993, Wednesday, Late Edition - Final

CAMBODIAN RULERS ASK FOR NEW VOTE

BYLINE: By PHILIP SHENON,  Special to The New York Times

SECTION: Section A; Page 9; Column 1; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 715 words

DATELINE: PHNOM PENH, Cambodia, June 1


The Government threatened today to reject the results of last week's elections
and warned of the possibility of "insurrections and riots" if the United Nations
refused to hold new voting in four provinces.

The United Nations rejected the call for new polling, saying that the Government
had failed to produce evidence of serious vote fraud in the four provinces:
Phnom Penh, the capital; Battambang; Kompong Chhnang and Prey Veng. Together
they account for 35 of the 120 seats in the new national assembly, which will be
responsible for drafting a constitution and forming a new government.

Alarmed by preliminary vote counts that continue to show a neck-and-neck race
between the governing Cambodian People's Party and the royalist opposition
party, the Government said there had been voting irregularities in the four
provinces and perhaps in several others.

'New Elections Must Be Held'

"We cannot accept the electoral process that is now under way," the president of
the People's Party, Chea Sim, said in a letter of protest to the United Nations,
which is managing the elections as part of a peacekeeping operation intended to
end Cambodia's 14-year civil war. "New elections must be held in the electoral
regions at issue."

The leading opposition party is closely associated with the nation's former
monarch, Prince Norodom Sihanouk, and is known as Funcinpec, the French acronym
for the National United Front for an Independent, Neutral Peaceful and
Cooperative Cambodia.

The national vote count showed today that, with 2.3 million ballots tallied --
or about 55 percent of the 4.2 million votes cast -- the royalist party had
about 950,000 votes, or 41 percent, followed by the People's Party with 890,000,
or 39 percent, and the rest divided among smaller parties. The preliminary count
suggested that the royalists should win 60 to 65 seats in the national assembly,
with about 55 seats for the Government party.

The Government's chief spokesman, Khieu Kanharith, warned at a news conference
today of fears that "soldiers will riot in the country when hearing the results
of the election," although he said the Government was trying to prevent any such
violence.

Monitors Say Election Fair

The United Nations, several foreign governments and a variety of independent
international poll monitors have said the six-day election, which ended on
Friday, was free and fair.

"What we're seeing is panic by a group of men who have never before had their
power challenged and who are shocked to discover that their hold over the people
doesn't extend to the voting booth," a senior United Nations official said. "I
hope they come to their senses before they turn this nation into another
Angola."

Fighting resumed in Angola last year after the guerrilla group known as Unita,
the loser in United Nations-sponsored elections, refused to accept the results.

Although few Cambodians would dare criticize their leaders publicly, there is
widespread hostility toward the Government because of corruption and brutality
on the part of some senior officials. The United Nations has accused the
Government and the People's Party of involvement in the murders of at least 15
opposition political figures during the election campaign.

Divisions Within Government

United Nations officials said today that they had detected serious divisions
within the Government, which was installed in 1979 by Vietnam after the
Vietnamese Army drove out the Khmer Rouge, over whether to accept the election
results.

"The situation might lead to anything," Yasushi Akashi, the head of the United
Nations peacekeeping operation in Cambodia said at a meeting with reporters.
"But I hope not. I don't believe the predictions of major unrest have any basis
in reality."

The Government has alleged several irregularities in the voting procedures used
by the United Nations, from possible tampering with the plastic seals used to
close ballot boxes to flaws in the indelibility of the ink placed on voters'
fingers to prevent them from voting twice.

The United Nations said that while there had been some irregularities -- some of
the plastic seals did break as ballot boxes were moved, for instance -- other
safeguards in the voting process had prevented cheating.


LOAD-DATE: June 2, 1993

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Map of Cambodia.

                   Copyright 1993 The New York Times Company


                              225 of 312 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 June 2, 1993, Wednesday, Late Edition - Final

Clinton's Order on M.I.A. Data a Small Shift

BYLINE: Special to The New York Times

SECTION: Section A; Page 10; Column 2; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 198 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, June 1


President Clinton's announcement on Monday that he had ordered the
declassification of all but a tiny fraction of military documents on Americans
who did not return from the war in Southeast Asia represents only a small change
from Bush Administration policy.

In July, President Bush ordered the declassification of 200,000 pages of State
Department papers and 2,600 pages of Central Intelligence Agency materials
related to the 2,260 American servicemen listed as unaccounted for in the
Vietnam War, Administration officials said today. The officials added that in
1991 Congress ordered that the military declassify 1.5 million pages of Defense
Department documents.

One major difference is that Mr. Clinton's order set a date -- Veterans Day,
Nov. 11 -- for the documents to be made public. In contrast, Mr. Bush's order
asked that the documents be released as soon as possible.

So far, about 100,000 pages of military documents, 100,000 pages of State
Department papers and "several hundred" pages of C.I.A. reports have been made
public, a White House official said today. The official added that they had
received few complaints about the pace of declassification.


LOAD-DATE: June 2, 1993

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1993 The New York Times Company


                              226 of 312 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 June 2, 1993, Wednesday, Late Edition - Final

Books of The Times;
The Disabled Come Out Fighting

BYLINE: By HERBERT MITGANG

SECTION: Section C; Page 20; Column 1; Cultural Desk

LENGTH: 990 words


No Pity
People With Disabilities Forging a New Civil Rights Movement
By Joseph P. Shapiro
372 pages. Times Books. $25.

It took a President with polio (Franklin D. Roosevelt, who couldn't walk on his
own) and the severely injured veterans of World War II, Korea and Vietnam to
make Americans aware that being disabled wasn't something to hide and be ashamed
of. Then it took demonstrations and lobbying to force the Federal Government to
recognize that people with disabilities ought to be included under the big
umbrella of civil rights.

President George Bush signed the Americans With Disabilities Act in 1991, and it
went into effect last year. By making public places and services accessible and
banning employment discrimination against the disabled, the law became one of
the most compassionate pieces of legislation enacted in this century.

During the Congressional debate about that legislation, advocates pointed out
that there were some 35 million to 43 million disabled Americans, broadly
defined as people with disabilities that interfered with such daily activities
as working or keeping a household. Even the lower estimate made the disabled the
country's largest "minority."

In "No Pity," Joseph P. Shapiro, who covers social policy issues for U.S. News &
World Report, provides a useful history of the effort to give the disabled
equality of access and opportunity. Its most original passages disclose the
private feelings of the disabled in their own frequently bitter, and
occasionally uplifting, words.

Although some of the material in the book is needlessly repetitious and
disorganized -- the details of the Disabilities Act are all over the place --
the reader does learn about the importance of such matters as choice of
language. Disabled people resent words that suggest they're sick, pitiful,
childlike, dependent or objects of admiration. They especially deplore any image
that turns them into poster children, smiling through pain with fund-raising
palms out. The word "invalid" is disliked; so is the phrase "afflicted with."
Words like "brave" or "courageous" are not always appreciated because most
disabled people aren't trying to be models of inspiration.

Mr. Shapiro also finds that the disabled don't like such politically correct
euphemisms as "the vertically challenged," the "differently abled," the
"handi-capable" or the "physically amd mentally challenged." For a long time,
the word "cripple" was considered derogatory, and it still is by many disabled
people. But some have reclaimed "cripple," regarding it as a word that can stand
for militant self-pride.

President Roosevelt became the country's most famous disabled person. Americans
admired his battle with polio and sent money to the March of Dimes, which he
helped to found. In his time, families regarded the handicapped as abnormal.
Even Roosevelt went to great lengths to hide the extent of his handicap; he was
never seen in his wheelchair. Washington was a wheelchair-accessible city, with
ramps at the White House, the Capitol and some of the public buildings. But it
took legislation to make such access required by law.

Disabled soldiers returning from the wars spurred Federal rehabilitation
programs and called attention to other disabled Americans. The Paralyzed
Veterans of America promoted medical care, and the President's Committee of the
Handicapped, created during the Truman Administration, convinced employers to
hire the disabled who had undergone rehabilitation. The new field of
rehabilitation medicine and the institutes established by Dr. Howard Rusk and
Dr. Henry Kessler were of major importance. Their rehabilitation centers
expanded physical therapy to include occupational therapy.

"The 1988 protest by deaf students at Gallaudet University was a defining moment
for the disability rights movement," Mr. Shapiro writes. In that protest,
students successfully insisted that the school's president should be a deaf
person. "It was the closest the movement has come to having a touchstone event,
a Selma or a Stonewall." And: "The uprising that followed resonated for people
of all disabilities, who empathized with the students' revolt against the
paternalistic care of well-meaning but insensitive people who were not disabled.
Gallaudet gave Americans a new rights consciousness about disability."

The Americans With Disabilities Act was introduced two months after the
Gallaudet protest.

In the House, the Senate and the White House, the proposal found sympathetic
sponsors and advocates for personal and family reasons. Representative Tony
Coehlo of California had epilepsy; Lowell Weicker, then a Representative from
Connecticut and now the state's Governor, had a son with Down's Syndrome;
Senator Tom Harkin of Iowa delivered part of his floor speech in sign language
so his deaf brother watching television could understand; Senator Edward M.
Kennedy of Massachusettts spoke of his son who had lost a leg to cancer. And
President Bush had dealt with the pain of disability: one of his sons had a
severe learning disorder and a favorite uncle, a surgeon, was struck by polio at
the height of his career.

The two most visible sections of the Americans With Disability Act required
businesses to be accessible to workers and customers. It looked like a law
simply to put wheelchair ramps on buildings. But another section of the law said
that all government services, from public toilets to health care, had to be
provided equally. Although a backlash developed against carrying out all the
provisions of the act, it changed the traditional mind-set of some people who
thought the disabled should not enter the American mainstream.

In "No Pity," the author emphasizes that "people with disabilities want neither
pity-ridden paternalism nor overblown admiration." Instead, they want a chance
"to build bonds to their communities as fully accepted participants in everyday
life."

LOAD-DATE: June 2, 1993

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Review

                   Copyright 1993 The New York Times Company


                              227 of 312 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 June 2, 1993, Wednesday, Late Edition - Final

PRO BASKETBALL;
Game 5 Looks a Lot Like Game 7 for Knicks

SECTION: Section B; Page 9; Column 2; Sports Desk

LENGTH: 811 words


All the plans, the work, the investments are at stake tonight. More than one
series. More than one basketball season. Reputations are on the line. Futures.
Dreams.

In two decades, the Knicks have not played a game as important as the one they
will play tonight against Chicago at Madison Square Garden. It is no
overreaction to say they must win Game 5 of the Eastern Conference finals. It is
no attempt to overstate the night merely to heighten the pressure on the Knicks.
Pat Riley knows his team has no room for missteps. His players know it. Stan
Jaffe and Dave Checketts and Ernie Grunfeld of the front office know it, too.

Likely elimination in Chicago awaits the Knicks should they lose to the Bulls in
Game 5 tonight. That's not panic talking. To say those words is to understand
that, sooner or later, deep into a series, a championship team must come to a
playoff crossroad such as this, and find the path that takes it the rest of the
way.

"Now it starts," Riley said late Sunday afternoon in Chicago, the competitor in
him itching to get on with tonight.

He had yesterday to remind his players of what tonight means for them. One wrong
turn now leads to who knows where for the men who in two years produced an
Atlantic Division champion, a 60-victory team and, finally, one with a chance
for a title for the first time since Vietnam.

Could these Knicks have something in common with their co-tenants at the Garden
from the National Hockey League? Remember, the Rangers at times seemed as good a
bet for the Stanley Cup a year ago as the Knicks look to be now for their third
N.B.A. title.

These Knicks, like those Rangers, were not constructed to last as much as they
were built to capture the moment. They are not so much a puzzle, planned piece
by piece, as they are a recipe, a seasoned mix that turned out right.

But if the Knicks cannot beat Michael Jordan's Bulls in the playoffs this year,
why would anyone think their chances would improve next time around? Why would
the Knicks not think about a different recipe for next season? The Bulls almost
certainly will add Toni Kukoc and they will likely unload more dead wood and
strengthen their bench as well. Whatever Orlando does with its draft pick, the
Magic will come back a 50-victory team next season, and if Charlotte keeps
Kendall Gill in town, then look out for the Hornets, too.

It is at the most critical juncture of a season that a coach publicly evaluates
his players simply by showing trust in them. Monday, in the swing game that
Riley wanted badly, he used seven players. He didn't trust veterans like Ro
Blackman and Tony Campbell or a rookie, Hubert Davis, against the Bulls'
pressure defense. He worked John Starks to the bone, 47 grueling minutes on a
day Jordan wasn't missing.

Seven players, and that included Greg Anthony, who most people seem to think is
out of here soon. So if you take the remaining six, and add Davis, what you have
is seven players, with age and miles becoming a factor for three, plus a
point-guard problem that can only get worse.

It took six months for the Knicks to earn home-court advantage against the
Bulls, and that is what they cling to as Jordan comes looking to wreck their
season. The Bulls beat the Knicks by 20 and 10 points in Chicago. Phil Jackson
said his team's goal whenever it plays the Knicks is to score 100 points. The
Bulls scored 103 and 105 over the weekend. Patrick Ewing sat down at the
post-game news conference Monday and reminded everyone that "we don't have to
win in Chicago."

That doesn't mean the Knicks aren't going to feel the tension that is going to
penetrate the Garden tonight, like no other playoff night this season. It is yet
another degree of playoff pressure, one this team has never faced.

Knick optimists pointed out that Jordan went for 54 Monday and the Knicks still
had a chance to steal the game in the fourth quarter. Another way of looking at
it is that Starks practically stitched himself to Jordan's jersey and couldn't
obstruct his levitation or keep him from scoring at will. The Knicks know that
Jordan is capable of blowing up their season, should he get hot like that again.

The Chicago papers were full of worry yesterday morning that Jordan was back to
monopolizing the Bulls' offense. "When that happens, there is a lot of isolation
and it allowed New York to get back in the game," said Scottie Pippen.

Actually, Jordan won the game, and that should have been the end of it. No
question, the Bulls have a better chance to win a road game if the others are
involved, as they were in Game 3. But, as Riley said, "each game is a chapter."
Tonight's just happens to be the biggest for the Knicks in 20 years. They will
feel the edginess in the crowd. When they step out there tonight, they will most
certainly feel their season, perhaps their futures, on the line.


LOAD-DATE: June 2, 1993

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1993 The New York Times Company


                              228 of 312 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 June 2, 1993, Wednesday, Late Edition - Final

Public & Private;
A Fragile Truce

BYLINE: By ANNA QUINDLEN

SECTION: Section A; Page 19; Column 5; Editorial Desk

LENGTH: 701 words


Those veterans of Vietnam who jeered and booed the President this Memorial Day
did a disservice to themselves and to the conflict in which they served.

More than that, it was they, not the man they reviled as a draft-dodger and a
coward, who did a disservice to those nearly 60,000 others whose names are
etched in stone on the Vietnam Veterans Memorial.

Mr. Clinton invited trouble when he chose to spend the solemn holiday not at
Arlington National Cemetery, where his predecessors have marked the occasion,
but at the black wall of tragic fine print that represents America's most
difficult and divisive modern conflict.

Those other Presidents were remembering their wars, less complicated ones.
Vietnam was Mr. Clinton's war, even though he opposed it and avoided serving --
perhaps especially because of that. It would not have been fitting for him to go
elsewhere. It would have been easier, yes, but it would not have been fitting.

He owed it to memory to go to the memorial on Memorial Day.

But the veterans owed it to memory to be respectful, not for the sake of the
President, or what the President is supposed to represent, but for the sake of
what they themselves were supposed to represent, these graying men in young
men's fatigues.

Why did they fight for the freedom of South Vietnam, if it was not to best the
perceived lockstep of Communism, to permit exactly that sort of dissent that
enabled honorable men and women to oppose U.S. involvement in Southeast Asia?

Why do they honor the service at all if they do not believe in the chain of
command, a chain that ends with the Commander in Chief, whether you like him or
not?

Why did they demand that the veterans of their war be restored to their rightful
place in the nation's consciousness after the demonization of the anti-war years
if that was just a shabby cover for making those who did not serve the demons
instead?

They did a disservice to those many, many Vietnam veterans who have grappled
with the nightmares, the lost years, the dead friends, and who have faced the
hard fact that sometimes there is no one to blame.

We who opposed the war learned to understand and accept what those soldiers did.
But the veterans who turned their backs on Mr. Clinton on Memorial Day showed
that they would never reciprocate, that they would not accept those whose
consciences steered them elsewhere.

They were not there for understanding, healing, remembrance.  They want someone
to admit that they were right and the others were wrong about the war. You could
argue that they behaved no differently than the anti-war protesters themselves
had once done. But the dissidents of Vietnam never pretended to put much stock
in authority figures or "My country, right or wrong."

These men did.

One said that Mr. Clinton should look on the memorial for the name of the person
who died in his stead. But that should be a knock not on one man but on a system
of military servitude that has disproportionately drawn on the poor, the
unskilled and unschooled.

One said that Mr. Clinton had been a disgrace to his country. The man had long
gray hair and a full beard, held a picket sign and interrupted the President in
a public place. In short, he looked and acted like exactly the kind of person he
would have despised 25 years ago.

One said the memorial was sacred.  Did he ever stop to remember that when Maya
Lin designed the long black circumflex it, too, was reviled as an affront to
patriotism, "an erosion control project" and "Orwellian glop," mainly by
veterans' groups?

It is the most perfect memorial imaginable. Grand and sad, a roster of the dead
whose gleaming surface reflects the faces of the living, it says to all: Touch
them. Remember them.  Mourn them. They are yours.

It is not glory on a horse. It is about human beings who did their best as they
saw it. It does not tell you that this was a grand or necessary enterprise.
Nothing about Vietnam was as uncomplicated as that. Nothing ever will be. The
best we have ever been able to hope for is a fragile truce.

The truce was broken on Memorial Day, of all days, by Vietnam veterans, of all
people. It should have been otherwise.

LOAD-DATE: June 2, 1993

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Op-Ed

                   Copyright 1993 The New York Times Company


                              229 of 312 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                   June 4, 1993, Friday, Late Edition - Final

Books of The Times;
Echoes of the Vietnam War Are Still Resounding

BYLINE: By HERBERT MITGANG

SECTION: Section C; Page 27; Column 1; Weekend Desk

LENGTH: 1213 words


The late, great Vietnam War lasted more than 10 years -- longer than the United
States engagement in two World Wars and the Korean War -- and it continues to be
a guiding fact in American foreign and military policy. The Vietnam Syndrome
remains a cautionary warning against adventurism in no-win wars or,
contrariwise, as a lingering attitude that some unrepentant hawks want
discarded. The famous hundred-hour victory in the Persian Gulf was sui generis;
it hasn't changed the views of key American decision makers, who do not want to
stumble into the current ethnic-religious-border war in the Balkans.

Nearly two decades after the end of the Vietnam War, a new round of books
explores the war's aims; how and why the United States got involved; who the
Vietnamese people are and what they thought about the foreigners who came to
their villages as warriors; the behavior of American soldiers in battle; the
campus wars and the peace movement at home, and how correspondents reported the
war while facing pressure from their publications, networks and government.

The half-dozen nonfiction books mentioned here by no means exhaust the Vietnam
theme. For instance, the failed air war, in which more bombs were dropped than
in both the European and Pacific theaters during World War II, is not covered.
This much is certain: in fact and fiction, personal stories from both sides will
continue to appear about the hearts and minds that were lost, and sometimes
discovered, in Vietnam.

In "UNDERSTANDING VIETNAM," Neil L. Jamieson, who was an officer of the Agency
for International Development in wartime Vietnam and is now a senior associate
of the Indochina Institute at George Mason University, discloses what the
American military and political leadership largely misunderstood: the nature of
Vietnamese society, the confrontation with colonialism and Western values, the
resistance of the intellectuals, the culture of the people.

Mr. Jamieson writes of United States-Vietnam relations today: "Americans and
Vietnamese of all political persuasions and all generations and all walks of
life must work to expand the sense of 'we' and to diminish the sense of 'they.'
And, "if we cannot increase empathy and vanquish self-righteousness, if we
cannot expand our moral imaginations to discern and accept the pattern that
connects us all in a common human condition, then we shall all continue to have
lost the war in Vietnam, to perpetuate a struggle in which there are no
winners."

Stan Sesser, author of "THE LANDS OF CHARM AND CRUELTY," has reported on
Southeast Asia in the last few years for The New Yorker. Among other countries
in his book, he visits Laos and Cambodia, war zones kept secret from the
American public.  How do the people who survived the B-52 raids now react to an
American visitor along the old Ho Chi Minh Trail in Laos?

Surprisingly, Mr. Sesser was greeted with unfailing courtesy. He asked a
district leader why the bombing failed to disrupt the North Vietnamese supply
lines. The leader replied: "Essentially, all that happens is that you make a few
holes in the ground, and they are later filled up. You destroy a few trucks, and
they are replaced. You kill some people, and they are replaced also. You can
make things uncomfortable, but airplanes can't stop people. You have to
physically possess the territory."

In "THEN THE AMERICANS CAME," Martha Hess, who traveled all over Vietnam in 1990
and 1991, succeeded in interviewing dozens of men and women who wanted their
stories to be known. The book includes more than 40 photographs taken by Ms.
Hess and Vietnamese photographers. Together, the interviews and grainy
photographs revive memories of the human cost of the war.

Some of the saddest stories in "Then the Americans Came" concern children
abandoned by American fathers. One 18-year-old man, working in a tailor shop in
Hue and dreaming of America, told Ms. Hess: "But because of my face, my hair, I
never think that I am Vietnamese.  Everything about me looks American. And I
consider myself an American. It is the country of my father, but the United
States Government and the O.D.P. [Orderly Departure Program] delegation, they
don't understand."

In "WORKING-CLASS WAR," Christian G. Appy, assistant professor of history at
Massachusetts Institute of Technology, delivers facts and figures to show that
the soldiers who did the fighting and dying in Vietnam didn't represent a
cross-section of American youth. Children of working-class parents were drafted;
those who came from prosperous families went to college. After studying records
and interviewing those who served (and those who didn't), Professor Appy
concludes that "America's most unpopular war was fought primarily by the
19-year-old children" of parents whose own work lives were "not only physically
demanding but in many cases physically dangerous."

At the same time that the dangerous war was being fought in the jungles of
Vietnam, "CAMPUS WARS" were being fought in the United States by antiwar
protesters. Kenneth J. Heineman, assistant professor of history at Ohio
University-Lancaster, found that the campus peace campaign was first spurred at
state universities rather than at the big-name colleges. His useful book
examines the outside forces, like military contracts and local communities, that
led to antiwar protests on campus.

Although some of the tales in "PAPER SOLDIERS" have been twice-told, Clarence R.
Wyatt, who teaches history at Centre College in Danville, Ky., broadens the
story of how the press covered the Vietnam War despite the efforts of the
Pentagon and the White House.

While there was no formal censorship in Vietnam, reporters did agree to abide by
ground rules. They weren't supposed to write about future operations, casualties
suffered by "friendly" units or tactical matters that might help the enemy. Jack
Foisie, a respected frontline correspondent for The Los Angeles Times, was one
of the few reporters whose accreditation was temporarily lifted for not getting
on the team. The author says his research reveals that "more often than not, the
press reported official information, statements and views with relatively little
dissent."

"Paper Soldiers" shows that the strongest reporters did manage to get most of
the military (if not the political) facts out to their readers and listeners,
far more so in troubled Vietnam than later from the news-controlled battle areas
in Panama, Grenada and the Persian Gulf.

The Books

"UNDERSTANDING VIETNAM," by Neil L. Jamieson. 428 pages. University of
California Press. $35.

"THE LANDS OF CHARM AND CRUELTY: TRAVELS IN SOUTHEAST ASIA," by Stan Sesser. 306
pages. Alfred A. Knopf. $23.

"THEN THE AMERICANS CAME: VOICES FROM VIETNAM," by Martha Hess. 239 pages.
Illustrated. Four Walls Eight Windows. $22.95.

"WORKING-CLASS WAR: AMERICAN COMBAT SOLDIERS AND VIETNAM," by Christian G. Appy.
365 pages. University of North Carolina Press. $39.95; paper, $14.95.

"CAMPUS WARS: THE PEACE MOVEMENT AT AMERICAN STATE UNIVERSITIES IN THE VIETNAM
ERA," by Kenneth J. Heineman. 348 pages. New York University Press. $40.

"PAPER SOLDIERS: THE AMERICAN PRESS AND THE VIETNAM WAR," by Clarence R. Wyatt.
272 pages. W. W. Norton. $22.95.

LOAD-DATE: June 4, 1993

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Review

                   Copyright 1993 The New York Times Company


                              230 of 312 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                   June 4, 1993, Friday, Late Edition - Final

NEWS SUMMARY

SECTION: Section A; Page 2; Column 5; Metropolitan Desk

LENGTH: 1058 words



International A3-13

SOUTH AFRICA SETS ELECTION
The Government and most of South Africa's opposition parties settled tentatively
on April 27, 1994 as the date when the country's black majority will cast their
first votes.  A1

CAMBODIA FORMS A GOVERNMENT
Prince Norodom Sihanouk announced on Thursday that he had forged a coalition
Government in which he would be Prime Minister, then said today that he was
abandoning the plan, apparently because of a long-standing family dispute.  A1



Prince Norodom Sihanouk was a king at 19 and a prisoner by 20.  A8

CONTEST FOR AN ENVOY'S POST
The White House asked both former Vice President Walter F. Mondale and Richard
C. Holbrooke if they would like to be ambassador to Japan. But no choice has
been made, and the old friends are reluctant competitors.  A1

A PROMISE MADE IN BOSNIA
The commander of the United Nations military forces in Bosnia said that the
leader of the Bosnian Serbs had told him that he had ordered a cease-fire around
the besieged Muslim town of Gorazde.  A12

U.S. takes another step away from from Bosnia intervention.  A12

U.S. pushes for a vote on the plan for safe havens.  A12

GERMANS SEEK ACTION ON ARSON
In Germany, thousands gather to memorialize five Turkish women and girls killed
in an arson attack and to demand action from German officials.  A3

Guatemala announces that its Vice President is taking over.  A5

Spanish youth, increasingly conservative, threaten the Socialists.  A9

In Gabon, oil brings wealth, and high prices.  A10

Russian official says his colleagues can't let go of Soviet thinking.  A6

U.S. is taking a softer line toward Ukraine on nuclear weapons.  A7

U.S. officials think there are more drug tunnels from Mexico.  A11

Jerusalem Journal: Palestinian merchants in a quandary.  A4

National A14-20

CLINTON WITHDRAWS NOMINATION
President Clinton withdrew his nomination of Lani Guinier as the new civil
rights chief, saying he could not defend many of the views she expressed in her
writings.  A1

BUCKLING UNDER PRESSURE
News analysis: The saga of Lani Guinier is the latest in a series of events in
which the President has overpromised and then backed down under political
pressure.  A18

A nomination failed solely on the basis of a law review article.  A18

UNLIKELY MILITARY ALLIANCE
General Colin Powell intended to retire quickly when President Clinton took
office. But the two men have developed an unexpected relationship based on
mutual respect.  A1

CLINTON CLOSE ON COURT CHOICE
President Clinton said he was close to choosing a Supreme Court nominee from a
list that includes Interior Secretary Bruce Babbitt.  A20

DOLE URGES UNITY IN CALIFORNIA
Senator Bob Dole has offered a message of unity to Republicans in California,
urging them to focus on issues they agree on.  A20

JURY DEADLOCKED ON LIBEL AWARD
Jeffrey Masson's libel trial against Janet Malcolm ended with the jury
deadlocked on monetary damages after deciding the writer had defamed the
psychoanalyst.  A1

Writers and editors disavowed the practices disclosed at the trial.  A16

GUNS AS THREAT TO HEALTH
Some who have been personally affected by gunshot wounds and deaths among
children see gun control as a public health issue.  A14

BAKING GEMS IN THE OVEN
Scientists at Pennsylvania State University have created a form of diamond by
cooking plastic in an ordinary oven.  A14

Ross Perot supports, but does not endorse, a Senate candidate.  A14

The dismissal of a scientific investigator will be reviewed.  A16

Law Page A21

Overwhelmed and underfinanced, the death-penalty bar reaches out.

At the Bar: Epithet and aftermath.

Metro Digest B1

JOBLESSNESS AMONG YOUTHS RISES
Unemployment among New York City's teen-agers rose to 40 percent in the first
three months this year, city officials said yesterday. It was nearly double the
rate of two years ago and the worst in the 25 years that records have been kept.
A1

PRISONER BEATEN TO DEATH
An epileptic prisoner who died in police custody at a Manhattan hospital 10 days
ago was beaten to death while he lay face down on a floor with his wrists
manacled behind him, unable to breathe adequately, New York City's Chief Medical
Examiner said yesterday. He ruled the death a homicide.  A1

Business Digest D1

Weekend C1-32

Biking: Boston to Manhattan.  C1

A day at Bergdorf's.  C1

Comedy festival.  C3

Gay and lesbian film festival.  C16

For Children C26

Theater: On Stage, and Off C2

Film: Garbo's grittier Anna.  C1

"Un Coeur en Hiver." C3

"Guilty as Sin." C8

"Life With Mikey." C8

"The Music of Chance." C13

Music: Mordecai Shehori.  C15

Sounds Around Town C29

Restaurants C20

Art: "Latin American Artists." C32

The Art Market C22

Books: Vietnam echoes.  C27

Television: TV Weekend C30

Sports B7-14

Baseball: Leyritz backs up the swagger.  B9

A Mets trade prospectus.  B9

Miami schoolboy goes first in draft.  B9

Basketball: Somber Knicks must regroup.  B7

More gambling allegations surround Jordan.  B7

No boycotting interviews for Barkley.  B12

Boxing: Foreman stalks the title.  B9

Columns: Vecsey on the Knicks.  B7

Lipsyte on Knicks and Bulls.  B12

TV Sports B12

Golf: Laoretti struggles.  B11

Love leads in Memorial.  B11

Hockey: Canadiens beat Kings in overtime to tie series.  B13

Horse Racing: Cherokee Run on rail in Belmont.  B7

Tennis: Medvedev ousts Edberg.  B7

Obituaries A22-23

Norton Simon, a capitalist and a collector.  A22

Walker O. Cain, an architect.  A23

Editorials/Op-Ed A30-31

Editorials

The Pentagon sheds a myth.

The Solingen tragedy.

Revenge on two whistle-blowers.

Topics: "A confusion happened."

Letters

A. M. Rosenthal: Our friend Qaddafi.

Anthony Lewis: Anatomy of a smear.

William T. Coleman Jr.: Three's company: Guinier, Reagan, Bush.

Jeffrey E. Harris: Two bucks will finance health care for 10 million.

Chronicle B4

Crossword C28

LOAD-DATE: June 4, 1993

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Summary

                   Copyright 1993 The New York Times Company


                              231 of 312 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                   June 4, 1993, Friday, Late Edition - Final

Sihanouk Names a Government In Cambodia, Then Withdraws

BYLINE: By PHILIP SHENON,  Special to The New York Times

SECTION: Section A; Page 1; Column 4; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 1565 words

DATELINE: PHNOM PENH, Cambodia, Friday, June 4


Prince Norodom Sihanouk, Cambodia's former monarch, announced Thursday that he
had formed a coalition government in which he would serve as Prime Minister and
supreme military commander, only to abandon the plan this morning in the midst
of what is apparently a long-running family psychodrama pitting Prince Sihanouk
against one of his sons.

The son, Prince Norodom Ranariddh, had originally been named Deputy Prime
Minister in the new newly proclaimed National Government of Cambodia.

In a proclamation to the nation on Thursday, Prince Sihanouk said he had formed
the coalition after receiving the agreement of the political parties led by both
Prince Ranariddh and the incumbent, Vietnamese-intalled Government of Prime
Minister Hun Sen.

'Big Difficulties'

But in statements released this morning, Prince Sihanouk asked for the
forgiveness of his people and said that his new government had collapsed because
of "big difficulties in implementing the formula."

He said his son's political party, known as Funcinpec, and the political party
of Mr. Hun Sen would now be responsible for "any tragedy inflicted on this
unfortunate nation."

Prince Sihanouk's announcement was typical of his unpredicablity and could be
another step in the intricate political maneuvers that have marked his years in
and out of power.

The royalist Funcinpec party -- the National United Front for an Independent,
Neutral, Peaceful and Cooperative Cambodia -- won last week's United
Nations-sponsored elections to select the members of a new National Assembly.
But rather than wait for the Assembly to choose a new government, Prince
Sihanouk moved adroitly to get Mr. Hun Sen to agree to accept the results of the
elections, after his incumbent Government had threatened earlier in the week not
to accept them.

The elections represented the centerpiece of a $2 billion United Nations
peacekeeping plan meant to end Cambodia's 14-year-old civil war.

Senior United Nations peacekeepers said today that the idea of a coalition
government with Price Sihanouk as its leader had apparently not been abandoned.
But they said it could be days or weeks before Prince Shianouk, who is 70, could
win over his 49-year-old son to enter a government. There had long been rumors
that father and son had serious disagreements. But those differences had never
before been aired publicly.

Facing defeat in the vote count, Mr. Hun Sen and his Government threatened this
week to reject the final election results, citing possible fraud in the voting
procedures, and to hold on to power -- a threat that appeared to evaporate on
Thursday.

Another threat, posed to the stability of the country by the Maoist-inspired
rebels of the Khmer Rouge, would never go away so easily. A spokesman for Mr.
Hun Sen said the Vietnamese-installed Government had agreed to hand over power
to Prince Sihanouk on the assumption that the Khmer Rouge would have no part in
the coalition. Mr. Hun Sen was named as one of two Deputy Prime Ministers.

But in his proclamation Thursday, the Prince, who during his long career has
been at times the enemy and at times the ally of the Khmer Rouge, made
conciliatory remarks about the rebels, asking them to participate in "national
reconciliation and national union."

Possible Role for Khmer Rouge

Despite his assertion last week that the Khmer Rouge had suffered an historic
defeat in the elections and had no future role in Cambodia, many diplomats
believe that Prince Sihanouk will eventually try to bring the Khmer Rouge into a
new government in the hopes of ending Cambodia's civil war.

That prospect worries Cambodians who remember Khmer Route reign of terror in the
1970's that left more than one million Cambodians dead from starvation, disease
or execution.

The major uncertainty in the elections had concerned the Khmer Rouge. They
refused to take part in them, and for a while threatened to disrupt them with
violence. But under pressure from China and other countries, the Khmer Rouge
eventually allowed the elections to take place with a minimum of disruption.

The coalition government announced on Thursday would have been a triumph for
Prince Sihanouk, who has spent most of the last two decades at lonely exile
trying to find a means both of returning to Cambodia in triumph and of restoring
peace to a nation that has known only genocide or civil war since his ouster in
1970. He was toppled in a coup led by his hand-picked Prime Minister, Gen. Lon
Nol, whose American-backed Government was itself brought down five years later
by the Khmer Rouge.

Mentions General Lon Nol

The Prince could not resist a swipe at General Lon Nol Thursday, noting in his
proclamation that the territorial boundaries of Cambodia would be the same as
those that existed prior to the "Coup d'Etat of Lon Nol."

In the two decades that followed the coup, Prince Sihanouk was first rebel
leader (working with the Khmer Rouge to overthrow Lon Nol), then prisoner
(imprisoned by the Khmer Rouge in the royal palace after they overthrew Lon
Nol), then rebel leader again (working with the Khmer Rouge to overthrow the
Government installed by Vietnam in 1979), the peacemaker.

Although the Prince had no sypmapthy with the Khmer Rouge, he agreed to serve as
head of state when they captured Cambodia, but he was soon forced into house
arrest. After Vietnam crushed the Khmer Rouge, he emerged as the leader of the
non-Communist opposition to the Vietnamese-dominated Government in Phnom Penh.

With more than 90 percent of the ballots counted, the United Nations said
Thursday that the royalist party had received 45.3 percent of the vote, followed
by the Cambodian People's Party, the political arm of Mr. Hun Sen's Government,
with 38.6 percent. The rest of the vote was divided up by the other 24 parties
taking part. A final count is expected to be released next week.

Questions About Duration

Although spokesmen for Mr. Hun Sen said the new Government would lead Cambodia
only until a new National Assembly is seated this summer, Prince Sihanouk's
proclamation of the coalition Government did not include the words temporary or
provisional.

United Nations peacekeepers and diplomats here said they were worried that the
Prince intended this to be a permanent Government, usurping at least some of the
powers that the United Nations had hoped would go to the National Assembly. The
Assembly is supposed to draft a new constitution.

The United Nations appeared ready to accept the coalition Government, although
United Nations officials here said its creation violated the spirit of the 1991
peace treaty. Under the treaty, the new government was supposed to emerge out of
the deliberations of the National Assembly.

"We've been presented with a fait accompli," a senior United Nations official
said. "After spending $2 billion to save this country, the United Nations was
shut out of this process. You have to wonder what the Prince is up to."

'Father of the Nation'

In his nearly 30 years in and out of power in Cambodia, the Prince's behavior
was often considered eccentric. and he was never known for a willingness to
share authority, except when forced to do so.

Prince Ranariddh was reported to be in Thailand Thursday, and his spokesmen in
Phnom Penh were not available for comment. A senior royalist party member said
that the coalition was "the work of Prince Sihanouk" and that while "some people
aren't happy with this arrangement, we have to accept it because Prince Sihanouk
is the father of the nation."

Working from his homes in exile in Beijing and North Korea, he was the moving
force in negotiations that led in 1991 to the United Nations peace treaty for
Cambodia.

The treaty resulted in the deployment of a 22,000-member peacekeeping force by
United Nations, the largest in its history, and last week's elections. When he
first returned from exile in November 1991, Prince Sihanouk was proclaimed
Cambodia's ceremonial head of state, a position he will retain in the new
Government.

90 Percent Turnout

The elections, the centerpiece of the peace effort, were without doubt the
freest and fairest in Cambodia's history, with more than 90 percent of the
nation's 4.7 million registered voters taking part.

A spokesman for Mr. Hun Sen said Thursday that the negotiations that led to the
creation of the coalition Government were orchestrated by Prince Sihanouk and
were "very smooth and very friendly," adding, "We hope that this Government can
work well for the benefit of the country."

The 120-seat National Assembly -- which will probably have 57 members from the
royalist party, 52 from the People's Party and 11 from two smaller parties -- is
to open this summer.

Many Cambodians say they voted for the royalists believing that by casting their
ballots for the party of Prince Ranariddh, they were in fact voting for his
father, Prince Sihanouk.

Prince Ranariddh, a 49-year-old French-educated law professor and political
scientist, looks much like his father. They share the same falsetto voice and
giggle. Both are accomplished linguists, fluent in French and English as well as
their native Khmer.

Although there are frequent rumors that father and son have serious differences,
Prince Ranariddh promised in the election campaign that if his party won, he
would turn over all state power to his father.

LOAD-DATE: June 4, 1993

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photos: Prince Norodom Sihanouk last weekend in Phnom Penh. (Associated
Press) (pg. A1); After announcing on Thursday that he had assumed all state
powers, Prince Norodom Sihanouk said today that he was unable to form a
coalition government of the main royalist party, which won last week's
elections, and the incumbent Vietnamese-installed Government. A cameraman filmed
the tally at the U.N. headquarters in Phnom Penh. (Associated Press) (pg. A8)

Map of Cambodia highlighting Phnom Penh (pg. A8)

                   Copyright 1993 The New York Times Company


                              232 of 312 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                   June 4, 1993, Friday, Late Edition - Final

Man in the News;
The Mercurial Prince: Norodom Sihanouk

BYLINE: By JAMES BARRON

SECTION: Section A; Page 8; Column 5; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 1079 words


He was a King when he was 18, a prisoner at 20, an exile at 31, a Prime Minister
at 32, a chief of state again at 38, a prisoner again at 54, an exile again at
69.

Now, at 70, Norodom Sihanouk has once again come to the brink of power, and
characertistically pulled back, at least for the moment. His approach to the
situation appears to be not much different from what it was in the days when his
business cards simply said, "Sihanouk du Cambodge," Sihanouk of Cambodia.

If those words echoed Louis XIV's "L'etat, c'est moi," they were to many
Cambodians a perfect-pitch description of the once-cherubic Prince, who is still
called the King by millions of his former subjects. For more than half a
century, he has been a quintessential power broker with an almost mystical sense
of belonging to his country.

As the most popular political figure in a country that has known only civil war
or mass murder since his ouster in 1970, he also held a virtually unshakable
claim on Cambodians' hearts. In the 1980's, the rumor that he was returning from
exile was enough to send people in the capital, Phnom Penh, scurrying to get the
streets cleaned up for him.

Known as Unpredictable

He had a reputation for being loquacious, unpredictable and autocratic, and for
wielding power with a style all his own, a blend of benevolence and petulance.
"A bit misunderstood, or if you wish, un-understandable," he once said in
describing himself.

He seemed to like it that way. In the 1970's, he gave interview after interview,
but what he said was consistently inconsistent. Just last month, he insisted
that the election was a historic defeat for the Khmer Rouge and that he had
abandoned a proposal to include them in a government. Yesterday he offered them
an olive branch and then took it back.

A few months ago he said in an interview, "I must remain the father of the
nation, whose task it is to reunite the nation." Amid fears that efforts to end
14 years of civil conflict might fail, John Gunther Dean, a former United States
Ambassador to Cambodia who had known him for 40 years, called Prince Sihanouk
"the essential cement in Cambodia."

His life has become an essential part of the 20th-century history of Cambodia.
The French underestimated him when, in 1941, they crowned Sihanouk rather than
his father or other members of the royal family who were ahead of him in the
line of succession. The French considered the pampered Prince more malleable
than his relatives and more interested in playing his saxophone than in changing
Cambodia.

Played Off U.S. and China

In his own words, the lamb became a tiger, and in 1953 he negotiated Cambodia's
independence from the French. In 1955, he abdicated, organized a new political
party and went on to be Cambodia's civilian leader for 15 years. He also
accepted limited aid from the United States and cemented economic and political
relations with Communist China, "our No. 1 friend," playing one off against the
other.

"Whether I swing to the right or to the left is my concern because I work only
in the interests of my country," he said after critics complained that he liked
to switch sides rather than fight.

He was toppled in 1970 in a coup led by Gen. Lon Nol and then aligned himself
with the Khmer Rouge in seeking to overthrow the American-backed Lon Nol
Government.

In 1975, he was imprisoned in his palace in Phnom Penh after the Khmer Rouge
came to power and overran Cambodia. Under the Khmer Rouge, more than a million
Cambodians died of starvation or disease or by execution. Prince Sihanouk was
freed in 1979, when Vietnam invaded Cambodia and ended the Khmer Rouge reign of
terror.

In the early 1980's, despite the evidence of genocide by the Khmer Rouge, he
aligned himself again with them in seeking to overthrow the Vietnamese-installed
Government in power today.

Prince Sihanouk's restoration as chief of state stemmed from a 1991 peace accord
between three rebel factions and the Vietnamese-installed Government. The
framers of the 1991 treaty chose to make Prince Sihanouk chief of state, with
the title of President of a Supreme National Council. They were counting on his
continuing popularity to give him the power to create harmony between the
Government and the Khmer Rouge, the two most important opponents in the civil
war.

But critics, including diplomats in Phnom Penh and experts on Cambodian history,
have contended that the Prince's volatile nature and his reluctance to share
authority, along with what they consider errors in political judgment, were at
least in part to blame for the 1970 coup and for the rise of the Khmer Rouge.

The coup came while the Prince was visiting Moscow. The key figures were a
relative, Sisowath Sirik Matak, who was a Deputy Prime Minister, and the Prime
Minister, Lon Nol. Some historians maintain that the Prince would not have been
driven from office were it not for the Vietnam War, which had damaged Cambodian
economic life.

Furious at his overthrow, he turned on the Americans, who had long complained
that he let the Vietcong send supplies through Cambodia, and he joined forces
with Cambodia's Communist insurgents. Until then, by what some call skillful
tightrope diplomacy, he had tried to keep his nation from being overcome by
either the Vietcong or the South Vietnamese forces that the United States was
backing.

After the Khmer Rouge ousted the American-backed Government in 1975, the Prince
was President for a year in the new Government. But he soon lost the title and
became a captive. More than a dozen of his relatives died in the Khmer Rouge
slaughter.

The Prince was born Oct. 31, 1922. His birthplace is uncertain; some writers say
he was born in Cambodia. He was the only child of Prince Norodom Suramarit,
whose grandfather, King Norodom, reigned from 1860 to 1904; and of Princess
Sisowath Kossamak, whose father, King Monivong, reigned from 1927 until his
death in 1941. It was King Monivong whom the Prince succeeded as King.

His longtime consort, Princess Monique, was described by Time magazine in 1964
as "the lovely half-Italian beauty-contest winner whom Sihanouk met when he
awarded her a pageant prize in 1951."

In his early years, the Prince was reported to have been married several other
times. Robert Trumbull, a New York Times correspondent in Asia, wrote in his
1964 book, "The Scrutable East," that "he is said to have about 30 children, by
a number of wives and concubines."

NAME: Norodom Sihanouk

LOAD-DATE: June 4, 1993

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Biography

                   Copyright 1993 The New York Times Company


                              233 of 312 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                   June 4, 1993, Friday, Late Edition - Final

Clinton and Powell Discover That They Need Each Other

BYLINE: By ERIC SCHMITT with THOMAS L. FRIEDMAN,  Special to The New York Times

SECTION: Section A; Page 1; Column 5; National Desk

LENGTH: 1541 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, June 3


It was during the transition, and President George Bush, Defense Secretary Dick
Cheney and Gen. Colin L. Powell, Chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff, were
sitting around the Oval Office with some aides, musing about Bill Clinton and
the merry band of baby boomers about to storm the White House.

Mr. Bush and Mr. Cheney were teasing General Powell with the ease of friends who
had been through wars together, one participant in the meeting recalls. "Well,
Colin, you're going to have to deal with these guys now," Mr. Bush said. "Not
for long," General Powell replied with raised eyebrows as the others let out a
hearty laugh.

Matter of Mutual Survival

Indeed, when Bill Clinton took office, General Powell already had one eye on the
exit, considering retirement even earlier than his currently planned departure
in September. Since then, though, the two men have developed an intriguing
relationship, one that neither of them could have expected.

The relationship began as a matter of mutual survival, it remains a matter of
mutual survival, but it has also evolved into one of mutual respect.

Mr. Clinton has needed General Powell's credibility to help buttress his own
shaky standing as Commander in Chief. That fact was underscored during the
Memorial Day ceremony at the Vietnam Veterans Memorial on Monday, when General
Powell performed the political equivalent of falling on a grenade for his
President, smothering with his own presence some of the angry dissent from
Vietnam veterans by effusively introducing Mr. Clinton to the crowd.

Similarly, General Powell has needed Mr. Clinton's cooperation to preserve a
military institution to which he is almost mystically devoted and which in his
view can flourish only if he can moderate the President's impulses to shrink the
armed forces, to allow homosexuals to serve and to intervene in thorny areas
like Bosnia.

Likes and Respects Clinton

But General Powell's relationship with his new boss has moved beyond
institutional needs. To his own apparent surprise, the general who describes
himself as the nation's senior active-duty Vietnam veteran has actually come to
like and respect the nation's senior active-duty draft avoider. In his Pentagon
office, the general keeps a recent birthday present from the President, an
inscribed, silver-framed photograph of himself, Mr. Clinton and Defense
Secretary Les Aspin.

General Powell has taken to describing Mr. Clinton to other generals as an
intellectual whose sense of American history precludes his doing anything that
would really hurt the military.

In an interview today, General Powell said of Mr. Clinton: "He has a historical
perspective. He keeps the total picture in mind." But, the general added, their
discussions of that history have largely steered clear of their Vietnam-era
experiences except "in passing."

Despite General Powell's insistence that he and Mr. Clinton instantly "hit it
off," his friends say the general has privately struggled to balance his
loyalties to a young new Presidentagainst his commitment to the
1.8-million-member armed forces.

At times in the early weeks of the Clinton Presidency, the general and his
fellow Chiefs appeared on the verge of insubordination, and it quickly became
clear that Mr. Clinton was not about to take them on.

Mr. Clinton's advisers say the President has discovered how much he needs and
values General Powell's advice and experience. General Powell's views were
central in reeling Mr. Clinton back from his campaign-bred inclination to
intervene in Bosnia.

Budget Clash

But, at the same time, Mr. Clinton's economic plans require him to slash the
military budget to help pay for everything from the deficit to health care to
aid for Russia. Mr. Powell's budget is in many ways a purse for Clintonomics,
and the President has struggled with how far and fast he can dip into it without
straining an already uncertain relationship with the military.

It has not been easy. Speaking of the Clinton team, a friend of the President
observed: "This is a group of people who have no feeling for the culture of the
military. Bill Clinton probably knew more gay people than military people before
he came to Washington."

The two men met only last fall, but the seeds of their relationship were planted
24 years ago. In the summer of 1969, Colin Powell was a young Army major
finishing his second tour in Vietnam. Mr. Clinton was a few months from helping
to organize antiwar demonstrations in London and Washington in the fall.

It was this contrast that forged the real backdrop, and the mutual wariness, of
their first meeting, which occurred at the Hay-Adams Hotel here last Nov. 19,
two weeks after Mr. Clinton had been elected President.

The private meeting, in an eighth-floor corner suite overlooking the White
House, lasted an hour and 45 minutes, three-quarters of an hour longer than
scheduled.

"From the very beginning they were friendly, but careful," said a top Clinton
adviser who attended the meeting. "Each, for different reasons, knew that they
had better get along, but we were not clear how it was going to work out. Over
the weeks, each did things that gained the other's trust."

The honeymoon soon hit the rocks, though, over an issue to which the White House
badly misjudged the military's reaction: the President's desire to lift the ban
on homosexuals serving openly in the armed forces.

The Joint Chiefs of Staff had believed that the President would consult them
before making any final decision and were furious to learn from a news article
that the Administration would seek their opinions only on the means of carrying
out Mr. Clinton's decision, not on the ban itself.

General Powell was angry and offended over newspaper editorials that challenged
his loyalty to the Commander in Chief, prompting him to redouble his efforts to
reverse the impression.

But precisely at the moment when he was trying to close the obvious gap between
himself and the President over the ban on homosexuals, an even more serious
breach threatened to open on the question of military intervention in Bosnia, to
which General Powell was not hiding his opposition.

A Powell-Clinton confrontation on Bosnia was avoided, though, in part because
the politically savvy general forged a tacit alliance with another opponent of
military intervention, Secretary of State Warren Christopher, and because Mr.
Clinton himself, worried about taking on the military over another issue and
growing increasingly aware of domestic opposition to involvement in Bosnia,
began backing away.

A senior White House official, indirectly confirming General Powell's influence,
put it delicately, "There has not been a decision on Bosnia that Colin opposed."

While the result was fine from General Powell's point of view, the route to that
result was a little disturbing to him.

Selling Clinton to Military

"One thing Powell is still uneasy about is Clinton's tendency to publicly think
out loud before finalizing what he thinks he is going to do," one friend of both
men said. "Every word Powell says in public is well considered, and he thinks
that should be the same with a President, especially if it involves a potential
use of force."

Together with Secretary Aspin, General Powell urged the President to mix it up
with troops. Mr. Clinton has taken the advice, visiting the Pentagon, delivering
the commencement address at West Point, flying out to the aircraft carrier
Theodore Roosevelt and even going out to the Marine base at Quantico, Va., on
Wednesday to present trophies to the champions of the annual golf tournament
there.

In selling Mr. Clinton to a skeptical military, General Powell's argument has
been that although the President may never have served, he understands the place
of the military in American life and that the success of his own foreign policy
will depend ultimately on his ability to project power abroad when need be.

On Monday, General Powell put his own credibility with the military community on
the line for Mr. Clinton, escorting him to the Vietnam Veterans Memorial, where
the general drew a much bigger ovation than did his Commander in Chief. And when
it came time to speak, he pulled out all the stops.

After citing "a pressing need to move forward together as a nation" in healing
the wounds of Vietnam, General Powell went on, "And therefore, my dear friends,
at this wall of honor, as the senior Vietnam veteran on active duty and as
Chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff, I want to welcome and introduce to you
the Commander in Chief of the armed forces of the United States, our President,
President Bill Clinton."

General Powell said today that as he and Mr. Clinton were driving to the
memorial together, "he didn't know what I was going to say, and I didn't know
what he was going to say."

Afterward, as they were walking away, Anthony Lake, Mr. Clinton's national
security adviser, thanked General Powell for what he had done that balmy
Washington afternoon.

"It was an important moment for the President," General Powell said today,
praising Mr. Clinton for the appearance at the memorial. "It was not only the
correct and right thing to do, it was really the only thing to do."

LOAD-DATE: June 4, 1993

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1993 The New York Times Company


                              234 of 312 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                  June 5, 1993, Saturday, Late Edition - Final
                              Correction Appended

COMMENCEMENTS;
Williams Honors Jim Lehrer

SECTION: Section 1; Page 10; Column 5; National Desk

LENGTH: 234 words


Jim Lehrer, associate editor and co-anchor of "The MacNeil/Lehrer Newshour" on
PBS, delivered the main address yesterday at the 204th commencement of Williams
College in Williamstown, Mass.

Mr. Lehrer received an honorary doctorate of humane letters. Other honorary
degree recipients were Louise Gluck, the Pulitzer Prize-winning poet and senior
lecturer in English at Williams; Henry Louis Gates Jr., the W. E. B. Du Bois
Professor of Humanities at Harvard University; Maya Lin, the designer of the
Vietnam Veterans' Memorial in Washington; Earl A. Powell 3d, a Williams alumnus
who is director of the National Gallery of Art; Martin Scorsese, the filmmaker;
Sir Richard Norman, rector of Exeter College at Oxford University; Harry C.
Payne, president of Hamilton College, who will take over next January as
Williams's president, and Walter V. Shipley, president of Chemical Bank and
another Williams alumnus.

St. Francis College

Senator Daniel Patrick Moynihan of New York delivered the main address to the
201 graduates yesterday at the 109th commencement of St. Francis College in
Brooklyn Heights.

Yolanda Serrano, executive director of the Association for Drug Abuse Prevention
and Treatment, received an honorary doctorate of humane letters, and Roy L.
Reardon, an alumnus who is senior partner at Simpson, Thacher & Bartlett,
received an honorary doctorate of laws degree.

LOAD-DATE: June 5, 1993

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

CORRECTION-DATE: June 6, 1993, Sunday

CORRECTION:

A brief article yesterday about the commencement at Williams College was
published prematurely. The ceremony is scheduled for today.


                   Copyright 1993 The New York Times Company


                              235 of 312 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                   June 6, 1993, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

A Noteworthy Collection

BYLINE: By LAUREL GRAEBER

SECTION: Section 7; Page 54; Column 1; Book Review Desk

LENGTH: 1944 words


This selection of paperbacks is from the New & Noteworthy column since the 1992
Christmas issue.
ALIEN INK: The F.B.I.'s War on Freedom of Expression
By Natalie Robins. Rutgers University, $14.95.
J. Edgar Hoover's investigation of American writers.


ALMANAC OF THE DEAD
By Leslie Marmon Silko. Penguin, $13.
A novel of memory and of Native American peoples.
AMERICAN NERVOUSNESS, 1903: An Anecdotal History
By Tom Lutz. Cornell University, $14.95.
How nervous disorders became the American malaise.
ANNE SEXTON: A BIOGRAPHY
By Diane Wood Middlebrook. Vintage, $14.
The life and death of a gifted and troubled poet.
AT WEDDINGS AND WAKES
By Alice McDermott. Dell, $5.99.
A novel of three generations of an Irish Catholic family.
BARCELONA
By Robert Hughes. Vintage, $14.
An art critic's generous paean to the city.
BASTARD OUT OF CAROLINA
By Dorothy Allison. Plume, $10.
A novel in the voice of an abused 13-year-old girl.
BEYOND THE CURVE
By Kobo Abe. Translated by Juliet Winters Carpenter. Kodansha International, $8.

Surreal short stories by the late Japanese author.
BILLIE DYER AND OTHER STORIES
By William Maxwell. Plume, $8.
Fiction about the Midwest by a former editor of The New Yorker.
BLACK WATER
By Joyce Carol Oates. Plume, $8.
A novel inspired by the accident at Chappaquiddick.
CAMBRIDGE
By Caryl Phillips. Vintage International, $10.
A novel, set in the 19th century, about the lives of a plantation owner's
daughter and a slave.
CAPITOL GAMES: The Inside Story of Clarence Thomas, Anita Hill, and a Supreme
Court Nomination
By Timothy M. Phelps and Helen Winternitz. Harper Perennial, $14.
An overview of the confirmation of Justice Thomas.
A CASE OF CURIOSITIES
By Allen Kurzweil. Ballantine, $10.
The Enlightenment as experienced by a watchmaker.
CELIA: A SLAVE
By Melton A. McLaurin. Avon, $10.
The true story of a slave who murdered the master who had forced her into sexual
servitude.
CHILDHOOD: A Multicultural View
By Melvin Konner. Little, Brown, $15.95.
A medical anthropologist discusses childhood.
CHINA IN OUR TIME: The People of China From the Communist Victory to Tiananmen
Square and Beyond
By Ross Terrill. Touchstone/Simon & Schuster, $13.
A history and analysis of the Chinese character.
A CLOSED EYE
By Anita Brookner. Vintage Contemporaries, $11.
A novel about four women linked by love and betrayal.
COMING INTO THE END ZONE: A Memoir
By Doris Grumbach. Norton, $9.95.
A novelist's reflections on turning 70.
COMPLETE COLLECTED STORIES
By V. S. Pritchett. Vintage International, $20.
Eighty-two stories by a master of short fiction.
THE CULTURE OF CONTENTMENT
By John Kenneth Galbraith. Houghton Mifflin, $9.95.
A noted economist's analysis of Republican policies.
THE DESTRUCTIVE WAR: William Tecumseh Sherman, Stonewall Jackson, and the
Americans
By Charles Royster. Vintage Civil War Library, $15.
How these generals helped shape the Civil War.
THE DISUNITING OF AMERICA:
Reflections on a Multicultural Society
By Arthur M. Schlesinger Jr. Norton, $7.95.
An examination of education and "political correctness."
THE DIVINE SARAH: A Life of Sarah Bernhardt
By Arthur Gold and Robert Fizdale. Vintage, $17.
The great heroine of the theater, onstage and off.
EAGLE ON THE STREET: Based on the Pulitzer Prize-Winning Account of the SEC's
Battle With Wall Street
By David A. Vise and Steve Coll. Collier/Macmillan, $14.
Policing Wall Street during the 1980's boom.
EARTH IN THE BALANCE: Ecology and the Human Spirit
By Al Gore. Plume, $13.
The Vice President's essay on the environment.
ELEANOR ROOSEVELT: Volume One, 1884-1933
By Blanche Wiesen Cook. Penguin, $14.
How personal betrayal led this First Lady to activism.
ELIZABETH I
By Anne Somerset. St. Martin's, $14.95.
Extolling the glory of Good Queen Bess.
ENCOUNTERING MARY:
Visions of Mary From La Salette to Medjugorje
By Sandra L. Zimdars-Swartz. Avon, $12.
The cultural impact of sightings of the Virgin Mary.
THE FAMILY ROMANCE OF THE FRENCH REVOLUTION
By Lynn Hunt. University of California, $12.
The French Revolution as Oedipal drama.
FORTUNATE LIVES
By Robb Forman Dew. Harper Perennial, $10.
Fiction about the effect of a child's death on a family.
FORTUNATE SON: The Autobiography of Lewis B. Puller Jr.
Bantam, $5.99.
A Vietnam veteran's Pulitzer Prize-winning memoir of his recovery from
devastating trauma.
FRANK CAPRA: The Catastrophe of Success
By Joseph McBride. Touchstone/Simon & Schuster, $16.
Why it wasn't such a wonderful life.
A FULL SERVICE BANK: How BCCI Stole Billions Around the World
By James Ring Adams and Douglas Frantz. Pocket Books, $10.
All about the global crimes of the Bank of Credit and Commerce International.
THE GIRLS IN THE BALCONY: Women, Men and The New York Times
By Nan Robertson. Fawcett Columbine, $10.
The women behind the 1974 sex-discrimination lawsuit.
GEORGE CUKOR: A DOUBLE LIFE.
A Biography of the Gentleman Director
By Patrick McGilligan. Harper Perennial, $13.
The two worlds of the great Hollywood director.
GOETHE: THE POET AND THE AGE.
Volume 1: The Poetry of Desire (1749-1790)
By Nicholas Boyle. Oxford University, $17.95.
Goethe's early years as a multifaceted genius.
HIGH COTTON
By Darryl Pinckney. Penguin, $11.
A novel of a young black man's search for identity.
HIGH GROUND
By John McGahern. Penguin, $10.
Short stories by a contemporary Irish master.
HOLOCAUST TESTIMONIES: The Ruins of Memory
By Lawrence L. Langer. Yale University, $13.
How the Nazi horror shaped its survivors' memories.
HUMANS
By Donald E. Westlake. Mysterious Press/Warner, $4.99.
A tragicomic novel in which God, fed up with humans, sends an angel to help them
destroy themselves.
I'M DYSFUNCTIONAL, YOU'RE DYSFUNCTIONAL:
The Recovery Movement and Other Self-Help Fashions
By Wendy Kaminer. Vintage, $10.
A critical look at the rage for 12-step solutions.
IN THE LAND OF MEN
By Antonya Nelson. Avon, $8.
Short stories about emotional survivors.
A LANDING ON THE SUN
By Michael Frayn. Penguin, $10.
A novel in which a British Cabinet Office administrator investigates a death and
the nature of happiness.
THE JAMESES: A Family Narrative
By R. W. B. Lewis. Anchor/Doubleday, $15.
William, Henry, Alice and their forebears.
JAZZ
By Toni Morrison. Plume, $10.
Fiction about love and murder in 1920's Harlem.
JEFFERSON DAVIS: The Man and His Hour
By William C. Davis. Harper Perennial, $18.
How the Confederate president staved off defeat.
KEEPING A RENDEZVOUS
By John Berger. Vintage International, $12.
Essays whose subjects range from fine art to the metaphysical implications of
cleaning an outhouse.
LANDSCAPE TURNED RED: The Battle of Antietam
By Stephen W. Sears. Ticknor & Fields, $12.95.
A pivotal Civil War battle, and America's bloodiest.
THE LOST UPLAND
By W. S. Merwin. Owl/Henry Holt, $14.95.
An eminent poet's fictional homage to the Dordogne region of France.
MAKING HISTORY. The Struggle for Gay and Lesbian Equal Rights, 1945-1990: An
Oral History
By Eric Marcus. Harper Perennial, $14.
Interviews with 45 men and women activists.
MERCHANTS OF DEBT:
KKR and the Mortgaging of American Business
By George Anders. Basic Books, $12.
An analysis of leveraged buyouts and how Kohlberg, Kravis, Roberts made them
happen.
THE MIND'S SKY: Human Intelligence in a Cosmic Context
By Timothy Ferris. Bantam, $13.95.
The link between mind and matter in the universe.
THE MISMEASURE OF WOMAN
By Carol Tavris. Touchstone/Simon & Schuster, $13.
How social research fallaciously compares the sexes.
THE NEW EMPERORS: China in the Era of Mao and Deng
By Harrison E. Salisbury. Avon, $12.50.
The personalities who created Confucian Leninism.
ORDINARY MEN: Reserve Police Battalion 101 and the Final Solution in Poland
By Christopher R. Browning. Aaron Asher/HarperCollins, $11.
How average men became agents of the Holocaust.
OUTERBRIDGE REACH
By Robert Stone. Harper Perennial, $12.
A novel about a round-the-world yacht race, in which a man puts his life and
marriage on the line.
THE OVERWORKED AMERICAN:
The Unexpected Decline of Leisure
By Juliet B. Schor. Basic Books, $12.
Why we work so much and play so little.
THE PATRIARCH: The Rise and Fall of the Bingham Dynasty
By Susan E. Tifft and Alex S. Jones. Touchstone/Simon & Schuster, $14.
The saga of journalism's Kentucky barons.
POSTCARDS
By E. Annie Proulx. Collier/Macmillan, $10.
A novel about the impact of a crime on a rural family.
PRODIGAL SON: Dancing for Balanchine in a World of Pain and Magic
By Edward Villella with Larry Kaplan. Touchstone/Simon & Schuster, $13.
How a working-class boy became a great star of ballet.
RACE: How Blacks and Whites Think and Feel About the American Obsession
By Studs Terkel. Anchor, $12.95.
An oral history of race relations in the United States.
THE RADICALISM OF THE AMERICAN REVOLUTION
By Gordon S. Wood. Vintage, $15.
How far the Revolution really went.
SAGES AND DREAMERS:
Biblical, Talmudic, and Hasidic Portraits and Legends
By Elie Wiesel. Touchstone/Simon & Schuster, $13.
Exploring Judaism through the words of its teachers.
SALEM IS MY DWELLING PLACE:
A Life of Nathaniel Hawthorne
By Edwin Haviland Miller. University of Iowa, $16.95.
A look behind this American writer's great reserve.
SCAR LOVER
By Harry Crews. Touchstone/ Simon & Schuster, $10.
The fictional saga of a man tormented by guilt.
THE SCRAMBLE FOR AFRICA: White Man's Conquest of the Dark Continent From 1876 to
1912
By Thomas Pakenham. Avon, $16
How European nations despoiled Africa.
THE SHRINE AT ALTAMIRA
By John L'Heureux. Penguin, $10.
A novel exploring the emotions behind a hideous act of child abuse.
SUGAR STREET: The Cairo Trilogy III
By Naguib Mahfouz. Translated by William Maynard Hutchins and Angele Botros
Samaan. Anchor/Doubleday, $11.
The Nobel laureate's conclusion to the saga of a family.
TALKING IT OVER
By Julian Barnes. Vintage International, $11.
A romantic triangle, narrated by its parties.
THE TAX INSPECTOR
By Peter Carey. Vintage International, $11.
A novel in which a pregnant tax inspector wreaks havoc on a family of eccentric
Australians.
THE THIRTEEN-GUN SALUTE
By Patrick O'Brian. Norton, $9.95.
Fiction about the British Navy battling Napoleon.
TROPICAL NIGHT FALLING
By Manuel Puig. Translated by Suzanne Jill Levine. Norton, $8.95.
The Argentine author's last novel, a look at the lives of two elderly sisters
and their neighbors.
TRUMAN
By David McCullough. Touchstone/Simon & Schuster, $15.
An examination of a President's singular character.
TURTLE MOON
By Alice Hoffman. Berkley, $5.99.
A novel about a single mother, her troubled son and a guilt-ridden policeman.
VERY OLD BONES
By William Kennedy. Penguin, $10.
More fiction about the Phelan family of Albany.
VIOLENCE
By Richard Bausch. Vintage Contemporaries, $11.
A novel exploring the nature of violence through the experience of one of its
victims.
VLADIMIR NABOKOV: The Russian Years, and VLADIMIR NABOKOV: The American Years
By Brian Boyd. Princeton University, $15.95 and $16.95, respectively.
Biographical volumes showing Nabokov's influences.
WAITING TO EXHALE
By Terry McMillan. Pocket Star, $5.99.
A novel about four black women in Phoenix.
WILDERNESS TIPS
By Margaret Atwood. Bantam, $6.99.
Short stories about men and women's private fictions.
WISE CHILDREN
By Angela Carter. Penguin, $10.
The author's last novel, the story of the irrepressible illegitimate twin
daughters of a classical actor.

LOAD-DATE: June 6, 1993

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Review

                   Copyright 1993 The New York Times Company


                              236 of 312 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                   June 6, 1993, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

Books for Vacation Reading

SECTION: Section 7; Page 34; Column 3; Book Review Desk

LENGTH: 10420 words



Art, Music & Popular Culture

THE ART OF CELEBRATION: Twentieth-Century Painting, Literature, Sculpture,
Photography, and Jazz. By Alfred Appel Jr. (Knopf, $35.) Modern times aren't all
Eliot and Kafka, the author cheerfully argues; there's also Matisse, Astaire,
Chaplin, Teddy Wilson and a whole raft of dedicated life affirmers.

ATGET'S SEVEN ALBUMS. By Molly Nesbit. (Yale University, $55.) A scholar finds
political commitment and self-conscious intentions in the work of the Paris
photographer who has been interpreted as a primitive.

BLACK AND BLUE: The Life and Lyrics of Andy Razaf. By Barry Singer. Foreword by
Bobby Short. (Schirmer, $28.) An important, atmospheric biography of the
lyricist who wrote "Ain't Misbehavin'," "Honeysuckle Rose" and "Stompin' at the
Savoy."

CHAUTAUQUA SUMMER: Adventures of a Late-Twentieth-Century Vaudevillian. By
Rebecca Chace. (Harcourt Brace, $21.95.) An amusing, intimate account of a
season with the Flying Karamazov Brothers on their annual vaudeville circuit.

CHRISTEN KOBKE. By Sanford Schwartz. (Timken, $35.) Mr. Schwartz's portrait, the
first English book-length study of the Danish painter known for his small, quiet
landscapes, is conversational, affectionate and discerning.

THE COLLECTED WRITINGS OF ROBERT MOTHERWELL. Edited by Stephanie Terenzio.
(Oxford University, $39.95.) Essays, observations and pronouncements by the most
articulate member of the New York School of painters, illuminating the ambitions
and the ethos of the Abstract Expressionist movement.

CORNELL CAPA: Photographs. Edited by Cornell Capa and Richard Whelan.
(Bulfinch/Little, Brown, $60.) Pictures that certify Mr. Capa's statement of his
aims: to show "human beings, their lives, their habitats, their behavior and
their relationships."

CUT WITH THE KITCHEN KNIFE: The Weimar Photomontages of Hannah Hoch. By Maud
Lavin. (Yale University, $40.) An account of the work of the avant-garde artist
that illuminates new definitions of femininity and sexual roles in Weimar
Germany.

DANCING: The Pleasure, Power, and Art of Movement. By Gerald Jonas. (Abrams in
association with Thirteen/WNET, $45.) A lavishly produced cross-cultural history
of dance worldwide, companion volume to a public television series.

DESIGN, FORM, AND CHAOS. By Paul Rand. (Yale University, $45.) In this
collection of essays by the pre-eminent statesman of graphic design, Mr. Rand
compares his own beautiful forms with the duds of the day.

THE DISCOVERY OF AMERICA. By Saul Steinberg. (Knopf, $50.) The first book-length
collection in 14 years by a great and greatly intelligent artist, who came to
this country in 1942 and whose vision of America has lately become tougher,
grittier, darker.

FRANK LLOYD WRIGHT: COLLECTED WRITINGS. Volume 1: 1894-1930. Volume 2:
1930-1932. Edited by Bruce Brooks Pfeiffer. (Rizzoli, cloth, $60 each; paper,
$40 each.) The start of a projected six-volume edition of the architect's
literary output; the collection's star so far is the 1932 version of "An
Autobiography."

MAGRITTE: The Silence of the World. By David Sylvester. (Menil
Foundation/Abrams, $75.) This authoritative, deliberate, insightful overview of
Magritte's life and art, by an English art historian, is beautifully illustrated
as well.

THE MAN IN THE BOWLER HAT: His History and Iconography. By Fred Miller Robinson.
(University of North Carolina, $24.95.) An ironic look at the cheerless
trademark of modernism -- as worn by Oscar Wilde, Charlie Chaplin, Laurel and
Hardy and Magritte's anonymous men.

NEW YORK, NEW YORK: How the Apartment House Transformed the Life of the City
(1869-1930). By Elizabeth Hawes. (Knopf, $30.) The author asks what makes
Manhattan so different, so European, so un-American, and decides that it is
vertical, high-rise living.

PUSH COMES TO SHOVE: An Autobiography. By Twyla Tharp. (Linda Grey/Bantam,
$24.50.) A mix of the dead serious with deadpan farce, suffering with glory,
much like her own dances.

THE QUEEN'S THROAT: Opera, Homosexuality, and the Mystery of Desire. By Wayne
Koestenbaum. (Poseidon, $22.) A dazzling, high-spirited anatomy of the "opera
queen," the homosexual fan for whom opera is a passion and an obsession.

THE THEATRICAL NOTEBOOKS OF SAMUEL BECKETT. General editor, James Knowlson.
Volume 2: ENDGAME. Edited by S. E. Gontarski. Volume 3: KRAPP'S LAST TAPE.
Edited by James Knowlson. (Grove Press, $75 each.) Beckett's deliberative method
and concern for structure come through vividly in these working notebooks. We're
still waiting for "Godot," the first volume of the series.

TO GIVE THEM LIGHT: The Legacy of Roman Vishniac. Edited by Marion Wiesel.
(Simon & Schuster, $45.) The sting of the nearly 140 black-and-white photographs
of Eastern European Jews in this book, which Vishniac took secretly between 1936
and 1938 to warn the world of the Jews' future doom, is that they are so
understated -- portraits of ordinary lives that would soon be no more.

TRAGIC MUSE: Rachel of the Comedie-Francaise. By Rachel M. Brownstein. (Knopf,
$30.) A discerning, insightful analysis of the life of the Alsatian waif Rachel
Felix, who dominated French theater and much of French society in the mid-19th
century.

WHAT'S IT ALL ABOUT? An Autobiography. By Michael Caine. (Turtle Bay, $24.) From
the charity wing of a London hospital to "Alfie" and Prince Andrew's wedding,
Mr. Caine presents, in his own words, his fun-loving, robustly philistine self.


Biography & Autobiography

ALWAYS RUNNING. La Vida Loca: Gang Days in L.A. By Luis J. Rodriguez.
(Curbstone, $19.95.) A chilling, unblinking testimony of the poet's life in the
1960's, when he was running with gangs in East Los Angeles and the San Gabriel
Valley.

ANNA: A Daughter's Life. By William Loizeaux. (Arcade, $19.95.) This memorial to
the author's daughter, who died in infancy, tracks the process of becoming a
parent and of bereavement with an honesty that has no fear of pathos or
embarrassment.

ANTHONY TROLLOPE. By Victoria Glendinning. (Knopf, $30.) A smart and winning
biography, stuffed with details that come from knowing all Trollope's work and
taking the Victorians seriously.

CHARLES SANDERS PEIRCE: A Life. By Joseph Brent. (Indiana University, $35.) A
biography of a great American thinker that not only renders the thought but
explains the disastrous life.

CURRICULUM VITAE: Autobiography. By Muriel Spark. (Houghton Mifflin, $22.95.)
The straight facts of a life sufficiently courageous but quite unlike, thank
goodness, the eccentric, elegant, mystifying, desperate world of her novels.

DANIEL BOONE: The Life and Legend of an American Pioneer. By John Mack Faragher.
(Holt, $27.50.) A fine biography, based on the best eyewitness accounts and
voluminous secondary material, of the man who led the first white settlers into
Kentucky in 1775.

THE DEVIL AT LARGE: Erica Jong on Henry Miller. By Erica Jong. (Turtle Bay,
$23.) Too short for a biography, not intimate enough for a memoir, this is Ms.
Jong's grab bag of jottings about the man who, at the age of 82, saw a
resemblance between his own "Tropic of Cancer" and her "Fear of Flying."

DIDEROT: A Critical Biography. By P. N. Furbank. (Knopf, $30.) Twenty years
after Arthur M. Wilson's classic biography, Mr. Furbank takes up Diderot's life
again and shows us, engagingly, why of all the 18th-century demigods he is the
most humane and modern.

DREAM MAKERS, DREAM BREAKERS: The World of Justice Thurgood Marshall. By Carl T.
Rowan. (Little, Brown, $24.95.) A syndicated columnist's ahistorical account of
the Supreme Court Justice who died this year at the age of 84.

ELIZABETH BISHOP: Life and the Memory of It. By Brett C. Millier. (University of
California, $28.) A lucid and sympathetic, if at times scolding, work about the
unhappy, troubled, proper woman who was once called "a poet's poet's poet."

FDR. Into the Storm 1937-1940: A History. By Kenneth S. Davis. (Random House,
$35.) Mr. Davis's fourth and penultimate volume on Franklin D. Roosevelt casts
him as a weak leader in his second Presidential term; the encyclopedic
documentation is unmatched.

GERALD BRENAN. The Interior Castle: A Biography. By Jonathan Gathorne-Hardy.
(Norton, $35.) An idiosyncratic life of the English writer remembered for his
vivid books about Spain and his sexual entanglement with the Bloomsbury Group's
Dora Carrington.

IL DUCE'S OTHER WOMAN. By Philip V. Cannistraro and Brian R. Sullivan. (Morrow,
$25.) Margherita Sarfatti, rich, beautiful, Jewish and a member of many elites,
took up with Mussolini for 19 years, even writing books about how wonderful he
was. The authors' research on this self-made victim is deep and original.

KING OF THE CATS: The Life and Times of Adam Clayton Powell, Jr. By Wil Haygood.
(Peter Davison/Houghton Mifflin, $24.95.) A balanced and broad biography that
has a sure feel for its flamboyant subject, who turned his power in a Harlem
pulpit into political clout unfettered by loyalties.

LINCOLN: An Illustrated Biography. By Philip B. Kunhardt Jr., Philip B. Kunhardt
3d and Peter W. Kunhardt. (Knopf, $50.) Powerful images, mostly from the
authors' family's archives, dominate this companion volume to ABC's Lincoln
documentary.

LOITERING WITH INTENT: The Child. By Peter O'Toole. (Hyperion, $21.95.) The
erratic memoir of a boy who escaped from the stench of a Yorkshire industrial
slum into the stuffiness of the Royal Academy of Dramatic Arts.

THE MAN WHO WASN'T MAIGRET: A Portrait of Georges Simenon. By Patrick Marnham.
(Farrar, Straus & Giroux, $25.) A thoughtful, convincing account of a man whose
diligence -- 76 Maigret books, 117 other "serious" novels and more than 200
others -- makes his claim to have made love to 10,000 women seem plausible.
After his mother died, he stopped writing. Odd.

MARLENE DIETRICH. By Maria Riva. (Knopf, $27.50.) Dietrich's only child tells
all in a book that startles by its sharpness of remembrance while confirming and
completing much that was already known about the disciplined, hard-working movie
star.

THE PASSION OF MICHEL FOUCAULT. By James Miller. (Simon & Schuster, $27.50.)
Neither a biography nor a survey but a narrative analysis of Foucault's quest to
transcend the constructed realities of life through extreme sexual experiences.

REMEMBERING DENNY. By Calvin Trillin. (Farrar, Straus & Giroux, $19.) Though in
the end Roger (Denny) Hansen remains elusive, Mr. Trillin's protest against the
unfulfilled promise of an all-American guy who became an isolated crank and then
took his own life is provocative.

A TASTE OF POWER: A Black Woman's Story. By Elaine Brown. (Pantheon, $25.) In
1974, Ms. Brown was appointed leader of the Black Panther Party; hence this
chilling, entertaining account of a woman in a movement rich in nihilism, sexism
and misogyny.

THIS I CANNOT FORGET: The Memoirs of Nikolai Bukharin's Widow. By Anna Larina.
(Norton, $24.95.) After her husband's execution by Stalin in 1938, Ms. Larina
survived more than 20 years in the gulag to write this lyrical memoir of a love
that inspired her and of the doings of Bolshevism's inner circles.

THIS LITTLE LIGHT OF MINE: The Life of Fannie Lou Hamer. By Kay Mills. (Dutton,
$24.) A full and riveting biography of the woman whose life, from 1962 until her
death in 1977, was inseparable from the Mississippi civil rights movement.

Business & Economics

BEATING THE STREET: The Best-Selling Author of "One Up on Wall Street" Shows You
How to Pick Winning Stocks and Develop a Strategy for Mutual Funds. By Peter
Lynch with John Rothchild. (Simon & Schuster, $23.) A homespun strategy for
investing from the former manager of the Magellan Fund: find a business that's
booming and buy its stock.

FOR GOD, COUNTRY AND COCA-COLA: The Unauthorized History of the Great American
Soft Drink and the Company That Makes It. By Mark Pendergrast. (Scribners,
$27.50.) Everything knowable about the potation of the 20th century.

MURDOCH. By William Shawcross. (Simon & Schuster, $27.50.) A sprightly life of
the media-bestriding colossus Rupert Murdoch, portrayed as an undemonized
capitalist more dedicated to making money than to ruling the world through
journalism.

POST-CAPITALIST SOCIETY. By Peter F. Drucker. (Harper Business/HarperCollins,
$25.) Like a star professor, Mr. Drucker lectures sweepingly about the
transition from the Age of Capitalism to the Age of the Knowledge Society, from
the decline of the megastate to the rise of organizations.

S&L HELL: The People and the Politics Behind the $1 Trillion Savings and Loan
Scandal. By Kathleen Day. (Norton, $24.95.) Ms. Day, who covered the affair for
The Washington Post, analyzes the fiasco she says could cost $13 billion a year
in interest forever.

UNDUE INFLUENCE: The Epic Battle for the Johnson & Johnson Fortune. By David
Margolick. (Morrow, $23.) Mr. Margolick, a Times reporter, skillfully explicates
the fabulous litigation between the wife and the offspring of a man who left
$402 million.

Children's Books

FOR THE LIFE OF LAETITIA. By Merle Hodge. (Farrar, Straus & Giroux, $15.) To
attend secondary school, Laetitia must leave her loving extended family in rural
Trinidad and board in town with her abusive father and his new wife and family.
The taut, lyrical novel captures the social and personal stress she experiences
as she comes of age. (Ages 12 and up)

FREEDOM'S CHILDREN: Young Civil Rights Activists Tell Their Own Stories. By
Ellen Levine. (Putnam, $16.95.) This wonderful account of the civil rights
movement is told episodically and chronologically through the experiences of 30
black Americans who were children or teen-agers in that period. (Ages 12 and up)

I'LL SEE YOU IN MY DREAMS. By Mavis Jukes. Illustrated by Stacey Schuett.
(Knopf, $15.) This storybook about a little girl who goes to visit her dying
uncle provides lasting and evocative metaphors for saying goodbye, combining
transcendent, elegiac prose and dreamy, painterly illustrations. (Ages 7 to 11)

THE MYSTERY OF THE CUPBOARD. By Lynne Reid Banks. (Morrow, $13.95.) The fourth
novel about Omri, the appealing British schoolboy, his family, his friends and
the small plastic creatures that come to life in the cupboard, contains the
story of Omri's splendid great-great-aunt, Jessica Charlotte Driscoll, an
extraordinary character. (Ages 10 and up)

THE TREE IN THE WOOD. Adapted and illustrated by Christopher Manson.
(North/South Books, $14.95.) There's a sense of completion when you reach the
end of a circular song and know you can begin again. Beautiful hand-colored
woodcuts are as peaceful as the song: "And the green grass grew all around, all
around, and the green grass grew all around." (Ages 5 to 8)

Crime

BUCKET NUT. By Liza Cody. (Perfect Crime/ Doubleday, $18.50.) An Amazonian who
keeps watch, with two attack dogs, over a London junkyard is displeased when she
is set up as a murder instrument in a gang war.

DON'T ASK. By Donald E. Westlake. (Mysterious Press/Warner, $18.95.) Mr.
Westlake's eighth novel featuring John Dortmunder is one of his best, with
plenty of Runyonesque New York low life and a lighthearted, psychology-free plot
revolving around the rival attempts of Tsergovia and Votskojek, two Eastern
European countries, to gain admittance to the United Nations.

PAPER DOLL. By Robert B. Parker. (Putnam, $19.95.) In this tight, poignant
story, Spenser goes to South Carolina to stir up the old ghosts of an
upper-crust WASP woman bludgeoned to death in Boston.

THE SHAMAN'S KNIFE. By Scott Young. (Viking, $20.) An austerely evocative story
in which Inspector Matteesie Kitologitak, an Eskimo detective working for the
Royal Canadian Mounted Police, is torn between ancient customs and modern laws
when an admired shaman is suspected in a homicide.

32 CADILLACS. By Joe Gores. (Mysterious Press/Warner, $18.95.) In this fall-down
funny caper, the King of the Gypsies wants to be buried in a pink Eldorado,
Cadillacs disappear all over the San Franciso Bay area, and the repo firm D.K.A.
is hot on the trail.

THE WAY THROUGH THE WOODS. By Colin Dexter. (Crown, $20.) The winner of
Britain's 1992 Gold Dagger Award, this is Mr. Dexter's best Morse mystery yet.
The prickly detective, ready to plunge into Jane Austen and billiards, gets
distracted by some cryptic verses about a missing Swede.

Fiction

ARC D'X. By Steve Erickson. (Poseidon, $20.) Part of this serious, fantastical
novel is set in Jeffersonian time, the other half in a modern America with
streets named Desolate and Unrequited.

ARE YOU MINE? By Abby Frucht. (Grove, $19.95.) Ms. Frucht's witty and sensual
third novel explores sexuality and its consequences, humanizing even a political
issue like abortion.

THE BEST INTENTIONS. By Ingmar Bergman. (Arcade, $22.95.) The Swedish director
playfully calls this book about his parents a novel. Whatever it is, it's lush
and devastating at once.

BONE. By Fae Myenne Ng. (Hyperion, $19.95.) A sophisticated first novel about
youth in San Francisco's Chinatown, about leaving it and about the unbearable
disloyalty of "assimilation."

A BOWL OF CHERRIES. By Shena Mackay. (Moyer Bell, $16.95.) An adroit novel that
incisively but compassionately deploys a dysfunctional family with familiar
problems -- isolation, failed hopes, mutual deceit -- in comic configurations.

THE BOY WITHOUT A FLAG: Tales of the South Bronx. By Abraham Rodriguez Jr.
(Milkweed Editions, paper, $11.) A first book of fiction, in which brutality is
controlled by sophistication.

BUFFALO SOLDIERS. By Robert O'Connor. (Knopf, $22.) Mr. O'Connor's first novel
successfully involves us with a self-absorbed nihilist, a drug-peddling Army
clerk of impoverished moral sensibility but acute esthetic intelligence.

THE BUNGALOW. By Lynn Freed. (Poseidon, $21.) The glorious South African
landscape, the hermetic lives of white middle-class South Africans, tea at 4,
the cataclysm yet to come.

CHARMS FOR THE EASY LIFE. By Kaye Gibbons. (Putnam, $19.95.) Like all Ms.
Gibbons's fiction, this novel concerns itself with strong women: a bookish
narrator, her mother, her grandmother, all of them prevailing through fierce
survival instincts and folk wisdom handed down from prior generations.

CHIMNEY ROCK. By Charlie Smith. (Holt, $22.50.) Mr. Smith's novel appropriates
the language and vision of Southern Gothic to the dwellers in a nasty, dusty
Hollywood through a narrator who represents a complete absence of ethical
consciousness.

CLEOPATRA'S SISTER. By Penelope Lively. (HarperCollins, $20.) Ms. Lively's
charming and intellectually resonant novel concerns an English couple whom fate,
or Fate, conspires to place on a plane bound for just the wrong North African
destination.

THE COLLECTED STORIES. By John McGahern. (Knopf, $24.) These stories, by a
master of the clean, powerful description that conveys the immaterial
significance in material things, offer a vision in which love is not an end but
a means of gaining the world.

THE COLLECTED STORIES. By William Trevor. (Viking, $35.) A lifetime's worth of
short fiction whose author enters into the lives of his characters with an
intensity that uncovers new layers of yearning and pain in themes that have been
endlessly explored.

CRY ME A RIVER. By T. R. Pearson. (Holt, $22.) A crime story, narrated by a cop
and loser whose comrade's death brings us, eventually, into contact with a
gallery of driven figures.

THE CZAR'S MADMAN. By Jaan Kross. (Pantheon, $31.50.) First published in 1978,
this witty, disciplined novel from Estonia, translated into English by Anselm
Hollo, a Finnish poet, is cast as a diary kept by a peasant's son.

DR. HAGGARD'S DISEASE. By Patrick McGrath. (Poseidon, $20.) In the (appropriate)
guise of a Gothic horror tale, Mr. McGrath produces a myth of the creator
sacrificed to his creation in the person of a surgeon who sees his onetime lover
in her son.

EINSTEIN'S DREAMS. By Alan Lightman. (Pantheon, $17.) Spare, poetic fantasies
about what Einstein might have dreamed when he was still a 26-year-old patent
clerk in Switzerland.

THE EMPTY LOT. By Mary Gray Hughes. (Another Chicago Press, cloth, $22.50;
paper, $10.95.) This absorbing novel concerns a ruthlessly ambitious divorcing
couple who struggle over the house that stands in for the ordered values they
seem to have forgotten.

EXPOSURE. By Kathryn Harrison. (Random House, $20.) This almost didactic novel
yields a thoughtful discussion of the artist's effect on the world, through the
story of the breakdown of a famous photographer's daughter, her father's
favorite model.

FABLES OF THE IRISH INTELLIGENTSIA. By Nina FitzPatrick. (Penguin, paper, $9.)
Thirteen bright, vigorous stories, featuring mostly poets, priests and
academics, set in Ireland or wherever the Irish are. There is lots of drinking
and even more talk.

FAMILY NIGHT. By Maria Flook. (Pantheon, $21.) Ms. Flook's astute first novel
examines the erotic undercurrents in an extended family of bright, twerpy people
who are reaching their 30's but are basically career teen-agers at heart.

FEARLESS. By Rafael Yglesias. (Warner, $18.95.) In this smooth, almost slick,
novel about an airplane crash and its harrowing aftermath, the survivors do not
merely survive; they live on in the reader's mind.

FLOOD! A Novel in Pictures.  By Eric Drooker. (Four Walls Eight Windows,
$15.95.) A vision of alienation in a New York peopled by the blighted and
despairing, told virtually without words.

FOR LOVE. By Sue Miller. (HarperCollins, $23.) A vivid, fine-grained, realistic
and honest novel whose characters are mainly over 40 and in love for far from
the first time.

THE FOURTEEN SISTERS OF EMILIO MONTEZ O'BRIEN. By Oscar Hijuelos. (Farrar,
Straus & Giroux, $22.) A capacious, marvelously complicated novel that is Mr.
Hijuelos's paean to femininity and to family life as it is actually lived.

FRAUD. By Anita Brookner. (Random House, $21.) A novel that explores
relationships between aged parents and adult children, returning repeatedly to
ask: when does love become destructive?

THE FURIES. By Janet Hobhouse. (Doubleday, $22.50.) Hobhouse's fourth and last
novel is mesmerizing and haunting, an autobiographical novel that shows she was
still searching for answers about her life, her choices, her family when she
died in 1991.

GUEST OF A SINNER. By James Wilcox. (HarperCollins, $20.) Mr. Wilcox's sixth
novel is a precise satirical urban comedy about a bunch of nobodies bumping
around Manhattan.

THE HEATHER BLAZING. By Colm Toibin. (Viking, $20.) A novel that explores the
Irish national psyche, concentrated in the forces that collide and are
reconciled within a single family.

HELLO DOWN THERE. By Michael Parker. (Scribners, $20.) This serious, memorable
novel shows a deep affection for its chief characters: a man who is hooked on
morphine and jazz and the high-school student he falls in love with.

I KILLED HEMINGWAY. By William McCranor Henderson. (Thomas Dunne/St. Martin's,
$18.95.) A 93-year-old eccentric claims to have murdered Hemingway (the rat
published the old man's work as his own!) in this complex, amusing, palpably
symbolic novel, concerned with issues from Oedipal to spiritual.

IN A COUNTRY OF MOTHERS. By A. M. Homes. (Knopf, $22.) A surprising New York
love story, tuned to the insults of urban life, about the relationship between a
young woman frightened by emotional attachments and her psychotherapist, who
believes her patient may be her daughter.

THE INFINITE PLAN. By Isabel Allende. (HarperCollins, $23.) Ambitious and large,
Ms. Allende's novel follows the disastrous life of a preacher's son and doubles
as a cameo history of the United States, running from World War II to the
1990's.

INSHALLAH. By Oriana Fallaci. (Nan A. Talese/Doubleday, $25.) Ms. Fallaci
renders the confused universe of political factions in Beirut strangely rational
in this muscular novel whose title means "God willing."

THE INVENTION OF TRUTH. By Marta Morazzoni. (Knopf, $18.) An absorbing novella
about artists and lookers at art; it concerns John Ruskin and 300 women working
on the Bayeux Tapestry.

THE ISLAND: Three Tales. By Gustaw Herling. (Viking, $20.) These stories by a
Polish writer are unified by a common theme -- the persistence of life in the
face of pain, humiliation and extremes of solitude -- and told with a humane,
compassionate detachment.

JAPANESE BY SPRING. By Ishmael Reed. (Atheneum, $20.) A funny, explosive novel
about political jockeying in the university; it spares no one who has ever
sought power or had an opinion.

JESUS' SON: Stories. By Denis Johnson. (Farrar, Straus & Giroux, $19.) The
universe of Mr. Johnson's fifth book of fiction is governed by addiction,
malevolence, faith and uncertainty, rendered with ferocious imagery and a
menacing sense of humor.

JUDGE ON TRIAL. By Ivan Klima. (Knopf, $25.) Mr. Klima's novel describes the
crisis of conscience of a jurist in Czechoslovakia as the sureties of his
personal life and the Marxist state crumble.

LEMPRIERE'S DICTIONARY. By Lawrence Norfolk. (Harmony, $22.) Not a dictionary
but a first novel, droll, ferocious and intricate, set in the late 18th century,
treating of a young man whose life is sidetracked by Ovidian myths and other
irruptions.

LET THE DOG DRIVE. By David Bowman. (New York University, $19.95.) Fresh, fun
and smart, this novel is told in the voice of an 18-year-old intellectual always
on the lookout for new obsessions.

THE LOOP. By Joe Coomer. (Faber & Faber, $21.95.) A deadpan novel whose tender
protagonist, significantly, has the job of clearing road kill and debris from
the beltway circling a city.

LOVE ENTER. By Paul Kafka. (Houghton Mifflin, $19.95.) In this clever epistolary
novel, a subintern in a maternity ward chronicles his Paris interlude of four
years before -- his love affair with two women in love with each other -- by
entering a series of letters into the hospital's computer.

LOVING DAUGHTERS. By Olga Masters. (Norton, $21.95.) First published in
Australia in 1984, this subtly passionate novel concerns a humanly imperfect
rural family on whom the outside intrudes in the form of a handsome, single
English clergyman.

THE MAN IN THE TOWER. By Michael Kruger. (Braziller, $19.95.) A mordant, funny
novel about a reclusive German painter who lives in the south of France and
broods on many things.

THE MAN WHO DREAMT OF LOBSTERS. By Michael Collins. (Random House, $19.) Stories
by an Irish-born writer that happen not in the Ireland of myth but in a squalid
third-world country.

THE MARRIAGE OF CADMUS AND HARMONY. By Roberto Calasso. (Knopf, $25.) Greek
mythology retold for the 90's, conspicuously lacking in the Victorian innocence
and decorum that inform the versions most of us are familiar with.

MARTIN AND JOHN. By Dale Peck. (Farrar, Straus & Giroux, $21.) A daring, honest,
dark debut novel about a gay hustler who travels from Kansas to New York and
back to care for his lover, who is dying with AIDS.

MONDO BARBIE. Edited by Lucinda Ebersole and Richard Peabody. (St. Martin's,
paper, $12.95.) A clever anthology of fiction and poetry inspired by the doll
that is the all-American totemic bimbo.

A MOTHER'S LOVE. By Mary Morris. (Nan A. Talese/Doubleday, $17.50.) A haunting,
disturbing tale of the fear and loneliness of a New York mother who decides to
go it alone.

MUSTANG SALLY. By Edward Allen. (Norton, $19.95.) Mr. Allen's regrettably
accurate second novel is the first of the college campus satires to take on
political correctness.

MYSTERY RIDE. By Robert Boswell. (Knopf, $22.) An irresistible novel about a
family (she given to causes, he ineffectual, their daughter a rotten kid) who
try to puzzle out their own history.

THE NORTH CHINA LOVER. By Marguerite Duras. (New Press, $19.95.) Set in Vietnam,
this novel about a French girl obsessed with a Chinese man, though it began as
notes toward a script for the movie "The Lover" (adapted from Ms. Duras's
earlier novel), produces a strange feeling of immensity.

NOW YOU KNOW. By Michael Frayn. (Viking, $21.) Mr. Frayn's eighth novel explores
a profound ethical territory -- the borderlands between public and private life
-- in a manic comedy whose protagonist, an English politico, trips over his
principles.

OPERATION SHYLOCK: A Confession. By Philip Roth. (Simon & Schuster, $23.) A
character named Philip Roth confronts another character named Philip Roth, and
at least one of them is full of impermissible thoughts in this deeply serious,
farcical novel.

THE ORACLE AT STONELEIGH COURT: Stories. By Peter Taylor. (Knopf, $22.) Mr.
Taylor's latest superb collection (a novella, 10 stories, 3 plays) explores the
ghostly influences from the past that can decide much of our destinies before we
are born.

PARTICLES AND LUCK. By Louis B. Jones. (Pantheon, $22.) In Mr. Jones's second
novel, a young physicist spends 24 hours learning the difference between reality
as described in theoretical journals and reality as people live it day to day.

POOR THINGS: Episodes From the Early Life of Archibald McCandless M.D., Scottish
Public Health Officer. By Alasdair Gray. (Harcourt Brace, $21.95.) The
experimentally minded Scottish artist-novelist's heroine is a female suicide,
reanimated by a wizard surgeon and given her unborn daughter's brain.

THE PORCUPINE. By Julian Barnes. (Knopf, $17.) A short, edgy, gloomy political
novel in which a well-meaning Eastern European prosecutor learns that the fall
of the old system has brought not energy and purpose but an ironically bourgeois
alienation.

A PORTRAIT OF MY DESIRE. By MacDonald Harris. (Simon & Schuster, $20.) This
nicely evasive writer gives us the sense that there is more to his story about a
selfish, cowardly widower than we know.

PROOFS: And Three Parables. By George Steiner. (Granta/Penguin, paper, $10.)
"Proofs," to which the "Parables" are appendages, is Mr. Steiner's arresting
novella of the collapse of Communism among some of its last adherents.

RAMEAU'S NIECE. By Cathleen Schine. (Ticknor & Fields, $19.95.) This inventive
comic novel, a literary hybrid, is both an essentially 18th-century moral tale
and a parody of post-modern form.

REBEL POWERS, by Richard Bausch. (Seymour Lawrence/ Houghton Mifflin, $21.95.)
The narrator of this novel, a thoughtful man trying to proceed honestly,
examines his family, imperiled by the clash of old verities and threatening new
ideas.

THE ROAD TO WELLVILLE. By T. Coraghessan Boyle. (Viking, $22.50.) There are
major characters but no heroes in this antiromance of 1907 in Battle Creek,
Mich., where Dr. John Harvey Kellogg, the Edison of clean living, presides over
pilgrims who hope to escape the ills and smells that flesh is heir to.

SACRED COUNTRY. By Rose Tremain. (Atheneum, $21.) A large novel, Ms. Tremain's
sixth, in which three generations of Britons try to sort out who they are and
how they might be happy.

SAVING ST. GERM. By Carol Muske Dukes. (Viking, $21.) A truly original novel in
which a stubborn, puttering biochemist who forgets she has a body, a job, a
family, is finally jolted out of her blessed state.

THE SECRET OF CARTWHEELS. By Patricia Henley. (Graywolf, paper, $11.) The
author's second collection of short stories presents brave and life-worn
characters, unsettled, cast loose; but when they are brave enough, they manage
to land on their feet.

SHADOW PLAY. By Charles Baxter. (Norton, $21.95.) Mr. Baxter's confident second
novel concerns primarily Wyatt Palmer, a bright boy who grows up into a dull job
and an atmosphere of compromise in a town where evil is both profound and
boring.

SHAMAN. By Noah Gordon. (Dutton, $23.) This intricate historical novel follows
an impious doctor, making his way from Boston to the territories of Illinois and
the battlefields of the Civil War.

THE SHIPPING NEWS. By E. Annie Proulx. (Scribners, $20.) In Ms. Proulx's third
book of fiction, a man mourns his adulterous wife in Newfoundland, where he
works on a newspaper whose boss magically senses what will most annoy his
employees.

SOLITUDE. By Victor Catala (Caterina Albert i Paradis). (Readers International,
cloth, $19.95; paper, $11.95.) Guaranteed a long obscurity by its first
publication in Catalan under a pseudo nym in 1905, this overtly feminist novel
sets a lowland peasant girl against a threatening mountain landscape and
society.

THE STORIES AND RECOLLECTIONS OF UMBERTO SABA. By Umberto Saba. (Sheep Meadow
Press, $22.50.) Melancholy short stories and sketches of Jewish life in Trieste
by an Italian writer, much esteemed in his own country, who died in 1957.

A SUITABLE BOY. By Vikram Seth. (HarperCollins, $30.) A multitude of characters
and events throng the 1,349 pages of this vast novel that strives to re-create
the life of post-British India.

SWIMMING IN THE VOLCANO. By Bob Shacochis. (Scribners, $22.) This novel by a
short-story veteran, full of huge, informative digressions, is more about the
fictional Caribbean island of St. Catherine than about the plot or characters
who happen to be there.

ULVERTON. By Adam Thorpe. (Farrar, Straus & Giroux, $23.) This promising first
novel deals with English history through linked tales in voices from the
Cromwellian to the modern documentary.

UNTIL YOUR HEART STOPS. By T. M. McNally. (Villard, $20.) A harrowing first
novel of suburban Arizona, in which violence, from personal through cosmic, is
visited on nearly everyone; though not especially wicked, they all seem to
deserve it.

VAN GOGH'S ROOM AT ARLES: Three Novellas. By Stanley Elkin. (Hyperion, $22.95.)
A subtle, complicated, sometimes astonishing collection; in the title story, a
provincial American teacher is overwhelmed by his encounter with formidable
world-class academics while living in the painter's very bedroom.

VERTIGO PARK: And Other Tall Tales. By Mark O'Donnell. (Knopf, $18.) Expertly
paced mock essays, playlets, yarns, poems and even cartoons by a lively, fertile
humorist.

THE VIRGIN SUICIDES. By Jeffrey Eugenides. (Farrar, Straus & Giroux, $18.) An
evocative, disarming novel with unlikely premises: five suburban sisters take
turns at suicide, and a gang of curious boys grow into their 30's trying to
figure out why.

WHAT REMAINS AND OTHER STORIES. By Christa Wolf. (Farrar, Straus & Giroux, $25.)
These eight fiction pieces by the former East Germany's most discussed author
contain insights that are sometimes blocked by a puritan, didactic tone.

WOMAN OF THE INNER SEA. By Thomas Keneally. (Nan A. Talese/Doubleday, $21.) A
picaresque, often hilarious novel about a wealthy woman's search for love
following a family tragedy; it ponders how individuals achieve spiritual
wholeness.

A WORLD FOR JULIUS. By Alfredo Bryce Echenique. (University of Texas, cloth,
$45; paper, $19.95.) This masterpiece of Latin American fiction, finally in
English 23 years after its publication in Spanish, concerns the amoral,
insulated superrich in Lima, Peru, of the 1940's and 50's.

WRITTEN ON THE BODY. By Jeanette Winterson. (Knopf, $20.) This ambitious work is
both a love story and a meditation on the body as our literal embodiment, the
part of us that really loves.

History

BALKAN GHOSTS: A Journey Through History. By Robert D. Kaplan. (St. Martin's,
$22.95.) A reporter's gallery of heroes and villains, past and present, who made
Albania, Bulgaria, Greece, Romania and the former Yugoslavia the sweethearts
they are.

CHANCELLORSVILLE 1863: The Souls of the Brave. By Ernest B. Furgurson. (Knopf,
$25.) An account of Lee's victory in the only great Civil War battle in which
the day was carried by mobility and maneuver instead of the attrition of men by
metal.

THE CREATION OF FEMINIST CONSCIOUSNESS: From the Middle Ages to
Eighteen-seventy. By Gerda Lerner. (Oxford University, $27.50.) A rough-hewn
history of how the exclusion of women from history has left them "adrift in an
eternal present."

DECISION IN THE WEST: The Atlanta Campaign of 1864. By Albert Castel. Maps by
Laura Kriegstrom Poracsky. (University Press of Kansas, $29.95.) A stunning,
daunting challenge to the legend that William Tecumseh Sherman was a brilliant
commander.

FIREWORKS AT DUSK: Paris in the Thirties. By Olivier Bernier. (Little, Brown,
$24.95.) Mr. Bernier's eighth book is a lively, thorough chronicle of the
momentous decade that saw the Third Republic, the Third Reich, World War II,
Picasso, Gide, Ernst, Miro, Celine, Renoir.

THE GOLDEN THIRTEEN: Recollections of the First Black Naval Officers. Edited by
Paul Stillwell. (Naval Institute Press, $21.95.) From interviews with eight of
the first 13 black American naval officers and three of the white officers who
trained them, Mr. Stillwell has created a moving oral history. Gen. Colin L.
Powell contributes the foreword.

HEISENBERG'S WAR: The Secret History of the German Bomb. By Thomas Powers.
(Knopf, $27.50.) Did the Nobel laureate deliberately retard Germany's progress
toward an atomic bomb? Mr. Powers, in this thorough, exciting book, argues that
he did.

A HISTORY OF FOOD. By Maguelonne Toussaint-Samat. (Blackwell, $39.95.) An
opinionated, omnivorous French journalist and sociologist examines the stuffing
of humanity, from prehistory to now and from France to the antipodes, in 800
pages.

THE NEW DEALERS: Power Brokers in the Age of Roosevelt. By Jordan A. Schwarz.
(Knopf, $27.50.) Through a series of biographical profiles, the author drives
home his arresting message -- that the New Deal was state capitalism, a system
to modernize the underdeveloped West and South.

THE PATH TO GENOCIDE: Essays on Launching the Final Solution. By Christopher R.
Browning. (Cambridge University, cloth, $39.95; paper, $10.95.) A magisterial,
rigorously meditated study of how Nazi Germany instituted the industrialized
murder of millions of men, women and children.

PROTECTING SOLDIERS AND MOTHERS: The Political Origins of Social Policy in the
United States. By Theda Skocpol. (Belknap/Harvard University, $34.95.) This
history of the welfare state is a sensitive examination of the occasions when
parsimony and individualism were not the main determinants of American policy.

TITANIC: An Illustrated History. By Don Lynch. Paintings by Ken Marschall.
(Madison Press/Hyperion, $60.) A recap of a familiar but irresistible story; Mr.
Marschall's splendid paintings suggest that he might have been there, loaded
with Kodachrome.

TO THE GATES OF RICHMOND: The Peninsula Campaign. By Stephen W. Sears. (Ticknor
& Fields, $24.95.) How George B. McClellan, the general whom nobody loves, lost
the largest single campaign of the Civil War because he was unwilling to fight.

Medicine & Psychology

A DANCING MATRIX: Voyages Along the Viral Frontier. By Robin Marantz Henig.
(Knopf, $23.) A highly readable account of how adept viruses are at finding new
pathways to new human populations.

FIRST, DO NO HARM. By Lisa Belkin. (Simon & Schuster, $23.) A reporter for The
New York Times conveys a series of wrenching medical and ethical decisions and
the people who make them.

FREUD, JUNG, AND HALL THE KING-MAKER: The Historic Expedition to America (1909).
By Saul Rosenzweig. (Rana House/Hogrefe & Huber, $27.50.) Freud, 53, got an
honorary degree from Clark University. What an occasion! Mr. Rosenzweig
re-creates it.

GENDER PLAY: Girls and Boys in School. By Barrie Thorne. (Rutgers University,
cloth, $35; paper, $12.95.) A sociologist finds that the fun and games of
childhood are rehearsals for the domination and subservience of adulthood.

GENIE: An Abused Child's Flight From Silence. By Russ Rymer. (HarperCollins,
$20.) Raised speechless and in isolation for her first 13 years, Genie inspired
heroic efforts to rehabilitate her and to study important principles of language
-- mostly in vain.

NOBODY NOWHERE: The Extraordinary Autobiography of an Autistic. By Donna
Williams. (Times Books/Random House, $21.) That Ms. Williams is able to decode
the closed vernacular of autism -- the rocking, the headshaking and the
scrunching up of toes -- is a testament to how remarkable her journey has been.

ON KISSING, TICKLING, AND BEING BORED: Psychoanalytic Essays on the Unexamined
Life. By Adam Phillips. (Harvard University, $19.95.) A children's
psychotherapist writes poetically about the dangers of vigilance and the
pleasures of carelessness.

THE PEOPLE IN THE PLAYGROUND. By Iona Opie. (Oxford University, $23.) The
Rabelaisian humor and poetic language of English children at play, presented by
a woman who has watched them for 40 years.

YOU MUST BE DREAMING. By Barbara Noel with Kathryn Watterson. (Poseidon, $21.)
The courageous, first-person account of the moral awakening of a woman who was
drugged and raped by an old, world-renowned psychiatrist, and then, against all
advice, sued him for malpractice.

Poetry

THE FATHER. By Sharon Olds. (Knopf, $20.) For years Sharon Olds has highlighted
sex and death in her poetry, and here these concerns come together in powerful,
sometimes breathless, scrupulously honest poems about her father dying of
cancer. These poems examine grief with surprising delicacy and in startling
depth.

GILGAMESH: A New Rendering in English Verse. By David Ferry. (Farrar, Straus &
Giroux, cloth, $15; paper, $10.) Only a handful of poets could come close to the
subtlety and intelligence of the verse in this translation of the Babylonian
epic, which is so masterly that it belongs as much to David Ferry as to its
original poet. The intensity of this story of love, loyalty and the search for
eternal life makes it a very modern, and profoundly moving, experience.

NEW & SELECTED POEMS. By Stephen Berg. (Copper Canyon, cloth, $21; paper, $12.)
A hard spareness marks the poetry of Stephen Berg and the world he has presented
in work over the 20 years covered in this volume; and the world of literature
and the mind becomes a refuge. The light he throws on life may be too sharply
focused for some readers; he makes us remember what we need to, but might
forget.

NEW AND SELECTED POEMS. By Mary Oliver. (Beacon, $20.) Poems from 30 years that
astonish by their consistent tone. Mary Oliver's concerns are public, her poetry
sustaining; she so completely controls the rhythm and pacing of her lines that
her poems teach us how to read them. This volume received the 1992 National Book
Award.

TRAVELS. By W. S. Merwin. (Knopf, $20.) Sturdily written, wonderfully
entertaining verse tales of an assortment of displaced characters make this a
book rich in incident and irony. Few contemporary poets can tell stories as well
as these are told, in a blend of romantic rhetoric and plain-spoken imagery that
transports them into the realm of legend.

Politics & Current Affairs

ACROSS THE WIRE: Life and Hard Times on the Mexican Border. By Luis Alberto
Urrea. (Anchor/Doubleday, paper, $9.) Not for the fainthearted, this book of
linked vignettes presents a tough, subjective view of the suffering, the trash
heaps and the slums of Tijuana.

AT THE HIGHEST LEVELS: The Inside Story of the End of the Cold War. By Michael
R. Beschloss and Strobe Talbott. (Little, Brown, $24.95.) A useful and readable
account of events of great magnitude by two keen observers who enjoyed unusual
access.

BOILING POINT: Republicans, Democrats, and the Decline of Middle-Class
Prosperity. By Kevin Phillips. (Random House, $23.) A thorough and acerbic
analysis of how the American middle class, over the last 20 years, has been
losing its cash and its access to services, education, advancement and baseball
tickets.

CONDUCT UNBECOMING: Lesbians and Gays in the U.S. Military, Vietnam to the
Persian Gulf. By Randy Shilts. (St. Martin's, $27.95.) A landmark history that
explores the ferocity and tenacity of those who have carried out -- with
physical and psychological intimidation -- the purges against lesbians and gay
men in the military.

CULTURE AND IMPERIALISM. By Edward W. Said. (Knopf, $25.) Mr. Said argues for
the centrality of imperialism to European high culture, especially when it hides
itself in the periphery.

THE END OF THE TWENTIETH CENTURY AND THE END OF THE MODERN AGE. By John Lukacs.
(Ticknor & Fields, $21.95.) For one thing, Mr. Lukacs says, it was a short
century, beginning in 1914 and ending with the fall of Communism. Now, he argues
provocatively, the world will be ruled by intransigent nationalism.

THE GULF CONFLICT 1990-1991: Diplomacy and War in the New World Order. By
Lawrence Freedman and Efraim Karsh. (Princeton University, $29.95.) The fullest
history yet of George Bush's famous victory, by two accomplished military
scholars.

HATE ON TRIAL: The Case Against America's Most Dangerous Neo-Nazi. By Morris
Dees and Steve Fiffer. (Villard, $21.) Mr. Dees, the trial lawyer for the
Southern Poverty Law Center, tells, with great moral power, how he successfully
sued Tom Metzger, a white supremacist, for inciting the murder of an Ethiopian
student in Oregon.

HIGH NOON IN SOUTHERN AFRICA: Making Peace in a Rough Neighborhood. By Chester
A. Crocker. (Norton, $29.95.) A history and defense of his conduct by Ronald
Reagan's top diplomat for African affairs, highly circumstantial and highly
instructive for those who agree with his policies and those who don't.

INSIDE GORBACHEV'S KREMLIN: The Memoirs of Yegor Ligachev. (Pantheon, $27.50.)
The recollections of a tough, honest Bolshevik who was instrumental in bringing
Mikhail S. Gorbachev to power but could not follow where Mr. Gorbachev wanted to
go.

LEAVING TOWN ALIVE: Confessions of an Arts Warrior. By John Frohnmayer.
(Houghton Mifflin, $22.95.) The political naif who was the chairman of the
National Endowment for the Arts licks his wounds after his none-too-brilliant
battles over the likes of Karen Finley, Holly Hughes, Andres Serrano and Robert
Mapplethorpe.

LIFE'S DOMINION: An Argument About Abortion, Euthanasia, and Individual Freedom.
By Ronald Dworkin. (Knopf, $23.) Mr. Dworkin contends that the relevant choices
cannot depend on anyone's "right to live" (or to die), but must proceed from the
idea that life is sacred, and that therefore the state must not interfere.

MARTYR'S DAY: Chronicle of a Small War. By Michael Kelly. (Random House, $23.) A
personal account of extremely vivid experiences during and after the Persian
Gulf war, by a journalist who later became a correspondent for The New York
Times.

PANDAEMONIUM: Ethnicity in International Politics. By Daniel Patrick Moynihan.
(Oxford University, $19.95.) Senator Moynihan, one of ethnicity's prime
explorers, argues that modern politics has culpably slighted the subject and
that national self-determination has proved a perilous principle.

PREPARING FOR THE TWENTY-FIRST CENTURY. By Paul Kennedy. (Random House, $25.)
The author of "The Rise and Fall of the Great Powers" undertakes to examine the
probable consequences of the world's present conduct. No nation will be
unscathed, he argues; many will be miserable; ours will decline more than some
but less than the most unfortunate.

RACE MATTERS. By Cornel West. (Beacon, $15.) What will turn our racial climate
more benign? Mr. West, an optimist but a wise one, thinks good will, hard work
and intelligence may yet help.

THE SEVENTH MILLION: The Israelis and the Holocaust. By Tom Segev. (Hill & Wang,
$27.50.) A frank and devastating chronicle, by a columnist for an Israeli
newspaper, of the uses and abuses of the Holocaust by political leaders in
Palestine and Israel.

A SINGLE TEAR: A Family's Persecution, Love, and Endurance in Communist China.
By Wu Ningkun in collaboration with Li Yikai. (Atlantic Monthly, $21.) In this
poignant memoir the teacher Wu Ningkun, persecuted as a counterrevolutionary for
22 years in Maoist China, tries to answer the question: "Have I suffered and
survived in vain?"

SLEEPING ON A WIRE: Conversations With Palestinians in Israel. By David
Grossman. (Farrar, Straus & Giroux, $22.) An Israeli journalist explores, with
great force, the anguish of Israel's largest minority, an anonymous population
of a million Arabs, who since the founding of Israel have lived in suspended
animation -- rejected, detested, suspected by the state they live in.

THE SPIRIT OF COMMUNITY: Rights, Responsibilities, and the Communitarian Agenda.
By Amitai Etzioni. (Crown, $22.) A thoughtful commentary about and a promotion
of communitarianism, the ideology that aims to address the moral crises of our
day and restore civic responsibility to society.

TALES OUT OF SCHOOL: Joseph Fernandez's Crusade to Rescue American Education. By
Joseph A. Fernandez with John Underwood. (Little, Brown, $24.95.) The
school-reform wars as observed by a chief combatant, the tough, intelligent,
nimble and occasionally abrasive man who has been ousted as New York City's
Schools Chancellor.

TURMOIL AND TRIUMPH: My Years as Secretary of State. By George P. Shultz.
(Robert Stewart/ Scribners, $30.) Mr. Shultz defends the incremental procedures
that led to good relations between President Ronald Reagan and the former Evil
Empire.

TURNING POINT: A Candidate, a State, and a Nation Come of Age. By Jimmy Carter.
(Times Books/ Random House, $22.) A thoughtful reappraisal of Mr. Carter's first
campaign, in 1962, when he was defeated in his bid for a seat in the Georgia
State Senate, challenged the returns and ultimately won.

TWIN PILLARS TO DESERT STORM: America's Flawed Vision in the Middle East From
Nixon to Bush. By Howard Teicher and Gayle Radley Teicher. (Morrow, $23.) A
member of the National Security Council staff until 1987 and his wife vent their
anger over the shortsightedness of America's twin objectives in the Middle East
-- to block Soviet influence and to keep the oil coming.

UNDER A NEW SKY: A Reunion With Russia. By Olga Andreyev Carlisle. (Ticknor &
Fields, $21.95.) A detailed, insightful account of Russian intellectuals and
trends since 1960 by the daughter and granddaughter of pre-Revolutionary
literary figures.

UNDER FIRE: The NRA and the Battle for Gun Control. By Osha Gray Davidson.
(Holt, $25.) In this informative report about the National Rifle Association's
history and lobbying activities, Mr. Davidson argues that the organization has
been weakened by its uncompromising stance that American democracy depends on
unfettered access to guns.

THE WORST OF TIMES. By Patricia G. Miller. (Aaron Asher/HarperCollins, $22.) Ms.
Miller, a lawyer specializing in matrimonial law, interviewed some 50 people
with firsthand experience for this memoir of abortion before Roe v. Wade.

Religion & Philosophy

THE ANCHOR BIBLE DICTIONARY. David Noel Freedman, editor in chief. (Six volumes,
Doubleday, $360.) This monumental (7,035 pages) and truly ecumenical work brings
together the efforts of nearly 1,000 contributors in entries, some of them at
essay length, on innumerable major and minor biblical topics.

THE CHURCH AND THE LEFT. By Adam Michnik. (University of Chicago, $24.95.)
Published in Polish in 1977, Mr. Michnik's essay argues that the secular
opposition to Communism must reconsider the reflexive anticlericalism of the
left.

DAKOTA: A Spiritual Geography. By Kathleen Norris. (Ticknor & Fields, $19.95.) A
deeply moving book that is itself an act of devotion by a poet who is a married
Protestant and also a lay member of a Benedictine community on the Great Plains.

ISLAM AND DEMOCRACY: Fear of the Modern World. By Fatima Mernissi.
(Addison-Wesley, $24.95.) With insightful flashes and no apologies, this Muslim
woman argues for democracy in the Muslim world and looks at the growing
fundamentalist movements there.

LEAD US NOT INTO TEMPTATION: Catholic Priests and the Sexual Abuse of Children.
By Jason Berry. (Doubleday, $22.50.) In his detailed investigation, Mr. Berry
finds cases of child molestation by Catholic clergy members from New York to
Honolulu, uncovers a pattern in the pedophilia and suggests that the church's
sexual ethic is partly to blame.

METAPHYSICS AS A GUIDE TO MORALS. By Iris Murdoch. (Allen Lane/Penguin, $35.)
Echoing her novels, Ms. Murdoch teaches us to be wary when approaching any
philosophy, including her own Platonic view that our moral sense depends on our
imperfect apprehension of perfection.

MY FATHER'S GURU: A Journey Through Spirituality and Disillusion. By Jeffrey
Moussaieff Masson. (Addison-Wesley, $20.) Before he grew up and overthrew Freud,
Mr. Masson lived a childhood of total immersion in his family's infatuation with
a spiritual guide his father brought home from India.

THE NEW COLD WAR? Religious Nationalism Confronts the Secular State. By Mark
Juergensmeyer. (University of California, $25.) This dispassionate comparative
study of violent religious movements centers on a question: are we about to
witness a geopolitical battle between zealots and Western secular societies?

OUTERCOURSE: The Be-Dazzling Voyage. By Mary Daly. (HarperSanFrancisco, $24.)
More radical cheek from the philosopher, theologian, mythologist, explorer,
pirate, warrior, witch, fairy and leprechaun who gave us "Gyn/Ecology."

RIGHTEOUS DISCONTENT: The Women's Movement in the Black Baptist Church,
1880-1920. By Evelyn Brooks Higginbotham. (Harvard University, $34.95.) A
sophisticated and inspirational study of the time when black women, in the
interest of survival and resistance, made the Baptist church their institutional
base.

SHAME AND NECESSITY, by Bernard Williams. (Centennial/University of California,
$25.) A clever, agile professor of philosophy argues that the Homeric Greeks may
have been wiser than the great thinkers of Athens and possibly even wiser than
we.

THE TIBETAN BOOK OF LIVING AND DYING. By Sogyal Rinpoche. (HarperSanFrancisco,
$22.) Tibetan Buddhism, an ancient, complex and mystical religion, gracefully
expounded by a native Tibetan authority (the Dalai Lama contributes a preface).

UPON THIS ROCK: The Miracles of a Black Church. By Samuel G. Freedman.
(HarperCollins, $22.50.) A report on a year spent with St. Paul Community
Baptist Church in a black section of Brooklyn and with its wise and
sophisticated pastor, who has made the church a locus of organization, rescue
and healing.

WRITING WOMEN'S WORLDS: Bedouin Stories. By Lila Abu-Lughod. (University of
California, $30.) In this richly textured ethnography, an anthropologist
recounts the conversations, stories, jokes and songs of Muslim Arab women living
in the Western Desert of Egypt; she writes to challenge our understanding of
Muslim life, and our very notion of culture.

Science

ASSEMBLING CALIFORNIA. By John McPhee. (Farrar, Straus & Giroux, $21.) The last
of four volumes on American geology and the practitioners of plate tectonics
explores the construction of California out of traveling rocks from all over the
world in the last 100 million years, as well as its probable dissolution.

COMPLEXITY: Life at the Edge of Chaos. By Roger Lewin. (Macmillan, $22.) A vivid
account of the eccentric characters who are blazing fresh paths through biology,
physics and mathematics to create a new interdisciplinary science.

COMPLEXITY: The Emerging Science at the Edge of Order and Chaos. By M. Mitchell
Waldrop. (Simon & Schuster, $23.) Mr. Waldrop relays the exhilaration of the
scientists and enthusiasts at the Santa Fe Institute as they found a new field.

DREAMS OF A FINAL THEORY. By Steven Weinberg. (Pantheon, $25.) Finding austere
inspiration in the possibility that the universe may one day be reduced to bare
mathematical formulas, a Nobel laureate and uncompromising reductionist argues
boldly that we should plunge wholeheartedly into that future.

FUZZY LOGIC. By Daniel McNeill and Paul Freiberger. (Simon & Schuster, $22.) How
computer scientists generated programs that can handle propositions like "40
percent true," and why such programs are often more useful than plain old
true/false logic.

GENIUS IN THE SHADOWS. A Biography of Leo Szilard: The Man Behind the Bomb. By
William Lanouette with Bela Silard. (Robert Stewart/Scribners, $35.) A
delightful, anecdote-rich biography of the Hungarian physicist who knew
everybody and everything but got no credit because his best friends could barely
stand him.

THE GOD PARTICLE: If the Universe Is the Answer, What Is the Question? By Leon
Lederman with Dick Teresi. (Houghton Mifflin, $24.95.) A Nobel laureate with a
gift for folksiness looks at the search for a unified theory of nature and for
the particle that could play a part in determining the properties of the
fundamental forces.

NATURE'S MIND: The Biological Roots of Thinking, Emotions, Sexuality, Language
and Intelligence. By Michael S. Gazzaniga. (Basic Books, $25.) In a bold,
absorbing challenge to the tabula rasa theory of mind, Mr. Gazzaniga, a
neurobiologist, asserts that drug addicts, alcoholics, depressives, musical
geniuses and philosophers are not made but born.

SCIENCE IN RUSSIA AND THE SOVIET UNION: A Short History. By Loren R. Graham.
(Cambridge University, $29.95.) This informative history shows that science in
Russia -- whether before, during or after Communist rule -- has never been the
independent enterprise it was in Western Europe.

Science Fiction

A DEEPER SEA. By Alexander Jablokov. (Avonova/Morrow, $22.) In this untidy,
provocative tale, an obsessive scientist teaches dolphins to talk by torturing
them, thereby raising ethical questions that come to vex the entire solar
system.

THE DESTINY MAKERS. By George Turner. (Avonova/Morrow, $20.) The Australian
novelist dispassionately homes in on a tough issue: In a world of runaway
population growth, who decides which babies don't get born?

DEUS X. By Norman Spinrad. (Spectra/ Bantam, $3.99.) A witty short novel that
asks whether an electronic replica of a human being has a soul, and, if so,
whether it can be saved with the help of the first female Pope.

DREAM OF GLASS. By Jean Mark Gawron. (Harcourt Brace, $21.95.) A complex and
engrossing philosophical novel that explores, with great energy and flashes of
poetry, the future of freedom in a world dominated by computers and the people
who control them.

THE HARVEST. By Robert Charles Wilson. (Spectra/Bantam, cloth, $23; paper, $12.)
An intelligently conceived, fully realized novel about an assortment of
malcontents who reject an offer to give up their humanity and become immortal.

NIGHTSIDE THE LONG SUN. By Gene Wolfe. (Tor/Tom Doherty, $21.95.) To inaugurate
a new multivolume series, the indefatigable Mr. Wolfe introduces a young priest
who, in trying to rescue his chapel and school from bankruptcy, stumbles on some
disturbing truths about his world and his gods.

Spies & Thrillers

BRIDES OF BLOOD. By Joseph Koenig. (Grove, $19.95.) What makes this crackling,
shocking police procedural about a murdered prostitute wildly different is its
setting -- the hate-filled streets and prisons of present-day Iran.

HARD DRIVE. By David Pogue. (Diamond/Berkley, paper, $4.99.) A company in
Silicon Valley, on the verge of unveiling a computer that takes dictation, is
foiled by a virus, and Armageddon begins.

THE JOURNEYMAN TAILOR. By Gerald Seymour. (Edward Burlingame/HarperCollins,
$20.) An Irish terrorist and a woman who is a British secret service agent
tangle in this morally complex, captivating novel.

POINT OF IMPACT. By Stephen Hunter. (Bantam, $21.95.) This superbly written page
turner, about a sniper-turned-hunter who has been framed, teaches us, among
other things, the details of shooting at a target half a mile away.

PRAETORIAN. By Thomas Gifford. (Bantam, $22.50.) Not quite an espionage tale,
not quite a war story, this complicated novel, set in the days when Rommel was
taking over North Africa, explores human relationships through the eyes of a
wartime journalist.

Travel, Nature & Adventure

AT THE HAND OF MAN: Peril and Hope for Africa's Wildlife. By Raymond Bonner.
(Knopf, $24.) Mr. Bonner inspects nearly every relevant argument about
conservation in Africa and finds that there will be none, without support by
intelligent exploitation.

THE AYE-AYE AND I: A Rescue Mission in Madagascar. By Gerald Durrell. (Arcade,
$22.95.) Mr. Durrell's 24th book, written in support of grave efforts to save a
rare mammal and its environment, is a sharply detailed romp in an enchanted
landscape of unique flora and fauna.

THE CRYSTAL DESERT: Summers in Antarctica. By David G. Campbell. (Houghton
Mifflin, $21.95.) Mr. Campbell, a biologist, spent three seasons in the
Antarctic and returned with eerily clear perceptions of that sere and
uninhabitable place.

THE FATE OF THE ELEPHANT. By Douglas H. Chadwick. (Sierra Club, $25.) A wildlife
biologist presents an elephant-centric view of the world -- from Tanzania to
Malaysia -- and a splendidly fun and morally sensible introduction to
elephant-human conflicts everywhere.

GOING BACK TO BISBEE. By Richard Shelton. (University of Arizona, cloth, $35;
paper, $15.95.) A memorable ride through time and experience from booming Tucson
to struggling Bisbee, Ariz., with fascinating sidetracks into botany, history
and biology.

THE LAST PANDA. By George B. Schaller. (University of Chicago, $24.95.) A
distinguished biologist's group portrait of "the most endearing creatures I have
ever seen" and a catalogue of human bungling that may guarantee the extinction
of the wild panda.

NATURAL OPIUM: Some Travelers' Tales. By Diane Johnson. (Knopf, $21.) The
distinguished essayist meditates frugally and perceptively on the psychological
strangeness of travel, from the plains of Tanzania to the slopes of Mormon Utah.

ROAD SCHOLAR: Coast to Coast Late in the Century. By Andrei Codrescu. (Hyperion,
$19.95.) Mr. Codrescu, a poet better known as an essayist on National Public
Radio, mounts a red '68 Caddy for a journey in essay writing, a countertrave
logue that visits lots of spots important in the less orthodox history of
America.

True Crime

DEATH BENEFIT: A Lawyer Uncovers a Twenty-Year Pattern of Seduction, Arson, and
Murder. By David Heilbroner. (Harmony/Crown, $20.) How a straight-arrow lawyer
ran to earth, despite the apathy of insurance companies and law enforcement
agencies, the appal ling psychopath who killed a client's daughter.

EVERYTHING SHE EVER WANTED: A True Story of Obsessive Love, Murder, and
Betrayal. By Ann Rule. (Simon & Schuster, $23.) A harrowing look at a modern-day
Southern psychopath who knew how to bat her eyelashes and annihilate a family.

THE MISBEGOTTEN SON. A Serial Killer and His Victims: The True Story of Arthur
J. Shawcross. By Jack Olsen. (Delacorte, $21.95.) A veteran true-crime writer's
fascinating and forceful account of a life devoted to torture, mutilation and
homicide.

LOAD-DATE: June 6, 1993

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Review; List

                   Copyright 1993 The New York Times Company


                              237 of 312 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                   June 7, 1993, Monday, Late Edition - Final

Cambodian Prince Pits Sons Against Each Other in Bid for Power

BYLINE: By PHILIP SHENON,  Special to The New York Times

SECTION: Section A; Page 3; Column 1; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 728 words

DATELINE: PHNOM PENH, Cambodia, June 6


Prince Norodom Sihanouk turned old family divisions into a weapon today in his
campaign to return to power in Cambodia, pitting one of his sons against the
other in hopes of forging a coalition government.

Although diplomats and United Nations peacekeepers say they believe that the
Prince will eventually succeed in pulling together a coalition, the political
climate of this war-shattered nation has been poisoned by feuding within the
royal family.

One of the sons in question is Prince Norodom Ranariddh, who is president of the
royalist party, which won last month's internationally supervised Cambodian
elections. Prince Ranariddh has so far resisted joining a coalition despite the
pleas -- and the wrath -- of his 70-year-old father, Prince Sihanouk. The elder
Prince, Cambodia's ceremonial head of state and its former monarch, was ousted
in a coup in 1970 and along with his family spent most of two decades in exile.

No Brotherly Love

The other son is Prince Norodom Chakrapong, who is a ranking official in the
Vietnamese-installed Government, and in its political arm, the Cambodian
People's Party.

Prince Ranariddh, 49, loathes his half-brother. In a letter last week to Prince
Sihanouk, Prince Ranariddh accused Prince Chakrapong of holding "no other
thought than to destroy me or to kill me." He said that he could never join a
government that included Prince Chakrapong.

Prince Ranariddh has long been considered the favorite son among Prince
Sihanouk's offspring -- no small distinction given that the Prince is believed
to have fathered scores of children from a variety of wives and concubines. Many
Cambodians have thought of Prince Chakrapong as a black sheep of the royal
family.

Because of the deep-seated hostility between the brothers, and with Prince
Sihanouk and Prince Chakrapong thought to be estranged as well, there was
astonishment today in Phnom Penh when Prince Chakrapong turned up on a balcony
at the Royal Palace alongside his father. There, Prince Sihanouk gave a speech
in which he denounced the royalist party, known by the acronym Funcinpec, saying
that it stood in the way of a new government.

Prince Sihanouk's first attempt at forming a coalition collapsed last week
because of objections from Prince Ranariddh. Prince Sihanouk said today that he
would continue to press for a new government, although he noted that the new
coalition may have to wait until later this year, when the heavens will be
aligned properly. Like manyCambodians, Prince Sihanouk is superstitious, and he
said that "astrologers have advised me not to pressure for a new government
because I won't succeed until my birthday next October."

Prince Chakrapong, who is believed to be in his early 50's, said nothing to the
crowd today. He sat quietly on the balcony, beaming as his father spoke.
"Chakrapong didn't have to say anything because the message to Prince Ranariddh
was pretty clear," said a senior United Nations official. "If Ranariddh stands
in the way of a coalition, Prince Sihanouk throws in his lot with Chakrapong."

Supporters Brought by Truck

After the Government's People's Party was defeated at the polls last month,
Prime Minister Hun Sen became eager to join a coalition led by Prince Sihanouk.
Mr. Hun Sen's Government trucked in hundreds of people to join the crowd in
front of the palace today, to cheer the Prince in his denunciations of
Funcinpec.

The Government added to the pressure on Prince Ranariddh by suggesting today
that it might never accept the results of the United Nations-supervised
elections. In a letter to the United Nations dated Friday but made public today,
the People's Party said that it had detected "a great variety of irregularities"
during the voting and asked the United Nations to investigate. The United
Nations is almost certain to reject the request, since international monitors
have certified the elections as free and fair.

Although hundreds of the people gathered outside the Royal Palace today had been
trucked here on Government orders, many seemed sincere in their support for
Prince Sihanouk.

"Funcinpec had success in the election," said Naim Som Mern, a 38-year-old rice
farmer. "Now they want all the power. They don't want national reconciliation."
He stood near a banner that read, "Only Prince Norodom Sihanouk Can Lead
Cambodia To Peace."

LOAD-DATE: June 7, 1993

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1993 The New York Times Company


                              238 of 312 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                   June 7, 1993, Monday, Late Edition - Final

Slaying Casts a Pall Over Prospect Park

BYLINE: By LYNDA RICHARDSON

SECTION: Section B; Page 3; Column 1; Metropolitan Desk

LENGTH: 916 words


In the Long Meadow of Prospect Park in Brooklyn, there are fresh flowers now in
an old shoe box, a small American flag and crumpled bits of paper --
hand-written tributes to a popular drama teacher who was shot to death while
fending off efforts to steal his bicycle last Wednesday.

Amid the park's 526 acres, the heartfelt mementos stand in isolation as a shrine
at the spot where 42-year-old Allyn Winslow collapsed and died in a bed of
clover.

As a police helicopter thumped overhead and mounted police galloped by the other
day, the somber spot seemed almost swallowed up in the meandering sprawl of
jewel-like lakes, meadows and wooded trails of trampled earth.

But the slaying, down the hill from the old-fashioned Picnic House, has cast a
pall that extends far beyond the green patch where Mr. Winslow fell with four
bullet wounds in his back. There is a new sense of hesitation throughout a park
that has served for more than a century as a personal playground, an oasis of
peace, for Brooklyn residents.

'We Try to Warn Them'

The killing in broad daylight of Mr. Winslow has made many Brooklynites --
already well acquainted with urban survival tactics -- regard the park in a
different way.

"Everybody is a little tense; you see it in their faces," said Michael Colon, a
park service employee who was cleaning the park's lakes. Mr. Colon said he has
felt obliged to remind parkgoers not to wander too far astray in the woods. "We
try to warn them. We tell them the truth. You shouldn't be by yourself."

On Friday, the police arrested four Brooklyn teen-agers, two 14 and two 16, in
the killing of Mr. Winslow. The police said the boys simply wanted to steal Mr.
Winslow's $250 turquoise mountain bike because three had bikes and they needed a
fourth.

The police say Mr. Winslow's death was the first slaying in the park in which
the victim and the killers did not know each other. Although there were two
rapes within eight days last month, the police say crime in the park has
traditionally been low.

Despite reassurances of heightened security, the rapes and the killing of Mr.
Winslow have resurrected the kind of hard-edged wariness usually reserved for
gritty subway rides and walks down city streets at night.

In the tangled woods of Prospect Park, there are more uneasy backward glances,
and more parkgoers traveling in pairs or groups.

Sophie Balcoff, who lives in Park Slope, wonders whether people will ever forget
what happened on June 2. In her mind, a feeling of serenity will not return
easily. "It's such a big place. Things can happen in a minute."

Ms. Balcoff said she has told her husband to not ride his bicycle alone in the
park anymore. The randomness of Mr. Winslow's death, she said, has also made her
think twice about using the park for birthday parties and picnics on warm summer
days.

Bordered on one side by largely middle-class Park Slope and on another by
Flatbush, Prospect Park has always been a place where Brooklynites have come
together from their disparate neighborhoods for a measure of peace.

An Urban Oasis

Built in 1866 and designed by Calvert Vaux and Frederick Law Olmsted, it is a
park of fusty elegance and fanciful Renaissance structures. It is a people's
park, a giant cookout on summer holidays, a respite of tranquillity in a city
that seems to offer few such oases.

In a clearing in the park the other day, near a gnarled tree stump sculpted with
haunting African faces, Ronnie Manoli said the killing of Mr. Winslow has left
him feeling uncomfortable.

"If you don't know someone and they are coming near you, you have to give them a
hard look," said Mr. Manoli, 26, who was playing a lively game of dominoes with
West Indian friends as a Bob Marley song played on a radio.

"Everybody now is a little bit apprehensive toward whoever is around here," he
said. "Anybody could be a criminal."

On a steep dirt trail near the Park Slope side, not far from the secluded knoll
where the four shots rang out Wednesday, Louis Martinez, a maintenance
supervisor for the New York City Housing Authority, made a nimble path through
the woods with his Yorkshire terrier. But the Vietnam combat veteran
acknowledged that his stroll was far from a fearless one. He said Mr. Winslow's
death has brought a feeling of violation.

"They have taken away my peace of mind," Mr. Martinez said.

But for one 33-year-old mother, it was not the visible presence of scores of
police officers that drew her back the other day. It was the spot in the meadow
where a trickle of visitors paused to pay their respects.

Patricia Hogan found someone there who knew how to reach the widow of Mr.
Winslow, whose funeral was held yesterday in Bay Ridge, where the family lived.
"I wanted her to know he didn't die alone," she said.

Ms. Hogan said she and her husband had been walking with their 6-month-old
daughter Wednesday afternoon when they saw the wounded teacher struggling to
pedal into the clearing.

"Just minutes before, I had just finished telling my husband that it was so nice
to have such a big, beautiful view and how easy it was to push the stroller,"
said Ms. Hogan, an occupational therapist. "While we were appreciating the park,
this poor guy was in the woods facing a nightmare."

With her hand on his shoulder, Ms. Hogan said she told Mr. Winslow to hold on,
and that help was on the way. As parkgoers looked on, she said the whole park
seemed to take on a quietness as Mr. Winslow passed from life to death.

LOAD-DATE: June 7, 1993

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1993 The New York Times Company


                              239 of 312 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                   June 7, 1993, Monday, Late Edition - Final

COMMENCEMENTS;
1,550 Degrees at Staten Island

SECTION: Section B; Page 2; Column 3; Metropolitan Desk

LENGTH: 377 words


Former Representative Geraldine A. Ferraro addressed the 17th annual
commencement ceremony of the College of Staten Island yesterday.

More than 1,550 degrees were conferred by the school, which is a senior college
of the City University of New York. It was the last ceremony on the Sunnyside
campus. The school is moving to a new campus at the site of the old Willowbrook
hospital next fall.

Ms. Ferraro told graduates they must make a momentous choice as they enter
professional life: "You can help carry us to a future better than this present,
or you can leave us right where we are. That's where your power and the power of
your CUNY degree lie."

University of Alabama

The University of Alabama at Birmingham conferred 2,076 degrees at its 24th
annual commencement yesterday.

Honorary degrees were presented to Birmingham's Mayor, Richard Arrington Jr.;
Dr. Arnold G. Diethelm, who is chairman of the university's department of
surgery, and to Dr. John R. Durant, the university's vice president for health
affairs.

Commencement exercises for the University of Alabama's main campus at Tuscaloosa
branch were held on May 15. A total of 4,268 degrees were conferred at the
exercises; Howell Raines, a Pulitzer Prize winner who is the editorial page
editor of The New York Times, delivered the main address.

Williams College

Jim Lehrer, associate editor and co-anchor of "The MacNeil/Lehrer Newshour" on
PBS, delivered the main address yesterday at the 204th commencement of Williams
College in Williamstown, Mass.

Mr. Lehrer received an honorary doctorate of humane letters. Other honorary
degree recipients were Louise Gluck, the Pulitzer Prize-winning poet and senior
lecturer in English at Williams; Henry Louis Gates Jr., the W. E. B. Du Bois
Professor of Humanities at Harvard University; Maya Lin, the designer of the
Vietnam Veterans' Memorial in Washington; Earl A. Powell 3d, a Williams alumnus
who is director of the National Gallery of Art; Martin Scorsese, the film maker;
Sir Richard Norman, rector of Exeter College at Oxford University; Harry C.
Payne, president of Hamilton College, who will take over next January as
Williams's president, and Walter V. Shipley, president of Chemical Bank and a
Williams alumnus.

LOAD-DATE: June 7, 1993

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1993 The New York Times Company


                              240 of 312 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                   June 7, 1993, Monday, Late Edition - Final

Books of The Times;
A Selective History of a Decade Defining America

BYLINE: By CHRISTOPHER LEHMANN-HAUPT

SECTION: Section C; Page 13; Column 3; Cultural Desk

LENGTH: 1055 words



 The Fifties
 By David Halberstam
 Illustrated. 800 pages. Villard Books/ Random House. $27.50.

Many prominent books have been written about the various subjects that David
Halberstam covers in "The Fifties," a history of the decade of which he
describes himself "a child," having graduated from high school in 1951 and from
college in 1955, and having had his values "shaped in that era."

In fact, Mr. Halberstam has written several of these books himself: "The Making
of a Quagmire," "Ho" and "The Best and the Brightest," about the Vietnam war,
many of whose tangled roots lay in the 1950's; "The Powers That Be," which
covered, among other media, television, which underwent its first major growth
in the 1950's; and "The Reckoning," about the American automobile industry,
whose self-induced collapse began in the 1950's.

Yet the secret of art is selection, and by carefully selecting what he covers in
"The Fifties," Mr. Halberstam makes even twice-told tales like the rise and fall
of McCarthyism or the case involving Whittaker Chambers and Alger Hiss seem
fresh, dramatic and surprisingly entertaining.

The principle of selection works in two ways for Mr. Halberstam. First, by
cutting down and simplifying histories that have been told before at complicated
length, he highlights significant developments that are likely to have been
obscured in a more detailed treatment. For instance, "The Fifties" makes us see
as rarely before the degree of Gen. Douglas MacArthur's arrogance in
underestimating Chinese military capacity as his forces drove toward the Yalu
River late in 1950, and the extent to which his earlier success with the marine
landing at Inchon heightened his sense of hubris.

Similarly, Mr. Halberstam's streamlined narrative brings out the "synergy of
talents" that Tennessee Williams, Elia Kazan and Marlon Brando achieved in "A
Streetcar Named Desire," which opened as a film in 1951, and the close relation
of those talents to the work of Alfred Kinsey in probing the sexual truth behind
American Puritanism. "The Fifties" underlines the starkness of the conflict
between Richard M. Nixon's gently pacifying mother and his angry, combative
father, and implies that the task of reconciling the two might have contributed
to his success in bringing together the conflicting extremes of the Republican
Party during the 1950's.

By treating Grace Metalious's surprise 1957 best seller "Peyton Place" alongside
a profile of Betty Friedan, the author of "The Feminine Mystique," Mr.
Halberstam suggests that the appeal of "Peyton Place" may have had as much to do
with its depiction of women trying to take control of their lives as with its
sexual revelations. And by recounting Francis Gary Powers's fateful U-2 flight
in the context of President Dwight D. Eisenhower's plan to visit the Soviet
Union and hammer out a disarmament pact, the text underscores one major motive
behind Eisenhower's 1960 speech warning against the military-industrial complex.

The other way in which Mr. Halberstam's canny selectiveness works for him is
simply in his choice of what to cover. He writes that the two most significant
events of the decade were the United States Supreme Court's ruling in Brown v.
Board of Education and the emergence of Elvis Presley, whom he quotes Leonard
Bernstein calling "the greatest cultural force in the 20th century." And in
supporting his case he skillfully summarizes Richard Kluger's monumental "Simple
Justice," along with other pertinent works on the Warren Court's decision, and
boils down more than a dozen books on Presley, combined with his own contacts
with the singer during a time spent reporting for The Nashville Tennessean.

But what captures the spirit of the decade best is his section on the "Ozzie and
Harriet" television show. For in his account of how the Nelson family drove
itself to produce an all-American portrait of what turned out to be "a
dysfunctional family," he sums up the conflict of the era between the longing
for a white-bread image and the blacker truth beneath.

Mr. Halberstam's thesis about the decade is that, below its placid surface,
great social ferment was occurring, a point he demonstrates eloquently by
outlining the beginning of everything from the civil rights movement through the
sexual revolution to the rise of rock-and-roll music. Understanding as he always
has that the most accessible way to sum up complex events is through sharply
drawn portraits of their leading actors, he anticipates the rise of the New Left
by profiling the sociologist C. Wright Mills, though he neglects to foreshadow
the rise of conservatism by, say, profiling the careers of William F. Buckley
Jr. or Milton Friedman.

And while one is complaining: there could have been more about the International
Business Machines Corporation and the rise of the computer. Although he writes
about Grace Metalious's success, he neglects the paperback publishing
revolution, in both its mass-market and quality aspects. He sums up Sloan
Wilson's critique of corporate culture in the novel "The Man in the Gray Flannel
Suit," and analyzes why the car industry failed, but he nowhere mentions John
Kenneth Galbraith's "Affluent Society" or hints at the rise of environmentalism.
And he never gets around to describing the end of the Korean War.

All the same, his portrait of the decade is vivid and beguiling. He writes:
"Three decades later, the fifties appear to be an orderly era, one with a
minimum of social dissent. Photographs from the period tend to show people who
dressed carefully: men in suits, ties, and -- when outdoors -- hats; the women
with their hair in modified page-boys, pert and upbeat. Young people seemed,
more than anything else, 'square' and largely accepting of the given social
covenants."

Yet from an age that he describes with words like "placid," "languid" and "black
and white," he has produced a history that is lively and polychromatic. All that
is missing is the sense we had back then that nothing would ever change. But by
pointing out the future that was bubbling beneath the surface of the era, Mr.
Halberstam makes it possible never to feel trapped in one's memories. And by
assuring that much, he evokes even a sense of nostalgia for that suffocating and
once-upon-a-time unpromising decade.


LOAD-DATE: June 7, 1993

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo of David Halberstam.

TYPE: Review

                   Copyright 1993 The New York Times Company


                              241 of 312 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                   June 7, 1993, Monday, Late Edition - Final
                              Correction Appended

25 Years. The Vision of Robert Kennedy Lives On.

BYLINE: By R. W. APPLE Jr.,  Special to The New York Times

SECTION: Section A; Page 14; Column 3; National Desk

LENGTH: 1323 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, June 6


For many, in a society that seems always to crave new myths and new idols,
Robert F. Kennedy is a rapidly fading memory a quarter-century after his death,
brittle with age. For many others, the third of the nation that was not yet born
when he was killed, there is no first-hand memory at all.

But to a remarkable number of Americans, Robert Kennedy remains a vivid
presence, the archetype of the charismatic leader.

Visiting Indian reservations, campaigning for Cesar Chavez, talking to children
in Appalachia, pledging himself to stand shoulder-to-shoulder with blacks in
their crusade for equal rights, he had an ability, rare in a glib and shallow
trade, to convey real compassion. Often words would fail him and he would run
them together or just move his mouth while nothing came out. Sometimes he would
cry.

But when he finally decided to run for President in 1968, he did so only after
Eugene McCarthy had carried the fight to Lyndon B. Johnson, and many Democrats
thought that smacked of opportunism.

Often Vulnerable

He had a slashing, vengeful political style, and many could never forget that he
had worked for Joseph R. McCarthy as a young man, or the way he browbeat --
indeed, all but blackmailed -- Gov. Michael V. DiSalle to throw Ohio behind John
F. Kennedy in the 1960 Presidential nominating race.

Robert Kennedy knew about that streak in himself, and he knew that others knew
about it, too. His defense was to mock himself. He wrote this to a friend in
Vietnam: "I'm spending a lot of time defending you against all the people back
here who keeps saying you're too ruthless."

Yet often he seemed frail and vulnerable, as at the 1964 Democratic convention
in Atlantic City, when he stood on the podium as the great throng beneath
cheered and cheered, for his slain brother but for him, too.

Or in the black neighborhood on the north side of Indianapolis that awful April
night in 1968, a few hours after hearing that the Rev. Dr. Martin Luther King
Jr. had been killed in Memphis. Standing on a flat-bed truck on a street corner,
huddled against the cold in a long black overcoat that seemed two sizes too
large, he sought to calm the rage of those listening to him.

"I know in my heart," he said hesitantly, "what you must be feeling. I had a
member of my family killed. He was a white man. But we have to make an effort in
the United States -- an effort to understand."

'Pain That Cannot Forget'

In Atlantic City he had quoted Shakespeare. Romeo and Juliet. In Indianapolis,
chopping the air with his closed right hand in the awkward gesture he used for
emphasis, he quoted Aeschylus: "Even in our sleep, pain that cannot forget falls
drop by drop upon the heart, and in our own despair, against our will, comes
wisdom through the awful grace of God."

A few months later, after Sirhan B. Sirhan had cut him down on June 5, 1968, at
his moment of triumph in the California primary, they put the same words on the
prayer card for his own funeral in St. Patrick's Cathedral and for his burial
beneath a plain white cross, in the shadow of a Japanese magnolia tree high on a
hillside at Arlington National Cemetery, beside his older brother John, in death
as in life.

Tonight his widow, Ethel, his children, his grandchildren and some of his old
comrades in political battle were back at Arlington for a 25th anniversary "Mass
of Courage and Reconciliation." There as well was President Clinton, whose
senior prom at Georgetown University was canceled because of the assassination,
and who was drawn into public life in large part by the Kennedys' example.

President Clinton, who has sought to portray himself as a new kind of Democrat,
untrammeled by ideology, said as dusk gathered over the cemetery that Robert
Kennedy "believed that government had to do things with people, not for them."
The eternal political question, Mr. Clinton asserted, is not right versus left
but right versus wrong.

"He would dare us to leave yesterday and embrace tomorrow," the President
declared.

Senator Edward M. Kennedy of Massachusetts, the last survivor among the four
Kennedy brothers, seemed alternately distraught and jolly as the 90-minute
service unfolded. He spoke only very briefly, reading a short section from
Tennyson's poem "Ulysses," ending his reading with the line:

To strive, to seek, to find, and not to yield.

Ed Guthman, teaching journalism at the University of Southern California, and
John Siegenthaler, still active as a newspaper editor, who were both spokesmen
at one time or another for Robert Kennedy, were on hand, and so were other
veterans of his successful 1964 campaign for Senator from New York and doomed
1968 campaign for the Presidency, including Rafer Johnson, the magnetic Olympic
decathlon star who was at his side when he was shot in California.

Children of the Legacy

Many came to mark his commitment, as Attorney General, to the cause of civil
rights: Janet Reno, who holds that office today; Martin Luther King 3d, the
child of a great figure in the civil rights movement; Andrew Young, then a
leader of the racial struggle in the South, later the American Ambassador to the
United Nations and Mayor of Atlanta; Marian Wright Edelman, then a young black
Mississippian drawn to the flame of Robert Kennedy's idealism, now the nation's
leading advocate of children's rights, and Toni Morrison, the writer.

Aretha Franklin sang the spiritual "He's Got the Whole World in His Hands," and
Andy Williams sang "Ave Maria."

Ethel Kennedy, who sat next to Mr. Clinton tonight, has not remarried. She
involves herself in the various memorials to her husband and remains a
participant in Washington social life.

Struggle With Emotions

The most prominent of the 10 living Kennedy children (David died of a drug
overdose in 1984) is Joseph P. Kennedy 2d, the eldest son, who awed people with
his poise when he walked through the aisles of the special train bearing Robert
Kennedy's body from New York to Washington, murmuring, "Thanks for coming,
thanks for coming." He was 15 years old then; now 40, he is in his fourth term
as Representative from the same Massachusetts district, redrawn to reflect
population shifts, that John F. Kennedy once represented.

Tonight he struggled with his emotions as he spoke.

Kathleen Kennedy Townsend, 41, is president of the Maryland Student Service
Alliance, part of the state's Department of Education. Michael L. Kennedy, 35,
runs the Citizens Energy Corporation in Boston, which supplies low-cost fuel to
poor people, and "he does for Joe what Bobby did for Jack, which is everything,"
as a family friend said. Kerry Kennedy Cuomo, 33, runs the Robert F. Kennedy
Memorial Center for Human Rights; her husband, Andrew Cuomo, a son of New York's
Governor, is an Assistant Secretary of Housing and Urban Development.

The Unanswerabled Question

This week, as in the days after Robert Kennedy's death, people kept asking the
same unanswerable question: Had he lived, would he have defeated Hubert H.
Humphrey for the Democratic Presidential nomination, and if so, would he have
beaten Richard M. Nixon?

What is clear is that after the assassination, the country took a turn toward
more conservative policies that have persisted since. Social justice and the end
of the war in Vietnam were long postponed. The "final and bitter irony in the
murder of Robert Kennedy," James Reston wrote in The New York Times on June 9,
1968, was that "instead of the new man he wanted for a new age, we are getting
the two most familiar candidates in the race, and instead of reassuring the
dissatisfied elements of the nation, we are rewarding the satisfied."

But even death does not absolutely close such issues, and now some of Robert
Kennedy's younger acolytes, like Peter Edelman and Eli Segal, have moved into
the Clinton Administration, to try once again to put into effect some of the
ideas he espoused.


LOAD-DATE: June 7, 1993

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

CORRECTION-DATE: June 8, 1993, Tuesday

CORRECTION:

An article yesterday about the observance of the 25th anniversary of Robert F.
Kennedy's assassination referred incorrectly to an associate of the Senator's
who attended. He is John Seigenthaler, a retired newspaper editor and former
Kennedy spokesman.


GRAPHIC: Photo: Robert F. Kennedy campaigning in March 1968 in Sacramento,
Calif. (George Tames/The New York Times)

                   Copyright 1993 The New York Times Company


                              242 of 312 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                  June 8, 1993, Tuesday, Late Edition - Final

NEWS SUMMARY

SECTION: Section A; Page 2; Column 5; Metropolitan Desk

LENGTH: 1056 words



International A3-15

IN ITALY, A WEB OF SCANDAL
The corruption scandal in Italy suggests that its emergence as an industrial
power was composed in part on the myth that an economic boom was built on free
enterprise rather than on an unholy alliance that denied the notion of
competition.  A1

U.N. RAISES FIREPOWER IN SOMALIA
The United Nations command in the Somali capital increased its firepower there
and warned a faction leader that it would punish those responsible for killing
about two dozen Pakistani peacekeepers.  A1



BOSNIA SUPPORTS 'HAVENS' PLAN
Bosnia and Herzegovina announced its support for a U.N. plan that would deploy
peacekeepers to protect six towns designated safe areas by the Security Council,
because it saw no other choice in face of attacks.  A3

UKRAINIAN BACKS U.S. ARMS PLAN
The defense Minister of Ukraine endorsed a U.S. plan to put the nuclear warheads
there under international control, but hard-liners are opposed to giving them up
and the Russians are skeptical of the plan.  A7

GUATEMALA OUSTS TOP OFFICERS
The former human rights ombudsman who is Guatemala's new President moved against
the military, sweeping out some officers who played leading roles in the
political turmoil of the last two weeks.  A10

U.S. TO DELAY ACTION ON IRAQ
The White House is postponing a decision on whether to retaliate against Iraq
for its apparent role in an assassination plot against George Bush until Kuwait
completes its trial of the suspects.  A13

ISRAEL OPTIMISTIC ABOUT TALKS
Israeli leaders offered unusually optimistic assessments of the Middle East
peace talks, with Foreign Minister Shimon Peres saying that Israel and Jordan
were so close to an agreement that "we just have to take out the pen and sign."
A13

Azerbaijan's Prime Minister offered to resign after rebels' gains.  A6

Rebel and militia chiefs denied a role in killing 300 people in Liberia.  A12

Nigeria is nervously awaiting multi-party presidential elections. A15

National A16-23

SCHOOLS OPENED TO CHURCHES
preme Court ruled that public schools that open their doors to community groups
for after-hours meetings must also make space for religious groups.  A1

DRUGS CAN BE SEIZED IN FRISK
The Supreme Court ruled that the police do not need a warrant to seize narcotics
detected during a routine frisk for concealed weapons.  A23

MINERS STRIKE TO KEEP CONTROL
The 10,000 members of the United Mine Workers of America now on strike are
trying to preserve both their jobs and the union's power in nation's coal
industry.  A16

FLYNN UNSURE ABOUT VATICAN POST
Boston Mayor Raymond Flynn, concerned that he will not have a role in global
trouble spots, is reconsidering his appointment as Ambassador to the Vatican.
A16

TEXANS FIND NEW LEVER IN BOOTH
Political Memo: In a state where voting Democratic has always been second
nature, Kay Bailey Hutchison's successful Republican bid for Senate signals a
change in Texas's political landscape.  A18

CLINTON MULLS COURT CHOICE
President Clinton is choosing a Supreme Court nominee from a list including
Interior Secretary Bruce Babbitt and two Federal Appeals Court judges.  A20

CLINTON NEGOTIATES ON BUDGET
President Clinton met with two leading senators to begin his effort to win
approval for his budget in the Senate Finance Committee.  A22

WHERE BUDGET CUTTERS FALTER
Political Memo: The only way to bring the Federal budget under control is also
the least popular way, cutting entitlement programs like welfare and Social
Security.  A22

David Gergen pledged to make the White House more open.  A20

Metro Digest B1

CREW OF IMMIGRANT SHIP CHARGED
The captain and crew members of the decrepit freighter that ran aground off
Queens were charged with smuggling illegal Chinese immigrants, as Federal
prosecutors described a bizarre voyage in which the agent of an organized-crime
boss in China seized control of the ship and locked the captain up.  A1

ANOTHER BITTER VOYAGE
It took $27,000 of borrowed money, a harrowing 52-day voyage by sea eating
rotten rice and two days by van and on foot from Mexico before Hua Zhen was
finally smuggled into the United States from China. That was six weeks ago,
before another ship bulging with passengers like him ran aground off of New York
City.  A1

MIA FARROW WINS CUSTODY
Describing Woody Allen as a "self-absorbed, untrustworthy and insensitive"
father, a judge rejected his attempt to win custody of his three children and
awarded custody to their mother, Mia Farrow.  A1

TEEN-AGER SLAIN OUTSIDE SCHOOL
A 16-year-old student on a lunch hour stroll outside a Brooklyn school for
troubled teen-agers was chased by two older youths and shot to death, the police
said.  A1

Business Digest D1

Science Times C1-12

New clues to dark matter within the Milky Way's halo.  C1

A new large mammal emerges from a remote park in Viet Nam.  C1

Scientist at Work: Dr. Benjamin S. Carson, neurosurgeon.  C1

Arts/Entertainment C13-18

New French cultural center conforms to an ancient neighbor.  C13

New York diva storms Hollywood.  C13

Cliburn contest winner.  C13

Tony post-mortems.  C13

Books: Romanian satires.  C17

Fashion B7

Enough Calvin Klein minimalism to fill Hollywood Bowl.

Sports B9-15

Baseball: Mets beat Cubs.  B11

Royals thump Yanks.  B11

Basketball: Petrovic killed in car crash.  B9

Oakley unhappy with Knicks role.  B9

Boxing: Morrison defeats Foreman.  B9

Hockey: Canadiens beat Kings in overtime.  B9

Obituaries B8

James Bridges, film maker.

Eugene Braun-Munk, publisher.

Dr. Shih-Chun Wang, neuroscientist.

Editorials/Op-Ed A24-25

Editorials

Settle down -- and toughen up.

C.I.A. funny businesses.

Don't rush the school chief choice.

Letters

A. M. Rosenthal: Give them a parade.

Russell Baker: Elvis, Pelvis & Mundt.

Lester C. Thurow: Answer: a value-added tax.

Timothy Ferris: Babbling brooks and talking dogs.

Joseph C. d'Oronzio: Good ethics, good health economics.

Chronicle B6

Bridge C18

Chess C17

Crossword C17

LOAD-DATE: June 8, 1993

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Summary

                   Copyright 1993 The New York Times Company


                              243 of 312 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                  June 8, 1993, Tuesday, Late Edition - Final

Inquiry on General's Remarks

BYLINE: Special to The New York Times

SECTION: Section A; Page 22; Column 5; National Desk

LENGTH: 257 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, June 7


The Air Force said tonight that it was investigating reports that a two-star
general had disparaged President Clinton in a speech, calling him, among other
things, a "pot-smoking" and "draft-dodging" Commander in Chief.

The investigation, disclosed tonight by The Washington Post, was confirmed by an
Air Force spokesman who identifying the officer as Maj. Gen. Harold N. Campbell.

Such public comments by a high-ranking officer about a President are rare and
can lead to the discharge of the officer. Military law prohibits contemptuous
comments by officers about their civil leaders.

General Campbell was made his remarks about the President on May 24 as part of
an awards program at a NATO base in the Netherlands, The Post reported, quoting
people who attended the program.

General Campbell is chief of plans and programs at the Air Force's Materiel
Command at Wright-Patterson Air Force Base near Dayton, Ohio.

Major Paul Wilson, a spokesman at Wright-Patterson, confirmed tonight that an
investigation of the general's remarks was being conducted but said there would
be no immediate comment from him.

The spokesman said General Campbell had been in the process of being transferred
to the Washington area where he was to have taken command of the Air Force's
Defense Fuel Supply Center. That transfer, the spokesman said, has been put on
hold.

General Campbell, The Post said, is 53 years old and a former fighter pilot who
served two tours in Vietnam and won numerous citations, including a Silver Star
for gallantry.

LOAD-DATE: June 8, 1993

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1993 The New York Times Company


                              244 of 312 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                  June 8, 1993, Tuesday, Late Edition - Final

Vietnam Forest Yields Evidence Of New Animal

BYLINE: By BARBARA BASLER

SECTION: Section C; Page 1; Column 1; Science Desk; The Environment Page

LENGTH: 1016 words

DATELINE: HONG KONG


IN a lush, primeval forest of Vietnam, barely explored even by the villagers who
live nearby, scientists have identified an entirely new species of mammal: a
cowlike creature with the glossy coat of a horse, the agility of a goat and the
long horns of an antelope.

"It's a striking animal that appears to be a cow that lives the life of a goat,"
said Dr. John MacKinnon of Hong Kong, a British biologist who made the find with
five Vietnamese scientists.

While the biologist has not seen the animal alive, he said it is well known
among the local Vietnamese peasants, who call it the "forest goat" or the
"spindle horn." DNA tests on 11 specimens, performed by Peter Arctander, a
Danish scientist, confirmed that the mammal was unlike any in the bovid family,
which includes cattle, sheep, goats and antelopes.

Dr. MacKinnon said this is the first large new mammal to be identified in more
than 50 years. The new genus and its single species, which he has designated
Pseudoryx nghetinhensis, has startled and delighted mammalogists.

Dr. MacKinnon's team, which described the new mammal after examining more than
20 specimens of skulls, hides and teeth, including three complete skins,
formally announced its discovery in the current issue of the British science
journal Nature.

The scientists came upon the animal's existence while exploring the Vu Quang
Nature Reserve, a beautiful stretch of dense, uncharted forest that lies 170
miles southwest of Hanoi, along Vietnam's mountainous border with Laos.

The Ho Chi Minh trail, ravaged by American bombs during the Vietnam War, begins
20 miles south of the reserve. But Dr. MacKinnon said the forest was
miraculously spared, and remained untouched by the devastation. He said the
forest was "a tiny, pristine corner of the world unknown to modern science,"
which has yielded a number of intriguing finds, including several new species of
fish and birds.

"Most of us feel we know all the large mammals that are out there, and when
something like this comes along, we are floored," said Dr. John Robinson, vice
president for international conservation at the Wildlife Conservation Society in
New York.

"There are a number of areas in Vietnam, Laos, Cambodia and Burma that have not
been studied systematically because of warfare and political instability," he
said, adding that this reserve and other spots in Southeast Asia promised to be
rich new fields for biologists and conservationists.

A Rare Event

Dr. Gordon B. Corbet, retired curator of mammals at the Natural History Museum
in London, was one of the scientists sent photographs of the first specimens of
the new find.

"There's no doubt this is a new species," he confirmed, but he said he did not
believe the new bovid would "change the way we think about other species." What
it should do, he said, "is fill in gaps and add to our knowledge."

He stressed that while finding new species of small mammals like mice, shrews
and bats was not unusual, uncovering a new large mammal was rare.

"This is quite exciting, because we are talking about an animal never before
seen or described or predicted by science," agreed J. E. Hill, a mammalian
expert who is a retired principle scientific officer with the Natural History
Museum in London. "For students of evolution and mammalian classification, this
is an important find."

Mr. Hill, who with Dr. Corbet was a co-author of "The Mammals of the Indomalayan
Region" (Oxford University Press, 1992), said this was the first new large
mammal to be discovered since a species of wild cattle from northern Cambodia
was described in 1937.

In 1975, a new living mammal, the Chiacoan peccary, a large wild pig, was
discovered in Paraguay. But scientists already knew of the peccary's existence
from evidence like preserved bones.

Dr. MacKinnon, who has spent years exploring Southeast Asia as a field
conservationist, first discovered specimens of the new mammal last year, while
on an expedition to Vietnam sponsored by the World Wildlife Fund working with
the Forest Inventory and Planning Institute in Hanoi.

He said the Vu Quang reserve was selected for exploration after satellite
photographs showed it to be "a dense, high-quality forest."

Dr. MacKinnon said the forest climbs up the Annamite Mountains, then "swings
down into the valleys, stretching along broad, clear, boulder-strewn rivers."

The biologist said visitors to the deep green forest could see "flashes of
bright bird plumage and hear the calls of wild birds and gibbons," which share
the reserve with tigers, leopards, elephants and deer.

The Pseudoryx, he said, spends much of its time on the higher promontories. It
has dainty hooves and sharp straight horns about 20 inches long, and weighs
about 220 pounds.

The animals have large face glands like those of deer, which secrete a scent to
mark territory, he said. Larger than a goat, but smaller than a cow, the animal
has a deep brown coat with black and white markings.

Dr. MacKinnon, who heads the Asian Bureau for Conservation here, has applied for
a grant to conduct a three-month field study of the mammal, which would include
setting photographic traps.

The Vietnamese Government has placed the mammal on its list of endangered
species, to prevent foreign zoos and local entrepreneurs from going after it.

The Government, which established the reserve in 1986, has since extended the
protected area to 150,000 acres from 40,000 acres. The reserve is named after a
group of 19th-century Vietnamese who rebelled against French colonialism.

Dr. MacKinnon said because Vu Quang was considered a cultural and not a nature
reserve, scientists had not bothered to explore it. And because its valleys are
too wet and its mountains too steep to cultivate, local Vietnamese rarely
disturb it. Some farmers now till the edges of the valleys, he said, but they
venture into the forest only to set snare traps to catch animals, including the
Pseudoryx, for food.

While there has been some logging, miles of virgin forest remain, and the
Vietnamese have agreed to ban further work there.

LOAD-DATE: June 8, 1993

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo: A taxidermist reconstructed a Pseudoryx nghetinhensis. (Nature)
(pg. C4)

Map of Vietnam showing location of Ha Tinh Province. (pg. C4)

                   Copyright 1993 The New York Times Company


                              245 of 312 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                  June 8, 1993, Tuesday, Late Edition - Final

C.I.A. Funny Businesses

SECTION: Section A; Page 24; Column 1; Editorial Desk

LENGTH: 471 words


Erwin Rautenberg ran an air freight company in Los Angeles called Air-Sea
Forwarders. But in 1956 he agreed to let the Central Intelligence Agency use the
company name. In return he began handling some of the agency's air shipments.
Air-Sea became a subsidiary of a C.I.A. proprietary called Air Asia. Now, Mr.
Rautenberg says, the C.I.A. has left him holding the bag for huge debts.

That's the least of the troubles caused by proprietaries. These are corporations
secretly owned by an intelligence agency that do business as private companies,
or appear to. They provide useful cover for agents and launder money for covert
operations. They also provide contacts with bona fide businesses to gather
intelligence and facilitate covert operations. But they are open to abuse and
are very difficult to police.

Air Asia ran the largest airplane maintenance facility in Southeast Asia during
the Vietnam War. By plowing back profits from Air Asia's lucrative contracts
into its own operations, the C.I.A. eased constraints on its budget.

The C.I.A. sold off Air Asia in 1975, and Mr. Rautenberg was stuck with Air-Sea
Forwarders' unpaid bills and corporate taxes. He sued for breach of contract. At
the C.I.A.'s insistence, before the case went to trial he signed a secrecy
order, itself secret, barring him from introducing certain facts. He won his
suit only to have the judge set aside the verdict, declaring that Mr. Rautenberg
had "blown cloak-and-dagger smoke at the jurors." The case is now awaiting
retrial.

Other C.I.A. proprietaries have spawned criminal activities. Air America
operated a substantial air transport business. It also helped conduct the covert
war in Laos. Local "assets" -- Laotians employed by C.I.A. agents -- were soon
transporting narcotics on the airline.

Laotians were not the only ones to go into business for themselves. The
notorious Edwin P. Wilson, who mastered the craft of setting up proprietaries
for the C.I.A., set up his own arms-smuggling outfit in 1976. Using contacts
from his C.I.A. days, he supplied Libya with explosives and trained Libyan
terrorists in their use, enriching himself at America's expense. In 1985 he was
sentenced to 52 years in prison.

Even when the C.I.A. severs its connection with a proprietary and the people who
run it, the trouble may not end. As the Church Committee investigation of the
C.I.A. found in 1975, "it is nearly impossible to evaluate whether a 'link'
still exists between the Agency and a former asset related to a proprietary."

To whom, of all people, did William Casey and Oliver North turn in 1985 to
supply arms to Iran? None other than Edwin Wilson's shadowy old-boy network.
This was the ultimate abuse of the proprietary -- to "privatize" national
security in order to circumvent the law and the Constitution.



LOAD-DATE: June 8, 1993

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Editorial

                   Copyright 1993 The New York Times Company


                              246 of 312 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 June 9, 1993, Wednesday, Late Edition - Final

Air Force General Faces Inquiry on Jab at Clinton

BYLINE: By ERIC SCHMITT,  Special to The New York Times

SECTION: Section A; Page 17; Column 5; National Desk

LENGTH: 644 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, June 8


The White House today again found itself grappling with President Clinton's
uneasy relations with the military, a result of reports that an Air Force
two-star general made disparaging remarks about Mr. Clinton in a speech last
month.

The Air Force is investigating whether the officer, Maj. Gen. Harold N.
Campbell, called Mr. Clinton a "pot-smoking," "womanizing" and "draft-dodging"
Commander in Chief, among other things, as some members of the audience later
complained.

The President's press secretary, Dee Dee Myers, told reporters today that the
Air Force was reviewing the matter to determine whether General Campbell had
made remarks "contemptuous" of the President and had thereby violated military
law.

Ms. Myers said Mr. Clinton would not comment, and a spokesman for General
Campbell said the general, too, would decline to make any statement.

Harshest Rebuke Yet

The remarks attributed to General Campbell, first reported in The Washington
Post today, would be the harshest public rebuke yet of Mr. Clinton by a military
official. Despite recent attempts by the Joint Chiefs of Staff and Mr. Clinton
to mend their differences, many officers and enlisted personnel still distrust
him for his plans to reduce military spending and allow homosexuals to serve
openly, as well as his efforts to avoid the draft during the Vietnam War.

Mr. Clinton is walking a fine line in trying to win the approval of the
uniformed ranks without appearing to be pandering to them. In the last several
weeks, he has visited the Pentagon, flown out to the aircraft carrier Roosevelt,
attended a parade at the Marine Corps barracks here and delivered the
commencement address at West Point.

At least one faction in the White House believes that Mr. Clinton and his aides
should avoid making an issue of this latest episode, reasoning that injecting
him into it would only draw more attention to his problems with the military.
"What do you think we should do, fire a guy with a Silver Star?" one White House
official said of General Campbell, a decorated former fighter pilot who served
two tours of duty in Vietnam.

Transfer Is Delayed

Until last month, General Campbell, 53, was deputy chief of staff for plans and
programs at the Air Force Materiel Command, which has its headquarters at
Wright-Patterson Air Force Base in Dayton, Ohio. He had been scheduled to
transfer to the Washington area to take command of the Defense Fuel Supply
Center, a unit of the Defense Logistics Agency. That transfer, an Air Force
spokesman said, has been delayed pending the inquiry.

Air Force officials said today that the complaints about General Campbell
stemmed from a speech he gave to 250 American service members and their spouses
on May 24 at an awards banquet near a Dutch air base where United States troops
are stationed.

Shortly after the speech, word of General Campbell's remarks filtered back to
Air Force officials in the United States. Last Sunday, the service dispatched
Lieut. Gen. Dale W. Thompson Jr., vice commander of the Air Materiel Command, to
interview people who had attended the banquet. General Thompson is expected to
give his recommendations in mid-June to Gen. Ronald W. Yates, the head of the
Materiel Command, who would be responsible for any disciplinary action.

Some Air Force generals expressed amazement at what General Campbell is reported
to have said, especially since Air Force officers had been warned to be careful
of remarks about the President.

After some sailors on the Roosevelt criticized Mr. Clinton during his visit in
March, Gen. Merrill A. McPeak, the Air Force Chief of Staff, issued a warning
not to allow "the debates about a new national military strategy" or "social
issues to divide us from the society we serve or to undercut the strength and
integrity of the chain of command."



LOAD-DATE: June 9, 1993

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1993 The New York Times Company


                              247 of 312 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 June 9, 1993, Wednesday, Late Edition - Final

Campus Journal;
Balloons Of Protest For Powell At Harvard

BYLINE: Special to The New York Times

SECTION: Section B; Page 7; Column 6; National Desk; Education Page

LENGTH: 676 words

DATELINE: CAMBRIDGE, Mass., June 8


Not since 1958 has a top-ranking Pentagon official been the commencement speaker
at Harvard University, where students often take up banners to clash with
officialdom of every kind.

On Thursday, Gen. Colin L. Powell, Chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff, will
get a taste of this Harvard tradition: as the speaker at the university's 342d
commencement, he will confront thousands of pink balloons carrying the message
"Lift the Ban."

Leaders of Commencement Pride, a group of about 40 gay and lesbian students and
faculty members at Harvard, say they have 7,000 balloons ready to protest
General Powell's support of the military's ban against homosexuals. They plan to
pass them out among the 6,000 graduates and more than 20,000 other people who
will attend the ceremony.

In the long line of Harvard protests, this one promises to be as visually
striking as the one at the 1986 commencement, when students protesting apartheid
in South Africa hired a plane to fly a banner saying "Divest Now." That did not
move Harvard to alter its policy of making selected investments in South Africa,
said Peter Costa, a Harvard spokesman. "We have protests here all the time for
everything from recycling to ozone to social justice," he said.

In 1958, the Pentagon official who spoke at Harvard was the Secretary of Defense
in the Eisenhower Administration, Neil McElroy.

While the protest this year is meant to be colorful, organizers say it is also
meant as a personal message for General Powell, who was chosen as speaker by the
university's alumni association. Each pink balloon is to represent one
homosexual who left the military since General Powell became Chairman in 1989,
said Brad Sears, a protest organizer who is a first-year student at Harvard Law
School.

"I think it will be powerful and meaningful for him to look at a sea of balloons
and think, 'That's the number of lives I've destroyed, the number of careers cut
short,' " Mr. Sears said. "Maybe he's never thought of it."

(The Pentagon says 3,595 people have been discharged for homosexuality since
1989; it has no total for those who resigned.)

After rallying against the invitation to General Powell, the protesters received
complaints that they were threatening his First Amendment right to free speech.
So they decided to aim their protest at the General when he receives an honorary
degree, in the morning. Graduates have been asked to hold up their mortarboards
with "Lift the Ban" stickers on them at the moment he receives his degree. They
will hold onto the balloons throughout the ceremony, as well as throughout his
afternoon speech.

Seniors who were still on campus last week during the break before commencement
said they would be upset if General Powell's speech were interrupted.

"As long as they don't interfere with the speech, it's a good thing," said Emily
McNeal, of Great Falls, Va. "People have a right to express their opinion. They
also have to respect Colin Powell's opinions."

Harvard's president, Neil L. Rudenstine, agreed. He defended the invitation to
General Powell, saying it was meant to recognize his "outstanding record of
service." Mr. Rudenstine said he had no objection to the protest as long as the
general was not kept from speaking.

But Peter Blake, a graduating senior who attended Harvard on a Reserve Officers
Training Corps scholarship, said the protest was disappointing. "People can't
see through to the fact of what Colin Powell has accomplished as an individual,"
he said.

General Powell's invitation has already had one concrete result. Having banished
R.O.T.C. from campus during the Vietnam War, Harvard has since paid a neighbor,
the Massachusetts Institute of Technology, to include Harvard students in the
R.O.T.C. program there. But after the announcement that General Powell would
speak, the Harvard faculty voted to stop paying M.I.T. beginning with the
freshman class of 1994. Two more governing boards at Harvard, as well as the
president, would have to approve the action before it would take effect.



LOAD-DATE: June 9, 1993

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1993 The New York Times Company


                              248 of 312 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 June 9, 1993, Wednesday, Late Edition - Final

The Pop Life

BYLINE: By Sheila Rule

SECTION: Section C; Page 20; Column 1; Cultural Desk

LENGTH: 991 words



Beck on Track

Jeff Beck, one of rock's most influential guitarists, is traveling along new
byways and retracing old ones.

Later this month, Epic will release "Crazy Legs," an album that brings Mr. Beck
together with a British roots-rock band, the Big Town Playboys, in a collection
of classics originally performed by the 1950's rocker Gene Vincent and his band
the Blue Caps. The album, a tribute to the Blue Caps' original lead guitarist,
Cliff Gallup, features Mr. Beck playing what he says he was struggling to learn
to play when he was 15 years old.

"It's sort of the culmination of teen-age frustration," said Mr. Beck, one of
three top guitarists -- the others being Eric Clapton and Jimmy Page -- to lead
the Yardbirds in the 1960's. "I saw Vincent in 1961 or something like that and I
never recovered. Cliff Gallup was light years ahead of his time and the whole
band was not ragged rockabilly but tight and razor sharp. So the album is a
complimentary thing and affectionate."

But Mr. Beck has also gone in new directions. He and Jed Leiber composed and
performed the soundtrack for "Frankie's House," a two-part drama about the
Vietnam War and the photojournalists who covered it. The film was broadcast
earlier this year on the Arts and Entertainment network. The soundtrack, which
Epic released as an album, followed a collaboration by the two men on an
instrumental version of "Hound Dog" for the film "Honeymoon in Vegas."

"That seems to be new for me," he said of soundtracks. "It enables me to keep
working without having to leave home. I hate touring and don't like not working,
so soundtracks are a good compromise. But I don't want to be thought of as an
old crusty guy who makes soundtracks, so I would like the odd tour every 10
years."

What's next in a career that has spanned nearly three decades?

"I wish I knew what I was going to do next," he said. "I have designs on doing
pure guitar and very little else so as not to have to worry about moody drummers
and touchy keyboard players. There's only room for one of those moody,
egotistical musicians. Yeah, I'd like a solo guitar thing."

Change at Jazz Station

Anna Kosof says that in her role as general manager of WBGO-FM, she's tried to
"keep jazz alive." A fair number of critics and musicians say that she's not
only kept it alive but also helped it kick up its heels and flourish.

Ms. Kosof is now resigning from the public radio station in Newark and moving on
to other challenges, although she will stay on as a consultant through the
summer while the station looks for her replacement.

Under her management, WBGO (88.3 FM) has maintained what music critics say is a
high level of programming, has helped raise jazz's profile, has expanded
corporate sponsorship of the music and has won the New Jersey State Council on
the Arts' Award of Excellence for the last three years.

"I think her arrival at the station coincided perfectly with the jazz audience's
readiness to accept this music as a viable form," said Jeff Levenson, the jazz
editor of Billboard magazine. "So she was positioned perfectly to capitalize on
the message that was being preached by Wynton and and his minions. As such, she
was able to usher the station and the overall appreciation and awareness of jazz
to a higher level."

The station's programs include a regular blues feature and the highly successful
"Rhythm Revue," a feast of classic rhythm-and-blues that is now nationally
syndicated and draws up to 500,000 listeners. The station also sponsors as many
as 50 events a year, including concerts, dance parties, art exhibitions and
children's educational programs.

"Most public radio stations tend to have a much narrower definition of jazz,"
Ms. Kosof said. "We try to get it out of its super-serious, esoteric framework
and give it the broadest definition. It's America's classical music, but on the
other hand, it's fun, it's the blues, it's pain, it's dancing.  Aside from the
fact that we play the best jazz in the world -- I unashamedly believe that -- I
think people feel that they belong to the station."

Ms. Kosof is leaving WBGO to co-produce "The Gorbachev Project." The project,
financed by the Corporation for Public Broadcasting, is to include a
feature-length film for television on the former Soviet leader's life, a
four-part radio documentary and commentary by Mr. Gorbachev for public radio.
She will also continue as a consultant to the corporation and plans to complete
her 11th book, "Battered Women: Living with the Enemy" (Franklin Watts).

The New Lulu

Some people are calling the album "Independence" (SBK/ERG) a comeback for Lulu.
After all, it's been about 10 years since the Scottish singer released an album.
But Lulu sees her latest record release differently.

"To all and sundry, I've been away somewhere; I died and came back to life,"
said Lulu, whose recording career began in 1964 when, at age 15, she had a hit
with her version of the Isley Brothers' "Shout." "I don't see it like that; I
see it as a natural progression. Some people have criticized me and said I
should have never stopped recording. But it was perfect; I did musicals,
television drama series and I've been raising my son, Jordan. It was a great
opportunity to do different things. I was also storing up some creative energy
inside that needed to burst out. It's bursting out and I'm ready to go now,
honey."

She's used some of that energy to write songs for the first time, including one
she recorded, "I'm Walking Away." Another that she wrote with Steve DuBerry, "I
Don't Wanna Fight," has been recorded by Tina Turner and is featured in the
movie "What's Love Got to Do With It."

"My brother made me do it," she said of songwriting. "He said, 'Whydon't you
write something?' and I said, 'Billy, I can't write.' He said that I was so
clear about what I love, what I'm passionate about, that there was no way I
can't do it. So I started."

LOAD-DATE: June 9, 1993

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1993 The New York Times Company


                              249 of 312 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 June 10, 1993, Thursday, Late Edition - Final

Vincent Copeland, 77, Is Dead; Led Anti-War Protests in 1960's

BYLINE: By BRUCE LAMBERT

SECTION: Section D; Page 23; Column 5; Metropolitan Desk

LENGTH: 415 words


Vincent B. Copeland, a co-founder of the Workers World Party, former labor
officer and a leader of protests against the Vietnam War, died on Monday at his
home in Hoboken, N.J. He was 77.

He had multiple illnesses, his family said.

After starting as a Broadway actor in the 1930's, Mr. Copeland turned to
political and social causes.

In 1950, 16,000 workers walked out of Bethlehem Steel's Lackawanna, N.Y., plant
to protest his dismissal as a welder for leading wildcat strikes.

As a grievance officer and union newspaper editor, he had opposed the company's
practice of denying black furnace workers better jobs by hiring outsiders to
fill them. He was not rehired, which he attributed to the union hierarchy's
dislike of his opposition to the Korean War.

In 1959 he helped to organize the Workers World Party, a Marxist-Leninist
organization of former members of the Socialist Workers Party and others. He was
the founding editor of its weekly newspaper, The Workers World, and remained
active until this year.

In the 1960's he was an officer of the National Mobilization Committee to End
the War in Vietnam.

He wrote "The Crime of Martin Sostre" (McGraw-Hill, 1970), about a Buffalo
bookstore owner who accused the police of framing him on narcotics charges
because of his race and radical politics.

Twice Mr. Copeland's views led to constitutional court cases.

He was denied a passport for spurning an oath required by law that said he was
not a Communist, and he appealed. "I believe that every American citizen has a
natural right to travel, regardless of his political or economic views," he
said. He won after the United States Supreme Court, in a parallel case, struck
down the law in 1964.

In 1964 he and 16 others appealed disorderly-conduct convictions in the first
Vietnam protest case to reach the Supreme Court. Key facts were not clear and
the Court let the convictions stand.

Mr. Copeland was also active in Jersey City issues and edited the Community
Voice, a neighborhood newspaper there, from 1985-88.

His stage career included appearances with Katherine Cornell, Lillian and
Dorothy Gish, Ethel Waters and Jose Ferrer.

He was married for 49 years to Elizabeth Ross, who died in 1989.

He is survived by two stepchildren, Deirdre Griswold of Weehawken, N.J., and
Patrick Thaddeus of Cambridge, Mass.; three sisters, Cynthia Cochran of
Manhattan, Audrey Foley of Currie, N.C., and Lois Santos of San Leandro, Calif.,
and three grandchildren.


NAME: Vincent B. Copeland

LOAD-DATE: June 10, 1993

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo: Vincent B. Copeland. (The New York Times, 1959)

TYPE: Obituary (Obit); Biography

                   Copyright 1993 The New York Times Company


                              250 of 312 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 June 10, 1993, Thursday, Late Edition - Final

Twins' Movie-Making Vision: Fighting Violence With Violence

BYLINE: By BERNARD WEINRAUB,  Special to The New York Times

SECTION: Section C; Page 13; Column 1; Cultural Desk

LENGTH: 968 words

DATELINE: HOLLYWOOD, June 9


Few films begin and end with such unsparing brutality as "Menace II Society."

"We wanted to show the realities of violence, we wanted to make a movie with a
strong antiviolent theme and not like one of those Hollywood movies where
hundreds of people die and everybody laughs and cheers," said Albert Hughes, the
21-year-old who directed this movie with his twin brother, Allen.

Allen Hughes, who is shorter, stockier and younger (by nine minutes), put it
more succinctly: "Our intention was to have the audience turn away."

Most audiences do. The low-budget film, produced by New Line Cinema, is a
corrosive film portrait of youths in the black ghetto of Watts in Los Angeles.
The movie, a surprise hit, is slowly being released around the country after
strong reviews that compared it to "Boyz N the Hood," the 1991 John Singleton
movie covering similar terrain.

Colder and Scarier

But "Boyz" offered elements of hope. "Menace II Society" is far colder and
scarier, a story that opens with the shocking, almost random, murder of a Korean
couple who own a grocery store in the ghetto. It closes with another graphic
death: a teen-ager slowly dies.

The film chronicles the downward spiral of an oddly passive and perplexed youth
named Caine (played by Tyrin Turner), who cannot conceive of a way out of his
violent world. A decent student and a small-time drug dealer, he lives with his
proud, deeply religious grandparents after his mother overdoses on heroin and
his father is murdered in a drug deal. His friends include a psychotic youth
(played by Larenz Tate) who murders without a blink. The story follows the
inevitable tragic collapse of Caine's fragile house of cards.

A Skill Is Born

The Hughes brothers look like characters in their own movie, with baseball caps
and baggy jeans. But unlike their fictional characters, they found a skill early
in their lives and nurtured it.

Their mother, Aida Hughes, gave them a video camera when they turned 12. They
made home movies, then short films and music videos. Mrs. Hughes, who reared her
sons alone after she and their father were divorced, runs a vocational center in
Pomona, 30 miles southeast of Los Angeles.

"Menace II Society" was written by Tyger Williams, 24, a friend of the Hugheses,
and developed by the three men over six weeks. But it had been in the twins'
minds for much longer, the Hughes brothers said.

'From-the-Heart Stories'

"This movie has been in our heads since we were 15: how kids become what they
become, how the environment affects them," said Allen Hughes during a recent
interview at the New Line Cinema offices in Beverly Hills. "Fifty percent of
this is from-the-heart stories of people we know. The other is from interviews."

The script's transition to the screen was relatively smooth by Hollywood
standards. After graduating from high school, Albert Hughes attended Los Angeles
City College, while Allen delivered pizzas in Los Angeles, skipping college.

Eventually they were hired by Hollywood Records to make music videos for such
rappers as Tupac Shakur, Too Short and K.R.S.-One. Their videos dealt with
issues ranging from teen-age pregnancy to police violence. They also directed an
episode of "America's Most Wanted" for Fox.

In the meantime, their idea for "Menace II Society" intrigued several major
Hollywood studios. But there were strings. "They were offering a lot of money
for us, but they wanted more control and they wanted us to put the '92 riots at
the end of the movie, which we didn't want," said Albert Hughes.

The brothers opted for New Line Cinema, the feisty, successful independent
company. The initial budget, $1.5 million, eventually climbed to $3.4 million.
Cameo roles in the movie are played by Charles S. Dutton, the star of the Fox
series "Roc" who was also in the Broadway production of "The Piano Lesson";
Samuel L. Jackson, the actor; Bill Duke, the director, and such rappers as Too
Short and MC Eiht.

During filming, Albert handles the camera and technical side, while Allen
oversees the actors. During the editing, they argue a lot. Their idol is Martin
Scorsese, whose films they have studied carefully.

"He's a complete film maker," said Allen Hughes. "His style, his lighting, his
editing, the kind of performances he gets: it's a perfect circle."

Close to Home

At this point, the twins, who grew up in Detroit and still live in Pomona, say
they are struggling not to let the success of the movie overwhelm them. Even
before "Menace II Society" was screened at the Cannes International Film
Festival in May, they were besieged by agents and executives.

"I just don't believe any of this," Allen Hughes said. "We didn't think anybody
would like this film. It's, like, gangsters love it and critics love it. I'm
shocked and numbed that this has happened."

The two say they are planning more films together, though they may also take on
projects separately.  But they insist that the theme of violence in the ghetto
will be central to their future movies, together or apart.

Death as a Way of Life

"We want to make films about this concrete Vietnam," said Albert Hughes. "People
kill over money, women, turf. People kill to show that they're men."

Unlike many films of this type, "Menace II Society" has incited no violence.
"Our violence is not Hollywood violence," Allen Hughes said of his movie. "We
don't glorify it. We don't want people cheering. We don't think an audience
should get an adrenaline rush when they see violence. So many of these big
Hollywood movies glorify violence, sensationalize it. Those movies are much more
violent than ours.

"I don't condemn anyone for watching those movies. I watch them, too. But that's
not the way it really is. The way it really is is something terrible."

LOAD-DATE: June 10, 1993

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo: Allen, left, and Albert Hughes have made a film, "Menace II
Society," which they say is intended to denounce violence. These 21-year-old
twins have come up with a low-budget surprise hit. (Matt Gunther)

                   Copyright 1993 The New York Times Company


                              251 of 312 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                  June 11, 1993, Friday, Late Edition - Final

THE MEDIA BUSINESS;
A Newspaper Whose Independent Streak Helps Boston Define Its Image

BYLINE: By WILLIAM GLABERSON

SECTION: Section D; Page 18; Column 1; Financial Desk

LENGTH: 1733 words


It claims to have been the first big newspaper in the country to call for an
American withdrawal from Vietnam. During the agonies of Boston's school
integration struggle in the 1970's, someone fired shots at its headquarters in
Dorchester. In the Brahmins' Boston of the late 1800's, it battled hospital
rules that barred Roman Catholic priests, even if their task was to administer
the last rites to their Irish immigrant parishioners.

In the more than a century since its founding, The Boston Globe -- usually
self-consciously responsible, sometimes flamboyantly liberal -- has helped shape
the identity of Boston and played a part in the life of the nation.

"The Globe is a critical element of Boston life," said Representative Joseph P.
Kennedy 2d, the latest Massachusetts politician in the famous family that The
Globe has occasionally battled and, some say, too often championed. "Whether
you're talking about the social, economic or political life of the biggest city
in the region, The Globe is important," Representative Kennedy said this week.

'Paddle Our Own Canoe'

Through the generations, especially since big media companies began to gobble
smaller newspapers in the 1970's and 1980's, The Globe has prized its
independence as a business. Its image as a newspaper that answered to no one was
central to its view of itself. And there were some who said that that was what
propelled it to become the dominant newspaper in New England.

"We have been willing to take risks editorially, and we've been able to paddle
our own canoe," the newspaper's current publisher and chairman of its parent
company, William O. Taylor, told a Globe historian in 1981. Mr. Taylor, 60, who
took over from his father as publisher in 1978, is the fourth generation of
Taylors to run the newspaper.

Charles H. Taylor, The Globe's original Taylor, who was given the title of
"General" because he once served as a military secretary to a Massachusetts
Governor, is described as the paper's rescuer rather than its founder.

The Globe was begun in 1872 when the booming city had 10 newspapers. The rival
Herald accounted for about half of the papers' combined daily circulation of
170,000. But The Globe quickly prospered, and by the turn of the century, it had
the largest circulation in New England.

The Depression brought a change in fortunes, allowing The Herald to regain the
lead, which it held until the mid-1950's, while the number of newspapers in the
city dwindled to four.

The Globe's founders were six Boston businessmen, including Eben D. Jordan, the
founder of the Jordan Marsh department store company. Within a year after the
paper was started, most of the original investors were gone. Mr. Jordan remained
and quickly called upon General Taylor, then 27, who had already worked as a
soldier, a reporter and a printer. General Taylor was originally hired as the
temporary business manager. He would become the central figure at The Globe and
an important figure in the Northeast and beyond.

Counted among The Globe manager's friends were the movers and shakers of the
era, including Joseph Pulitzer (though General Taylor disapproved of Mr.
Pulitzer's brand of journalism, saying the owner of The New York World would not
be happy unless he saw blood dripping from the pages of the newspaper every
day).

Adhering to rectitude as a guiding rule, General Taylor and his descendants have
run the newspaper since 1873 and have shared voting control with the heirs of
Eben Jordan.

Trusts Set to Expire

The corporate entity that formally owns The Globe, Affiliated Publications,
Inc., sold stock to the public beginning in 1973 and is traded on the New York
Stock Exchange. Separate trusts set up for the Jordan and Taylor heirs own 33
percent of the stock in Affiliated. But together, the two trusts have 68 percent
of the voting power in the company.

The trusts are scheduled to lapse in 1996, and some of the more than 100 heirs
are believed to be eager to disentangle themselves from the newspaper. Quietly
over the years, a host of potential suitors, including big media companies, have
made inquiries about a potential sale. William O. Taylor turned away most of
them.

This week, as rumors of the merger with The New York Times Company swirled,
there were some in The Globe's newsroom and in Boston who suggested that the
independence of the city's top newspaper may have had something to do with the
way Boston has viewed itself over the years.

Under the merger, The Globe would retain its management and its editorial
autonomy.

Not The New York Times

A sophisticated, world-class city with its own rough edges, Boston had its own
world-class newspaper that was -- and this sometimes appeared to be the main
point -- not The New York Times. That may have helped the city keep its own
distinct identity, said Martin Nolan, a nationally known reporter for The Globe
and former chief of its editorial page.

"Do you know what it's like to live in the shadow of New York? It's deep in the
New England psyche," Mr. Nolan said. "My own gut instinct," he said of his fears
about the deal with The New York Times, "is we're going to be in the farthest
reaches of Fairfield County; we're going to be a prominent New York suburb. This
is a loss to that New England psyche."

Of course, there are those in Boston who have never forgiven the New York
Yankees for buying Babe Ruth from the Red Sox in 1920.

Mr. Nolan, who has been with The Globe 31 years this week, is one of those who
remember that The Globe, as he put it, was "a sort of a laughingstock of a
newspaper" when he started. For three-quarters of a century until 1967, it did
not endorse a political candidate, and its coverage was sometimes seen as
parochial.

That changed.

Partly because of the ferment of the times, partly because it began to prevail
in the 1960's in its long battle with its archrival, The Boston Herald-Traveler,
and partly because of a back-slapping Harvard alumnus named Thomas Winship, The
Globe built a national reputation.

Mr. Winship succeeded his father as editor of The Globe in 1965. In his youth
the younger Mr. Winship worked at The Washington Post. At The Globe, he emulated
the style of his friends Benjamin C. Bradlee, The Post's editor (whose son is
now a rising editor at The Globe), and Philip Graham, The Post's publisher.

Cambridge and Georgetown

Mr. Winship traveled the "Cambridge-Georgetown axis" of Harvard and Washington
intellectuals and government servants, as the writer J. Anthony Lukas put it in
his book on Boston, "Common Ground." Mr. Winship propelled The Globe toward a
broader national perspective and toward a more activist stance on local issues.

It was not always a clear path, and there were always -- and are still --
questions about how committed to Boston's urban core the mass-distribution Globe
was. "The Globe's prevailing voice" during some of Mr. Winship's term, Mr. Lukas
wrote, "was that of a Harvard-educated lawyer from the suburbs -- affable,
humane and well intentioned, but no longer entirely comfortable in the city of
his youth."

Long strong in its coverage of sports, Mr. Winship's Globe refined a specialty
in political reporting. It was host to lively columnists. Its investigative
reporters zeroed in on local wrongdoing like bid-rigging in the government of
Somerville, Mass., with enough punch to win a Pulitzer Prize.

In 1980, perhaps the height of the Thomas Winship era, The Globe won three
separate Pulitzer Prizes.

Crisis Over Busing

But the Boston school crisis was especially difficult for the newspaper. It was
sometimes criticized for appearing to be too protective of its city. On the
first day of court-ordered school busing, The Globe's headline said "Boston
Schools Desegregated, Opening Day Generally Peaceful." Other national
newspapers, including The New York Times, focused on the rock-throwing, jeering
crowds that greeted black students in South Boston.

The Globe did aggressively persist on the school story, though, sometimes
angering residents so much that the newspaper took its name off the cars used by
reporters.

In 1975, the paper was rewarded with a Pulitzer Prize for "massive and balanced
coverage of the Boston school desegregation conflict in a bitterly emotional
climate."

There were other Pulitzers and other controversies to come. But since 1984, the
newspaper has not won a Pulitzer. In journalism circles, that fact is often said
to be an indication of editorial troubles in recent years.

After Mr. Winship retired in 1985, the publisher appeared unable to settle on a
successor. There were high-level departures, and there was dissention among the
news staff.

One editor, Michael C. Janeway, left after 14 months and a bitter battle over
his management style and conflicting visions for the future of the newspaper.
For a long period, The Globe simply left the position of editor vacant. During
the tenure of Mr. Janeway's successor, John S. Driscoll, The Globe was widely
criticized for appearing to drift, and it was sometimes beaten on Boston news by
The Herald, now owned by Rupert Murdoch's News America Publishing Company.

"I just don't think it's been aggressive enough on public issues," Mr. Winship
said this week. But he and others said that in recent months The Globe appeared
to be, as Mr. Winship put it, "coming back on the tracks" under the stewardship
of Matthew V. Storin, 50, who was appointed editor in February.

After a long career in high-level editorial positions at The Globe, Mr. Storin
resigned in 1985 because of a dispute with Mr. Janeway. In his time away from
The Globe, he held a series of journalism jobs, including the editorship of The
Chicago Sun-Times and the managing editorship of The Daily News in New York.

Mr. Storin returned to The Globe last summer as executive editor. In the months
since his promotion to editor, Mr. Storin has received high marks for increasing
competitiveness in news and upgrading national coverage. He is also perceived to
be trying to alter the newspaper's image of recent years as a publication aimed
at Boston's suburbanites and the region's intellectual elite.

"I think he understands that the paper was perceived as relentlessly liberal and
out of touch," said Mark Jurkowitz, the media critic at The Boston Phoenix
weekly, "and he's trying to do something about both."

LOAD-DATE: June 11, 1993

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1993 The New York Times Company


                              252 of 312 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                  June 11, 1993, Friday, Late Edition - Final

Powell Receives a Rousing Greeting at Harvard

BYLINE: By ERIC SCHMITT,  Special to The New York Times

SECTION: Section A; Page 14; Column 3; National Desk

LENGTH: 1013 words

DATELINE: CAMBRIDGE, Mass., June 10


Instead of the threatened noisy protests against the military's ban on
homosexuals, Gen. Colin L. Powell, the Chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff,
drew a rousing ovation today from Harvard University students, faculty and
alumni at commencement ceremonies here.

Many of the Harvard graduates took issue with General Powell as a symbol of the
military's opposition to homosexuals serving openly in the ranks, but it was
generally a quiet protest. Hundreds of students held placards or pink balloons
emblazoned with "Lift the Ban" that bobbed lazily in the tree-shaded Harvard
Yard during a morning ceremony. Scores of students and some faculty members
turned their backs on the general when he received an honorary degree of law.

However civil, the protest today was one of the most visible and prominent
displays of opposition to the gay ban in a debate that has been dominated by the
military and its Congressional supporters. Security was very tight for General
Powell, the first senior Pentagon official to give a commencement address here
since Defense Secretary Neil McElroy in 1958.

When the university's marshal, Richard Hunt, began introducing General Powell to
the 35,000 students, faculty, relatives and friends this morning, however, a
wave of applause and cheers rose in a crescendo, drowning out catcalls, as the
nation's senior military officer stood at attention showing no visible emotion.

'Modicum of Respect'

Many students echoed the sentiment of David Etheridge, a 27-year-old business
school graduate from Newton, N.C. "Look, I don't agree with Powell on the gays
issue, but it's like when you invite someone to your home, you treat them with a
certain modicum of decency and respect," Mr. Etheridge said.

Undergraduate students, many carrying the 7,000 pink balloons a student gay
rights group distributed today, expressed less enthusiasm for General Powell
than graduate students interviewed.

"Harvard shouldn't honor militarism, and by honoring Powell they are implicitly
endorsing his position on homosexuals," said Ann Pellegrini, class of '93, from
Cambridge, who identified herself as a lesbian.

Harvard's president, Neil L. Rudenstine, has called for an end to the military's
ban on homosexuals and today allowed a color guard of gay Vietnam War veterans
who are Harvard alumni to stand outside his office.

Some Veterans Disagree

Even some alumni who served in the armed forces disagreed with Harvard's choice
of General Powell to be commencement speaker. "The military has more to fear
from macho males than from gays," said Dr. Brad Patterson, Class of 1943, who
served as an officer on a Navy PT boat in World War II. He said he favored
lifting the ban.

But General Powell, dressed in his medaled Army green uniform, disarmed the
crowd with the same deft political touch he has used on contentious senators in
Washington.

One of the student speakers, Bhaswati Bhattacharya, a graduate student, urged
her classmates to challenge racism and prejudice in their daily lives, and "find
the strength to question the tradition that gay men and lesbians have not been
freely allowed to serve in the armed forces merely because they are different."

As Ms. Bhattacharya turned from the dais to wild cheering, General Powell,
seated behind her, quickly stood and took her by the elbow to congratulate her
on her speech.

In a separate afternoon ceremony in Harvard Yard, a square formed by Georgian
and Victorian-style red-brick buildings, General Powell touched on the
homosexual issue only briefly at the end of his 24-minute speech, talking
through the occasional heckler to a more supportive audience than the morning
crowd. The general said the issue rested on balancing the rights of homosexuals
who want to serve openly in the military and the possible disruption that
declaration might have on morale and fighting readiness.

"The President has given us clear direction to reconcile the differences, and I
believe we're near a solution that will do so," General Powell said to loud
applause. At a news conference after the speech, General Powell declined to give
details on what plan the military might devise that would satisfy President
Clinton's pledge to end discrimination in the military on the basis of sexual
status. The Pentagon's plan is scheduled to be at the White House by July 15.

Many students said they did not agree with General Powell's contention that the
military is a unique institution that needs to operate by its own set of rules,
even if that sometimes means discriminating against people.

Students Picked Edelman

"The military is representative of America, and needs to live up to democratic
values even if it isn't a democratic institution per se," said Elliott Ichimura,
a 23-year-old graduating senior from Seattle.

Some other students criticized the university, whose appointed committees of
faculty and administrators invited General Powell to give the commencement
address. The students' choice, Marian Wright Edelman, president of the
Children's Defense Fund, spoke to students on Wednesday.

"I think Marian Wright Edelman has more to say for our generation than the
military," said Denise James, 21, a graduating senior from Queens.

The university conferred 1,571 undergraduate and 4,241 graduate degrees at its
342d commencement.

In addition to the degree for General Powell, honorary degrees were awarded to
Daniel Boorstin, a former Librarian of Congress; James Burke, a retired chairman
of Johnson & Johnson; Julia Child, the chef; W. Edwards Deming, who guided
production in World War II; Shmuel Eisenstadt, the sociologist; Albert
Eschenmoser, the chemist; Oscar Handlin, the historian; Nannerl Overholser
Keohane, the former president of Wellesley College who will soon assume the
presidency of Duke University; Deborah Willen Meir, the founder and principal of
New York's Central Park East Secondary School; Christiane Nusslein-Volhard, the
geneticist; Ravi Shankar, the sitarist; Susan Sontag, the author, and Wole
Soyinka, the playwright.

LOAD-DATE: June 11, 1993

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo: Gen. Colin L. Powell, Chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff,
greeting Harvard graduates after speaking at the university's commencement.
(Associated Press)

                   Copyright 1993 The New York Times Company


                              253 of 312 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                  June 11, 1993, Friday, Late Edition - Final

COMPANY BRIEFS

SECTION: Section D; Page 3; Column 1; Financial Desk

LENGTH: 98 words



COLLIERS INTERNATIONAL, Boston, the real estate services firm, said its Colliers
Jardine affiliate is part of a group that received approval to develop a $905
million deep-sea port in Vung Tau, Vietnam.

B. F. GOODRICH, Akron, Ohio, has completed the purchase of the Cleveland
Pneumatic Company, which makes landing gear, for $200 million in cash from Abex
Inc. of Hampton, N.H.


 MNC FINANCIAL INC., Baltimore, a bank holding company, said its shareholders
had approved its merger with the Nationsbank Corp. of Charlotte, N.C., for $1.4
billion in cash and stock.


LOAD-DATE: June 11, 1993

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1993 The New York Times Company


                              254 of 312 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 June 12, 1993, Saturday, Late Edition - Final

Aides in Cambodia Province Say It Is Seceding

BYLINE: By PHILIP SHENON,  Special to The New York Times

SECTION: Section 1; Page 6; Column 4; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 512 words

DATELINE: PHNOM PENH, Cambodia, June 11


Officials in the southeastern Cambodian province of Svay Rieng told the United
Nations today that the province was seceding from Cambodia and warned the United
Nations peacekeepers in the province that they must withdraw immediately or face
attack.

The threat was made as demonstrators smashed the windows of United Nations
vehicles and offices in the province and destroyed the local headquarters of the
royalist opposition party, which won last month's elections. There were no
reports of injuries.

United Nations officials say the attacks and the secessionist threat appear to
be part of a larger campaign by the Government to negotiate greater powers for
its leaders in whatever coalition is formed.

"The Government apparently wants us to believe that it is willing to sabotage
the process unless it gets what it wants in the new Government -- more seats in
Parliament, control of additional ministries, whatever," said a senior official
in the United Nations peacekeeping force.

In what may be another element of the Government's campaign, 27 of the
Government's candidates for seats in the newly elected National Assembly
informed the United Nations this week that they would not take seats in the
Assembly, which will be responsible for drafting a new constitution.

Among those withdrawing their names were Sen Song, the Government's Minister of
National Security, who has been reported to be a leader in the secessionist
movement.

United Nations officials said that leaders in Svay Rieng, all of them members of
the governing Cambodian People's Party, told United Nations officials today that
the province "is no longer part of Cambodia" and that the peacekeeping force
there must leave by Saturday or risk violence.

"We'll stay, but things won't be very pleasant this weekend," a United Nations
official said.

Cambodian and foreign witnesses said hundreds of people took part in the protest
today against the United Nations in Svay Rieng. A few of the demonstrators
joined in throwing rocks at United Nations automobiles and offices, and in
destroying the local headquarters of the royalist opposition party, which is
known by the French acronym Funcinpec.

Witnesses said that it appeared that the demonstration had been organized by
officials of the People's Party, and they identified several of the protesters
as plainclothes policemen and soldiers.

Earlier this week, the Vietnamese-installed Government warned that some
provinces might try to secede rather than come under the control of a government
led by the royalist party.

The royalist party, which is associated by many Cambodians with the nation's
former monarch, Prince Norodom Sihanouk, won 58 of the 120 seats in the new
Assembly, which will meet for the first time on Monday. The People's Party
received 51 seats.

The province of Svay Rieng, which borders Vietnam and has a population of
415,000, had been considered a stronghold of the People's Party. The party won
three of the province's five seats in the Assembly, with the royalist party
receiving the other two.

LOAD-DATE: June 12, 1993

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1993 The New York Times Company


                              255 of 312 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 June 12, 1993, Saturday, Late Edition - Final

King C. Chen, 67, Dies; Studied Asian Politics

SECTION: Section 1; Page 27; Column 6; Metropolitan Desk

LENGTH: 250 words


King C. Chen, a political science professor and author who specialized in Asian
politics and international relations, died on Wednesday at a hospital in Newark.
He was 67.

The cause was heart failure, his family said.

Dr. Chen was a resident of Livingston, N.J. He was a professor at Rutgers for
the last 24 years and earlier taught at Brown University, Brooklyn College and
the State University of New York at Oswego.

He wrote five books, including "Vietnam and China, 1938-54" (Princeton, 1969),
"China's War Against Vietnam, 1979" (Hoover Institution, 1987) and "China's
Policy Toward Taiwan" (Wu Nan, 1990).

Dr. Chen had served as president of the Chinese-American Academic and
Professional Society, vice president of the North American Chinese Social
Science Society, chairman of the editorial board of the Central Daily News in
Taipei, research member of the Taiwan Government's National Unification Council,
adviser to the United States State Department and member of the editorial board
of Asian Affairs.

Born in Fujian, China, Dr. Chen graduated from National Chengchi University in
Nanjing. He fled to Taiwan amid the Communist revolution then went to the United
States on a scholarship.

He earned a master's degree in international affairs from the University of
Virginia and a doctorate in political science from Pennsylvania State
University.

Surviving are his wife of 30 years, the former Grace Ho, and two sons, David, of
San Francisco, and Donald, of Carbondale, Colo.

LOAD-DATE: June 12, 1993

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Obituary (Obit); Biography

                   Copyright 1993 The New York Times Company


                              256 of 312 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 June 12, 1993, Saturday, Late Edition - Final

Yale Class of '68 Still Making a Difference

SECTION: Section 1; Page 20; Column 5; Editorial Desk

LENGTH: 461 words


To the Editor:

As class secretary of the Yale Class of 1968, I join my classmates in taking
vigorous exception to the portrayal of the class in your May 30 article. The
article, essentially a grotesque summary of the book of essays by class members,
produced on the occasion of the 25th reunion, concludes that the class has been
self-indulgent and uncommitted to agendas that were articulated in the 1960's
and pursued with violence and confrontation elsewhere. Let me make three points.

(1) The determination and idealism of the 1960's has not been diminished by the
diversity of careers chosen by class members. The choice of medicine, law,
academia, environmentalism, business, journalism or the public sector does not
show lack of commitment to making a difference. Class members are leaders in
their fields and are making a difference, both in financial achievement (with a
record class gift to Yale of $15.1 million) and in service to others.

The deans of Yale College, the Columbia Graduate School, and department heads at
universities and hospitals are classmates. So are Federal and state judges,
medical researchers and practitioners, and civic-minded business leaders. Class
members express leadership in local service with a lower profile. Change for the
better is defined in individual actions.

(2) The commentaries in the 25th reunion book illustrate the humanity of the
class members, which is not contradicted by a priority accorded to family and
friends. You seem to disparage the fact that people in the class exhibit this
human and uplifting characteristic, which does not undermine a determination to
effect improvements in the world around us. Class members spoke movingly in a
book written by friends for friends to show the highs and lows of an extended
period.

(3) The suggestion that Yale was some kind of country club without an ethical or
moral compass does not square with the facts. The members of the Class of 1968
did not choose Yale because it was a "male bastion." It was, and is, a great
undergraduate institution, and the all-male character was a given at the time.
The class played a major role pressing for co-education at Yale.

Yale students were national leaders in the major causes of the time -- civil
rights and opposition to the Vietnam War in particular -- to a much greater
degree than other institutions you name. Yale had one of the first black studies
programs in the United States, developed with the help of Class of 1968 members.

The depth of commitment to change was significant and evident, and the class
lived those views then and lives them now. Material success and family
involvement do not imply a sellout of a commitment to make a difference.

JAMES R. LATIMER
Dallas, June 2, 1993

LOAD-DATE: June 12, 1993

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Letter

                   Copyright 1993 The New York Times Company


                              257 of 312 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                  June 13, 1993, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

Enormous Changes at the Last Minute

BYLINE: By John Darnton;  John Darnton is the London bureau chief of The New
York Times.

SECTION: Section 6; Page 24; Column 1; Magazine Desk

LENGTH: 3888 words


Spring has come early to Warsaw this year. Crocuses poke through the soil near
Chopin's statue in Lazienki Park, and the snow has retreated to small mounds
heaped with dirt in the shadows.

For me, a visitor returning to Poland after an absence of 11 years, the change
is more than seasonal. The country's transformation is noticeable even before
entering, in the cursory glance given to my American passport at the spanking
new Okecie airport. Gone are the interrogations, the hassle of filling out
currency forms, the peculiar overhead mirrors that enabled immigrations
officials to peer down your back.

On the ride into town, Pontiac and Chevrolet dealerships line the road. On a
billboard, two women on Rollerblades, wearing yellow and fuchsia sweatbands,
smile and hold up Coca-Cola bottles. A sign says it's only 2.3 kilometers to
McDonald's. Five new hotels have gone up, almost creating a skyline.

The change can be seen too in things no longer here. The Pewex shops that sold
liquor and cigarettes and canned hams, and only accepted hard currency. The meat
stores open only to party officials. The ubiquitous black marketeers hounding
tourists, who came with their phrase books at the ready and soon learned that
the customary greeting from strangers wasn't "Good day" or "Hello" but "Pssst,
change money?"

Everywhere, English is seen and heard. It may be fractured, as in the sign over
a repair shop -- "carservis." Or it may be precise, as in the crisp diction of
some of the thousands of students now taking the language. Nowhere does one hear
Russian, which was compulsory in school during the years of the "fraternal
relationship" with the Soviet Union.

Before, imported American films had to conform to ideology. (Thus, "Apocalypse
Now," which depicted American brutality in the Vietnam War, was permitted while
"The Deer Hunter," which showed a savage Vietcong, was not). The movies had to
portray the dark side of America -- America as a cesspool of alcohol, crime and
poverty. Predictably, the policy backfired: the audience erected its own filter.
What it saw was not the man robbing the car but the car itself with sleek
styling and smooth bucket seats.

Now, anything goes. Though the Polish film industry is booming -- it produced
more than 30 feature films last year -- almost all of the theaters show American
movies. They run the gamut, from "Dracula" to "Home Alone 2" to "Fried Green
Tomatoes." The message of alienation that characterizes much of American culture
comes through loud and clear.

Before, the cultural icons from the West were filtered and softened through a
Polish culture that still made room for the Catholic priest swinging incense,
the peasant saddling his horse to a wooden wagon and the somewhat seedy nobleman
clicking his heels and kissing the hand of a woman.

Young people who flocked to discotheques lacked the hard edge of their Western
counterparts, the overtones of rebellion and violence. They mimicked the form
but not the substance. They may have been alienated from their Government but
not from their parents. One young student I knew, the spitting image of James
Dean, came close to breaking up with his girlfriend because he felt she didn't
show enough respect to his mother.

All this is rapidly changing. Polish skinheads, though few in number, are every
bit as rabid and racist as their cultural heroes in Germany. The Polish rap
group Breast delights in devising obscene lyrics to invoke the wrath of the
establishment. The hottest new play in town, "Antigone in New York," by Janusz
Glowacki, a Polish playwright living in New York City, is about homeless people
in Tompkins Square Park, and the America it evokes is the familiar one of
alcohol, crime and poverty.

It may be that Communism's most significant achievement in the 1950's was to act
as a hermetic seal, and that once the seal was broken, by the power of American
culture in the 1960's, the entire system was doomed.

With the end of the cold war, the Second World War has also dimmed. No more
pamphlets in the hotels giving statistics of the war losses, no more faded
footage of the invading Wehrmacht on television. Aside from a state-sponsored
commemoration of the 50th anniversary of the Warsaw Ghetto uprising on April 19
-- an event intended to show how much Poland has moved away from anti-Semitism
-- there is no attempt to evoke the horrors of the past.

Gorbachev and Yeltsin have acknowledged Soviet guilt for Katyn, the massacre of
thousands of Polish officers. Schools now can teach the truth about the
Molotov-Ribbentrop Pact, which divided up Poland. The obsession with suffering
and betrayal is over.

Not coincidentally, there has been a remarkable shift in public attitude toward
the Russians. A decade ago, Soviet soldiers had to be stationed in the
countryside, out of sight, and a car with Soviet license plates parked overnight
in Warsaw was apt to have its windshield smashed. Now there is nothing but
sympathy for the hordes of poor Russians, Moldavians, Ukranians and others who
slip across the border to sell their pathetic wares.

How abruptly it can all change. "When I was growing up," recalls Adam Michnik,
the onetime dissident who helped form Solidarity, "I learned that we were
surrounded by three countries -- the German Democratic Republic, Czechoslovakia
and the Soviet Union. Now look, they've all disappeared."

I served as a correspondent in Poland from 1979 to 1982. When I arrived,
Communism was in the full bloom of its decay. From outside, the regime of Edward
Gierek looked normal enough, but inside the rot had spread. To come crumbling
down, all it needed was a nudge. That came in August 1980, when the workers of
the Lenin Shipyard in Gdansk went on strike. For the next 16 months, Solidarity
held the country and much of the world in thrall. Then, abruptly, the drumbeat
of freedom stopped: on Dec. 13, 1981, martial law came down like the blade of a
guillotine.

I witnessed a cycle of oppression, rebellion, oppression. Three years, three
different countries. There was a sense of symmetry to it. And now, 11 years
later, I have returned and found a fourth country. Stalin once said that
Communism fits Poland the way a saddle fits a cow. Well, Poland has thrown off
the saddle. Making up for lost time, it has embraced a rambunctious, even
rapacious capitalism. Adam Smith has replaced Karl Marx.

One evening, back in my hotel room, I went over some notes I had made over a
decade ago. Only then did the enormity of the changes really come home to me.

DECEMBER 1980. Recently my wife, Nina, and I met Stash, a 30-year-old academic
who recently discovered he was Jewish. His parents were ardent Communists and
they kept their background a secret. But he always suspected he was different.
He grew up, he said, "with the sense that anti-Semitism was somehow personally
threatening," so that when he pried the truth out it didn't come as a total
surprise. Still, it changed his life.

His girlfriend, Monika, is Catholic, but she wears a pendant with a Star of
David. A whole group of young intellectuals has gathered around them, about 20
in all. They are all Jewish or half-Jewish, and they are hungry to learn
whatever they can about their religion and culture. What's astounding is how
little they know and how hungry they are for information.

Some of their stories are dramatic. One young woman named Ewa was rummaging
around in the attic one afternoon and found a document that identified her
grandmother as Jewish. When she confronted her mother, her mother at first
denied it. "Then she broke down and cried. She said she had raised me as a
Catholic to protect me. She begged me not to tell my brother, but of course I
didn't go along. Being Jewish -- it's part of what makes you what you are, and
you have a right to know it."

Stash's group began meeting, at first just to swap experiences and to "overcome
the taboo" of admitting they were Jewish. Then they met to study Judaism. By the
time I encountered them, they were getting together to observe holidays and
festivals, though no one really knew what to do or how to act. They seem to feel
a little self-conscious about the whole thing but they are drawn to it by some
force they can't describe.

There's not much to help them. No one really knows how many Jews are left in
Poland, but the figure is somewhere between 5,000 and 10,000 -- a pathethic
remnant considering that Poland was the center of prewar world Jewry with three
and a half million. In Warsaw alone there were about 400,000 Jews in 1938,
nearly a third of the city.

Recently I read "Shosha," by Isaac Bashevis Singer, and then took a walk along
Krochmalna Street, which he describes house by house. He wrote lovingly of the
tenements and shops and balconies hung with wash and cobblestone alleyways so
packed with sellers and thieves and prostitutes that it was hard to pass. There
was nothing left but cold high-rise buildings set back from the street and a few
bare-branched trees. I saw two children skateboarding, but no other sign of
life.

There's no Jewish community in any sense of the word, no children even. Of 30
prewar synagogues, only one survived, and that was because it was used as a
stable for the horses of Nazi officers. Today it sits empty and ransacked, its
windows broken with pigeons flying in and out. Saddest of all are the few old
men who hang out there. They are broken, wizened figures, and they have learned
how to evoke pathos to secure handouts from the one or two American tourists who
come by. "The synagogue will remain," said one of them, Izah Kamer, 70. "But the
youngest of us is 53. In 10 years, we'll all be gone. There will be nobody left
to pray in it."

Stash and his group have little to do with these old men. They meet only in one
another's apartment, and they switch the venue every two weeks because they are
nervous about the authorities. They remember the thugs in leather jackets who
used truncheons to break up meetings of dissidents. They've asked me not to
write a word about them. Of course, I have to agree, but I'm disappointed.

They invite us to a Hanukkah party. As we slip into a doorway and climb up a
darkened staircase, someone handing us a bowl of potato latkes to carry, Nina
asks one of them, "How do you say 'Happy Hanukkah' in Polish?" The answer comes
with a quick laugh: "You don't say 'Happy Hanukkah' in Polish."

MARCH 1993. These days it's not hard to find Stash, whose full name is Stanislaw
Krayewski. His name is well known in religious circles, from the various
Christian-Jewish committees he serves on. As he strode into the Bristol Hotel,
looking older and filled-out at 42, he announced that he had become something of
a spokesman on Jewish issues, even appearing on television.

He had married Monika, who converted to Judaism, and they had two boys, ages 6
and 3, both being raised as Jews.

With the advent of democracy, the group stopped its underground services. The
synagogue is now newly reconstructed and functioning. It was, said Stash, a
relief to be able to worship openly. "It filled a great void," he said, and it
was important not only to identify oneself as Jewish but to be seen as Jewish in
the eyes of the rest of the world.

Indeed, there are some tentative signs of a Jewish revival in Warsaw.  There are
services twice a day, and there is no longer a problem securing a minyan, the
minimum number of men necessary for worship. Thanks largely to the Israeli
Embassy, there is a Jewish kindergarten with 34 children. And there are even
Jewish camps and Jewish clubs for fencing and bridge, along the lines of the
prewar Maccabiah. The camps and clubs are run by the Ronald S. Lauder
Foundation, which was set up five years ago to preserve what remains of Jewish
life in Eastern Europe.

Most important, of course, there is a rabbi. Rabbi Pinchas Menachem Joskowicz
was sent here four years ago from Israel. He speaks Polish -- he was born 75
years ago near Lodz and survived the war in Poland. He did not return to Poland
easily. He had to summon up "some kind of inner strength" -- his wife refused to
accompany him or even to visit him. "I'll tell you why I came," he says. "I once
saw 20 people hanged on the gallows. One of them was shouting: 'Jews, don't let
our blood spill in vain. Avenge us!' This gives me the strength to come back. I
want to restore all these ruins that the Germans wanted to eradicate. They
didn't just want to kill us. They wanted to wipe out all traces that we ever
existed."

Rabbi Joskowicz does not believe in the possibility of rebuilding the community.
He exudes an air of fatalism. He observes that not all of the Catholic churches
are "friendly." He sends young boys to other countries to be bar mitzvahed. And
he is resigned to the fact that he will never see the "billions" needed to
restore the Jewish cemetery, where 300,000 moss-covered tombstones are cracked
and fallen. His shoulders are stooped with world-weariness, and he is facing
something he thought he would never have to live through again. For the revival
of Judaism has rekindled the ancient scourge of anti-Semitism.

A year ago the rabbi was walking home from evening prayers when he was jumped by
a gang of skinheads. "I cried for help. They knocked my hat off and hit me a few
times. They shouted: 'Jews go to Israel.' They knocked me down." Ever since
then, the rabbi has taken a cab. "They see easily I'm a Jew, so I don't stay
outside on the streets in the evening."

On the front of the newly reconstructed synagogue, someone has drawn two
swastikas and the words, in English: "Jude Is Dead." Similar graffiti have
appeared before, and whenever they are painted over, they come back. The rabbi
shrugged. "That's the outside of the building. It's written for the Poles and
it's bad for the Poles. I want things to be good on the inside."

NOVEMBER 1979. Mostly, Poles go about the business of living. It is not an easy
business. A search for a pair of shoes can turn into a weeklong odyssey. Lines
for milk form at dawn. Meat shops are empty. The waiting list for apartments,
which are cramped and dingy, is seven years. For a car it's five years.

The frustrations of daily life weigh on the spirit. "A thousand tiny
crucifixions," a friend calls them. The crowds elbowing onto the cold streetcar,
the frozen faces of the saleswomen, the labyrinthian bureaucracy that intrudes
into every facet of existence, the grime-infested assembly lines with that
scratchy, buoyant music coming over the loudspeakers, the lying news programs,
the continuous refrain of "nie ma, nie ma" -- "there is none" -- all of these,
mixed in with the very bleakness of things, are almost unbearable.

There is a string of coal-mine disasters in Silesia. I go to one in the town of
Czechowice-Dziedzice, where a cave-in killed two miners and a deadly fire
trapped 20 more underground. Coal is the mainstay of the economy, and the miners
are the most pampered workers in the socialist state. But is the regime
squeezing the miners too hard in its increasingly desperate scramble for foreign
exchange?

For two days I try to get close to the mine. Each time I arrive, something has
gone wrong -- the official I was to see has been called away, the gate is
locked. Losing patience, a local party secretary finally tells me to get the
hell out of town.

I find a small bar two blocks away, named Barborka, after the miners' patron
saint. I enter, a smoky cavern smelling of beer and sweat, with a menace of
fistfights in the air. The bawl of conversation stops. Hostile eyes rimmed with
coal dust turn to the stranger in a necktie. No one eases my path to the bar,
but I finally get a beer. Gently I approach a table. I explain that I am an
American journalist, that I have come to learn about the disaster. A miner
lurches up, lunges actually, and grabs me by the arm. His face is three inches
from mine. "First thing," he says, "you gotta realize all the papers in this
country print crap, lies and crap." His companion says, "They're scared of the
truth, and by Christ the Government better do something or we're going to do
something ourselves."

There follows over the next hour an unremitting stream of complaints, threats
and curses from dozens of miners, despite the presence of a shadow who crept in
and sat conspicuously alone at a table nearby. By the end, as I leave, my car
now tailed by three men in a Polonez, I think: rarely have I encountered such a
burning brand of anger, a pure white-hot, we're-going-to-get-the-bastards anger.
And this from the elite of the work force.

The next morning I return to the mine. The party secretary tells me I got his
workers drunk to elicit classified information. I decide to leave. And the fire?
"None of your business," he says. "And don't you worry -- everything's under
control here." Three days later they bring up the bodies.

MARCH 1993. These days the great debate under capitalism is about how many
people are doing better and how many are doing worse. The waiting list for
apartments is gone. But on the open market, at a cost of $15,000 to $80,000, who
can afford them? (Rentals are virtually nonexistent.) The stores are filled with
goods; now with inflation galloping along at 40 percent, the problem is how to
stretch the paycheck to buy them.

I decide to look up an old friend, Stash Gayewski, a courtly, elegant man who
once served as Ambassador to France. Cheerfully, he confirms that things have
never been blacker. "Take me as an example. I get 3,200,000 zlotys [$215] a
month on my pension. Take away 600,000 zlotys [$40] for rent. Then some for
clothes and some for food and before you know it, it's all gone. And I'm better
off than most people. I can eat every day for practically nothing at the
foreign-ministry canteen. I see a lot of people eating there, including a lot of
former foreign ministers.

"Liberty has its price, but the price is very high. Disillusionment is growing.
Political life has degenerated. Moral life is worse. There's this new
clericalism. It all came too fast -- Solidarity was not prepared to take power."

He advises me to travel outside Warsaw, and so I go to Lodz, which underwent a
48-hour general strike in February. Some 64,000 members of Solidarity took part.
The main industry of the city is textiles, and with the collapse of the
traditional market in Russia, factories are shutting down and laying off
workers.

I sit in the Solidarity office and listen to Henryk Formicki, a local Solidarity
leader, earnestly describing the abysmal conditions for workers. He stands in
front of a map of Poland with eight pinned banners; they denote towns on strike
or strike alert. He speaks angrily of the Government's inaction. I have to pinch
myself -- this is 1993, and many Solidarity people are running the country. Lech
Walesa is President. Formicki's language, tactics and commitment are the same as
theirs once was. Deja vu.

Formicki calculates that 132 of the 285 factories in Lodz have closed down and
that some 40,000 people have been laid off in the past three years. Most of the
textile workers are women. That explains the sudden upsurge in prostitution and
live sex shows so unbelievably lewd that they are notorious throughout the
country.

We go to visit a textile factory called Uniontex. It was built 170 years ago,
with walls as thick as a castle's. The grounds cover 70 acres, including an
ancient sports stadium, railroad-switching yards, three swimming pools and, off
to one side, the decaying mansions of the founders, Scheibler and Grochman.
There are also blocks of dismal red-brick workers dormitories that were used in
"The Promised Land," Andrzej Wajda's film that excoriates capitalist
exploitation.

At its height before the war, Uniontex employed 14,000 people. Since 1989, with
the introduction of free-market economics and the collapse of the Soviet sales
outlet, production has fallen 50 percent. Only 3,000 workers are left. From time
to time a potential foreign buyer will tour the plant and hopes will soar, says
Leszek Lewandowski, director of production. "But nothing's come of it. These old
walls you see scare away the capitalists."

Inside the mill house, huge hundred-year-old machines from Manchester grind
away. Cotton dust hangs in the air, so thick that the rows of spindles and
thread extend off into the distance and then disappear in a yellowish haze. The
women who work the machines, standing eight hours a day, have legs as thick as
birch stumps.

They are shy when interviewed singly, but in a group inhibitions drop away and
there is no stopping them. Standing around on a 10-minute break, wearing rough
cotton jumpers, smiling and frowning with broad faces, they pour out their
complaints. "Ten years ago, I was working and I could save. Now when I spend
money for a new pair of shoes, there's nothing left over," says Miroslawa
Jaroszek. After 26 years here, she earns $113 a month.

"This Government's a big disappointment," puts in Stanislawa Wisniewska. "How
can they allow a worker to be a beggar? They were supposed to improve our lives.
After 34 years here, I've got nothing to put in my pot."

They all say life was better under Communism. But when I ask them if they want
to return to Communism, they all say no. Some shake their heads for emphasis.
Why not? They pause, uncertain. "The Russians," says one, finally. Says another:
"We got the Russians out." Says a third: "At least we can talk now, say what we
feel. We'll give them a bit more time. We can hold on a bit longer, till the
summer. We'll see what happens then. Maybe it'll all come together."

Maybe it will, I think as I leave. But how much time will it take? How much time
remains? The last time I left Poland, and looked down through the airplane
window at the tiny fields and forests shrinking into the distance, I knew only
that the system could not last. But how the change would come about was beyond
imagining. Who could have foreseen that the process started by the Poles would
spread to the center of the empire? That it would happen in the belly of the
beast, in Moscow?

Now, I'm leaving behind a new Poland. It is being proclaimed as the economic
success story of Eastern Europe. Unlike the Balkans, Hungary and what once was
the Soviet Union, Poland has no clamoring minorities, no ethnic divisions, no
internal tensions -- its troubled history has left it totally homogeneous, 99
percent white and Roman Catholic. Its borders are secure for the first time in
memory. And it has rid itself of foreign domination. Its historic enemies,
Germany and Russia, are internally preoccupied.

Politics is as fractious as ever -- witness the no-confidence vote late last
month that effectively ended the Government of Hanna Suchocka, the fifth Prime
Minister since 1989. But the newspapers are strong and the courts are
functioning independently. There is a memory at least of what unity was like
during the Solidarity days and a kind of consensus that restraint is important.

In short, for the first time since it was partitioned and disappeared from the
map for 123 years, Poland is coming into its own, however haltingly. It has
reconciled its contradictions, put the horrors of the war and Communism behind
and settled its account with history.

LOAD-DATE: June 13, 1993

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photos: A new arrival at a trolley station in Warsaw. McDonald's,
Rollerblades and Chevrolet dealerships have also popped up on the city's
landscape since the fall of Communism. (Photograph by Wojtek Laski/Sipa)(pg.
24); The stores of Warsaw are now filled with goods, like this kitchenware. The
problem is stretching the paycheck to afford them. (Photograph by Dennis
Chamberlain for The New York Times)(pg. 42); A vendor from the former Soviet
Union near Warsaw Stadium. Once reviled, Russians are looked upon with sympathy
in Poland. (Photograph by Stachowicz-Wojcik/Gamma-Liaison)(pg. 43)

                   Copyright 1993 The New York Times Company


                              258 of 312 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                  June 13, 1993, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

PHOTOGRAPHY VIEW;
The Heroism Of Anonymous Men and Women

BYLINE: by Vicki Goldberg

SECTION: Section 2; Page 33; Column 1; Arts & Leisure Desk

LENGTH: 1537 words

DATELINE: PHILADELPHIA


Documentary photographers are many but their jobs are few. In America, at least,
photojournalists with long lists of awards to their names have trouble finding
assignments, especially assignments that deal with difficult and depressing
subjects. It may be that television news is so full of harrowing events that
magazines are putting their money on reassurance. People can get bad news and
appeals for pity for free; why would they pay extra at the newsstands? At all
events, in a field where some sort of mass venue is essential, many "concerned
photographers" find themselves playing to small audiences, devising projects
primarily for books, or shifting into the business of celebrity portraiture.

Sebastiao Salgado is an exception. Not only has he been showered with awards, he
has also been lionized by museums and widely published in the last few years. In
1991, his work seemed to be everywhere. This is a testament in part to his
talent, which is undeniable and impressive, in part to the importance of his
subjects and his evident sympathy for them, and in part to a comfortingly
old-fashioned esthetic and belief in the goodness of humanity and its capacity
to survive. Even his photographs of famine in the Sahel, the drought-plagued
region south of the Sahara, generally played up the dignity, the classical grace
and resignation of the starving rather than the horrors of their plight.

Now "Workers, an Archeology of the Industrial Age: Photography by Sebastiao
Salgado" is on view at the Philadelphia Museum of Art (through July 11, after
which it travels to Louisville, Ky., Iowa City, Dallas and, in 1995, New York).
This show, 250 pictures large and sponsored by Professional Imaging, a division
of the Eastman Kodak Company, represents six years of travel to approximately 50
locations and arrives with a book with yet more images. An epic amount of
photographs for an epic enterprise, it ends up being something of an overdose.
Although many of the pictures are exceptional, no photographer in history has
taken 250 first-rate photographs.

In the catalogue Salgado, 49, calls this project "a homage to workers, a
farewell to a world of manual labor that is slowly disappearing." Manual labor
here means everything from sugar-cane harvesting to cigar making, steel and
bicycle manufacturing, shipbuilding and shipbreaking (reducing old ships to raw
material for re-use). In Philadelphia, "Workers" is next to a wonderful show of
Camille Pissarro's late-19th-century cityscapes, which romanticize the
industrial-age harbors and crowded cities of France at least as zealously as
Salgado romanticizes work and workers, though the painter glories in the signs
of the mechanical revolution whereas the photographer less than a century later
writes its elegy.

This elegy may be a little early. It is true that the developed nations are
entering the post-industrial era and that machines, computers and robots are
doing many of the jobs men and women used to do. But as recently as 1989 the
International Labor Review reported that manufacturing as a share of total
output in Asia was consistently increasing. Where Salgado is excruciatingly on
point is in his catalogue introduction: "The developed world produces only for
those who can consume -- approximately one-fifth of all people. The remaining
four-fifths, who could theoretically benefit from surplus production, have no
way of becoming consumers."

Photographs are not particularly good at teaching economics, and Salgado does
not really try. Some of the work he pictures is clearly arduous, even dangerous,
and many of the workers are obviously poor, undoubtedly overworked,
long-suffering and patient, but he seldom addresses their working or living
conditions.

His best pictures are both beautiful and haunting, charged with a Latin American
sense of drama. (Although he is now based in Paris, he was born and brought up
in Brazil and claims this drama as his birthright.) Salgado documents a world
where darkness is powerful and invites the sudden effects of light as poetic
revelation, smoke-filled shafts of light, nuanced caresses along the edges of
form. It is to his credit that he has tried, and managed more often than one
might expect, to accommodate his style to the various places and labors he has
photographed. For the steel industry in Poland and France he took up machine
moderne; for the shipbreakers of Bangladesh he adopted an echoing, almost
surreal formality; for canal building in India, a more geometrical concision.

His muscular, black-and-white compositions, frequently concentrated on one
strong figure that anchors the secondary objects of attention, sing the rhythmic
song of manual labor, the unnatural beauty of machines, the endurance, intensity
and struggle of the worker's life. Salgado has a remarkable eye for the human
figure as fulcrum, accent or activator of a motley or mechanical scene, plus a
sharp instinct for the uses of silhouettes and isolated figures. His pictures
dwell on the strange, mutated faces that masks and goggles and coal dust make,
with their hints of a charged existence.

Deeply invested in the heroism of anonymous men and women, Salgado has a
romantic vision of labor. He seeks out dauntless workers in daunting
occupations, as well as proudly confident men wearing rags or slathered with
mud. He focuses on single figures subsumed and almost overwhelmed by the
materials of their work: a tangle of wool or branches or fishing nets. This
response to pattern is strongest in the Boschian pictures of Brazilian gold
miners reduced to repetitive parts of some infernal machine as they clamber over
the pit in packed formations.

Both the style and the humanism of Salgado's photographs are throwbacks to the
30's. A kind of rhetorical grandness and centripetal force inhere in many of his
compositions; they hint of a time when the center held together better than it
seems to now. His compositional strategies are bold but not new, and the fact
that they fit into some recognizable scheme of things may in itself help explain
the breadth of his appeal. Neither post-modern nor alienated, he is a
photographer of clear intent and comprehensible means, and he speaks of a
universe with humanity at its center. This is familiar, unthreatening, even a
relief.

The worker pictures echo a feeling common enough during the Depression that grit
and perseverance and innate dignity would ultimately guarantee the survival of
the down-and-out. One would like to share his assurance of human nobility,
survival and salvation, hedged about though it may be with the difficult facts
of life. But in a post-World War II, post-Vietnam era of refugees and
homelessness, it is not always easy. Salgado's images are so persistently grand,
even grandiloquent, that they overload the scales.

The notion, strong in the 1930's, that the camera can and should elicit active
sympathy continues to burn brightly in Salgado's work and elsewhere despite the
onslaught of alienation and glitz in photography. It has even outlived the
compassion fatigue supposedly induced by an excess of images requiring our
sympathy. In fact, the power of images to move the heart and conscience endures
no matter how burdened people's eyes and minds are, as pictures of Kurdish
refugees and starving Somalians testify. Moral sympathies might just be
capacious enough to outlast the unremitting siege of the media.

Some of Salgado's pictures can be specifically credited with provoking powerful
responses. His photographs of Cambodian amputees in 1990 in The Independent,
with an article appealing for money to manufacture artificial limbs in Cambodia,
helped bring in contributions far beyond the amount of the appeal.

What qualities in a photograph can move people to such actions is very unclear.
The subject must be the primary mover, but whether the treatment should be
artistic (as in Salgado's case) or wrenchingly blunt (as in some pictures of
war) is hard to say. Both subject and treatment must reach the wellsprings of
horror or compassion but must also leave open the possibility of remedy. Clearly
Americans have been greatly stirred by images of the conflict in Bosnia, but
solutions are not ready to hand, and the public has not been moved to demand
action.

Salgado's worker photographs do not call for action so much as for a change in
consciousness. In large numbers, however, his photographs suffer from the
insistence of their message. Awkward as it is to complain of too much humanism
-- it's a bit like saying your family loved you too much -- Salgado's reverence
for downtrodden humanity pulses so doggedly from so many pictures that
eventually one could feel preached at, or a trifle disbelieving, or even a
little resentful at not being able to muster such noble feelings hundreds of
times oneself.

He is the real article. Not a rich man, he gave generously to the Cambodian
amputees and donated most of his profits from the Sahel pictures to Medecins
Sans Frontieres, the French doctors who worked there.  Still, 250 images on the
wall, no matter how good many of them are, is a little too much goodness in one
place. Everything in moderation . . . even goodness. Even Salgado.

LOAD-DATE: June 13, 1993

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photos: "Steel Plant, France" (1987) by Salgado -- A comfortingly
old-fashioned esthetic and a belief in the goodness of humanity. (Sebastiao
Salgado/Magnum Photos/Philadelphia Museum of Art)(pg. 33); "Coal Mine, India"
(1989) -- Faces mutated by coal dust, with their hints of a charged existence.
(Sebastiao Salgado/Magnum Photos/Philadelphia Museum of Art)(pg. 35)

TYPE: Review

                   Copyright 1993 The New York Times Company


                              259 of 312 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                  June 13, 1993, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

IDEAS & TRENDS;
The Globe's Own Family Is a Story Unto Itself

BYLINE: By FOX BUTTERFIELD

SECTION: Section 4; Page 6; Column 4; Week in Review Desk

LENGTH: 897 words

DATELINE: BOSTON


WHEN she was a young reporter at The Boston Globe two decades ago, Susan Trausch
remembers, a very excited John I. Taylor, president of the family company that
had owned the paper since 1872, came up to her as she was preparing to do a
routine story on the local gas company.

"Are you," he asked with apparent envy, "going to ride on the gas truck?"

Ms. Trausch, now a columnist for The Globe, recalled the story Friday after
learning that the paper would be sold to The New York Times Company under a $1.1
billion merger agreement, the largest in newspaper history.

The story typified a side of The Globe that its reporters and editors have
treasured for years. "It was a small place, where people were family and there
was lots of tender loving attention," Ms. Trausch said.

For many years, the Taylor family gave every employee a turkey for Christmas.
There were baskets of fruit when staff members were sick, and Davis Taylor, the
publisher from 1955 to 1977, sometimes helped reporters with their children's
tuition.

And the Taylors seemed remarkably un-self-conscious about their power. Martin
Nolan, a former editorial page editor, recalled an afternoon when John I. Taylor
and a reporter met another editor returning from lunch, thoroughly drunk. "Poor
Joe," Mr. Taylor said. "We better get him out of here before somebody sees him."

But the world has changed, and The Times's acquisition of The Globe continues a
trend toward the consolidation of American communications, in which the few
remaining family-owned papers are being sold or closed. The Times is also such a
paper, run for generations by the Sulzbergers, who have known the Taylors for
quite a while.

Under the terms of the sale, The Globe, with a daily circulation of 505,000 and
Sunday circulation of 811,000, will retain editorial autonomy for at least five
years. The deal will extend the reach of The Times in the Northeast corridor and
give it dominance in the New England advertising market.

The Taylor family was driven toward a sale by the 1996 expiration date of two
trusts that have controlling voting power over the parent corporation,
Affiliated Publications. The Taylors are said to have feared a divisive bidding
war.

In its early years, fighting with a brace of raucous competitors, The Globe had
a reputation for being trustworthy but stodgy. In a city riven by conflict
between descendants of Yankees and newer Irish-American immigrants, The Globe at
first was known as "the maid's paper," since the Taylors insisted on treating
the Irish with fairness in print. That also meant The Globe came in the back
door in many affluent Boston households.

For many years, its editorial voice was timid. When he started at the paper in
1961, Mr. Nolan said, "The joke was that the strongest Globe editorial is when
it came out against the Dutch elm disease." The lead editorial every day was
signed "Uncle Dudley," a practice not stopped until 1966.

Shots Fired at Building

But in the late 1960's, under the editorship of Thomas Winship, The Globe
changed. It became one of the first papers to crusade against American
involvement in Vietnam. Later, when Boston was ordered to accept busing to end
school segregation, The Globe strongly supported the unpopular plan.

Parents of white schoolchildren picketed, shots were fired into the building,
and reporters were menaced. One former editor recalled a night when a seemingly
solicitous policeman directed him around the block to avoid the picket line. But
more demonstrators were waiting there -- they threatened him for several minutes
and rocked his car before letting him enter the parking lot.

Mr. Winship and the Taylors were Harvard-educated Yankees who lived in the
suburbs, and the perception grew that The Globe was a voice of liberalism,
supportive of the Kennedys but perhaps out of touch with the city's blue-collar
citizens.

Last week, William M. Bulger, the State Senate's powerful president and
representative from South Boston, where some of the most vehement anti-busing
protests were, poked fun at the impending merger. He said he originally hoped
the sale might mean dismissals at The Globe, which had recently detailed his
close connections with lobbyists.

He was disappointed, he said, to learn that "the jobs of Globe employees are
safe . . . and the reputations of everybody continue at risk."

Mr. Nolan defended the editorial stance. He said former Senator Paul Tsongas
once told him: "You don't know how important The Globe is -- you make it
possible for me and the Kennedys to be liberal."

But Mr. Nolan, who grew up in Dorchester when it was a working-class,
Irish-American neighborhood, said the perception of The Globe as simply a
patrician Yankee voice was badly out of date -- although he admitted once
believing it himself.

When he was starting out, he said, John I. Taylor made an assumption then
natural to some in Boston and asked: "When did you get out of Harvard?"

Mr. Nolan said he was terrified, assuming his career was in jeopardy because he
had gone to Boston College, a Catholic school. But when he confessed, Mr. Taylor
only answered, "Fine school, fine school."

The Taylors have carried on one Yankee tradition, a sort of thrifty
unpretentiousness. William O. Taylor, the current publisher, drives a Jeep to
work, and often takes editors to lunch at blue-collar haunts.

LOAD-DATE: June 13, 1993

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1993 The New York Times Company


                              260 of 312 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                  June 13, 1993, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

Surfers to Compete At China Beach

BYLINE: AP

SECTION: Section 8; Page 9; Column 1; Sports Desk

LENGTH: 121 words

DATELINE: HANOI, Vietnam, June 12


Vietnam plans to hold its first international surfing tournament at a beach once
popular with American soldiers during the Vietnam War, a newspaper reported
today.

Vietnamese authorities expect the Oct. 4-11 World Qualifying Series event to
attract more than 100 professional surfers from as many as 20 countries, the
official newspaper Vietnam News said.

The competitors will gather at China Beach, located 7 miles south of the city of
Danang. China Beach, known in Vietnam as Non Nuoc Beach, served as a favorite
rest-and-recreation spot for combat-weary American troops. Vietnam News
described surfing conditions there as "ideal," with waves measuring 9 to 18 feet
high during the last three months of every year.

LOAD-DATE: June 13, 1993

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1993 The New York Times Company


                              261 of 312 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                  June 13, 1993, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

OUTDOORS;
Gone Fishin': A Father, a Daughter, a Dingy and a Pair of Fluke

BYLINE: By Peter Kaminsky

SECTION: Section 8; Page 11; Column 2; Sports Desk

LENGTH: 837 words


The tides that sweep through Jones Beach Inlet carry with them a spectacular
array of wildlife, each in its season. In summer, there are ducks and geese,
stripers and blues, egrets and herons. In fall these warm weather residents head
south and the patient observer will sometimes glimpse dolphins and whales. In
winter, Canada geese and harbor seals frequent the marshy islands of Long
Island's Great South Bay and Hempstead Bay, yielding in spring to blackfish,
flounder and fluke.

Mike McLaughlin is second-in-command at Ed's Fishing station, a white clapboard
snack bar/boat livery/ tackle shop in Point Lookout, L.I., on the western shore
of Jones Beach Inlet. Mack was born in the Bronx, summered in Point Lookout,
served in Danang during the Tet offensive, left the Army but stayed in Vietnam
with Chase Manhattan, took a Vietnamese bride, and on his return, knocked around
the Northeast until the tides finally beached him at Ed's.

Ed's reminds one of nothing so much as an old-fashioned general store: from 6
A.M. until sundown a polyglot community of fishermen, sailors and kibitzers
finds its way there for the latest fishing report, bait, tackle, gas, and local
gossip and coffee served up by Eileen Andersen, the proprietor (and Ed's niece).
There are no last names among the regulars. It's T. J. and Dennis and Tony and
Karl and if you're a newcomer and Mack says you're all right, you're all right.
Apart from a large contingent of retirees, everyone has another job but if you
ask them they will tell you that their real jobs are here on the water: They are
clammers, netters, long liners, sea tow captains, fishing guides, diving
instructors. Lovers of the sea, all.

My 8-year-old daughter, Lucy, and I left Brooklyn at 6:50 A.M., reveling in the
absence of traffic along the Long Island Expressway. By 7:45 we were in our
dingy, rigged for fluke, baiting our tandem hooks with squid and live killies.
We moved upcurrent and joined a flotilla of two dozen fishing boats as we
drifted back along the channel in front of the fishing station. We needed
3-ounce sinkers to hold bottom. Lucy cried "Whoa," breaking into a triumphant
grin and pumping the rod as she reeled in a fish. I took particular pride in the
way she dropped the tip of the rod, a maneuver that eludes most novice anglers
in the heat of battle.

The fluke was a small keeper at 14 1/2 inches. The Sea Spray II, a large party
boat full of anglers, gave Lucy a toot of the horn and a round of applause. We
drifted into the inlet, fired up our small outboard and moved uptide for another
drift on which I hooked two horseshoe crabs, their legs writhing like Medusa's
hair.

Lucy stood in the bow and sang into the wind while we went bouncing through the
gentle swells. We moved onto the flats of Hempstead Bay -- a wide expanse of
channels and sloughs dotted with mud islands frosted with deep green grass where
ducks and geese rested while egrets foraged in the black muck between the
surface of the bay and the high-water mark.

The flatness of the view was relieved by a half dozen bay houses, raised on
stilts sunk into the mud. These romantic cottages are remnants of the 30's and
40's before the great development boom that followed World War II and the
ensuing restrictions of our era. If you own one of these homes, you may continue
to use it. But if it blows down, burns down or falls down, that's it; no new
construction is allowed in the bay.

We returned to the main channel, taking our place in the drifting throng, now
grown to some three dozen boats. We passed the loading docks used by Doxsee Sea
Clams where the food-rich bottom is often a magnet for fluke. With their nets
and booms, rusted paint jobs and faded, unreadable names you knew that these
were boats designed and used only for work.

I took and released a short fluke and Lucy, who displayed that dulling of
enthusiasm that comes after an hour or two of fishlessness, said she was ready
to go. As often happens, no sooner had she spoken than she gave a happy whoop as
her rod bent. In short order we had boated a 3-pound fluke, a real doormat, as
the saying goes.

Back at the dock I filleted our fish, while Lucy snacked on a celebratory candy
bar, peeling off thick white fillets which required nothing more than some salt,
fresh ground pepper and a coating of olive oil to make the foundation of a great
cookout which we had with our neighbors that evening. Lucy wore the look of a
successful provider.



IF YOU GO

To reach Ed's Fishing Station in Point Lookout, take the Long Island Expressway
to the Meadowbrook Parkway South to Exit M10 (Loop Parkway) and make a left at
the end. Proceed through Point Lookout to Lynbrook Avenue. Make a left and Ed's
is at the end of the street. Skiffs rent for $55 for the whole day (6 A.M.-4
P.M.) and $40 dollars for half-days after 12 P.M. Ed's provides boat, life
preservers, and a tankful of gas. You may buy snacks and bait and you may rent
tackle at deckside. (Telephone: 516-431-4193.)

LOAD-DATE: June 13, 1993

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Drawing

                   Copyright 1993 The New York Times Company


                              262 of 312 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                  June 13, 1993, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

ARTS AND ENTERTAINMENT;
TELEVISION

BYLINE: By BILL CARTER

SECTION: Section 14; Page 25; Column 3; Summer Times Supplement

LENGTH: 625 words



June

"FAMILY DOG." Once CBS's great animated hope, because it carried the names of
Steven Spielberg and Tim Burton as producers, this dog's-eye view of family life
has turned into the longest-running disappointment in recent network history.
Three years in the waiting, it is now being played out as a summer series. CBS,
starting June 23, at 8 P.M.

"JOHNNY BAGO." Another series CBS has talked about putting on the air for more
than two years has now been relegated to summer duty. This one, which stars
Peter Dobson as a street hustler who is fleeing the mob in a rented recreational
vehicle, also carries the pedigree of association with a famed film name, in
this case Robert Zemeckis. CBS, starting June 25, at 10 P.M.

"CURACAO." Notable mostly as an answer to the question: What is George C. Scott
doing these days? In this made-for-cable movie, he's playing an American
expatriate on the Caribbean island, whose friendship with another expatriate,
played by William Peterson, leads to involvement in murder. Showtime, June 27 at
9 P.M.

"LIFEPOD." The first original movie to play in the Fox network's new lineup of
Monday movies isn't all that original. It's a remake of the Hitchcock classic
"Lifeboat," with a group of travelers, stranded from their spacecraft, who
discover a saboteur in their midst. Ron Silver stars and also directs. Fox, June
28, at 8 P.M.

July

"12:01." Still pursuing the science-fiction genre, Fox comes back with a new
film about one of those cinema reliables, the experiment gone awry. A day starts
over for a personnel clerk, and he gets a chance to reverse fate, which is good,
because the first time around, he lost his job and his girlfriend was murdered
in front of him. Jonathan Silverman stars with Helen Slater. Fox, July 5 at 8
P.M.

"ACTING ON IMPULSE." In this movie about the movies, a star of Hollywood fright
films, played by Linda Fiorentino, resolves to escape from her screaming duties
by taking a vacation at a quiet country resort, which, of course, a crazed
killer decides to stalk. Showtime, July 10 at 9 P.M.

"MISSING: JOHN ROBERTSON." A documentary tracing the extraordinary efforts of a
young American woman to learn the fate of her father, declared missing in
Vietnam 26 years ago. The film follows her to Vietnam, where she meets a man who
says he captured her father, and eventually to Russia, where she meets Boris
Yeltsin. Discovery Channel, July 13 at 9:30 P.M.

"HEIDI." A new two-part movie version of the children's classic, not updated to
an outpost in outer space. This one is still set in the Alps, where an orphan
girl changes the life of her irascible grandfather. Noley Thornton plays Heidi,
Jason Robards is the grandfather and Jane Seymour plays against type as the
prim, grim governess. Disney Channel, July 18 and 19 at 7 P.M.

SHARK WEEK. The perennial crowd pleaser from the Discovery Channel: a full week
of shark features with titles like "Teeth of Death." Always the highest-rated
week for the Discovery Channel, it begins with "African Shark Safari," July 18
at 10 P.M.

"BLUE ICE." Michael Caine, who must have had a couple of weeks off from making
theatrical movies, has squeezed in this cable effort, in which he plays a
retired intelligence agent (not named Harry Palmer, though) who jumps back into
action to save Sean Young. HBO, July 31 at 8 P.M.

August

"BASED ON AN UNTRUE STORY." Or "Hot Shots Comes to Television": A takeoff on the
ripped-from-the-headlines television movie traditions, in which Morgan
Fairchild, playing a perfume mogul who loses her sense of smell, is stalked by a
serial killer and encounters a high school teacher lusting after her students
and even a rescue team trying to save a lost child. Fox, Aug. 9 at 8 P.M.

LOAD-DATE: June 17, 1993

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Schedule

                   Copyright 1993 The New York Times Company


                              263 of 312 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                  June 13, 1993, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

New Jersey Q & A: John A. Williams;
A Novelist's Journey in Race Relations

BYLINE: By SHIRLEY HORNER

SECTION: Section 13NJ; Page 3; Column 1; New Jersey Weekly Desk

LENGTH: 1481 words

DATELINE: TEANECK


THERE came a time, John A. Williams says, when he had to choose between taking
an active role fighting racism or take up his pen and demand to be heard. In the
end, he decided to be "totally a writer," he says, and his 20 books bear witness
to his determination. And come this January, he will be able to devote even more
time to his writing when he retires from Rutgers University in Newark, where for
the last 14 years he has been a professor of English and journalism.

In an interview at his home in Teaneck, Professor Williams, 67, further talked
about the relationship between blacks and whites in general, and blacks and Jews
in particular; his his interracial marriage and the experience of teaching at
Rutgers.

"No complaints," he insisted. "I'm talking about the facts of racism that have
figured prominently in my life." They have also figured in the lives of the
heroes of his novels.

Professor Williams recalled being the product of a broken home and dropping out
of high school -- and being "rescued" by the G.I. Bill of Rights after three
years' naval service in World War II. In 1950, he graduated from Syracuse
University, determined to break into journalism.  "But I forgot about the people
who did the hiring," he said.

He worked in a foundry, as a vegetable clerk and a caseworker and in public
relations, and eventually as a journalist in the United States, Africa and
Europe, writing for Newsweek, among other magazines. And the publication of his
third novel, "The Man Who Cried I Am," in 1967, a caustic story of a dying
writer pleading for black survival -- "Just tell me I am" -- brought Mr.
Williams international acclaim.

Two years earlier, he had married Lori Isaac, and in 1967, at 41, the father of
a third son, Adam (there are two sons, Gregory and Dennis, from a previous
marriage), he "stumbled" into college teaching, he said. In 1975, the Williamses
left Manhattan for Teaneck; four years later, he accepted a full-time
professorship at Rutgers.

In the 70's -- "my most productive decade" -- he edited or co-edited four
anthologies and wrote four nonfiction books and four novels, one of which, "The
Junior Bachelor Society," became an NBC miniseries in 1981.



Q. You mention that your first novel, "The Angry Ones," about a young black
intellectual, waited four years, from 1956 to 1960, to find a publisher.  How
are you doing these days?

A. Not too good. Five years ago I wrote a novel about a black gay musician
imprisoned in Dachau in 1933, and it keeps getting rejection letters.  The
reaction I sense is that I, as a black man, have no business touching this
topic. Well, World War II was very important to me; this was a war that I was
in.

The story came about this way: I and my wife, who is Jewish -- she was the last
of her family to emigrate from Hungary in 1936 -- were traveling from Spain and
Italy in 1966 and came upon Dachau in southern Germany. Among the ID photos
affixed to a board I saw two black men, and I sort of wondered about that and
the pictures of blacks in the camp brochure. When all these things started to
bubble in my mind about 10 years ago, I wrote to Dachau, and they verified the
existence of black prisoners.


Q. How did you come to Teaneck?

A. We came here because we felt the town would not be inhospitable to a mixed
marriage. I grew up in a neighborhood like Teaneck's, in which the population
was 40-50 percent Jewish, but I don't think those days of black-Jewish
cooperation were ever that glorious; it's nice to think that they were.

We've seen this town change: there was a great to-do here over Leonard Jeffries,
who lives in Teaneck, because he had delivered what was called "a racially
charged speech," in which he criticized the power of Jews in Hollywood. My
feeling was that Jeffries shouldn't be criticized while Michael Levin, his
colleague at City College, didn't come in for the same kind of treatment for
articles and letters claiming blacks on the average are less intelligent than
whites.


Q. In an interview in 1969 you spoke of the "growing animosity" between blacks
and Jews. How do you size up the situation today?

A. I feel that given this juncture in our time, that blacks and Jews in 1993 are
even less willing to learn from each other, so few people try. The whole
business goes back to something that the acerbic black journalist George
Schuyler wrote in 1929 about "black people's greatest gift to America" -- that
we define where the bottom of the social ladder is, that we are like mudsills.
People who came from Europe -- from merchants, royalty or peasantry -- could
aspire to a class equality because there was this doormat underneath that was
us.

In my father's family Bible, the first birth listed is in 1803. Why is it that
it's taken eight generations for me to be in a position to help and really mold
my family?


Q. In your books you sometimes warn of race riots. Did you think of that
forecast when rampage followed the 1990 shooting of a black teen-ager, Philip
Pannell, by a white police officer, Gary Spath, in Teaneck?

A. Yes, the Philip Pannell incident set people on edge, as it should have.  We
do get tired of reading these stories about cops' shooting kids in the back.
It's almost as if they have to go through some kind of ritual in order to become
policemen.

I have a legitimate reason to feel bad. My son Adam just told me that about
three years ago he and a friend, on their way in leaving the home of another
friend in New Milford, had exited through the back stairs. Somebody obviously
called the police, and the cop was so nervous, he was shaking while holding the
gun. The resolution is that you don't shoot people that you don't have reason to
shoot at. You shouldn't shoot people over property for one thing -- which these
guys will do in a minute.


Q. Do you see signs of change in the election of blacks to positions of power,
in New Jersey and elsewhere?

A. My impression is that people like Sharpe James, the Mayor of Newark, have
come to these jobs at a rough time, at the precise time when cities are breaking
down. This decline began in the Vietnam War; the cities are bankrupt -- they're
overspent, or whatever money was counted upon has been stolen.

You also see our judicial system coming apart. I'm speaking now of juries. This
is something I wrote about 10 years ago. We're going to find our justice system
being moved hither and yon because of the dark population in the inner cities
and the whites' feeling that they can't get equal justice so they want a change
of venue somewhere else.


Q.  Have you suffered many slights because of your marriage?

A. Generally we've had our share, as we expected we would. I'm sure that there
are lots of things that go on because of our marriage that I'm totally unaware
of.

Sometimes in the customs line, returning from Europe, we go up together before a
sign that says "One family at a time," and we're greeted with the remark "Can't
you read the sign?"

In such a marriage, you both have to be strong in ways that are sometimes not
very visible. A sense of humor helps, and it helps to have strong interests in
common as we do.  Lori has been a freelance editor for many years; we met in
1955 at a publishing house.


Q. What are some of your thoughts on retiring from Rutgers?

A. I think you'd be hard pressed to find more than three or four black faculty
who'd say that their time had been absolutely pleasant at Rutgers. The same
racism that afflicts the larger society certainly afflicts the universities. The
American Council on Education every two years prints tables of how well
minorities are doing -- students, faculty and staff -- at American universities.
Figures are disgraceful.

If there is one thing I recognize as a teacher, it's that the problems of racism
will never be overcome in the school systems. Racism is too deep-seated in the
family. One or two students you meet will say, "My parents didn't raise me to be
racist." It may be quite true. But, although I hate to, I equate the usual
racism with what goes on in the animal kingdom, so that youngsters just like
cats and dogs and horses are most grateful to the people who feed them, and
accept the racist teachings along with the comfort.


Q. Are you saying that you see no solution to the problems of white-black race
relations?

A. I'm really very mixed on that. I am pessimistic, but I think it's the kind of
pessimism that would be delighted to be proved wrong, absolutely wrong.

I had a graduate student who gave me the kind of doll that you put on your
rearview mirror that sort of bounces. The doll was painted solid black, and it
had on a green plastic hula-hula skirt. And she said, "I would like you to have
this. This is what my parents call a 'boogie doll.' " And what she was saying to
me was that she was not like her parents.

LOAD-DATE: June 13, 1993

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo: John A. Williams, a professor of English and journalism at
Rutgers for 14 years, will retire to spend more time writing. (Chris Maynard for
The New York Times)

TYPE: Interview

                   Copyright 1993 The New York Times Company


                              264 of 312 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                  June 14, 1993, Monday, Late Edition - Final

Cambodian Prince Tells Troops to Prepare to Fight Over Secession

BYLINE: By PHILIP SHENON,  Special to The New York Times

SECTION: Section A; Page 3; Column 1; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 684 words

DATELINE: PHNOM PENH, Cambodia, June 13


Cambodia's royal family feud threatened to dissolve into civil war today as
Prince Norodom Ranariddh ordered his troops to prepare for battle against
secessionist forces led by his estranged half-brother, Prince Norodom
Chakrapong.

Both princes are sons of Prince Norodom Sihanouk, the 70-year-old former monarch
who is now considered by many people to be the country's best hope for national
reconciliation. While there was no sign today that Prince Sihanouk had moved to
mediate the dispute, many diplomats say they believe that he will eventually
forge a coalition government that may include both princes.

Prince Chakrapong, who is believed to be in his early 50's, is a Deputy Prime
Minister in the incumbent, Vietnamese-installed Government, which lost last
month's internationally supervised elections. He announced on Saturday that he
and other so-called renegade elements of the Government had refused to accept
the election results and would lead an "autonomous zone" of seven eastern
provinces that he said had seceded from Cambodia.

Meeting with reporters in Phnom Penh today on the eve of the first meeting of
the newly elected national assembly, Prince Ranariddh, 49, said he had ordered
his troops to prepare for war with the secessionist forces that are apparently
led by his half-brother.

'Cambodia Is Small Enough'

"We are ready to send our forces to fight and to liberate that part of Cambodia,
and I hope we will be supported by the world community," said Prince Ranariddh,
whose political party supports its own army of about 5,000 troops. "We are not
going to accept any partition of Cambodia. Cambodia is small enough."

It is not clear how many soldiers are under the control of Prince Chakrapong,
although at a rally Saturday he was flanked by a senior Cambodian Army general.

The royalist opposition party won 58 of the 120 seats in the national assembly,
which will be responsible for writing a new constitution, while the Government's
political party won 51 seats.

During the election campaign, Prince Ranariddh told voters repeatedly that a
vote for the royalist party was a vote for his father, a view that was shared by
many voters in their hopes for peace and an end to the country's 14-year civil
war.

United Nations officials say the threat of secession appears to be a negotiating
tactic by leaders of the incumbent Government who hope to preserve some power in
a coalition with the royalist party.

United Nations peacekeepers and diplomats in Phnom Penh, the capital, say that
while they are optimistic that the secessionist threat will prove to be a bluff,
they are always concerned about threats from Prince Chakrapong, who is widely
feared among Cambodians because of his association with some of the brutal
elements of the authoritarian Government. The Government was installed by
Vietnam after the Vietnamese Army invaded Cambodia in 1978 and ousted the Khmer
Rouge leadership.

On Saturday, Prince Chakrapong issued a thinly veiled threat of violence against
United Nations peacekeepers who remained in the provinces that make up the
so-called autonomous zone: Svay Rieng, Kampong Cham, Prey Veng, Kracheh, Stoeng
Treng, Ratanokiri and Mondol Kiri.

On Saturday, the United Nations ordered virtually all of its civilian
peacekeepers to leave three eastern provinces where United Nations workers had
been threatened at gunpoint in recent days.

The Government of Prime Minister Hun Sen has insisted that Prince Chakrapong is
acting on his own, without authority from senior Government officials in Phnom
Penh. Many diplomats say they find that assertion hard to believe given the
close ties between Prince Chakrapong and senior officials like Mr. Hun Sen
himself, who had been a leader of the Khmer Rouge.

The differences between Prince Ranariddh and Prince Chakrapong date back many
years, certainly to the 1980's, when the royalist party was principally a rebel
army seeking to overthrow the Government, and possibly to their childhoods, when
they were seen a potential rivals to replace their father as Cambodia's national
leader.

LOAD-DATE: June 14, 1993

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1993 The New York Times Company


                              265 of 312 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                  June 14, 1993, Monday, Late Edition - Final

U.S. Plans Tougher Strategy To Combat Alien Smuggling

BYLINE: By JOSEPH B. TREASTER

SECTION: Section A; Page 1; Column 1; Metropolitan Desk

LENGTH: 1298 words


Shaken by the stranding of nearly 300 illegal Chinese immigrants aboard a tramp
steamer off New York last week, after a surge of similar smuggling attempts
along the coasts of Florida and California, Federal officials say they are
developing an arsenal of new counter-smuggling tactics.

Under a sweeping plan being devised by the National Security Council and several
Federal agencies, law-enforcement officials would be armed with some of the
powerful tools now widely used against organized crime but banned in immigration
cases: wiretaps, far-reaching conspiracy statutes and forfeiture laws to seize
money and property obtained through smuggling.

Penalties for smuggling immigrants would be stiffened, too, rising to perhaps a
maximum of 20 years in prison, up from five years now.

Federal officials say they are also urging that intelligence satellites and
other sophisticated monitoring devices that have been used in the fight against
international drug traffickers be brought to bear against immigrant smugglers.

The new strategy is being developed by a working group drawn from the State
Department, Justice Department, Immigration and Naturalization Service and the
Coast Guard and led by the National Security Council. Although the group had
been working on the problem of seaborne smuggling for several months, its
efforts gained new impetus with the grounding off the coast of Queens of the
Golden Venture, which resulted in the deaths of six Chinese immigrants.

A main thrust of the effort, the officials say, is to confront the vicious
Chinese and Vietnamese gangs that dominate the multimillion-dollar immigrant
smuggling business, often holding bewildered newcomers captive in near-slavery
conditions and recruiting some as drug-runners, prostitutes and enforcers.

The effort marks a significant departure in the nation's approach to immigration
enforcement. At least partly because of America's history as a nation of
immigrants, immigration violations have long been regarded as somewhat benign
and Washington officials have been reluctant to authorize harsh tactics against
them.

"The perception has been of somebody just throwing people in the trunk of a car
and driving across the Mexican border, not as organized crime where people were
being hurt," said William J. Kerins, acting director of the immigration
service's anti-smuggling branch. "But it's getting out of control now. We're
facing first-class criminal organizations and we need the proper tools to deal
with them."

Though attention is now focused on Chinese gangs because of the recent arrivals
of boatloads of illegal Chinese immigrants, Mr. Kerins said that equally violent
gangs from Jamaica, Colombia, the Dominican Republic and Nigeria have begun to
intertwine the smuggling of immigrants with drug trafficking, money laundering
and other crimes.

The anti-smuggling plan, to be made public by the Clinton Administration in the
next few days, also calls for a campaign to press foreign governments to try to
block crime syndicates from buying and outfitting smuggling boats as well as
from organizing smuggling operations.

Crackdown on Shipping

Countries that sell ship registrations for worldwide operation with minimal
regulation, sometimes called flags of convenience, will be urged to try to
screen out immigrant smugglers; countries along the ships' routes will be asked
to deny them fuel and provisions and to report them to United States
authorities.

With thousands of miles of open coastline, the United States is an easy place
for smugglers to land. And chastened by years of disappointing attempts to stop
drug smuggling, Federal officials are not entirely sanguine about their chances
of stemming the tide of desperate people streaming out of China's poverty.

"But I think we have to make the effort and see if we can do it," said an
Administration official involved in the planning. "I hope it's more susceptible
to a response than drug smuggling."

Because the surge in oceanbound immigrant smuggling is such a new phenomenon,
immigration enforcement has so far been piecemeal. The Coast Guard is the United
States' main hope of catching smuggling vessels. Each day dozens of patrol boats
and planes criss-cross the Atlantic and Pacific coasts, looking for drugs,
fishing violators, polluters and illegal immigrants.

Need for Intelligence

But patrolling is not the answer, said Rear Adm. Richard A. Appelbaum, chief of
the Coast Guard's law-enforcement and defense operations.

"Intelligence is the key to our ability to efficiently respond," he said.

But intelligence is sorely lacking. The nation's main sources, Federal officials
said, are informers in Taiwan, Hong Kong and Thailand, the principal staging
areas for the smugglers, and on the streets of New York's Chinatown, which
officials say is the final destination of most of the illegal Chinese
immigrants.

In developing the new strategy, immigration officials say, other agencies have
been supportive of a proposal to copy the practices of the Drug Enforcement
Administration and the Federal Bureau of Investigation in tracking cars, planes
and boats with a device known as a transponder. The device emits high-frequency
signals and can be used to plot the exact geographic coordinates of a vessel as
it moves across the ocean.

The use of satellites with cameras and other surveillance gear, in conjunction
with increased intelligence gathering by agents, is also under consideration,
Federal officials said.

Immigration officials have requested that the Central Intelligence Agency join
in the effort against immigrant smuggling. But opponents argue that the agency's
resources are already stretched thin.

Question of Priorities

"You have to ask, 'What are you not going to be doing if you are doing this?' "
an Administration official said.

As the United States plans measures to counter the smugglers, Chinese Government
officials say they have reinforced border patrols in Fujian Province, the region
of poor farmers and fishermen from which most of the illegal Chinese immigrants
have been coming.

But they accuse the United States of encouraging migration by adopting a liberal
policy of political asylum for Chinese citizens since the uprising at Tiananmen
Square in 1989. Many of the proposals will require Congressional action.
Representative Charles E. Schumer, the Brooklyn Democrat who heads the House
Subcommittee on Crime and Criminal Justice, said Congress was likely to endorse
them.

"Going after the gangs would indeed make a difference," he said. "It's not going
to end illegal immigration from China, but I think it's likely to do some real
good."

A Growing Problem

American officials first became aware of the phenomenon of Chinese men and women
being smuggled into the United States by sea 22 months ago, when a trawler with
the prosaic name of I-Mao #306 appeared off the coast of Los Angeles with 132
illegal immigrants packed in its holds.

But the problem did not begin to attract attention at the highest levels in
Washington until the last few weeks when six smuggling boats were seized, one
off Jacksonville, Fla., one off San Diego, three off San Francisco and finally
the 230-foot Golden Venture last Sunday.

In several cases, Vietnamese gang members have helped land Chinese immigrants on
American shores by sailing smaller boats to rendezvouswith mother ships, Mr.
Kerins said.  Federal officials working on the new strategy say that stiffer
sentences should not only make smugglers think twice about bringing in illegal
immigrants, but that they will provide an incentive for low-ranking members of
the criminal organizations to implicate superiors and an incentive for
prosecutors to invest time in complicated investigations.

LOAD-DATE: June 14, 1993

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1993 The New York Times Company


                              266 of 312 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                  June 14, 1993, Monday, Late Edition - Final

A Rights Meeting, but Don't Mention the Wronged

BYLINE: By ALAN RIDING,  Special to The New York Times

SECTION: Section A; Page 3; Column 1; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 1025 words

DATELINE: VIENNA, June 13


In an atmosphere strangely removed from reality, the first World Conference on
Human Rights in 25 years opens here on Monday with a broad mandate to discuss
human rights in the world -- as long as it avoids naming any government known
for abuses.

Under the rules adopted for the two-week conference, the fate of civilians
caught in wars in, say, Bosnia and Herzegovina, Angola and Liberia will probably
never be mentioned. Nor is any discussion expected of political prisoners in,
say, China or Cuba.

Instead, 5,000 delegates from 111 countries will debate human rights in the
abstract, adding women's rights, indigenous peoples' rights, minority rights and
other rights to long-recognized political and economic rights.

Drawing the Battle Lines

Yet in the often rarefied world of the United Nations, the conference is
considered crucial -- not only because it could eventually give the
international community greater power to denounce rights violations, but because
it could lead to a redefinition of human rights.

On both those issues, the outlook is for a major battle between Western
countries, which favor strengthening the United Nations mechanisms for defending
human rights, and mainly Asian nations, which resent it when the West intrudes
into their internal affairs in the name of human rights.

The Clinton Administration, which plans to underline its strong commitment to
human rights, is particularly alarmed by what it views as efforts by some
governments -- led by China, Syria, Cuba and Iran -- to erode the notion that
human rights are by definition universal.

Specifically, it dismisses the argument that any definition of human rights
should take account of "national and regional particularities and various
historical, cultural and religious backgrounds," calling such talk a screen
behind which authoritarian governments can perpetuate abuses.

Is Development a 'Right'?

Western countries consider their first priority here to be damage control --
insuring that the conference issues a strong endorsement of the universality of
human rights and rejects the idea that such rights can be measured differently
in some countries.

In contrast with that stance, Washington has signaled that it is moving toward
accepting the long-standing third world demand that development be considered a
human right. As evidence of this, it intends to ask the Senate to ratify the
1966 International Convention on Economic, Social and Cultural Rights.

Even on this issue, differences are expected. Some third world countries want
the conference to reject any link between respect for human rights and economic
aid; Western countries, which regard such conditions as a vital human rights
instrument, are determined not to budge.

If there is pessimism about the outcome, it is because the debate has been
endlessly rehearsed at preparatory talks. While a draft document eventually
emerged, the brackets around long sections pointed to the many areas where there
is no agreement.

Seeking New Definitions

Although some experts fear a North-South clash will now replace the East-West
confrontation that has usually disrupted such conferences, the lines are in fact
less clearly drawn. Many new Latin American democracies are clearly aligned with
the West, and even Asian and African countries are not operating as blocs.

Rather, Western officials have identified a small group -- China, Cuba, Syria,
Iran, Vietnam, Pakistan, Malaysia, Singapore, Yemen and Indonesia among them --
that have led the fight to redefine some human rights as "Western." The Western
strategy here is to try to isolate those countries.

Justifying the rule that the debates should not be "country-specific," Secretary
General Boutros Boutros-Ghali, said last week that the conference "would be
transformed into a political conference if it focused on individual human rights
cases."

Still, reality will be knocking on the door in the presence of representatives
of some 1,000 non-governmental organizations, who held a three-day forum here to
make their views known before the formal sessions begin.

Meanwhile, Downstairs . . .

Already last week, in fact, the human rights debate had become known as the
"upstairs-downstairs" confrontation -- between Government officials preparing
the conference on the second floor of the Austria Center and hundreds of human
rights workers one floor below.

Tensions between the two floors intensified when the United Nations acceded to a
demand from China and prohibited the Dalai Lama from addressing the
non-governmental organizations. The Dalai Lama fled Tibet when China annexed the
region in 1959.  The Austrian Government, which had invited the Dalai Lama and a
dozen other winners of the Nobel Peace Prize, protested to China.

It was unclear whether the Tibetan leader would be allowed to attend the opening
ceremony on Monday. Clearly embarrassed by the dispute, United Nations officials
said that, as chairman of the conference, Austria's Foreign Minister, Alois
Mock, could himself invite the Dalai Lama to speak.

Boo's for Carter



Many representatives from non-governmental organizations were no less upset when
300 people from their own ranks booed former President Jimmy Carter as he
addressed their closing session on Saturday night. The protests came from Latin
American delegates; one Argentine protester said the shouts were "the cries of
thousands of people killed with American guns sold to latin American armies."

Asma Jehangir, of the Pakistani Human Rights Commission, then took the floor to
say that Mr. Carter, whose defense of human rights is well remembered, had been
treated disgracefully. Kenneth Roth, director of Human Rights Watch in New York,
said it was "a terrible irony" that the forum that had protested the silencing
of the Dalai Lama had failed to respect Mr. Carter's freedom of speech.

Of more significance to the conference itself, however, the non-governmental
organizations strongly endorsed the "universality" of human rights and made it
clear that they will spend the next two weeks denouncing "country-specific"
violations.


LOAD-DATE: June 14, 1993

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo: The United Nations acceded yesterday to a demand from China and
prohibited the Dalai Lama from addressing the World Conference on Human Rights,
setting off a protest from the Austrian Government, which had invited him and
other winners of the Nobel Peace Prize. The Dalai Lama spoke at a news
conference yesterday in Vienna. (Associated Press)

                   Copyright 1993 The New York Times Company


                              267 of 312 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                  June 14, 1993, Monday, Late Edition - Final

Abroad at Home;
The Powell Factor

BYLINE: By ANTHONY LEWIS

SECTION: Section A; Page 15; Column 1; Editorial Desk

LENGTH: 690 words

DATELINE: CAMBRIDGE, Mass.


At a lunch for the honorary degree recipients on Harvard's commencement day Gen.
Colin Powell was asked to say a few words to the guests. When he finished, a
woman who has been critical of the military said to a friend: "I'm going to
start Pacifists for Powell."

In 24 hours here General Powell all but charmed birds from the trees. When he
spoke extemporaneously, he was thoughtful, gracious, direct, easy. Then he
delivered a formal speech to thousands, including protesters on the issue of
gays in the military, and got a standing ovation.

The Powell visit was a phenomenon: a political phenomenon. Watching him turn
audiences from skepticism to admiration, one had to think that after his
retirement as Chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff next September he will
sooner or later run for public office.

The visit had another notable aspect. General Powell gave the clearest signal
yet that a meaningful compromise on the gay issue is now acceptable to the
military leadership -- and is likely to happen.

Because he had said long ago that "open homosexuality would have a very negative
effect on military morale and discipline," many at Harvard were critical of the
decision to award him an honorary degree. He disarmed some when at lunch he
praised the dignity of the protesters.

During the commencement ceremony a speaker on behalf of graduate students,
Bhaswati Bhattacharya, deplored the fact that gay men and lesbians "have not
been freely allowed to serve in the armed forces because they are different."
When she finished, General Powell stood up and shook her hand.

He spoke about the cold war and what its end means for this country. He praised
President Clinton warmly for pledging help to Russia "in the spirit of Truman
and Marshall." He said the emotions of Vietnam had dissipated, and "the armed
forces are again at one with the people." Then, somewhat surprisingly, he
directly addressed the gay issue.

"We took on racism," he said of the armed forces. "We took on drugs. We took on
Tailhook. We will do the same, my friends, with the very difficult issue of
homosexuals in the military.

"The controversy involves two pressing interests: the interest of gay and
lesbian Americans who want the privilege of serving, and on the other hand
concern for cohesion in the military and the right to privacy.

"The President has given us clear direction to reconcile those interests, and I
believe we are near a solution."

What was striking in that statement was not only the prediction that a solution
was near. It was the way General Powell defined the issue, with respect for the
interest of gays and lesbians who want to serve.

General Powell's words reflected, I believe, a real change in the political
outlook on the issue. Despite the angry words of recent months, there has been
movement away from prejudice and fear.

First, the official ban on gay service has come to look more and more
anachronistic. Former Senator Barry Goldwater has just called the policy
"un-American discrimination." Israel, whose military we admire, has removed its
last limits on homosexuals in the forces.

Second, anyone willing to open his mind even a little must know by now that many
gays and lesbians have served well, and are serving, in the U.S. forces. The
individual stories that have been broadcast to the country mock the notion that
gays are unsuitable for service.

Third, efforts by the services to ferret out gays and lesbians and discharge
them have become embarrassing -- "senseless" moves to destroy the careers of
proven military assets, as Senator Goldwater put it.

At a minimum, then, it seems that there can be agreement on stopping witch hunts
in the services. Even Senator Sam Nunn has said: "I do not believe we should
have sex squads looking for ways to investigate service members' private,
consensual behavior."

A formula for compromise might prohibit only public displays of sexuality -- as
sexual harassment is prohibited. It would probably not satisfy the gay movement,
but it would be a major step. And with the backing of Colin Powell, it would
surely get the necessary political support.

LOAD-DATE: June 14, 1993

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Op-Ed

                   Copyright 1993 The New York Times Company


                              268 of 312 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                  June 14, 1993, Monday, Late Edition - Final

Is Clinton Moving to Left, Right or Center?;
First at the Wall

SECTION: Section A; Page 14; Column 5; Editorial Desk

LENGTH: 226 words


To the Editor:

Your report of President Clinton's appearance at the ceremony before the Vietnam
Veterans Memorial (front page, June 1) contains the remarkable observation that
he was the first President to attend Memorial Day services there in the 12 years
since the wall's construction.

I wonder how many caught the irony that President Reagan, in 1985, found the
time to travel to the German cemetery in Bitburg, where he honored the graves of
Waffen SS Nazis? Senator Daniel Patrick Moynihan said at the time that Mr.
Reagan displayed "a measure of moral insensitivity that we must not permit in
our Presidency." Elie Wiesel, Nobel Peace Prize winner, implored Mr. Reagan not
to go to Bitburg, and 53 senators joined in appealing to him, in vain, not to
lend his presence there.

I wonder how many of those who shouted obscenities at President Clinton at the
wall raised their voices then against the moral obtuseness of Ronald Reagan at
Bitburg?

Mr. Clinton is to be commended for his courage and his attempt to bind the
nation's wounds. He honored the Vietnam dead, while not retracting his
opposition to the failed foreign policy that sent them there.

Our new, young President shows again that he has the courage of his convictions,
a precious rarity in a cynical capital.

MEYER RANGELL
Bloomingburg, N.Y., June 4, 1993

LOAD-DATE: June 14, 1993

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Drawing.

TYPE: Letter

                   Copyright 1993 The New York Times Company


                              269 of 312 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                  June 14, 1993, Monday, Late Edition - Final

Is Clinton Moving to Left, Right or Center?;
A Rigorous Standard

SECTION: Section A; Page 14; Column 6; Editorial Desk

LENGTH: 202 words


To the Editor:

Anna Quindlen doesn't seem to understand in "A Fragile Truce" (column, June 2)
the difference between opposition to the Vietnam War, which is not dishonorable,
and evading wartime service to one's country through influence and manipulation
of the system, which is dishonorable. It is the second that I and many other
veterans find abhorrent.

The rationale often given is that many people similarly avoided service. While
this does not make the act any less dishonorable, the passage of time can bring
some measure of forgiveness. Only one of those failing this basic obligation has
become Commander in Chief of the Armed Forces. It seems to me that anyone
aspiring to this office or holding it should be held to a much more rigorous
standard than the rest of us folks; it is difficult to forgive this failure of a
high officeholder when so many ordinary citizens acted responsibly.

I am not a Vietnam War veteran, and you will doubtless find my views
old-fashioned, but I am a veteran of World War II who is entitled to wear with
pride the Combat Infantry Badge, Bronze Star, Purple Heart and the Presidential
Distinguished Unit Citation.

ROBERT P. MAXON
New York, June 2, 1993

LOAD-DATE: June 14, 1993

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Letter

                   Copyright 1993 The New York Times Company


                              270 of 312 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                  June 15, 1993, Tuesday, Late Edition - Final

U.S. Rejects Notion That Human Rights Vary With Culture

BYLINE: By ELAINE SCIOLINO,  Special to The New York Times

SECTION: Section A; Page 1; Column 6; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 1091 words

DATELINE: VIENNA, June 14


Responding to a challenge by some authoritarian governments in the third world,
the United States warned today that it would oppose any attempt to use religious
and cultural traditions to weaken the concept of universal human rights.

The strong statement set the stage for a intense struggle between Western
countries committed to the universality of human rights and countries that
oppose what they describe as the imposition of Western values.

Speaking on the opening day of the first World Conference on Human Rights in 25
years, Secretary of State Warren Christopher said the universality of human
rights set a single standard of acceptable behavior around the world, a standard
Washington would apply to all countries.

Adhering to conference rules that ban criticism of specific countries, Mr.
Christopher did not name the nations that challenge the universality of human
rights. But he noted, "We cannot let cultural relativism become the last refuge
of repression."

Some countries say human rights should be interpreted differently in regions
with non-Western cultures. The countries holding this view are led by China,
Syria and Iran, and include Singapore, Malaysia, Indonesia, Yemen, Vietnam and
Cuba.

The United States and its allies view this position an attempt to win United
Nations approval for a delay of democracy and political freedom.

Foreign Minister Ali A. Alatas of Indonesia, the only representative of this
group to speak today, rejected the charge that some countries were promoting a
concept of human rights "based on some nebulous notion of 'cultural relativism,'
as spuriously alleged by some quarters."

But, without mentioning Bosnia and Herzegovina by name, he seemed to accuse
Western nations of applying a double standard when he noted that "a few hundred
kilometers from here, an entire nation is being subjected to brutal aggression,
mass murder, systematic rape and the inhuman practice of ethnic cleansing."

Statement of U.S. Policy

In what was viewed as the Clinton Administration's first major policy statement
on human rights, Mr. Christopher acknowledged continued violations around the
world, but he also applauded recent successes, like the reversal of a coup in
Guatemala and elections in Cambodia.

He made only a brief mention of Bosnia, vowing that those guilty of "ethnic
cleansing" there would be punished. But in sharp contrast to his scathing attack
on the Serbs in February, today he referred only to "those who desecrate these
rights."

A key purpose of Mr. Christopher's speech, and of the United States role at the
two-week conference, is nonetheless to defend the universality of human rights.
And he pointed out that countries that respect human rights are generally the
most peaceful and stable, while the worst violators are the world's aggressors
and those who encourage the spread of arms.

Specific Steps Urged

Mr. Christopher, who promoted human rights as Deputy Secretary of State in the
Carter Administration, also called for the appointment of a United Nations High
Commissioner on Human Rights and of a special United Nations envoy to
investigate violence against women.

The Administration, which has defined human rights as a focus of foreign policy,
will also press for Senate ratification of four treaties -- to eliminate racial
discrimination and discrimination against women, to protect the economic rights
of the poor and to codify basic human rights and duties.

The Administration seems to be developing a flexible carrot-and-stick approach,
using incentives to modify the behavior of countries it considers capable of
improvement, like Turkey and China, while punishing those it considers
renegades, like Iran. Former President Jimmy Carter, who was in the audience
when Mr. Christopher spoke, was more willing to provoke crises with countries
that had poor human rights records.

The Clinton Administration's approach has brought a mixed response from human
rights organizations.

On the one hand, the Administration has been praised for its decision to ratify
the four treaties, for its emphasis on women's rights and for its appointments
of longtime proponents of human rights to key positions, particularly John
Shattuck as Assistant Secretary of State for human rights issues.

But some human rights organizations have sharply criticized the Administration
for failing to fulfill Mr. Clinton's campaign promises on human rights. The most
dramatic such example was Washington's decision to forcibly return Haitian boat
people seeking political asylum.

As the conference began, the United Nations Secretary General, Boutros
Boutros-Ghali, noted that some countries use the human rights debate as an
instrument of national policy.

Support From Head of U.N.

"There is no denying that some states constantly try to hijack or confiscate
human rights," he said.

Mr. Boutros-Ghali backed the universality of human rights, even arguing that the
international community had a right to intervene if governments "become
tormentors" of their peoples. "In these circumstances, the international
community must take over from the states that fail to fulfill their
obligations," he said.

After policy statements from some 160 governments, the conference is to prepare
a final declaration on human rights, which is expected to become the main
battleground between "universalists" and those wishing to define human rights in
religious, cultural, economic and social terms.

While national delegates are not permitted to criticize countries by name, no
such rules bind representatives here from 1,000 non-governmental organizations.
Many of these groups deal with specific problems, from discrimination against
aboriginals in Australia to child abuse in Brazil.

As delegates arrived for the conference, at the Austria Center, a group of Kurds
protested noisily against what they called repression by the Turkish Government,
and five Buddhist priests sat quietly with posters demanding "religious freedom
for a Free Vietnam."

Twelve winners of the Nobel Peace Prize boycotted the opening to protest the
United Nations decision to ban the Dalai Lama from addressing the
non-governmental organizations during their three-day forum here last week.

And on the edges of the conference, Mr. Christopher met with the foreign
ministers of Israel, Syria and Egypt. Despite the Administration's concerns
about human rights abuses in these three countries, the talks focused on the
Middle East peace talks, which are to resume Tuesday in Washington.


LOAD-DATE: June 15, 1993

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1993 The New York Times Company


                              271 of 312 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                  June 15, 1993, Tuesday, Late Edition - Final

Tune In to Democracy

BYLINE: By Joshua Muravchik;  Joshua Muravchik, a resident scholar at the
American Enterprise Institute, advised the Clinton Presidential campaign on
foreign policy.

SECTION: Section A; Page 27; Column 2; Editorial Desk

LENGTH: 565 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON


Over the next two days, House appropriations and Senate foreign relations
subcommittees will begin deciding whether to create Radio Free Asia -- to do for
such tyrannies as China, North Korea, Vietnam, Laos and Burma what Radio Liberty
and Radio Free Europe did for Communist Europe.

The Administration is expected to weigh in with a recommendation. If President
Clinton, who chose to extend China's most-favored-nation status without any
human rights conditions, wants to retain credibility as an advocate of global
democracy, he'll want to make sure a robust plan for Radio Free Asia goes
forward. In de-fending his decision, he said we have an interest in China's
modernization. But this is true only if China's political development goes
hand-in-hand with its economic development. A China that grows rich and powerful
without becoming democratic will be more of a menace than a blessing.

Economic growth will not necessarily lead to democratization, as in South Korea
and Taiwan, which have democratized under optimum conditions: affluence and U.S.
influence. Japan modernized around the turn of the century, but the impetus
toward liberalization could not overcome authoritarianism and militarism.

Before M.F.N. is extended again next year, we must obtain substantial
concessions on political prisoners, forced labor, emigration and the jamming of
American broadcasts.

Despite jamming, Voice of America reaches a large Chinese audience with world
news and programs in limited-vocabulary English that help Chinese learn our
language. Radio Free Asia would broadcast entirely in Chinese dialects (and in
other native languages to other countries) and would focus on news about China
(and in broadcasts to other countries, on their national news). Pioneered by
Radio Free Europe and Radio Liberty, such broadcasting provides the information
that would be available in the domestic press if it were free.

Of course it is hard to gather domestic news in an unfree country, and the
target countries can make it harder by not accrediting Radio Free Asia
correspondents. Radio Free Europe and Radio Liberty operated under the direst
constraints, gathering news of Soviet bloc countries during the worst of the
cold war. They compensated by employing hundreds of researchers who interviewed
travelers, collected unofficial publications and scoured the official media.

After the Soviet empire fell, we confirmed how effective this was, as the new
Eastern European leaders -- Lech Walesa, Vaclav Havel, Boris Yeltsin and even
Mikhail Gorbachev -- offered glowing testimonials to Radio Free Europe/Radio
Liberty.

Candidate Clinton declared strong support for a Radio Free Asia, and $30 million
to launch the service has been included in his fiscal 1994 budget. But Congress
will trim the budget, and Radio Free Asia is nobody's pork.

The new "China lobby" -- businessmen and diplomats who oppose anything that will
roil Beijing -- are trying to scuttle Radio Free Asia just as they torpedoed
human rights conditions on trade. They have proposed adding a few hours of news
about China to Voice of America's broadcasts. This would be a weak substitute
for an independent Radio Free Asia. In Europe, Voice of America and Radio Free
Europe/Radio Liberty operated side by side -- each performing its distinct
mission -- with proved effectiveness. In Asia, we should do no less.

LOAD-DATE: June 15, 1993

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Op-Ed

                   Copyright 1993 The New York Times Company


                              272 of 312 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 June 16, 1993, Wednesday, Late Edition - Final

Ruling Cambodia Party Says Deal Has Been Made on Power Sharing;
Secessionists Flee

BYLINE: By PHILIP SHENON,  Special to The New York Times

SECTION: Section A; Page 6; Column 3; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 306 words

DATELINE: PHNOM PENH, Cambodia, June 15


A secessionist movement in Cambodia's eastern provinces appeared to collapse
today as the United Nations said its leader had fled across the border to
Vietnam with dozens of his followers.

United Nations peacekeepers on Cambodia's eastern border said that the
secessionist leader, Prince Norodom Chakrapong, crossed into Vietnam early this
morning in a convoy of about 20 vehicles and that he had turned over a cache of
weapons to startled Vietnamese border guards.

Prince Chakrapong -- commonly described by Cambodians as the "kon chloy," or
wayward son, of Prince Sihanouk -- is a Deputy Prime Minister in the current
Government, which was installed by Vietnam in 1979.

On Saturday the younger Prince declared himself the leader of an "autonomous
zone" in 7 of Cambodia's 21 provinces in a protest over the Government's loss in
elections last month. The elections were organized by the United Nations as part
of a peacekeeping effort to end the long civil war.

U.N. Peacekeepers Threatened


Seccesionist demonstrators attacked United Nations vehicles and offices in three
of the provinces and threatened United Nations civilian peacekeepers at
gunpoint, ordering them to leave the so-called autonomous zone.

That Prince Chakrapong would flee to Vietnam is no surprise given the close ties
between Hanoi and the current Cambodian Government.

The Vietnamese-installed Prime Minister, Mr. Hun Sen, traveled through the
eastern provinces this week to stem what he insisted was a growing secessionist
movement by Cambodians who believed that the election had been marred by voting
irregularities.

The head of the United Nations peacekeeping force here, Yasushi Akashi, said
today that Mr. Hun Sen "has conveyed a message to me that he has been successful
in calming down the situation in the eastern provinces."

LOAD-DATE: June 16, 1993

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1993 The New York Times Company


                              273 of 312 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 June 16, 1993, Wednesday, Late Edition - Final

Milton Tatelman, 50, An Adman and a Critic

SECTION: Section D; Page 24; Column 5; Metropolitan Desk

LENGTH: 243 words


Milton J. Tatelman, an advertising creator and entertainment critic, died on
Friday at his home in Provincetown, Mass. He was 50 and also lived in Manhattan.

The cause was AIDS-related lymphoma, his family said.

Mr. Tatelman was the advertising director at Paramount Pictures and later ran
his own agency. He created commercials for major films like "2001: A Space
Odyssey," "Goodbye, Columbus," "Rocky," "Nashville," "The Longest Yard," "The
Godfather" and "Good Morning, Vietnam."

At the Ogilvy & Mather agency, he helped create a commercial with the slogan
"Yahoo, Mountain Dew," that won a Clio award. He also created the ad campaigns
for Jordan's furniture stores in New England that featured his brothers, Eliot
and Barry, who run the company.

Under the pen name Newton North, he was a part-time film critic for The New York
Post and New York Herald Tribune. There were occasions when he was sharply
critical of the same movies for which he wrote promotional advertising.

He was the entertainment editor of Key magazine from 1978 to 1991. He was on the
voting committee for the Tony Awards and was a member of the Outer Critics
Circle.

Mr. Tatelman was born in Newton, Mass. After graduating from Case Western
Reserve University, he earned a master's degree in advertising from Bernard
Baruch College.

His survivors include his companion, Stuard Derrick, and his brothers, Eliot, of
Sudbury, Mass., and Barry, of Wayland, Mass.


LOAD-DATE: June 16, 1993

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Obituary (Obit); Biography

                   Copyright 1993 The New York Times Company


                              274 of 312 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 June 16, 1993, Wednesday, Late Edition - Final
                              Correction Appended

John Connally of Texas, a Power In 2 Political Parties, Dies at 76

BYLINE: By RICHARD SEVERO

SECTION: Section A; Page 1; Column 5; National Desk

LENGTH: 1920 words


John B. Connally, the former Governor of Texas who served in two Presidential
Administrations and who was wounded when President John F. Kennedy was
assassinated, died yesterday at Methodist Hospital in Houston. He was 76.

The cause was complications of pulmonary fibrosis, said a hospital spokeswoman,
Blythe Schaffer. Mr. Connally had been admitted to the hospital May 17 with
breathing problems.

Early in his political career, Mr. Connally was a protege of Lyndon B. Johnson
and served as Secretary of the Navy in the Kennedy Administration as well as
Secretary of the Treasury under President Richard M. Nixon. After switching from
the Democratic to the Republican Party in the 1970's, he was regarded for a time
as a serious contender for the Presidency.

Tumultuous Public Life

Mr. Connally's public life was nothing short of tumultuous. On Nov. 22, 1963,
while serving his first term as Governor, Mr. Connally was riding in Kennedy's
open-topped limousine through the streets of Dallas and was wounded when Kennedy
was shot and killed. A bullet passed through his body, leaving Mr. Connally with
scars on his back, chest, wrist and thigh.  Later, he would recall drifting in
and out of consciousness for four days. He said the first sustained
consciousness he had was of watching television coverage of Kennedy's body being
carried to Arlington National Cemetery.

Mr. Connally also said he thought that the shot that killed the President had
been meant for him. He said this was because the accused assassin, Lee Harvey
Oswald, had written a letter asking Mr. Connally, as Navy Secretary, to upgrade
his undesirable discharge from the Marines, and that no action had been taken on
the request.

Robert S. Strauss, the former Democratic national chairman, who was one of Mr.
Connally's oldest friends, described him last night as "one of the ablest men I
ever knew, a man who had an uncanny ability to forget the transitory stuff and
retain all the vital information in his head, year after year."

"He was a pioneer," Mr. Strauss said. "He was a different kind of governor than
Texas had ever had. He spent a lot of money on mental health and education and
other things that were verboten at the time. One time he even put a liberal
rabbi on the Board of Regents at the University of Texas, with all those
businessmen.

"But after the assassination, he moved right and kind of lost his way."

In his 1989 book "Nixon: The Triumph of a Politician," Stephen E. Ambrose wrote
that Mr. Nixon's "admiration for Connally grew to the point of adulation after
Mr. Connally advised him to go ahead with the bombing of Hanoi and the mining of
Haiphong." By 1972, Mr. Nixon says in his memoirs, he believed that Mr. Connally
"was the only man in either party who clearly had the potential to be a great
President."

Mr. Nixon discussed with several of his aides the possibility of putting Mr.
Connally on the Republican ticket that year instead of Vice President Spiro T.
Agnew. But they demurred, arguing that dumping Mr. Agnew would anger Republican
conservatives, and Mr. Nixon gave in.

Part of Mr. Connally's success as a politician derived from his impressive
appearance. In 1970, after he was named Treasury Secretary, he was described in
an article in The New York Times: "Mr. Connally is tall, gray-haired, handsome,
personable and articulate, and his manners and bearing recall those of President
Johnson. Yet he is suave and has a touch of the Eastern establishment."


Born Into Poverty

John Bowden Connally Jr. was born in Floresville, Tex., on Feb. 27, 1917, one of
seven children born to John Bowden Connally and the former Lela Wright. His
father had been a cowboy, a barber and a grocer before turning to dairy farming
and finally tenant farming. The family's circumstances were always quite modest;
there often were debts and struggles to pay them.

The younger John Connally attended public schools in Harlandale, where his
family lived, and in nearby San Antonio. He then went to the University of
Texas, where he received a bachelor's degree and then a law degree.

In college he was interested in campus politics, oratory and acting, and was
elected president of the Students Association. He also developed a desire to
amass land and money, and never return to the poverty he knew as a boy.

Mr. Connally met Lyndon Johnson when he was a young Congressman from Texas in
the late 1930's, and was a campaign worker for him..

An Aide to Eisenhower

In World War II Mr. Connally served as a Navy officer, first as a legal
assistant to James V. Forrestal, who was then Secretary of the Navy, and later
in North Africa on the staff of Gen. Dwight D. Eisenhower when he was planning
the Allied invasion of Italy. Still later, reassigned to the Pacific, Mr.
Connally won the Bronze Star for valor.

After the war he worked again in Johnson's Congressional campaigns, and managed
his successful campaign for the United States Senate in 1948. During this period
Mr. Connally also practiced law, first in Austin, Tex., and later in Fort Worth.

In 1952 he bolted the Democratic Party to help Eisenhower win the Presidency at
the behest of Mr. Connally's client, Sid W. Richardson, a wealthy oil executive.

His defection did not bother Johnson, who valued Mr. Connally's aggressiveness
and skills and continued to rely on them as he steadily gained power in the
Senate.

They were effectively used again in 1956, when Mr. Connally helped his mentor
wrest control of the Democratic Party in Texas from Gov. Allen Shivers. Johnson
was grateful, but later reportedly told his Under Secretary of State, George W.
Ball, that Mr. Connally could "leave more dead bodies in the field with less
remorse than any politician I ever knew."

A Lucrative Association

In the early 1950's Mr. Connally had become a lawyer for Mr. Richardson, who
ultimately put him in charge of running his business ventures in Texas and
Jamaica. The association proved most lucrative to Mr. Connally, who eventually
became one of the executors of Mr. Richardson's estate.

In 1960 Mr. Connally managed Johnson's unsuccessful campaign to wrest the
Democratic Presidential nomination from Kennedy and worked for the Democratic
ticket after Kennedy chose Johnson as his running mate.

Mr. Connally was instrumental in the ticket's carrying Texas, the key to the
Democratic victory, and Johnson gave him much of the credit for the narrow
defeat of Mr. Nixon and his running mate, Henry Cabot Lodge of Massachusetts. In
a letter to Mr. Connally, the Vice President-elect said, "Except for you, I know
the outcome would have been different."

As a condition of accepting the Vice-Presidential nomination, Johnson was given
control of appointments to the Kennedy Administration from Texas, and Mr.
Connally was thus assured of an important post.

He became Kennedy's Secretary of the Navy in January 1961, but resigned the post
in less than a year to make a successful run for governor of Texas, a job he
held from 1963 to 1969. At the time of the assassination, Kennedy was visiting
Texas in the hopes of mending some political fences, and Mr. Connally, as
Governor, was accompanying him. Governor Connally had a reputation as a big
spender, focusing on the improvement of higher education and establishing the
state as a magnet for development during his three two-year terms.

Conservative Connections

Mr. Connally was in the conservative wing of the Democratic Party, and in 1969
Mr. Nixon, who liked Mr. Connally's politics, asked him to serve on an advisory
commission to reorganize the executive branch.

Mr. Nixon was so impressed with Mr. Connally that he named him Secretary of the
Treasury in 1971. As Secretary until 1972, Mr. Connally was largely responsible
for the Federal guarantee of some $250 million in loans to the Lockheed Aircraft
Corporation, then the nation's largest major military contractor but near
collapse because of major cutbacks in military spending and other setbacks in
its civilian projects.

It was during his tenure, in August 1971, that the United States went off the
gold standard, which had the effect of inaugurating the era of floating
currencies and devaluing the dollar. The Adminstration also imposed wage and
price controls in an effort to control inflation.

"We are at the end of an era in our economic policy," Mr. Connally declared in
an interview that month, defending the moves. "American business and labor may
have to get used to the idea of living within certain parameters."

Mr. Connally gave the President some advice on matters not related to money.
According to "The Lone Star," a biography of Mr. Connally written by James
Reston Jr. and published by Edward Burlingame Book/Harper & Row in 1990, Mr.
Connally urged Mr. Nixon to consider the use of nuclear weapons to win the
Vietnam War.

In May 1973, three months after Johnson's death, Mr. Connally officially became
a Republican. He said that party was his "true philosophical home" because it
"it best expressed the broad view of most Americans, whatever their party
affiliation."

Special Adviser to Nixon

In 1973, as Mr. Nixon became more deeply embroiled in the Watergate scandal, he
turned to Mr. Connally for help and named him a special adviser, a job that he
held for 69 days before quitting. Mr. Reston says in "The Lone Star" that Mr.
Connally resigned because Mr. Nixon picked the House minority leader,
Representative Gerald R. Ford of Michigan, as Vice President to replace Mr.
Agnew, who resigned on Oct. 10, 1973, after pleading no contest to a charge of
tax evasion stemming from kickback payments he had received as Governor of
Maryland.

Months later, with Mr. Connally out of public office, Mr. Ford was sworn in as
President after Mr. Nixon resigned rather than face impeachment over the
Watergate scandal.

In 1974 Mr. Connally was indicted by a Federal grand jury on charges of perjury
and conspiracy to obstruct justice. Prosecutors said he had taken $10,000 from
the American Milk Producers Inc. after persuading Mr. Nixon to back a
controversial increase in price supports for milk in 1971. Mr. Connally was
exonerated by a Federal jury in Washington in 1975.

But Mr. Connally continued to be active in politics even after this incident. In
the late 1970's he unsuccessfully opposed Ronald Reagan's drive to control the
Republican Party, and in 1980 he made a costly but losing campaign for the
Republican Presidential nomination.

After that, he abandoned whatever aspirations he had for public office and
concentrated on making money, which led to a partnership with former Lieut. Gov.
Ben Barnes of Texas.

But in 1988 Mr. Connally declared bankruptcy, placing the blame for his $93
million personal debt mostly on bad real estate, oil and gas investments he made
in Texas as the state's economy began to worsen. He was forced to sell most of
his 2,674-acre ranch near Floresville, along with his horses, Chippendale and
Louis XIV furniture, fine china, rifle collection and ceremonial saddles inlaid
with his initials in gold.

Left with his ranch house and a mere 200 acres, Mr. Connally said, "I know what
it is to be poor." To the surprise of nobody who knew him, he emerged from
bankruptcy within a year.

His survivors include his wife of 52 years, the former Idanell Brill; two sons,
John 3d of Houston and Mark M. of Austin; a daughter, Sharon C. Ammann of
Austin; four brothers, two sisters, eight grandchildren and one
great-grandchild.


NAME: John B. Connally

LOAD-DATE: June 16, 1993

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

CORRECTION-DATE: June 17, 1993, Thursday

CORRECTION:

A picture caption yesterday with the obituary of John B. Connally incorrectly
described a picture of him and President John F. Kennedy. The car in which the
two men were sitting was not the limousine in which Kennedy was assassinated,
but a smaller car they used earlier that day. The caption also misstated Mr.
Connally's location in the later motorcade. He sat in a jump seat between the
front and rear seats of the limousine, not in its front seat.


GRAPHIC: Photos: John B. Connally. (Craig Stafford, 1988) (pg. A1); John B.
Connally, right, who was then Governor of Texas, sitting with President and Mrs.
Kennedy in the limousine in which Kennedy was assassinated on Nov. 22, 1963. Mr.
Connally, who later in the motorcade moved to the front seat of the car, was
also shot in the attack; Mr. Connally said he thought the attack on the
President was meant for him. His belief was based on a letter written to him
when he was Secretary of the Navy by Lee Harvey Oswald, who requested that his
undesirable discharge from the Marines be upgraded. The request was not acted
upon. (Associated Press) (pg. D25)

TYPE: Biography

                   Copyright 1993 The New York Times Company


                              275 of 312 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 June 16, 1993, Wednesday, Late Edition - Final
                              Correction Appended

General to Be Disciplined For Disparaging President

BYLINE: By ERIC SCHMITT,  Special to The New York Times

SECTION: Section A; Page 20; Column 5; National Desk

LENGTH: 937 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, June 15


An Air Force inquiry has concluded that a two-star general made disparaging
remarks about President Clinton, and the general now faces disciplinary action
that will effectively end his career, senior Air Force officials said today.

The Air Force inquiry found that the officer, Maj. Gen. Harold N. Campbell,
called Mr. Clinton a "dope-smoking," "skirt-chasing," "draft-dodging" Commander
in Chief, in a speech last month in the Netherlands.

Senior military officers are frequently asked at Congressional hearings to give
their personal opinions on military policies, but it is extremely rare for an
officer to ridicule his commander openly, especially the President.

General Campbell's superior, Gen. Ronald W. Yates, the head of the Air Force
Materiel Command, is expected to meet with the general on Thursday and give him
one of two types of written reprimands: either a written reprimand or a more
serious written rebuke that typically includes forfeiting pay. General Yates has
ruled out a court-martial, Air Force officials said.

A Tense Relationship

Given the fierce competition for advancement in today's shrinking military, any
professional blemish virtually dooms an officer's chances for promotion. And if
a senior officer is passed over for promotion, his military career is considered
finished.

General Campbell, a decorated former fighter pilot who served two tours of duty
in Vietnam, declined to comment today, an Air Force spokesman said. He has made
no public statements on his comments at an awards banquet last month.

The general's remarks, which one official familiar with the inquiry said were
probably meant to be "an ice breaker" at the beginning of the speech, were the
harshest public rebuke of Mr. Clinton by a military official. Despite efforts by
the Joint Chiefs of Staff and the White House to patch up their differences,
many military officers still harbor animosity toward Mr. Clinton for his plans
to reduce military spending and allow homosexuals to serve openly in the armed
forces, and for his avoiding the draft during the Vietnam War.

At the urging of his senior military advisers, Mr. Clinton has tried to win the
approval of the armed services. In the past few months, Mr. Clinton has flown to
the aircraft carrier Theodore Roosevelt, attended a parade at the Marine Corps
barracks here and given the commencement address at West Point.

'Very Bad,' Clinton Says

Responding to questions from reporters today, Mr. Clinton said he had not seen
the final report and would not intervene while the Air Force was handling the
inquiry. "For me, personally, I didn't care," the President said. "People say
whatever they want to say about me personally."

The President added, "But for a general officer to say that about the Commander
in Chief, if that happened, is a very bad thing."

Until last month, General Campbell, 53, was deputy chief of staff for plans and
programs at the Air Force Materiel Command, which has its headquarters at
Wright-Patterson Air Force Base in Dayton, Ohio. He had been scheduled to
transfer to the Washington area to take command of the Defense Fuel Supply
Center, a unit of the Defense Logistics Agency. That transfer has been delayed
pending the outcome of the inquiry.

The furor stemmed from remarks General Campbell gave in a speech to 250 American
service members and their spouses on May 24 at the awards banquet, near a Dutch
air base where United States forces are stationed.

Details of General Campbell's comments filtered back to the United States,
alarming top Air Force commanders so much that Lieut. Gen. Dale W. Thompson Jr.,
the vice commander of the Air Force Materiel Command, was dispatched to the
Netherlands last week to interview people who attended the speech.

General Yates declined to comment on the inquiry's findings, a spokesman said
today. General Thompson was traveling today and unavailable for comment, his
office said.

Motive Is Irrelevant

A senior Air Force official familiar with the three-page inquiry and its
accompanying witness statements said General Thompson interviewed about two
dozen people. Virtually all remembered General Campbell's remarks about Mr.
Clinton, but people had differing versions of the context and tone.

"They weren't in anger or in disdain," said the official, who spoke on the
condition of anonymity. "I think it was meant as an ice breaker, but it's a fine
line between what's construed as a joke and what's uncomplimentary and
contemptuous. Regardless of the motivation, they were in very poor taste and
deserve punishment."

The military's lawbook, the Uniform Code of Military Justice, says any
commissioned officer found to have used "contemptuous words" against the
President may be court-martialed. But the Air Force has never court-martialed a
general officer in its 46-year history.

If General Yates issues the more serious written rebuke, called an Article 15,
General Campbell can appeal to the Air Force Chief of Staff, Gen. Merrill A.
McPeak. The lesser reprimand cannot be appealed.

Two senior officers who know General Campbell well said it was unclear if he
would challenge any disciplinary action. In instances like this, senior officers
often request early retirement and can be demoted a rank or two in the process.

Last summer, the Air Force retired Donald L. Kaufman as a colonel from his last
rank, major general, a two-rank demotion, after he illegally brought back from
the Persian Gulf war two AK-47 rifles, a rocket-propelled grenade and a hand
grenade, and then tried to get an aide to get rid of the war booty.


LOAD-DATE: June 16, 1993

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

CORRECTION-DATE: June 17, 1993, Thursday

CORRECTION:

A brief front-page summary yesterday about an Air Force general who was found to
have disparaged President Clinton misstated the prospective disciplinary action
in some copies. It is the Air Force, not the President, that plans to reprimand
the officer, Maj. Gen. Harold N. Campbell.


GRAPHIC: Photo: Maj. Gen. Harold N. Campbell faces disciplinary action for
disparaging remarks about President Clinton. (U.S. Air Force)

                   Copyright 1993 The New York Times Company


                              276 of 312 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 June 17, 1993, Thursday, Late Edition - Final

Books of The Times;
Starring in Tocqueville's Crystal Ball

BYLINE: By HERBERT MITGANG

SECTION: Section C; Page 17; Column 1; Cultural Desk

LENGTH: 982 words



Commager on Toqueville
By Henry Steele Commager
130 pages. University of Missouri Press. $24.95.

Henry Steele Commager's brilliant new interpretation of Alexis de Tocqueville's
"Democracy in America" offers this astute comment: "He had an instinct for the
jugular vein in history."

The same can be said for Dr. Commager, the author of major works on the American
mind and dream and now professor emeritus of history at Amherst College. For in
"Commager on Tocqueville," our premier historian allows the reader to see
America today through the critical vision of Commager on Commager.

Pulling no punches, Dr. Commager achieves three things in his invaluable little
book. He makes us want to read or reread Tocqueville's 1835 classic, he tells us
what's lasting and what's flawed about "Democracy in America" and, more than
many of the historians in academe, he speaks out about some imperfections of the
United States.


As a historical icon, Tocqueville is generally more cited than read. He could be
quaint as well as prescient, better on the political system than on the people.
Prepare to be chided if you quote this Tocqueville sentence -- from his chapter
titled "The Young Woman as a Wife" -- to a feminist: "In America a woman loses
her independence forever in the bonds of matrimony." He can hardly be blamed for
failing to anticipate the current society-page phrase "the bride will retain her
name."

But selective quotations are always unfair, including Tocqueville's famous but
isolated paragraph predicting that the future belonged to America and Russia
because "each of them seems to be marked out by the will of heaven to sway the
destinies of half the globe." To which Dr. Commager adds that Tocqueville
accurately predicted "the Americanization of the Old World," but he foresaw it
as impending only within his own lifetime.

"Commager on Tocqueville" explores five areas Tocqueville raised but did not
always answer: democracy and the tyranny of the majority, the price of a just
society, centralization and democracy, the military in a democracy and the
contradictions between political equality and economic inequality. While showing
great respect for Tocqueville's profound interpretations of America, Dr.
Commager uses these areas as taking-off points for his own humane and liberal
views.


It's been a long turning from the Age of Andrew Jackson in the 1830's to the Age
of President Clinton in the 1990's, but Dr. Commager finds that Tocqueville's
ideas, if not his high standards, remain as instructive today as they were a
century and a half ago. Admittedly, Tocqueville's sources of information were
inadequate and often misleading: "He made it a point to meet the best people,
and the best people, then as now, were inclined to deprecate democracy." Yet Dr.
Commager emphasizes that Tocqueville, the aristocrat, admired America's
egalitarian government and society.

Balancing equality and justice in modern America, here is Commager on Commager
in some of his most challenging words: "We were vindictive toward those who
refused to fight in a war in Vietnam that they thought unjust and immoral, but
we do not always prosecute those agents of the Central Intelligence Agency and
the Federal Bureau of Investigation, whose business it is to enforce the law,
for the countless crimes they committed -- committed with official approval, to
be sure -- nor did we prosecute those who improperly gave their approval. Is
there one justice for the citizen and another for those who regard themselves as
rulers above the law, not servants of the people and of the law?"

Tocqueville was certain that war and the military would endanger liberty and
democracy in the New World. Here, too, Dr. Commager finds Tocqueville capable of
looking into the future. "And though Tocqueville could not possibly have
foreseen the form that militarism would take in the era of the
military-industrial complex," Dr. Commager says, "he did somehow apprehend that
war would increasingly involve business and manufacturers and that inevitably
the state and the interests that provided the materials for war would become
mixed-up and interdependent."


But Dr. Commager doesn't simply place the blame on the American military for the
military-industrial complex during the cold war. He follows up Tocqueville's
fear that militarism would harm a democratic Government by pointing to
civilian-led administrations in Washington that assumed "something of the
military character" and were responsible for creating what he calls the national
security state.

Again, Commager boldly on Commager: "It was President Truman who formulated the
doctrine that led the United States to replace Britain in the Near and Middle
East, and Truman, too, who made the decision to enter the Korean War. It was
Eisenhower who sent warships and marines to Lebanon, Kennedy who launched the
Bay of Pigs. Kennedy, too, was in part responsible for the initial ventures into
Vietnam, which under the guiding and misguiding hands of Presidents Johnson and
Nixon escalated into a major war."

Dr. Commager builds on Tocqueville's vision of a democratic society by calling
for the next egalitarian goal: a just society in the United States and for the
rest of the world.  He proposes that international agencies and regulatory
commissions, not "some abstract thing called 'world government,' " should handle
such basic concerns as the environment, health, nourishment, agriculture and "a
hundred other problems that no one nation can possibly solve and which unsolved
will affect every nation."

In an eloquent conclusion to a book whose only flaw is that it lacks an index,
Dr. Commager writes that the United States should recover the "moral and
practical leadership," which inspired Tocqueville in the last century and which
existed during times of crisis up to the middle of the 20th century.

LOAD-DATE: June 17, 1993

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo: Henry Steele Commager (Amherst College)

TYPE: Review

                   Copyright 1993 The New York Times Company


                              277 of 312 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 June 17, 1993, Thursday, Late Edition - Final
                              Correction Appended

The Capital Press and the President: Fair Coverage or Unreined Adversity?

BYLINE: By WILLIAM GLABERSON

SECTION: Section A; Page 22; Column 1; National Desk

LENGTH: 1630 words


Though mutual distrust is routine in Washington, President Clinton's conflicts
with reporters have raised, somewhat earlier than usual, the question that
arises in every Administration: whether the nation's news organizations are
being fair to the President.

For months now, the press has had little good to say about President Clinton,
and he has sometimes been unable to contain his obvious frustration with the
press.

That rocky relationship reached a low on Monday in Mr. Clinton's acid Rose
Garden response to ABC News's White House correspondent, Brit Hume. Mr. Hume
asked Mr. Clinton about "a certain zigzag quality" in the President's decision
making. Mr. Clinton's response ended the news conference by chastising
reporters.

The debate over the fairness of the coverage is about such subtleties as tone
and emphasis rather than literal accuracy. And the battle between the President
and the press has raised anew the unanswerable question of whether it is the
events or the way they are recorded that set the tone of an administration.

"This is the normal process, but accelerated," said Larry J. Sabato, a professor
of government at the University of Virginia who wrote "Feeding Frenzy" (Free
Press, 1991) about politics and the news. "Rarely, if ever, have press relations
deteriorated so quickly as they have in this Administration."

Criticism of the coverage has also focused attention on the growing trend of the
news media to supplement traditional news accounts with heavy doses of
interpretation, which some readers see as virtual editorials.

Not surprisingly, some people argue that the messenger is being blamed for the
message. Stephen Hess, who studies the Presidency and the press at the Brookings
Institution in Washington, said: "Bill Clinton is getting bad press largely
because he's been all thumbs. The press didn't hire Zoe Baird. The press didn't
fire Lani Guinier."

Presidential Punching Bag

But reporters have overheard the President telling guests that he felt like a
punching bag, and he has publicly blamed the press for focusing on the wrong
things. "Controversy gets news," he said during a town meeting in late May, "and
when we're out here working on things that aren't controversial, it's often not
reported."

Some who sympathize with the President say Mr. Clinton is rightly impatient with
what they see as the press's destructive tendency to oversimplify and
overdramatize and to declare quick winners and losers.

This week the sparks flew over news accounts of Mr. Clinton's first Supreme
Court nomination, when he selected Judge Ruth Bader Ginsburg after stops and
starts. Some said the news of Judge Ginsburg's nomination was unfairly
overwhelmed with negative interpretation about whether the President had
mishandled the selection process.

Kathleen Hall Jamieson, dean of the Annenburg School for Communication at the
University of Pennsylvania, said President Clinton was right to be distressed
that the press had focused so much on "tactics and the game" of Washington
politics as opposed to the substance of public issues.

Government as a Game

Ms. Jamieson acknowledged that reporters need to help readers and viewers
understand the relationship of each decision to Mr. Clinton's overall
performance. "But, when everything the President does is covered as 'how is he
doing?' rather than 'what does it mean?' you lose your ability to evaluate
governance," she said.

This week, the White House worked anew to play down differences with the press
corps. "I don't think it's necessarily a question of fairness," George
Stephanopoulos, the President's former communications director and now his
senior adviser, said yesterday. "They're doing their job. Our job is to make
sure that our side of the story gets out."

But there is general agreement that Mr. Clinton entirely missed a media
honeymoon. "This is a strange city," said Adam Nagourney, a Washington political
correspondent for USA Today. "Everyone makes these instant judgments; the
conventional wisdom moves way too fast. It's more of a press problem than it is
Clinton's problem."

Even before Mr. Clinton moved into the White House, some commentators asserted
that news organizations, including The New York Times, appeared to be "a chorus
of journalistic doubt and concern," as The New Yorker magazine put it just two
weeks after the election.

Clinton as 'Antihero'

From there, the coverage only grew harder. The three major networks' evening
news broadcasts have pounded away with negative coverage. The President, as The
Boston Globe said, has been "the nightly news' leading antihero."

According to a new study by the Center for Media and Public Affairs, which
receives some of its financing from conservative groups, 64 percent of all
references to Mr. Clinton by network news reporters or by people they
interviewed were negative during the first four months of the Administration, as
against 41 percent negative comments about President Bush during the same period
of his Administration in 1989. At the time, President Bush had very high ratings
in public opinion polls, while Mr. Clinton's ratings are at a post-World War II
low.

In the nation's magazines and newspapers, writing about the White House has
taken on an edge. Time magazine reported in a June 7 cover article titled "The
Incredible Shrinking President" that Mr. Clinton's public approval ratings had
slipped to record lows and described his Presidency as "beset since its
inception by miscalculations and self-inflicted wounds."

U.S. News & World Report's June 14 issue, under the headline "A question of
competence," described the President as "preoccupied with an astonishing series
of mistakes and bungles."

Litany of Negatives

Newspaper news and analysis columns have been filled with barbs. In print,
reporters referred to the "Hair Force One" and "Travelgate" affairs and
described the "embarrassment du jour." The White House staff, William Neikirk of
the The Chicago Tribune wrote on May 30, has been described as a " 'children's
crusade' of unexperienced, liberal ideologues." David Shribman of The Boston
Globe wrote in a news analysis that the President, "who seemed to have perfect
pitch, now seems tone deaf."

"It doesn't get much worse than this," Thomas B. Rosenstiel wrote in The Los
Angeles Times, adding, "The President and his staff have been put into the
position of somehow proving they are not incompetent." In The New York Times
Week In Review Section, Michael Kelly declared, "What might be called Mr.
Clinton's incredibility factor has been building for some time."

But the edge may have grown sharpest in the handling of the Supreme Court
nomination. The Wall Street Journal's accounts of the nomination were examples
of the growing use of interpretation in news articles.

The news article in the Journal on Monday included the kind of
right-between-the-eyes analysis that infuriates those who think they spot an
ambush of the President by the press. "No matter how it turns out," the article
by Jeffrey H. Birnbaum and Paul M. Barrett said, "Mr. Clinton's handling of the
situation -- widely considered inept even by political allies -- has been
damaging."

Beyond Just the Facts

Albert R. Hunt, The Journal's Washington bureau chief, acknowledged that in
earlier times who, what, when, where and why were the only questions journalists
believed they were called on to answer in news reports.

To adapt to the public's growing saturation with news, Mr. Hunt and other
journalists said, news organizations have struggled to offer more, including
perspective and interpretation of events. That, he said, was the intention of
the Journal's coverage of the Ginsburg nomination.

"The question I kept getting all weekend, was: 'How can a smart, able guy screw
up like this?' " Mr. Hunt said. "If we're supposed to be writing about what's
happening, that's what's happening."

Evan Thomas, the Washington bureau chief for Newsweek, said "an adversarial
relationship between the White House and the press is a good thing, because if
the press falls asleep at the switch, what you get is the Bay of Pigs, Joe
McCarthy, Vietnam."

What Honeymoon?

Still, Mr. Thomas said some reporters covering the White House might have extra
bite when it comes to Mr. Clinton and his aides. There is, Mr. Thomas said,
"some overkill and a kind of meanness. And there is an element of revenge,
because this particular crowd were smug, contemptuous of the press and thought
they could go over our heads."

Some say the Administration may feel particularly betrayed because Mr. Clinton's
campaign, after the Gennifer Flowers and draft-record controversies, appeared to
control the press. The expectations for a long honeymoon (or, indeed a honeymoon
at all, which the President bemoaned missing at his news conference on Tuesday)
may have derived from misconceptions about Washington reporters.

Because many of them are of the same generation as the President and are widely
believed to be Democrats and politically liberal, there may have been some
belief among the President's staff that the press would be on their side. "I
think they're surprised that being adversarial is more important than being
liberal," said William Kristol, who was chief of staff for Vice President Dan
Quayle.

Some who have been around the White House for a long time say there is a certain
sense of deja vu in all the maneuverings and mutterings between the President
and the press. Helen Thomas, who has covered every President since John F.
Kennedy for United Press International, said she did not believe Mr. Clinton's
complaints were especially unusual.

"No President ever liked the press," Ms. Thomas said, "and we don't expect to
start now."

LOAD-DATE: June 17, 1993

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

CORRECTION-DATE: June 18, 1993, Friday

CORRECTION:

An article yesterday about President Clinton's relations with the press referred
incorrectly to the communications school at the University of Pennsylvania. It
is the Annenberg School for Communication.


GRAPHIC: Photo: The latest dispute between the Clinton Administration and the
press involved news accounts of Mr. Clinton's first Supreme Court nomination,
when he selected Judge Ruth Bader Ginsburg after public stops and starts.
"They're doing their job," said George Stephanopoulos, the President's former
communications director and now a senior adviser, who spoke with Mr. Clinton as
they stood facing reporters with Judge Ginsburg. "Our job is to make sure that
our side of the story gets out." (Jose R. Lopez/The New York Times)

                   Copyright 1993 The New York Times Company


                              278 of 312 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                  June 18, 1993, Friday, Late Edition - Final

Sihanouk Is Reunited With Son, Who Vows Secession Bid Is Over

BYLINE: By PHILIP SHENON,  Special to The New York Times

SECTION: Section A; Page 10; Column 1; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 366 words

DATELINE: PHNOM PENH, Cambodia, June 17


Only days after he announced a secessionist movement in Cambodia's eastern
provinces, the wayward son of Prince Norodom Sihanouk was reunited today with
his father and promised that his secessionist campaign was over.

"This audience marks the official end of the 'secessionist' movement in certain
provinces of Cambodia," the royal palace said in a statement after the meeting
between Prince Sihanouk, Cambodia's head of state, and the son, Prince Norodom
Chakrapong.

Prince Chakrapong, promised amnesty by his father, had returned to Phnom Penh on
Wednesday after fleeing earlier in the week to Vietnam.

Last week Prince Chakrapong announced that he was forming an "autonomous zone"
in seven eastern Cambodian provinces to protest the outcome of the
internationally supervised elections last month.

Royalists Won Election

Prince Chakrapong was a Deputy Prime Minister in the current
Vietnamese-installed Government, which lost the election to the royalist
opposition party led by his estranged half-brother, Prince Norodom Ranariddh.

Although Prince Chakrapong's departure for Vietnam certainly suggested that his
secessionist movement was over, it was not certain until today. Palace officials
said the Prince had returned to Phnom Penh after receiving word from his father
that he would not be punished.

The abrupt collapse of the secessionist movement heightened speculation that
creation of the so-called autonomous zone was a ploy intended to put pressure on
Prince Ranariddh to agree to a coalition government.

If it was a ploy, it worked. On Wednesday, Prince Ranariddh agreed to a interim
coalition government with the current Prime Minister, Hun Sen, only a week after
the Prince had rejected a similar plan.

The power-sharing agreement was brokered by Prince Sihanouk.

Although Prince Chakrapong was ready only last week to partition Cambodia, his
father announced today that all was forgiven. The "patriotism" of Prince
Chakrapong "makes me embrace you with all my profound affection," Prince
Sihanouk told him.

For his part, Prince Chakrapong told his father in a handwritten letter, "I
volunteer to serve your royal policy forever, without conditions."


LOAD-DATE: June 18, 1993

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1993 The New York Times Company


                              279 of 312 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                  June 18, 1993, Friday, Late Edition - Final

Critic's Notebook;
Books That Make a Case for Shades of Gray

BYLINE: By MICHIKO KAKUTANI

SECTION: Section C; Page 1; Column 1; Weekend Desk

LENGTH: 2979 words


HUMAN beings have always had a fondness for black and white distinctions, for
easy ways of categorizing experience, values and taste, as though life were just
one great big athletic showdown. People are foxes (who know many things) or
hedgehogs (who know one big thing); Apollonians (advocates of order and
classical discipline) or Dionysians (revelers in the romantic and the extreme).
Writers are palefaces (genteel surveyors of sensibility, like Henry James) or
redskins (raucous explorers of the outer limits, like Melville). One is "in" or
"out"; in Nancy Mitford's words, "U" or "Non-U." Or, as Ken Kesey once put it,
you're either on the bus or off the bus.

Recently, however, such amusing distinctions have given way to more serious
efforts to pigeonhole the world, efforts that underscore our tendency to see
everything in terms of either-or, all-or-nothing, left-or-right. Teen-agers used
to ask each other, "Are you a fan of the Stones or the Beatles?" John or Paul?
Those innocuous questions, used to categorize one as a human being, have been
replaced by similarly reductive -- but considerably more loaded -- litmus tests:
Are you "pro life" or "pro choice"? Are you for unemployed loggers or endangered
spotted owls? Do you believe Anita Hill or Clarence Thomas? Is Bosnia another
Holocaust or another Vietnam?

Television, newspaper and magazine polls almost daily tell us whether President
Clinton is up or down, whether people give a thumbs up or a thumbs down to the
world, the country, their own lives. Newsweek's Conventional Wisdom Watch
evaluates everything from politics to sports to the fortunes of Socks the cat
with an arrow up or an arrow down (or a horizontal arrow to indicate no change).
Time magazine's new column Winners & Losers gives the reader an illustrated list
of that week's personalities who have scored a success or suffered a defeat,
while its Health Report categorizes developments in medicine as "good news" or
"bad news."

Mr. Clinton's campaign talk of creating a new politics of consensus has devolved
into factional fights between liberals and moderates within his own
Administration, and attacks from the right and left without. The
Administration's struggle to find an acceptable Supreme Court nominee, its
waffling over the issue of homosexuals in the military, the appointment of David
Gergen as a White House consultant, all have been marked by a heightened
awareness of reactions from the left and the right.

Indeed, shrill denunciations, absolutist language and extremist assertions have
become a commonplace in debates about politics, race, abortion and sexism. Dr.
Leonard Jeffries preaches the superiority of blacks (or "sun people" as he calls
them), while David Duke has declared "there's only one country anymore that's
all white, and that's Iceland, and Iceland is not enough." Feminists blame men
for sexism, while members of the men's movement blame women for making them
victims. Traditionalists assail multiculturalists as "Visigoths in Tweed," while
radical reformers complain about the hegemony of DWEM's (that is, dead white
European males).

This rising tide of rhetoric, along with our current penchant for either-or
constructions, is both a symptom of -- and a catalyst for -- the growing
polarization of American society, a polarization, as authors of several recent
books point out, that has begun to affect how we think about everything from
politics to the arts. "Polarization is addictive," writes the critic Robert
Hughes in his eloquent new book, "Culture of Complaint." "It is the crack of
politics -- a short intense rush that the system craves again and again, until
it begins to collapse."

Cornel West -- the director of Afro-American studies at Princeton University and
the author of a new book called "Race Matters" -- argues that in the area of
race, too, "the predictable pitting of liberals against conservatives, Great
Society Democrats against self-help Republicans, reinforces intellectual
parochialism and political paralysis."

As Mr. West sees it, "these two camps have nearly suffocated the crucial debate
that should be taking place about the prospects for black America." By focusing
on government aid and the economic dimension, he says, the liberal approach
overlooks the crucial role of culture and values; by focusing on the moral
behavior of poor city blacks, he adds, the conservative approach "tends to deny
the lingering effect of black history -- a history inseparable from though not
reducible to victimization."

Another scholar, James Davison Hunter of the University of Virginia, defines the
polarization taking root in America in somewhat different terms. In his book
"Culture Wars: The Struggle to Define America," he suggests that orthodox
elements from the Roman Catholic, Jewish and Protestant traditions are forming a
coalition against progressive forces from those same traditions and secular
interests. Given most political and social issues, he suggests, it's fairly easy
to predict the stand of many major organizations: on the progressive side, one
can usually find mainline Protestant denominations, as well as such groups as
the National Council of Churches and the Union of American Hebrew Congregations;
on the orthodox side can usually be found such groups as the National Right to
Life Committee, the American Council of Christian Churches, the American
Association of Christian Schools and Agudath Israel of America.

Mirror, Mirror

Just what accounts for this growing polarization? In part, the development is a
reflection of realities in American society: the growing disparity between rich
and poor, and the growing racial tensions that have been exacerbated by
unemployment, shifting immigration patterns and a troubled economy.

Yet at the same time, the polarization is also the result of ideologues on
either end of the political spectrum imposing their paint-by-the-numbers
formulations on the national debate; and a function of a time-pressed,
fashion-obsessed society in which people have opinions about books they've never
read and movies they've never seen. After all, it's easier and more amusing to
dispense a quick pro or con witticism about a subject -- be it Somalia, the
budget or the latest Springsteen album -- than to embark upon a considered
discussion. Cut to the chase, as they say: what people want to know is, is it
good or bad? What's the bottom line?

No doubt the "us versus them" view of the world also has roots in the
Manichaeism of the cold war decades, which pitted a virtuous, democratic America
against the evil empire of the Soviet Union; and in the counter-culture
struggles of the 60's, which encouraged opponents of the Vietnam War to see
themselves in an adversarial relationship with the Establishment. Conservatives
remember the 60's, when they saw liberals as obscenity-shouting radicals;
liberals remember the 80's, when they saw conservatives as greedy capitalist
pigs.

As the world order has fragmented, as economic and social problems have
proliferated at home, these old habits of bipolarism die hard. Japan and Iraq
have been floated as possible successors for the role once filled by America's
old nemesis, the Soviet Union, while an assortment of domestic bogeymen have
been proposed by ideologues on both the left and right.

Of course, the us-versus-them formula has long been used by politicians, eager
to focus their agendas by playing up distinctions between themselves and their
opponents. It's an inclination that has been galvanized by television: not only
do the nightly news programs zero in on the most colorful sound bites, but talk
shows (from "The McLaughlin Group" to "Crossfire" to "Meet the Press") like to
pit conservatives against liberals, Republicans against Democrats.

In his compelling new book "Strange Bedfellows," the Los Angeles Times reporter
Tom Rosenstiel argues that television has concentrated increasingly on the
horse-race aspect of politics, and that politicians have learned to exploit this
situation. Of the Clinton adviser Paul Begala, Mr. Rosenstiel writes that he
"believed the teachings of Republican strategist Roger Ailes that the press was
mostly interested only in conflict, scandal, polls, process and gaffes." Mr.
Rosenstiel adds: "So to get coverage of a speech, he usually included attack
lines, making his speeches more malicious than they would otherwise be."

Corralling Scapegoats

In the escalating war of words, hyperbole flourishes, as both sides play to the
public's fears, searching for easy scapegoats and convenient straw men. Extremes
consequently begin to dominate the debate: while the left tries to equate
conservatives with Senator Jesse Helms, the right tries to equate liberals with
the Rev. Jesse Jackson. As Mr. Hughes observes in "Culture of Complaint," "one
side needs the other, so that each can inflate its agenda into a chiliastic
battle for the soul of America."

This process of polarization began decades ago, say Thomas Byrne Edsall and Mary
D. Edsall in their book "Chain Reaction: The Impact of Race, Rights and Taxes on
American Politics." As the Edsalls see it, the reform wing of the Democratic
party, which gained control of the nominating process in 1972, alienated
working-class and middle-class whites by pushing the party toward an
identification with minority rights. During the 80's, the Edsalls say, the
Republicans learned to exploit this development, portraying the Democrats as the
party of special interests and welfare recipients; this Republican tactic --
which culminated in the use of Willie Horton in television ads during the 1988
campaign -- effectively used racial politics as a wedge to break up the old
Democratic coalition.

Though the Democrats have regained the Presidency, the polarization nourished by
years of divided government (since 1951, the White House and Senate have been
controlled by different parties more than half the time) has remained in place.
Voters have become accustomed to a familiar dialectic: the private sector versus
the public sector, taxpayers versus welfare recipients, defenders of
responsiblity versus advocates of rights.

Political Art

In much the same way that the liberal-conservative dialectic has politicized the
workings of government (from the selection of Supreme Court Justices to the
passing of budget proposals), it has also infected the worlds of art and
academia.

Some artists have willfully decided to use their work as a means of making
political statements: rap music frequently purveys a hostile, divisive message,
using ethnic slurs and violent antipolice demagoguery to try to shock audiences
into an awareness of social problems. Much of the art on view at this year's
Whitney Biennial is also overtly ideological, banging home messages about
racism, sexism and ecology with the subtlety of a jackhammer.

At its best, such art has the ability to educate the public at large and provoke
intelligent discussion; one thinks, say, of "Angels in America," Tony Kushner's
Pulitzer Prize-winning play about AIDS and the spiritual malaise of America.
More often, however, overtly political art, like that on display at the
Biennial, tends to preach to the converted, thereby accelerating the
Balkanization of the arts in this country and the loss of common ground.

"A dazzling array of different radio stations, music recordings, and films,"
says the history professor Paul Jerome Croce, in an essay in the magazine The
Public Perspective, "are now available to individual customers, without their
having to defer to the selective choices of media moguls. With polarized
politics and technological variety, people can get their news and find
entertainment -- things that used to be the province of mass culture -- all
within the segregated clusters of their own subculture."

To complicate matters further, the politicized Zeitgeist that has encouraged
overtly ideological works of art also ratifies the tendency to look at all art
-- both past and present -- through an ideological lens. On one hand,
reactionaries label everything from "Murphy Brown" to the photos of Robert
Mapplethorpe as subversive work that threatens to undermine family values and
corrupt the youth of the nation. On the other hand, advocates of political
correctness denounce the likes of Conrad and Melville as outdated avatars of a
sexist and racist power structure that needs to be overturned.

The loudest voices raised on both sides of this debate are shrill, admitting
little room for rational discussion or common sense. Columbus is either the
heroic explorer who opened the gates of the New World or the barbaric
imperialist who initiated the rape of Eden. The literary canon taught at
colleges is condemned either as a motley assortment of obscure third-world
writers, or as an obsolete collection of DWEM's. To put it another way, you're
either on the bus or off the bus.

The problem with this either-or approach is that it reduces art to its message,
and erases the subtle grays of ambiguity and chance. Characters become stick
figures in a morality drama, and just to make sure that the identity of the
heroes and the villains is perfectly clear, the audience is given lots of little
signposts. In "Indecent Proposal," we know Demi Moore is supposed to be
sympathetic because she takes a job teaching citizenship; in "Jurassic Park," we
know the Brachiosaurus is a good dinosaur because it's a vegetarian; the
Velociraptor is a bad one because it's got an unhealthy appetite for meat.

As politically correct attitudes permeate esthetics, the story an artist wants
to tell or the way it is told becomes less important than the issues it
supposedly addresses. "It revives the illusion that works of art carry social
meaning the way trucks carry coal," writes Mr. Hughes. "It divides the sprawling
republic of literature neatly into goodies and baddies, and relieves the student
of the burden of imaginative empathy, the difficulties of esthetic
discrimination."

No Nuances, Please

The consequences of society's overall polarization are similarly insidious.
Hyperbolic rhetoric about any issue obscures the emotional and political nuances
of the actual situation. Symbolism and metaphor -- comparing Bosnia, say, to
Vietnam or the Holocaust -- begin to color reality; generalizations take the
place of specifics; snap judgments replace thoughtful debate.

To give Mr. Clinton or any public figure a simple thumbs up or thumbs down
flattens out the ambiguities of politics and history, turning the chiaroscuro of
real life into a comic book's primary colors. "We tend to deal with our past
Presidents," writes Meg Greenfield in a recent Newsweek column, "either by
suppressing and ignoring their faults so we can count them saintly, or
uncovering those faults and deciding they obliterate all the good the benighted
fellow ever did. Which is to say that, just as it is with our contemporary
Presidents, so we seem always to insist that their long-gone predecessors were
either heroes or villains, successes or failures -- never, say, a little of each
and a lot in between."

Equally problematic is the effect that an either-or, all-or-nothing mentality
has on the collective dialogue. When opinions calcify into hard-line stands,
when extremists on the right and left define the agenda, the middle ground is
lost, and along with it, the possibility of consensus.

Beyond Dogma: Jazz

Are there any solutions to this situation? In his book "Beyond the Culture
Wars," Gerald Graff, a professor of English at the University of Chicago,
proposes teaching the conflict between, say, multiculturalists and their
traditionalist opponents as a way of forcing students to grapple directly with
both sides of the debate.

Mr. West uses the metaphor of jazz to describe a mode of critical exchange that
would move beyond dogmatic pronoucements and supremacist ideologies. "The
interplay of individuality and unity is not one of uniformity and unanimity
imposed from above," he writes, "but rather of conflict among diverse groupings
that reach a dynamic consensus subject to questioning and criticism. As with a
soloist in a jazz quartet, quintet or band, individuality is promoted in order
to sustain and increase the creative tension with the group -- a tension that
yields higher levels of performance to achieve the aim of the collective
project."

Such an approach is predicated not upon mutually exclusive alternatives but upon
the inclusive belief that individuals can understand, even sympathize with the
disparate beliefs and values of others. Its result is not polarization but
pluralism, the idea, as Isaiah Berlin wrote in "The Crooked Timber of Humanity,"
that "there are many different ends that men may seek and still be fully
rational, fully men, capable of understanding each other and sympathizing and
deriving light from each other, as we derive it from reading Plato or the novels
of medieval Japan -- worlds, outlooks, very remote from our own."

The Books

"BEYOND THE CULTURE WARS: How Teaching the Conflicts Can Revitalize American
Education." By Gerald Graff. W. W. Norton & Company. $19.95.

"CHAIN REACTION: The Impact of Race, Rights and Taxes on American Politics." By
Thomas Byrne Edsall with Mary D. Edsall. W. W. Norton & Company. $22.95.

"THE CROOKED TIMBER OF HUMANITY: Chapters in the History of Ideas." By Isaiah
Berlin. Alfred A. Knopf. $22.

"CULTURE OF COMPLAINT: The Fraying of America." By Robert Hughes. New York
Public Library/Oxford University Press. $19.95.

"CULTURE WARS: The Struggle to Define America." By James Davison Hunter. Basic
Books. $13.

"RACE MATTERS." By Cornel West. Beacon Press. $15.

"STRANGE BEDFELLOWS: How Television and the Presidential Candidates Changed
American Politics, 1992." By Tom Rosenstiel. Hyperion. $24.95.


LOAD-DATE: June 18, 1993

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Drawing. (pg. C24)

                   Copyright 1993 The New York Times Company


                              280 of 312 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 June 19, 1993, Saturday, Late Edition - Final

General Ousted for Derisive Remarks About President

BYLINE: By MICHAEL R. GORDON,  Special to The New York Times

SECTION: Section 1; Page 9; Column 3; National Desk

LENGTH: 735 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, June 18


In the political equivalent of a public execution, the Air Force Chief of Staff
took the unusual step today of holding a news conference to announce that a
two-star Air Force general who had made disparaging remarks about President
Clinton would be fined and forced to retire.

Gen. Merrill A. McPeak, the Air Force chief, said that Maj. Gen. Harold N.
Campbell, who called President Clinton a "dope smoking," "skirt chasing," "draft
dodging" commander in chief, would be fined $7,000 and would retire on July 1.
An official letter of reprimand will also be placed in the file of the
53-year-old general.

At the White House, President Clinton said, "I think General McPeak handled it
in the appropriate fashion."

The Air Force's punishment of General Campbell comes amid high-level efforts to
improve relations between the military and the White House. His punishment was
clearly intended as a signal by military leaders that open ridicule of the
President, a punishable offense under the Uniform Code of Military Justice,
would not be tolerated.

Seriousness of Offense

"This is not a trivial matter," General McPeak said at the Pentagon news
conference. "There should be no doubt about the lesson learned. The chain of
command has to be almost pollution free. It runs from the President all the way
down to the corporal who pulls the trigger."

Pentagon officials said that the news conference was held at the suggestion of
Defense Secretary Les Aspin, who has tried to help President Clinton improve his
ties with the military.

Even before General Campbell's remarks, General McPeak had sent a warning to Air
Force personnel to avoid insubordination. He issued the warning after sailors
aboard the aircraft carrier Theodore Roosevelt openly criticized the President
this year.

A contender for Gen. Colin L. Powell's job as Chairman of the Joint Chiefs of
Staff, General McPeak told reporters, "I owe a personal apology on this matter
to the American people."

After a rocky start in which President Clinton alienated many members of the
military -- already wary because of his having avoided the draft during the
Vietnam War -- by promising to allow homosexuals to serve in the armed forces,
the President has sought to win the support of the military in several carefully
orchestrated visits and speeches.

The comments by General Campbell, which were made on May 24 at a banquet in the
Netherlands, violated General McPeak's instructions and threatened to disrupt
efforts to build a smooth relationship between the White House and the military.

Under military law, a commissioned officer who uses "contemptuous words" against
the President is subject to a variety of punishments, including court-martial.
Dealing with the remarks by General Campbell was a delicate matter for the White
House. While Mr. Clinton could not let the insubordination stand, he also could
not be seen to be extracting retribution against a general who had served two
tours in Vietnam and won the Silver Star.

The President therefore tried to distance himself from the incident, saying at a
news conference this week that the investigation into the episode and the
possible punishment of General Campbell was up to the Air Force.

Ultimately, the punishment of General Campbell was decided by his superior, Gen.
Ronald W. Yates, commander of the Air Force Materiel Command. Under military
law, the general could have been court-martialed. But that was likely to have
been seen as an exceedingly stern response, since the Air Force has never
court-martialed a general.

Apology From General

General McPeak said at today's news conference that he had talked with General
Campbell, who agreed that he had erred. In addition, Pentagon officials said
General Campbell had prepared a contrite statement saying that military people
needed to show respect for civilian authorities.

General McPeak said he did not know of any previous episode in which a chief of
staff of his service had held a news conference to announce the punishment of a
subordinate.

The punishment brought General Campbell's Air Force career to an abrupt end
after more than three decades. He was deputy chief of staff for plans and
programs at the Air Force Materiel Command, situated at Wright Patterson Air
Force Base in Dayton, Ohio, and had been scheduled to take command of the
Defense Fuel Supply Center in Washington.

LOAD-DATE: June 19, 1993

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo: Gen. Merrill A. McPeak, the Air Force Chief of Staff, announcing
that Maj. Gen. Harold N. Campbell, who made disparaging remarks about President
Clinton,k would be fined $7,000 and would retire July 1. (Jose R. Lopez/The New
York Times)

                   Copyright 1993 The New York Times Company


                              281 of 312 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 June 19, 1993, Saturday, Late Edition - Final

A New Name for Winning: Losing

BYLINE: By Dov S. Zakheim;  Dov S. Zakheim, a defense consultant, was Deputy
Under Secretary of Defense in the second Reagan Administration.

SECTION: Section 1; Page 21; Column 2; Editorial Desk

LENGTH: 737 words

DATELINE: ARLINGTON, Va.


During the mid-1970's, Navy planners studied the prospect of fighting the Soviet
Union in the Atlantic and Pacific theaters with a fleet they expected to be half
the size of the one that operated during the Vietnam War. Making the best of a
bad situation, they devised the "swing strategy." It called for a rapid and
successful operation in the Pacific and redeployment of part of the Pacific
Fleet to save the day for embattled Atlantic units.

Few naval officers -- and even fewer naval analysts -- took the idea seriously.
There were too many unknowns. Would the Soviet Union lose quickly enough in the
Pacific? What would be the level of American losses? How would the war unfold in
the Atlantic and in Europe? Would the Pacific forces transit safely to the
Atlantic? Would they arrive in time or would the war on land have already been
decided? No one could answer these questions, though Pentagon operations
analysts tried mightily to do so.

The Clinton Administration wants the swing strategy to rise from its analytical
ashes, incorporating not merely the Navy but all our conventional forces.
Defense Secretary Les Aspin is giving it a new name: win-hold-win. It should be
win-hope-win.

A vastly reduced military, confronted by the simultaneous demands of two
regional wars it cannot meet, would attempt to win one while holding off the
enemy in the other until reinforcements arrived from the first. The concept is
no more realistic today than 20 years ago, yet it threatens to become the
bedrock of post-cold-war strategy.

The Administration appears prepared to jettison the doctrine of overwhelming
force, which proved its mettle in operations as small as Grenada and as large as
the Persian Gulf. In its place, win-hold-win would depend upon the highly
suspect operations analysis that governed strategy during the Vietnam War era
and was discredited by the Carter Administration's failed effort to free the
hostages held by Iran.

For our forces to "hold" an adversary, the analysts would have to postulate
exactly the enemy's strength, the time required to win the first operation and
the surviving forces available to reinforce the holding operation. They had
better be right; if not, the hostage-rescue fiasco could be repeated on a
massive scale.

Like the Navy of the 70's, the Administration is contemplating win-hold-win to
make the best of a deteriorating defense budget situation.

When Mr. Aspin was chairman of the House Armed Services Committee, he proposed a
force capable of winning two regional wars simultaneously. President Clinton's
determination to carry out budgetary cuts twice as large as those promised
during the campaign has made that objective unachievable. Moreover, as a result
of inexorable annual increases in operations and personnel costs, and equally
relentless increases in the costs of fielding new weapons, today's budgetary
trends suggest we may not have the resources to conduct even one operation of
the magnitude of Desert Storm.

Instead of forcing the Pentagon to fall back on a highly problematical strategy,
the Administration should accept fiscal reality. The cost of conducting two
regional campaigns simultaneously is closer to the fiscal 1994 budget of $263.4
billion than to the progressively smaller budgets forecast through 1997.

The Administration can realize further savings, notably through cuts in heavy
armored units and the size of our submarine force. It could reduce such
infrastructure elements as bases and support personnel, and upgrade current
types of aircraft rather than replace them with entirely new models. Yet these
changes would not reduce budgets significantly below the $260 billion level. And
other efficiencies, however desirable, are no more likely to be fully carried
out now than under George Bush and his post-World War II predecessors.

Who would believe we could defeat two aggressors simultaneously -- even
consecutively -- if our budget fell under $260 billion? Win-hold-win is no
substitute for adequate defense resources. If instituted as advertised, it would
be an analyst's dream but an officer's nightmare. The last three decades have
shown that analysts do not win wars -- the military does.

Secretary Aspin should clamp the lid back on this budget-driven Pandora's
nightmare. And he should try to preserve today's budget levels, which would
sustain a win-win strategy in simultaneously fought wars.

LOAD-DATE: June 19, 1993

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Op-Ed

                   Copyright 1993 The New York Times Company


                              282 of 312 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                  June 20, 1993, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

New & Noteworthy

BYLINE: By Laurel Graeber

SECTION: Section 7; Page 28; Column 1; Book Review Desk

LENGTH: 896 words



BECOMING A MAN: Half a Life Story
By Paul Monette. HarperSanFrancisco, $12.
Winner of the 1992 National Book Award for nonfiction, this autobiography
chronicles Paul Monette's struggle to accept his homosexuality after years spent
hiding it. "His fine memoir is affirmative and ultimately celebratory," Wendy
Martin said here last year.
A GOOD SCENT FROM A STRANGE MOUNTAIN
By Robert Olen Butler. Penguin, $10.
Robert Olen Butler was an Army linguist in Vietnam and his experience infuses
his first collection of short fiction, which won the 1993 Pulitzer Prize. All 15
stories are told from the point of view of a Vietnamese emigrant to the American
Gulf Coast, where his or her sense of loss is less a result of the war than of
cultural displacement. Last year our reviewer, George Packer, praised the
stories' originality, calling them "the work of a writer who is intoxicated by
Vietnam and the Vietnamese, who loves what has alienated so many other
Americans."

AFTER HENRY
By Joan Didion. Vintage International, $12.
These essays cover wide terrain, from Presidential politics to urban violence to
the author's feelings regarding the death of her editor, Henry Robbins. "Joan
Didion writes well," Hendrik Hertzberg said here last year. "More often than
not, she writes beautifully."
COLLABORATORS
By Janet Kauffman. Graywolf, $11.
This novel concerns a young woman's almost suffocatingly close relationship with
her mother. Writing in the Book Review in 1986, Ursula Hegi praised Janet
Kauffman's "extraordinary gift for language and character development. . . . She
brings a poet's sensitivity to her prose."
IN MORTAL COMBAT: Korea, 1950-1953
By John Toland. Quill/Morrow, $13.
The Korean War was, in its own time, as unpopular as the one in Vietnam years
later. But, argues the military historian John Toland, it may prove to have been
the deciding element in the chain of events that eventually unraveled Communism.
"Mr. Toland's rendition is panoramic, gripping and, to a remarkable degree,
original in its insights," Nicholas Eberstadt said here in 1991. In KOREA: The
First War We Lost, by Bevin Alexander (Hippocrene, $16.95), the author takes a
different view, asserting that the United States triumphed over North Korea but
failed to curb Chinese strength. In 1986 our reviewer, Richard Halloran, found
the book "well researched and readable." For an in-depth look at China's role,
there is THE DAY THE CHINESE ATTACKED: Korea, 1950, by Edwin P. Hoyt
(Athena/Paragon House, $12.95), which also evaluates the state of
Chinese-American relations through the 1980's.
LET THE DEAD BURY THEIR DEAD: And Other Stories
By Randall Kenan. Harvest/Harcourt Brace, $10.95.
In these interrelated short stories, Randall Kenan continues the saga of the
residents of Tims Creek, the tiny, mostly black North Carolina hamlet he brought
to life in his first novel, "A Visitation of Spirits." Last year our reviewer,
Howard Frank Mosher, called the collection "nothing short of a wonder-book."
THE REAL THING: Stories and Sketches
By Doris Lessing. Harper Perennial, $11.
The pieces in this collection include keenly observed glimpses of contemporary
London life as well as short stories that illuminate its emotional underside.
Last year our reviewer, Eils Lotozo, said that the author continues to write
with the "freshness and wonder of one newly arrived on the planet."
THE PATRON SAINT OF LIARS
By Ann Patchett. Ivy, $5.99.
In Ann Patchett's first novel, a pregnant young woman enters a Catholic home for
unwed mothers not because she lacks a husband, but because she lacks a
meaningful life. Last year our reviewer, Alice McDermott, called the book a
"made-up story of an enchanted place. A fairy tale. A delight."
AMERICAN PLACES: A Writer's Pilgrimage to 15 of This Country's Most Visited and
Cherished Sites
By William Zinsser. Harper Perennial, $10.
William Zinsser's itinerary included Disneyland and Rockefeller Center, along
with less frequently celebrated locales like Abilene, Kan. (Dwight Eisenhower's
hometown). "Mr. Zinsser personalizes each place, giving its history and adding
his own keen observations," Herbert Mitgang said in The New York Times last
year.
DAUGHTERS OF ALBION
By A. N. Wilson. Penguin, $10.
This is the third in A. N. Wilson's "Lampitt Papers" novels, a saga that
revolves around, among other things, the possible murder of a famous historian
by his biographer. Last year our reviewer, Joel Conarroe, found the book "an odd
hybrid, revealing characteristics not only of the academic detective tale but
also of the comedy of manners . . . and the novel of ideas."
HEAD TO HEAD: The Coming Economic Battle Among Japan, Europe, and America
By Lester Thurow. Warner, $12.99.
The United States will probably lose this war, warns Lester Thurow, an
economist, unless it is prepared to make radical changes. Last year our
reviewer, Adam Smith, found the author's solutions debatable but described him
as "a cogent analyst and an excellent interpreter of economic doctrine."
BOOTLEGGER'S DAUGHTER
By Margaret Maron. Mysterious Press/Warner, $4.99.
The daughter is Deborah Knott, the attorney heroine of Margaret Maron's latest
mystery series, who is asked to investigate an 18-year-old murder case. "The
country air encourages plot as well as plant growth," Marilyn Stasio said here
last year.

LOAD-DATE: June 20, 1993

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Drawing

TYPE: Review

                   Copyright 1993 The New York Times Company


                              283 of 312 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                  June 20, 1993, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

TRAVEL ADVISORY;
New Hydrofoil In Vietnam

SECTION: Section 5; Page 3; Column 5; Travel Desk

LENGTH: 145 words


Until recently, traveling from Ho Chi Minh City to the beach at Vung Tau 60
miles away required a land trip that took anywhere from two to four hours
because of the condition of the roads (basic, at best) and the traffic (a
melange of trucks, bicycles, cyclos, motorcycles and oxen carts). Now, a
Russian-built hydrofoil leaves every morning at 8 A.M. from the docks on the
Saigon River near the Saigon Floating Hotel (Me Linh Square) and arrives 90
minutes later at the resort the French called Cap St.-Jacques. The 112-foot
craft is crewed by Russians and has a snack bar.

After visiting some of the temples and sandy Bai Sau beach, passengers can
return at 4 P.M. First-class tickets are about $9 for foreigners. For
information and reservations, go to the headquarters of Dolphin Marine at 66
Hoang Dieu Street in Ho Chi Minh City, or telephone 251348.

LOAD-DATE: June 20, 1993

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1993 The New York Times Company


                              284 of 312 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                  June 20, 1993, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

THE WORLD;
Human Rights: The West Gets Some Tough Questions

BYLINE: By ALAN RIDING

SECTION: Section 4; Page 5; Column 1; Week in Review Desk

LENGTH: 1031 words

DATELINE: VIENNA


IT is tempting to reduce the global human rights debate today to a clash of good
guys against bad guys, of Western democracies against Asian dictatorships, of
countries defending the principle of universal human rights against third world
attempts to water down the concept with economic, cultural and religious
arguments.

It is all the more tempting because the attack on traditional "Western" human
rights is being led by the likes of China, Syria and Iran, countries not exactly
renowned for their love of democracy. Further, with barely a blush, the Asian
bloc seems to have assumed the Soviet bloc's old role of opposing international
"meddling" on human rights.

Yet halfway through the World Conference on Human Rights, the first such
gathering in 25 years, it is apparent that the debate is becoming more
complicated: not only do some of the third world's economic arguments have
validity, but lobbies in the West are now claiming special rights for, say,
women, children, indigenous peoples, migrant workers and the handicapped.

As a result, the notions enshrined in the 1948 Universal Declaration of Human
Rights -- the right to life and security, along with a host of "negatives," such
as the rights not to be tortured, raped, imprisoned without due cause or
"disappeared" -- are in danger of becoming lost in a broader discussion about
democracy, development, culture and religion.

Led by the United States, Western nations -- now backed by Moscow and its former
satellites -- say they prefer to end the Vienna conference without agreement
Friday if the alternative is a final document that threatens the principle of
universal human rights. They are also determined to give the United Nations
greater power to monitor and denounce human rights abuses.

In this, they are being strongly supported by delegates from over 1,000
non-governmental organizations, including many from Asia, who dismiss the third
world's "relativist" arguments as nothing more than excuses for authoritarian
regimes.

The meeting last week verged at times on the surreal. On the first floor, human
rights groups busily denounced everything from attacks on Guatemalan Indians to
trafficking in Thai women. One floor above, the diplomats could discuss only
general principles.

Yet, by positioning itself as judge of the world's behavior, the West is also
vulnerable to charges of upholding double standards. Today's worst atrocities
are taking place in Bosnia, and the West has done little to stop them. Germany's
Foreign Minister, Klaus Kinkel, also had to recite a public mea culpa last week
about the "xenophobic outrages" in his own country.

In addition, it is not forgotten here that the West was once happy to back
anti-communist dictatorships and now protects despotic Arab monarchies out of
fear of Islamic fundamentalism.

Yet perhaps the greatest weakness in the West's case is that it has
traditionally emphasized political over economic rights. "It's hard for people
who have never faced hunger or illiteracy to understand how crucial they are to
a majority of mankind," Reed Brody of the International Human Rights Law Group
said. "Ask an American about human rights and he'll say: freedom of speech. Ask
an African woman about human rights and she'll say: the right to feed her
children."

In a switch in American policy, the Clinton Administration has decided to
recognize the "right to development." Last week, most Western countries also
paid lip service to the "indivisibility" of human rights which means, as Pierre
Sane, the head of Amnesty International, put it, that "you can't choose between
torture and starvation." Yet the West's focus at this conference is still on
civil and political rights.

As a result, while repressive regimes in say, China, Cuba, Iran, Burma, Vietnam
and Syria may have little credibility when they claim that human rights are
strictly internal matters, they and others -- among them, Singapore, Malaysia
and Indonesia -- have won more sympathy for their argument that economic
development is a more immediate priority than Western-style democracy.

Indeed, without bothering to point to democracy's dismal record in lifting third
world countries out of poverty, many Asian one-party states can boast
extraordinary economic growth of late. "The argument that human rights is the
precondition for development is unfounded," said China's Deputy Foreign
Minister, Liu Huaqiu.

In justifying his country's one-party system, Singapore's Foreign Minister, Wong
Kan Seng, recalled that the United States, Britain and France took 200 years to
consolidate democracy. And he argued that democracy can still be interpreted
differently. "Singaporeans, for instance, do not agree that pornography is an
acceptable manifestation of free expression or that homosexual relationships are
just a matter of life style choice," he said.

He also said that "too much stress on individual rights over the rights of the
community will retard progress." For example, he went on, Singaporean society
protects itself by requiring anyone "who behaves in a suspicious manner" to be
tested for drug use. Elsewhere, "the community's interests are sacrificed
because of the human rights of drug consumers and traffickers."

Indonesia's Foreign Minister, Ali Alatas, went further, arguing that, because
human rights exist as a function of history, culture, value systems, geography
and phases of development, they are "the competence and responsibility of each
government." In other words: West keep out.

But this is not another North-South schism. Most Latin American and some African
countries now agree that universal human rights exist. Last week, Nigeria,
Gambia and Uganda endorsed the American proposal that a new United Nations High
Commissioner for Human Rights be appointed.

Indeed, in a sense, the conference can already claim success. If Asian countries
are attacking universal human rights, it is because they are under closer
scrutiny. And if non-governmental organizations are stronger, it is because
peoples' awareness of their "right" to human rights is growing. "This movement
is more important than the conference," one American official said.

LOAD-DATE: June 20, 1993

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo: Bosnian demonstrators at the World Conference on Human Rights in
Vienna last week. (Agence France-Presse)

                   Copyright 1993 The New York Times Company


                              285 of 312 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                  June 20, 1993, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

Woman in the News;
Immigration Expert Who Takes Broad Approach -- Doris Marie Meissner

BYLINE: By MARTIN TOLCHIN,  Special to The New York Times

SECTION: Section 1; Page 26; Column 3; National Desk

LENGTH: 798 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, June 19


4 A child of immigrants, Doris M. Meissner grew up in a German-speaking
household in Milwaukee during World War II and suffered the anguish of ethnic
discrimination early.

"I can clearly recall sitting on buses and streetcars and hearing my mother tell
me not to talk, because it wasn't good to be heard speaking German," she said in
a telephone interview from Milwaukee.

Ms. Meissner, 51, is now expected to become the custodian of the hopes of
today's immigrants and those trying to gain entry. President Clinton nominated
her on Friday to be Commissioner of Immigration, which requires Senate
confirmation.

Ms. Meissner (pronounced MICE-ner) has specialized in immigration issues for
nearly two decades, serving at the Justice Department in Democratic and
Republican administrations. She served briefly as acting Commissioner in 1981.

Her family nurtured her longstanding interest in government and public issues,
she said. "I think it probably came from my home and from my parents' strong
feeling that you give back," she said. "They were always very grateful to have
been here and to have built a life here."

Paying a Debt

She has spent her life trying to give something back to her country, in two
areas: women's rights and immigration policy. "I'm committed to the full
participation of women in the life of our society," said Ms. Meissner, who for a
time led the National Women's Political Caucus.

Ms. Meissner has won plaudits for bringing diverse groups together during 13
years at the Justice Department and during her present role as director of the
Immigration Policy Project of the Carnegie Endowment for International Peace.

"Immigration has traditionally been the province of advocacy groups only," she
said. "We have created a dialogue that looks at these questions as serious
policy questions, not just as questions for advocacy groups."

"We have to place the issues in an international context," she continued. "The
movement of people is emerging as one of the critical global issues of our age.
It is based on huge deficiencies in human rights and deep economic
differentials."

When she takes over the Immigration and Naturalization Service, Ms. Meissner
will be charged with, in President Clinton's words, insuring that the United
States does not "lose control of our borders." Ms. Meissner indicated in the
interview that she would take a broad approach to that mission.

Treating the Cause

"Today, people have information and cheap transportation," she said. "They know
what their circumstances are and can act on it. We can't deal with this only as
an enforcement issue in the United States. We have to look at it worldwide and
attack the conditions that create the desperation."

Her nomination won immediate praise from those involved with immigration issues.

Doris Marie Meissner was born in Milwaukee on Nov. 3, 1941. Her mother, Hertha
Borst, was 10 when she came to this country from Berlin, Germany, and her
father, Fred Borst, was 22 when he arrived from Stuttgart, Germany.

Her father was a tool and die maker and her mother a bookkeeper. "My parents
were definitely the pivotal influences on my life," Ms. Meissner said. "They
were both very hard-working and absolutely devoted to their kids. Our family
life was very much devoted to our German heritage.

"Good parents make kids feel special and are proud of what they do. When you
grow up in that kind of an environment, you're ready to meet the world when that
time comes."

She attended public schools and met her husband, Charles Meissner, now an
economist with the World Bank, when they were both undergraduates at the
University of Wisconsin in Madison. She stayed to earn a master's degree in
political science when he served in the Army during the Vietnam War.

Drawn to Politics

While studying, she recalled, "I wanted to get involved in a campaign, some kind
of political activity." She managed the campaign of Midge Miller, an opponent of
the war who defeated a 20-year incumbent for a place in the state Legislature.

After the election, her husband returned from Vietnam and the couple moved to
Washington. Ms. Miller provided the connection that enabled Ms. Meissner to
become a founding member of the National Women's Political Caucus and its
executive director in 1971.

In that post, she assailed both national political parties for not providing
campaign financing for women. She devoted special effort to the
successfulcampaign of Patricia Schroeder for a House seat.

Ms. Meissner won a White House fellowship in 1973 and went to work at the
Justice Department, where she later specialized in immigration issues, becoming
Acting Commissioner in 1981 and Executive Associate Commissioner from 1982 to
1985.

Ms. Meissner and her husband have two children: Christine, 28, a high school
teacher, and Andrew, 24, a film student.

She inherited her parents' sense of family. "The most important thing is to be
there for the people who are closest to you: family and close friends," she
said. "And it's important to do work that is satisfying to you and useful to the
world. If I can do those two things, I'm satisfied."

NAME: Doris Marie Meissner

LOAD-DATE: June 20, 1993

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo: Doris Marie Meissner (Reuters)

TYPE: Biography

                   Copyright 1993 The New York Times Company


                              286 of 312 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                  June 20, 1993, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

Who's Got Clout

BYLINE: By William Safire;  William Safire, the New York Times political
columnist whose latest book is "The First Dissident: The Book of Job in Today's
Politics," also uses his Clout Scale to measure earthquakes, groundswells and
landslides.

SECTION: Section 6; Page 25; Column 3; Magazine Desk

LENGTH: 6039 words


POWERFUL PEOPLE maneuver for position," said the outsider Bill Clinton about
Washington moments after he was sworn in as the 42d President, "and worry
endlessly about who is in and who is out, who is up and who is down." The new
man's derogation of clout was in the grand tradition; leaders always resist
outside assessments of the jockeying for power that goes on within. King Lear
derided the way "poor rogues talk of court news," which he described as
essentially "who loses and who wins; who's in, who's out."

Three months into his Presidency, Clinton was still deriding as a "political
smoke screen" reports that "somebody's up and somebody's down." But soon
afterward, he had to backtrack: "We think that there needs to be a little
tighter coordination here," he admitted, and announced that his chief of staff,
Thomas (Mack) McLarty, was being given a second deputy, freeing Clinton's best
friend from kindergarten days to give unspecified policy advice.

We poor rogues talking of court news could tell that somebody was surely up (in
that case, Roy Neel, Al Gore's chief aide and an experienced Senate hand), and
somebody was at least seen to be down ("Mack the Nice," as the courteous McLarty
is known). That was the first public sign that the power lines of the
Clintonites were being adjusted to reflect the realities of administering a
Government and wrestling with the negative reaction to its surprising early
ideological shift.

A couple of weeks later, after a flip-flop by Christopher and a haircut from
Cristophe increased the Presidential nose dive in opinion polls to warp speed,
the up-and-downing intensified. Clinton, deciding to blame communications more
than content for his plunge, put David Gergen, a Nixon-Ford-Reagan Old Pro, out
front and pulled the media-battered George Stephanopoulos in close.

People -- appointees -- determine policy. The Earl of Chesterfield's idealistic
assertion that "measures, not men, has always been my mark" was nicely skewered
by George Canning in 1801 as "the idle supposition that it is the harness and
not the horses that draw the chariot along."

The warm desire for diversity and the cold political trade-offs that led to the
molasseslike peopling of the Clinton Administration have given way to the force
of personality in small meetings and examples of good and bad judgment in public
view. The little boxes and dotted lines on a table of organization are shaking
down to "guys we can trust and guys we're stuck with."

BILL CLINTON IS THE first President in American history to entrust the top power
positions in his Administration to two people he cannot fire: the First Lady and
the Vice President. He could not fire his lifelong best friend, the chief of
staff, either, which explains why the selfless McLarty, along with the alter ego
Stephanopoulos, were elevated to more advisory positions -- with others being
inserted as "the Hammer" or "the Persuader" alongside them.

Some Clinton watchers thought the disciplinary role -- which Mack insists that
he had planned from the start, but that his choice, Harold Ickes Jr. of New
York, ran into flak -- would go to Rahm Emanuel, 33, a hard-edged, soft-eyed
former Chicagoan with the grace of a ballet dancer who squeezed $100 million out
of fat cats to finance the campaign. ("If you had a flow chart," Emanuel says of
those halcyon days, "it would be a kaleidoscope.") But he remains the political
director, running the daily 5 P.M. meeting in the Ward Room of the White House
mess, with David Wilhelm, the Friend of Bill who now runs the Democratic
National Committee; Mandy Grunwald, the media maven; Stan Greenberg, the
pollster; David Dreyer, the press aide who doubles as a speech writer; Dee Dee
Myers, the formerly token press secretary who is now assuming a more
traditional, out-front position in briefing the press, and James Carville and
Paul Begala, the pop-'em-with-populism campaign consultants, along with
schedulers and advancers.

These are the image-protectors and Permanent Campaigners, trying to figure out
how Mike Deaver did it in the first Reagan term and wondering why the Inaugural
air has gone out of the balloon. Their goal, as Emanuel puts it: "To make
Clinton the first Democratic President since Roosevelt to be re-elected."
(Though Truman served nearly two terms, he was elected President once; that
means no Democrat has been re-elected in nearly 50 years.)

At lunch in the White House mess -- first time back since I was a Nixon speech
writer 20 years ago -- Mack's soft-spoken, color-free demeanor was broken only
once, when he burst into sudden laughter at the question: "Were you the genius
who chose April 15 as the day to float the notion of a value-added tax?" I
learned elsewhere that the genius was the ebullient Donna Shalala, Secretary of
Health and Human Services, who has little to be ebullient about: the health
portfolio was stripped from her by Hillary Rodham Clinton and given to Ira
Magaziner, a certified Deep Thinker and longtime friend of the Clintons;
meanwhile, reform of H.H.S.'s chief human service -- the promised end of
"welfare as we know it," in candidate Clinton's words -- was not even given
modest financing in the budget submitted this spring. Clintonites say Magaziner
is "narrow but deep," his clout derivative but considerable.

About the only Cabinet member lower on the totem pole at this moment than Donna
Shalala is Hazel O'Leary, the utilities executive from Minnesota. She got the
job as Energy Secretary when former Senator Tim Wirth's ex-colleagues in the
Senate turned on him after his scathing article about that body in this
magazine; he now deals with drug-running at State while Mrs. O'Leary presses her
nose to the power window.

Why do I feel no regret in reporting the lowly spots in the pecking order of
these intelligent, reputable Clinton appointees? Because it may well help them
bureaucratically: the Democratic political consultant James Carville, "the
ragin' Cajun" or "Jugular Jim," tells me that around Clinton, "to be down is to
be up. You write that I'm in a state of exile, and if Clinton reads it, for the
next week I'm the one he has traveling with him. Clinton spots the most
vulnerable person in the room and protects that person."

Such protection is already being given the Interior Secretary. Clintonites go
out of their way to extol the loyalty and patience of the former Arizona
Governor Bruce Babbitt, which suggests he has lost more than a few internal
battles on grazing fees and public lands. If being down in the Cabinet is to be
raised up, Babbitt, Shalala and O'Leary are due for a boost -- and in fact,
Babbitt is a leading contender for the opening on the Supreme Court.

MOST EXPERIENCED politicians are doing well in the Clinton Cabinet. Henry
Cisneros, the former Mayor of San Antonio who wisely ducked the rigors of a
Texas Senate race to take on Housing and Urban Development, is considered a
persuasive spokesman for the Administration, as is the Cabinet's other Hispanic
member, the former Denver Mayor Federico Pena, at Transportation. Mike Espy, the
first black to be sent to Congress by Mississipians in this century, was
underrated at the start at Agriculture but is thought to be performing well. Not
one of the trio can be called a major player, but all have modest places at the
power table.

So does Ron Brown, the Democratic National Committee chairman who solved the
Democrats' Jesse Jackson problem, making him the choice for Commerce; although
he has a demerit for sponsoring the O'Leary pick (the Energy Secretary will be
lionized at the next Cabinet meeting, if the Carville vulnerability theory is
correct), Brown has worked out a nice-cop-tough-cop technique with Mickey
Kantor, the trade negotiator, on Japan. The smooth Brown had previously
exploited Kantor's explosive abrasiveness in the Bush-Clinton-Perot television
debate negotiations; together, Brown and Kantor took the vaunted
Baker-Teeter-Darman team to the cleaners on debate formats, and hope to do the
same to the Japanese on trade balances.

As the low-key Robert Rubin takes over building support for the North American
Free Trade Agreement, a political tar baby, the high-key Kantor will keep the
heat on the GATT talks, the world-trade negotiations. Working closely with
Kantor and adding intellectual depth and telegenic feistiness to the economic
group is Laura D'Andrea Tyson, the University of California at Berkeley
economist inclined to apply affirmative action to Japan's trade imbalance.
Kantor, at the pinnacle of Clinton Clout last year as campaign chairman, sought
aggressively to be transition chief and later chief of staff; after his
take-charge bid was blocked by Bruce Lindsey, Stephanopoulos and Hillary, he
came back, subdued, to take a lesser role. "Mickey will be in varying shades of
In," says an insider, "but he won't be Out." And he won't be blamed, as Rubin is
very likely to be, for the rift that develops with organized labor over allowing
American plants to "run away" to Mexico. The Kantor Lesson: in a loose,
free-flowing, grimly antihierarchical staff structure, where collegiality is a
virtue, don't try too hard to get to the top of the heap.

ONE CABINET MEMBER vouchsafed to me the secret behind Bill Clinton's running of
the Executive Branch: "Where power is not delegated, proximity is all."

She or he (sources who place their political lives in my hands to help compile
the Clout Ratings are protected) explained the power lines at this stage of the
new Government: the new President brought a small group of loyalists into his
White House, filled with a spirit of solidarity and a sense of the gladness of
change. Slowly, suspiciously, Bill and Friends fleshed out the skeleton of the
Departments with appointees, many of them relative strangers, and conveyed to
them the trappings of office but declined to delegate the power to make
decisions even about their own staffs.

For example, when Hillary Rodham Clinton's third and final choice for Attorney
General was put in place, Janet Reno soon discovered the A.G. de facto was Mrs.
Clinton's Arkansas law partner, Webster Hubbell: in the aftermath of the Branch
Davidian disaster in Waco, Tex., it was the trusted Associate Attorney General
Hubbell, not Reno, whom the White House consulted. The moment that revealed the
distance between the third-choice A.G. and the President came when she told Tom
Brokaw she was unable to talk to Bill Clinton immediately after the suicidal
fire; instead, Webb Hubbell was the point of contact. Reno got her revenge when
she refused to accept the choice of chief of the criminal division from Hillary:
a law partner of Susan Thomases, the First Lady's First Friend, was passed over,
generating some independence at Justice and not a little ill will from the power
center. (Susan Thomases, who retains her clout, should not be confused with
Linda Bloodworth-Thomason, whose clout diminished in the wake of her husband
Harry's haircutting and travel advice.)

"Close counts only in horseshoes and hand grenades," goes the adage; not so in
Presidential power-playing. Closeness to the President counts for everything --
when power is not delegated.

GEORGE Stephanopoulos -- "stuffin' envelopes" is the mnemonic, though some
prefer Sesame Street's "Snuffleupagus" -- was, in the First Clinton
Administration, the third member of the power trio around the President. Not
since James Hagerty advised Eisenhower while managing his press relations had a
"communicator" counted for so much in a White House, and not since Ted Sorensen
served as John F. Kennedy's alter ego had an adviser been so closely attuned to
his principal's principles and mind-set.

In contrast to longtime Friends of Bill like Bruce Lindsey and Mack McLarty, the
slight, 32-year-old bachelor came aboard only a year ago, a refugee from Dukakis
and Mondale campaigns who had learned the hard way how not to lose.

At the start, he was the intellectual straw boss, consulted on everything,
active everywhere and spread too thin. His judgment to move quickly to deliver
on promises to abortion rights groups was well received by press and public,
though he got no credit for it; however, his judgment to pay back homosexuals
for their support in the first weeks of the Administration was faulted by the
news media and insiders alike.

Ensconsced in the Press Secretary's traditional office, his leg hooked over an
arm of the Queen Anne chair, touseled head resting in the corner, Stephanopoulos
would dismiss criticism of a paucity of press conferences as "elitist," and
moments after that, he would fence with the press corps, gutsily rejecting the
premises of loaded questions. A visitor came out of the office once occupied by
Ron Ziegler with the impression that Stephanopoulos delighted in what he was
doing, and most of the time -- unlike most of his youthful cohorts, frazzled by
policy all-nighters, courting exhaustion as a kind of fraternity initiation --
Stephanopoulos found running a country from its communications center to be fun.

Then the First Clinton Administration came to an end. The communications chief
was not along on the trip when the hairdresser, Cristophe of Beverly Hills,
recommended by the Hollywood producer, Harry Thomason, blew-dry the Clinton
image of folksiness. But he was closely involved in the firing of the veteran
White House travel staff at the behest of two campaign helpers: Thomason, who
wanted a crack at the White House press-travel business for an outfit he partly
owns, and the President's young cousin, who also happened to be the friend of a
Stephanopoulos deputy. To justify the old-style divvying of the political
spoils, Stephanopoulos -- unwarned by counsel Bernard Nussbaum's aides -- went a
bridge too far, eliciting an unusual formal F.B.I. statement of the existence of
a criminal investigation; this unthinking abuse of police power for political
purpose reminded oldtimers of the Nixon sins. "When Christopher and Bentsen
aren't around the White House," said one exasperated observer, "it's 'Home
Alone.' "

From this episode, Stephanopoulos learned that there are some battles that
cannot be won, and that some awkward situations called for backpedaling rather
than brazening. He called around to those he misled to apologize. "We learn
every single day in this office," the roughed-up young man told the press corps
in a brief flash of genuine contrition. "We'll continue to learn."

But when the news media reaction to Scalpgate and Travelgate combined with the
deeper political rebellion against the leftward lurch to pound down public
support of the new President, the Clintons realized the politics of change
itself needed a drastic early-course change. "Communications" and "partisanship"
were blamed, rather than strategic policy blunders, and Stephanopoulos took the
fall; he was gathered into the Oval Office bosom as "Senior Policy Adviser,"
where he will lie low until the next turn of the clout-rating wheel.

He was replaced as the symbol of the Second Clinton Administration (I steal this
construct from F.D.R.'s Brain Truster and speech writer Raymond Moley, who
divided the First and Second New Deals) by David Gergen. The moderate Ray Price
brought David into the speech-writing ranks of the Nixon Administration; he went
on to serve Gerald Ford and, when his hoped-for post at the head of Ronald
Reagan's U.S.I.A. went to a Reagan crony, became a top press aide in the White
House, barring access to reporters he considered "hostile." He successfully
crossed the street to magazine and television commentary, taking generally
sensible and libertarian positions on the right, and identified the motive for
his recrossing as "patriotism." Clinton was indeed on the ropes: his economic
plan passed the heavily Democratic House only because, in the Oklahoma Democrat
David McCurdy's words, "We couldn't afford to let him die." Time was overripe
for a switch to the center; the choice of Gergen represents that recognition of
a need to end the leftward lurch.

BRUCE LINDSEY, the eminence grise around the White House, is the Clintons'
confidant, the closest-in adviser; I am told by one of his many nonadmirers that
he sought the job of Chief of Staff, but both Hillary and her husband felt he
would not be as good an administrator as the other longtime friend, Mack
McLarty. Lindsey's consolation was to be given greater access to the President's
ear; in addition, he was given the specific task of staffing the Administration
with loyalists and an affirmative representation of women and minorities. At
first Lindsey tripped over Nannygate, and as a result was cautious to a fault in
selecting sub-Cabinet appointees; as one support-deprived official puts it, "Zoe
froze the system." But the protected Lindsey, unlike the exposed McLarty, took
no heat. He performs a function that Bebe Rebozo performed for Nixon: sounding
board for the Clintons' resentments at ill treatment from the press.

Harry Thomason's clout rating, which had soared to 7.4 after he and his wife,
Linda, produced the Inaugural extravaganza, has taken a tumble to 3.7. He can
still flash the coveted White House "resident's pass," allowing him john
privileges in the family quarters, but the Hollywood set, which began to
advertise its clout with "the long hug" of Bill Clinton by Barbra Streisand at
the gala, found its influence on the wane -- at least until next fund-raising
time.

AL GORE IS HAVING FUN, but he tries not to let it show. He subscribes to the
notion that in national politics, stuffiness is next to godliness, and only
lately, and with the most sober second thought, has he begun to lighten up. The
Vice President -- grimly obsequious to the President in public -- lays it on the
line in private without the formal deferrence exhibited by the Secretary of
State or the professorial shuffling of the nation-al security adviser. I ran
into him just outside the Oval Office one day, tossed the singles-bar line at
him -- "Do you come here often?" -- and was cheerfully told, "All the time."

I had known him only as the Senate's "Mr. Green," who would trudge over to
newspaper offices with large charts to demonstrate why we were not devoting
enough space to global warming. Now near the top of the heap, he has extracted
small victories for biodiversity and environmentalism from the economic group,
which is concerned about the fallout on the job market. Clout is not
transferrable, however; though Gore placed his Senate aide, Carol Browner, at
the head of the Environmental Protection Agency, she is not regarded as a heavy
hitter.

As a longtime Washington hand -- son of a Senator, eight years a Senator himself
-- Gore helps prepare the President for the arcane ways of the capital. For
example, before Clinton's State of the Union Message to a joint session of
Congress, it was Gore who pointed out that when the President called for change,
only half the chamber would rise and applaud, and the speaker at the rostrum
should not expect the entire audience to react positively. Seems obvious enough,
but that night, Clinton called Gore to thank him for the heads-up, admitting he
would have been thrown by the sight of so many sitting on their hands had he not
been forewarned.

More important, Gore is one of the very few willing to beard the lion in his
den. Clinton, winging his foreign policy at the start, told The New York Times
that he wanted to "depersonalize" the conflict with Saddam Hussein; that was
duly reported as a dramatic change from Bush's policy, which had been to insist
on the dictator's ouster before relations with Iraq could be resumed. Clinton
reacted with anger and confusion, insisting that no policy change had been made.
Christopher, testifying to Congress that day, put some daylight between himself
and the President's blunder, and Tony Lake, the scholarly national security
adviser, is not the sort to storm into the Oval Office to straighten out a
petulant President. It took Al Gore, shirt-sleeved but somber, to go in and say
he would go on a talk show the next day to wrench the position back into line.
Clinton agreed to let Gore "walk back the cat." Later, the lawyerly Secretary of
State found a way of making Clinton's dovish "de-personalize" seem even more
hawkish on Saddam than Bush had been -- by welcoming Kurdish leaders to
Washington and telling them that it meant that only a true democratic
replacement for Saddam, and not some successor Iraqi thug, would be acceptable
to the United States.

Who swings the most weight with Clinton in the formulation of foreign policy? So
far, there have been two big decisions -- one easy, one hard. The easy one was
to back strongly Boris Yeltsin and his reformers in Russia, as Richard Nixon was
urging and as George Bush had failed to do. Strobe Talbott, the former Time
columnist who was a Clinton chum at Oxford and now has the former Soviet Union
portfolio at State, pressed for a summit embrace. Tony Lake deferred to his
judgment in this area: "Tony is spooked by Talbott," mutters an N.S.C.
colleague. A political honcho said, "We couldn't save Wyche Fowler in Georgia;
how are we gonna save Yeltsin?" Secretary of State Christopher (who must suspect
Talbott covets his job) was cautious as usual but leaning toward giving Yeltsin
a world spotlight before his referendum. Defense Secretary Les Aspin (who must
suspect Jim Woolsey, the C.I.A. director, covets his job) is a mature Washington
hand and a possible distance runner, if his health holds up; Aspin and Gore were
outspokenly for it. Clinton then arranged to see Nixon, who had been rebuffed
when he tried to get Bush to support the reformers, and who showed the new
President how foreign aid could be presented as a palatable way to protect
planned defense cuts. Clinton came down cleanly for Yeltsin, and picked up
deserved credit when the reformers won the referendum.

Bosnia was the hard one. When the Munich analogy clashed with the Vietnam
syndrome, Clinton's National Security Council split. Tony Lake, Les Aspin and
United Nations Ambassador Madeleine Albright were the hawks; Christopher and
Gen. Colin Powell (soon to retire and be replaced as Chairman of the Joint
Chiefs by an airman, with more faith in bombing) were the doves. Gore was not
usually identified as taking a point of view, because he would have to be out
front selling whatever Clinton decided, but I'm told that in advising the
President, Gore "took an aggressive posture."

After the television pictures of the siege of Srebrenica pushed editorial and
some public opinion toward intervention, Clinton let it be known he favored
fairly hawkish allied action: "lift and strike," lifting the United Nations
embargo that kept arms from Bosnian Muslims and air strikes to suppress Serbian
artillery and cut supply lines. Like Bush during the televised flight of
terrified Kurds from the wrath of Saddam Hussein, Clinton had been swayed by the
widespread revulsion at the slaughter of civilians -- but not swayed enough to
take the leadership required for action.

Clinton first made certain the world knew the United States would not go this
alone, in effect giving the Europeans a veto over any American plan; that was
his first mistake. His next was to dispatch Christopher to Europe to "consult"
with Britain and France, which wanted no action beyond economic sanctions.

Christopher interpreted Clinton's words as instruction to actually consult --
which in this case meant to bring back an answer of "no." The tip-off came in
Brussels, when Manfred Worner, the NATO Secretary General, told Christopher he
was ready to convene a meeting of allied ambassadors at which NATO would firmly
support joint action. If Christopher wanted a "yes" to take home, he would have
jumped at the opportunity; instead, President Clinton's man turned the NATO
meeting down. Then, one by one, he made what British Prime Minister John Major
told associates was a "bloodless" presentation to the major allies. Christopher
returned not with the grudging approval of the allies, as Clinton had hoped, but
with a convenient "out"; gutless Europe, not the courageous American President,
was to blame.

Frankly, I thought at the time that Clinton must have sent his Secretary of
State to Europe with the mission of being turned down, but I am assured that the
President was sincere in wanting to coerce the Serbs into a cease-fire and was
knocked off-course by his Secretary's ineptness.

What happened to Christopher's clout rating? Amazingly, it went up; Clinton has
exhibited no irritation, publicly or privately, with the failure of his
Secretary of State to carry out his mission. On the contrary, the
make-the-most-of-it President nearly boasted of a decision to refuse to "go it
alone." Sixth-floor professionals at State may be sick at heart, and
seventh-floor political appointees, like Under Secretary Peter Tarnoff, may be
rebuked when they blurt out a too-poor-to-lead policy, but the Clintons were
drawn closer to "Chris" by his first diplomatic fiasco.

THE NATIONAL Economic Council is a bureaucratic counterpart to the National
Security Council. This new power center was created to show the public that in
the new era, economic policy would be at least as high a priority as national
security; more important, it moves the center of gravity on economic policy away
from the Treasury and into the White House.

The President and Hillary's choice to head the council was Robert Rubin, a New
York investment banker who, at 54, had risen to the top of Goldman, Sachs &
Company. He knew Mickey Kantor from his years as a Democratic fund-raiser, which
brought him into the Clinton economic inner circle during the campaign. Rubin
was also a longtime friend of Lloyd Bentsen's, and had served as trustee of the
Texas Senator's blind trust; each man had recommended the other to be Treasury
Secretary, although Bentsen subtly made it known he really wanted that role as
the principal spokesman for economic policy. Rubin dutifully settled for Mr.
Inside; because he has no aspirations for elective office and no need to top
last year's $26 million income, he is content to have the President's economic
ear. The council is too big; Clinton let every Cabinet officer sit on it who
asked to, but Rubin gets around that time-wasting expansiveness by breaking it
down into subcouncils.

Here's an example of how Rubin's operation works: A hardball strategy, devised
by Howard Paster, a legislative aide, to ram a "stimulus" package through the
Senate, succeeded only in uniting Republicans in opposition; a filibuster
organized by Bob Dole shifted the issue from "job creation" to "pork." The first
legislative defeat of a Clinton initiative encouraged Ross Perot to go public
with his objections to a failure to cut spending, and it became apparent that
the entire Clinton plan to sell a historic tax increase by calling it budget
reduction was in trouble. Pollster Greenberg, in the 5 P.M. Ward Room meeting,
confirmed that the public did not trust Clinton to use the new money to sop up
red ink. The poor rogues reporting court news were prepared to consign the
economic plan to a "crisis of confidence."

Bentsen, a Texas patrician with a moderate image -- and at 72, the Grand Old Man
of the Clinton Administration -- had Rubin convene a meeting of a portion of the
council in the Roosevelt Room of the White House. The G.O.M., who had absented
himself from heavy lobbying on the losing stimulus plan, liked the idea being
pressed by Representative Charles Schumer of New York to create a "trust fund"
in which new tax money would go, earmarked for reducing the deficit. Never mind
that Democrats had denounced a similar "tax-return checkoff" proposal made the
year before by President Bush as a feckless gimmick; the public wanted ironclad
assurances that new taxes would not be diverted to new spending, and Bentsen
felt the idea's time had come.

Leon Panetta, director of the Office of Management and Budget, was all for it.
Panetta has long been a Washington maverick: I remember him from the Nixon
Health, Education and Welfare Department, where he ran the Office of Civil
Rights and angrily quit to co-write a book entitled in sarcasm "Bring Us
Together." A generation ago, he switched parties, won a seat in Congress and
ultimately became the Democrats' leading House budgeteer; when the didactic
Alice Rivlin bored Bill Clinton stiff in a job interview -- "she's more loyal to
cutting the deficit than to the Clintons" was one assessment -- the faithful,
good-humored Panetta won the top job at the Office of Management and Budget.

Panetta saw the "trust fund" idea as a way of enforcing fiscal discipline. For
months, he had been losing this battle; in the formulation of the economic plan,
his pleas for $2 in spending cuts for every $1 in tax increases were countered
inside the economic council by the passionate, articulate arguments of Robert
Reich. That Harvard political economist, rewarded with the Labor secretaryship
for his years of loyal Friend-of-Billhood, is an unabashed spender on (in his
preferred term, investor in) Government programs to train workers and finance
the creation of jobs. In the early planning, Reich urged taxation for new
spending; Panetta wanted to use most of the new tax money for deficit reduction;
Bentsen was in the middle. Rubin, inexperienced in politics and focused on the
impact of the promise of deficit reduction on interest rates and the bond
markets, came down on the side of Reich.

In the trust-fund meeting, Reich again pressed the liberal side, arguing against
the fund because it might turn out to be more than a gimmick and might hamstring
the spending necessary to train a new work force. But the climate had changed;
Stephanopoulos sided with Bentsen, who felt the President now needed to present
to suspicious taxpayers some sort of anti-deficit guarantee. Reich then asked
for a parallel "investment trust fund," to set aside money saved by spending
cuts in defense for his training programs; that didn't fly. Rubin made the
decision by asking his deputy, Gene Sperling, to do the paper work to make sure
the fund would not unduly tie the Administration's hands. Next morning, in a
15-minute meeting with the President, the pros and cons of a trust fund were
presented and Clinton chose the pro. The fund was in a speech the next day. Then
Alice Rivlin shrugged it off as mere "display" and had to be told to get with
the program.

THE HILLARY FACTOR is pervasive. She has apparently decided that health will be
to the Clinton Administration as Social Security was to F.D.R., as highways were
to Eisenhower -- the lasting legacy to show that one couple can make a
difference.

The most severe internal struggle so far has been the fitting of health reform
into the budget package. Leon Panetta urged that first things should come first:
agreement with Congress on taxing and spending for this fiscal year, with the
second bite -- the health plan with its accompanying taxation -- coming in the
fall. Hillary disagreed; she insisted that the health reformation come close on
the heels of the budget, while the Clinton mandate was still fresh.

She lost that one. But she won on the economic plan, tilting it toward Reich and
away from Panetta, and her influence is felt in most of the Administration's
appointments. Did she have an input on Bosnia? She expresses no position on
foreign affairs, but as several insiders say, in the same words, "They talk
about everything." The First Lady -- with so much at stake in her health reform,
and with a more focused mind than her husband -- was said to exert her influence
on the side of letting the Bosnians down and concentrating on America.

That's why, in the current indexation, she outclouts 'em all. Clinton staff
members, who tend to absolve the President of blame with the traditional "if the
Czar only knew," say the mistakes made in recent months would have been
minimized "if only Hillary were here" and not occupied with the health task
force.

But just as a nonpartisan face was being put on the Second Clinton
Administration, there was Hillary making a fiercely partisan speech against the
"special interests" among the health care providers. As the President pulls in
his spending horns, the First Lady, with more clout than anybody, presses for
the heavier spending option in the health plan.

It's not easy to keep up, but to cloutologists, turbulence has its attractions.

WILLIAM SAFIRE'S CLOUT RATINGS
William Safire's Clout Scale, used here for the first time to rate the political
influence of members of the Clinton Administration, is based on criteria
pioneered by the developer of the Richter scale to measure seismic disturbances
and the Saffir-Simpson scale to measure the force of hurricanes.

On a scale of 0 to 10 -- with 0 indicating total political impotence and 10
signifying Undisputed Leader of the Free World, a rating automatically given a
new President -- cloutologists give Administration members numerical ratings
based on the sum of these criteria: (a) job title (with 5 for the top four
Cabinet positions and the Chief of Staff, 3 for minor Cabinet posts and National
Security Adviser, 1 for Veterans Affairs, .5 for Environmental Protection
Agency, etc); (b) proximity to the President's ear (up to 7 for Closest
Adviser); (c) quality of intellect and force of personality during internal
struggles; (d) ability to sell the President's programs on television or through
deep-backgrounders; (e) longtime F.O.B. status; (f) political savvy, and (g)
last-minute secret weighting by the author to reflect irritation at
inaccessibility or salivation at the potential of future leaks.

Hillary Rodham Clinton, 9.2: Has no problem with that.

Al Gore, 8.4: Obsequious in public, candid in private.

Warren Christopher, 8.0: Foreign policy inward, lawyer's influence upward.

Thomas McLarty, 7.5: Chief of Staff "Mack the Nice."

David Gergen, 7.3: Moderate image-saver can teach it either way.

Robert Rubin, 7.3: Mr. Economic Inside.

Thomas McLarty, 7.5: Chief of Staff "Mack the Nice"
 Lloyd Bentsen, 7.2: Mr. Economic Outside.

Les Aspin, 7.2: Slow Pentagon starter, long-distance runner.

George Stephanopoulos, 7.1: Took the rap for the early leftward lurch.

Bruce Lindsey, 7.1: Arkansas mafia's consigliere.

Tony Lake, 7.0: Chief of National Security; Professoriate.

Strobe Talbott, 7.0: Russiameister spooks State and N.S.C.

Leon Panetta, 6.8: Budget chief always down, never out.

Robert Reich, 6.7: Liberal at Labor showed early foot, now fading.

Laura D'Andrea Tyson, 6.5: Surprises Economic Councilmates with feistiness.

James Carville and Paul Begala, 6.3: Mule-drivers of the permanent campaign.

Roy Neel, 6.2: Gore's man on the inside.

Mickey Kantor, 6.2: Trade rep. always out, never down.

James Woolsey, 6.1: Chief spook all cloak, no dagger.

Bernard Nussbaum, 6.1: President's mouthpiece constantly under fire.

Janet Reno, 6.1: Attorney General de jure popular at expense of the Clintons.

Henry Cisneros, 6.0: H.U.D.'s escapee from Texas Senate race.

Webster Hubbell, 6.0: Hillary's back channel to Justice.

Susan Thomases, 5.8: New York lawyer protecting Hillary's back.

Mark Gearan, 5.7: Mack's liberal deputy chief of staff.

Ron Brown, 5.6: Finding comfort in Commerce.

Rahm Emanuel, 5.5: Re-election is the bottom line.

Madeleine Albright, 5.4: U.N. envoy loyally defends policy she disagrees with.

Stan Greenberg, 4.9: Pollster wets finger, points direction.

Mike Espy, 4.8: There when a farmer needs a friend.

Federico Pena, 4.8: Picking up a little speed at Transportation.

Howard Paster, 4.5: Legislative aide trying to make a comeback.

Bruce Babbitt, 4.5: Interior caught between Western strategy and liberal budget.

Harry Thomason and Linda Bloodworth-Thomason, 3.7: With friends like these . . .
.

Richard Riley, 3.2: Education chief left lecturing on his own.

Carol Browner, 3.1: Not easy being green.

Donna Shalala, 3.1: Health to Hillary: Human Services out of budget.

Hazel O'Leary, 3.0: Much of the zip has gone out of Energy.

Jesse Brown, 3.0: Warms veterans' chair at Cabinet table.

LOAD-DATE: July 7, 1993

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photos: Chief Justice William Rehnquist (far right) swearing in the
Clinton cabinet in January. On the author's clout scale, the steady-but-stuffy
Al Gore is up; Health and Human Services Secretary Donna Shalala (third from
left) and Environment Administrator Carol Browner (center) are down, which might
actually bode well for them. (pg. 24); Whom does the First Lady call when she
needs something at Justice? Associate Attorney General Webster Hubbell, left,
shown at a Justice Department meeting in April. (pg. 28)(Photographs by David
Burnett/Contact)

                   Copyright 1993 The New York Times Company


                              287 of 312 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                  June 20, 1993, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

Killing What Slavery Could Not

BYLINE: By Arlie Russell Hochschild;  Arlie Russell Hochschild, the author of
"The Second Shift," a book about two-job families, teaches sociology at the
University of California, Berkeley.

SECTION: Section 7; Page 27; Column 1; Book Review Desk

LENGTH: 1146 words



CLIMBING JACOB'S LADDER
The Enduring Legacy of
African-American Families.
By Andrew Billingsley.
446 pp. New York:
Simon & Schuster.
$27.50.

IN 1890, according to United States Census studies, 80 percent of all black
families with children were headed by married couples. In 1960, the proportion
was 78 percent. But after 1960, it declined steeply: 1970, 64 percent; 1980, 48
percent; and by 1990, it had plummeted to 39 percent. (In 1990, the
corresponding figure for whites had fallen to 81 percent.)

What makes "Climbing Jacob's Ladder: The Enduring Legacy of African-American
Families" so welcome is the calming way Andrew Billingsley, the chairman of the
family studies department at the University of Maryland and the author of "Black
Families in White America," guides us past simple, often heated interpretations
of such data. He combines an unflinching look at current troubles in the black
family with an appreciation of its abiding strengths. The balance between these
two viewpoints is the hidden gift of this book.

Since Daniel Patrick Moynihan published "The Negro Family: The Case for National
Action" in 1965, much of the academic discourse on the subject has crackled with
attack and defense. During the Reagan-Bush years, those who tried to illuminate
the relation between economy and culture, the context and interior of family
life, generally held opposing views. Either they were "conservatives" who forgot
the context -- the economy, racism, class divisions among blacks -- and focused
on cultural deficiencies in the poor black community. Or they were "liberals"
who focused on the context and ignored culture. "Climbing Jacob's Ladder"
bridges the gap between these two positions and moves the debate in the
direction of inquiry.

Mr. Billingsley begins by setting the modern black family in a historical
context. He describes the family in West African society, under slavery, during
Reconstruction and Jim Crow. He traces black migration to Northern cities, and
documents the de-industrialization that has eroded the cores of these cities and
the black families within them. It is ironic, he reflects, "that the traditional
family system that slavery could not destroy during 200 years may be dismantled
in a few short years by the modern industrial transition."

Drawing from the University of Chicago sociologist William Julius Wilson's
research, Mr. Billingsley argues that the decline of black marriage is largely
due to the impact of job loss experienced by black men, especially in the
working class. Between 1955 and 1980, employment for black men aged 20 to 24
declined from 78 percent to 55 percent. This decline, he says, is "a major
reason for the downturn in their marriage rates and the upturn in unmarried
parenthood."

Some of his data confirm this economic interpretation, and some of them don't.
For example, the black two-parent family declined in the 1970's and early 1980's
when the economy was in recession. But the two-parent family did not decline
during the Great Depression of the 1930's. Furthermore, marriage rates fell in
the 1960's when the economy was expanding and black income and college
enrollments were rising. Mr. Billingsley argues that black men who lost jobs in
the 1970's and 1980's often broke up their marriages. Other data suggest that so
did black men with jobs, to a lesser degree but also at a rising rate.

Economic trends are important, but they're not the whole story; we are left
wondering how culture fits in and not really told. The timing -- the 1960's --
might suggest that the sexual revolution and social upheavals that destabilized
white families did the same to blacks, though Mr. Billingsley doesn't say so.
His discussion of cultural context is more descriptive than analytic.

More generally, Mr. Billingsley makes the reasonable argument that the strength
of the family depends on the strength of the support it receives from the
institutions around it -- the church, businesses, the military. But the chapters
he devotes to each become a series of tails that wag the dog. And he doesn't
make a persuasive case that a decline in these institutions causes a decline in
black marriage. So while I like his initial approach -- setting out reams of
data, including dozens of tables -- I am left with more questions about the
black family.

The moving stories he tells, drawn from personal experience and research, show
how black families reach out to help -- taking in needy relatives or children
who need raising. Black families formally and informally adopt more children
than white parents of comparable means, he says. He writes of the Rev. Otis Moss
of Cleveland, whose mother died when he was very young. A few years later, his
father died in a car accident. "While young Otis was standing viewing the
wreckage, a woman completely unrelated to him took him by the arm and said,
'Come home with me' " -- and she raised him. The author notes that this is a
"not uncommon form of African-American family life."

Kent Amos, a successful businessman and a Vietnam veteran, "quietly designed an
after-school program" for his son and his friends in their home in 1981. Within
six years, there were 50 boys helping with chores, homework and dinner. Nearly
10 years later, 36 of them were in or had graduated from college. "Most of the
others were employed or in school," Mr. Billingsley writes. "Only a few had been
lost to the streets."

THE best chapter of the book is based on his own research on the black church.
In it, Mr. Billingsley describes the Third Shiloh Missionary Baptist Church in a
poor neighborhood of New Orleans. In 1988, drug traffickers boldly set up two
crack houses across from the church, he says, and began stealing the church's
typewriters and the public address system. Instead of moving away, Shiloh used
its building fund to buy the crack houses, tore them down and built apartments,
employing parishioners to do the job. The church plans to use the rent to pay
for a tutoring program.

Other churches described in the book set up AIDS education workshops and foster
grandparent programs. Male parishioners in one Los Angeles church put six crack
houses out of business by patrolling the streets in front of them, 50 to 200
strong, every weekend. Not every affluent black man is Kent Amos, and not every
black church is like Third Shiloh. Still, Mr. Billingsley gives us a glimpse of
inspiring people we hear far too little about.

In "Climbing Jacob's Ladder," Andrew Billingsley calls for developing a strategy
to prevent family problems from occurring in the first place, a strategy backed
by government, with nonprofit and private support. Guiding it, I hope, will be
research that neither avoids the context of culture nor addresses it in
tone-deaf ways, but research that looks outward to economy and society, and
inward to the heart.

LOAD-DATE: July 7, 1993

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Review

                   Copyright 1993 The New York Times Company


                              288 of 312 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                  June 20, 1993, Sunday, Late Edition - Final
                              Correction Appended

Who's Got Clout

BYLINE: By William Safire;  William Safire, the New York Times political
columnist whose latest book is "The First Dissident: The Book of Job in Today's
Politics," also uses his Clout Scale to measure earthquakes, groundswells and
landslides.

SECTION: Section 6; Page 25; Column 3; Magazine Desk

LENGTH: 6039 words


POWERFUL PEOPLE maneuver for position," said the outsider Bill Clinton about
Washington moments after he was sworn in as the 42d President, "and worry
endlessly about who is in and who is out, who is up and who is down." The new
man's derogation of clout was in the grand tradition; leaders always resist
outside assessments of the jockeying for power that goes on within. King Lear
derided the way "poor rogues talk of court news," which he described as
essentially "who loses and who wins; who's in, who's out."

Three months into his Presidency, Clinton was still deriding as a "political
smoke screen" reports that "somebody's up and somebody's down." But soon
afterward, he had to backtrack: "We think that there needs to be a little
tighter coordination here," he admitted, and announced that his chief of staff,
Thomas (Mack) McLarty, was being given a second deputy, freeing Clinton's best
friend from kindergarten days to give unspecified policy advice.

We poor rogues talking of court news could tell that somebody was surely up (in
that case, Roy Neel, Al Gore's chief aide and an experienced Senate hand), and
somebody was at least seen to be down ("Mack the Nice," as the courteous McLarty
is known). That was the first public sign that the power lines of the
Clintonites were being adjusted to reflect the realities of administering a
Government and wrestling with the negative reaction to its surprising early
ideological shift.

A couple of weeks later, after a flip-flop by Christopher and a haircut from
Cristophe increased the Presidential nose dive in opinion polls to warp speed,
the up-and-downing intensified. Clinton, deciding to blame communications more
than content for his plunge, put David Gergen, a Nixon-Ford-Reagan Old Pro, out
front and pulled the media-battered George Stephanopoulos in close.

People -- appointees -- determine policy. The Earl of Chesterfield's idealistic
assertion that "measures, not men, has always been my mark" was nicely skewered
by George Canning in 1801 as "the idle supposition that it is the harness and
not the horses that draw the chariot along."

The warm desire for diversity and the cold political trade-offs that led to the
molasseslike peopling of the Clinton Administration have given way to the force
of personality in small meetings and examples of good and bad judgment in public
view. The little boxes and dotted lines on a table of organization are shaking
down to "guys we can trust and guys we're stuck with."

BILL CLINTON IS THE first President in American history to entrust the top power
positions in his Administration to two people he cannot fire: the First Lady and
the Vice President. He could not fire his lifelong best friend, the chief of
staff, either, which explains why the selfless McLarty, along with the alter ego
Stephanopoulos, were elevated to more advisory positions -- with others being
inserted as "the Hammer" or "the Persuader" alongside them.

Some Clinton watchers thought the disciplinary role -- which Mack insists that
he had planned from the start, but that his choice, Harold Ickes Jr. of New
York, ran into flak -- would go to Rahm Emanuel, 33, a hard-edged, soft-eyed
former Chicagoan with the grace of a ballet dancer who squeezed $100 million out
of fat cats to finance the campaign. ("If you had a flow chart," Emanuel says of
those halcyon days, "it would be a kaleidoscope.") But he remains the political
director, running the daily 5 P.M. meeting in the Ward Room of the White House
mess, with David Wilhelm, the Friend of Bill who now runs the Democratic
National Committee; Mandy Grunwald, the media maven; Stan Greenberg, the
pollster; David Dreyer, the press aide who doubles as a speech writer; Dee Dee
Myers, the formerly token press secretary who is now assuming a more
traditional, out-front position in briefing the press, and James Carville and
Paul Begala, the pop-'em-with-populism campaign consultants, along with
schedulers and advancers.

These are the image-protectors and Permanent Campaigners, trying to figure out
how Mike Deaver did it in the first Reagan term and wondering why the Inaugural
air has gone out of the balloon. Their goal, as Emanuel puts it: "To make
Clinton the first Democratic President since Roosevelt to be re-elected."
(Though Truman served nearly two terms, he was elected President once; that
means no Democrat has been re-elected in nearly 50 years.)

At lunch in the White House mess -- first time back since I was a Nixon speech
writer 20 years ago -- Mack's soft-spoken, color-free demeanor was broken only
once, when he burst into sudden laughter at the question: "Were you the genius
who chose April 15 as the day to float the notion of a value-added tax?" I
learned elsewhere that the genius was the ebullient Donna Shalala, Secretary of
Health and Human Services, who has little to be ebullient about: the health
portfolio was stripped from her by Hillary Rodham Clinton and given to Ira
Magaziner, a certified Deep Thinker and longtime friend of the Clintons;
meanwhile, reform of H.H.S.'s chief human service -- the promised end of
"welfare as we know it," in candidate Clinton's words -- was not even given
modest financing in the budget submitted this spring. Clintonites say Magaziner
is "narrow but deep," his clout derivative but considerable.

About the only Cabinet member lower on the totem pole at this moment than Donna
Shalala is Hazel O'Leary, the utilities executive from Minnesota. She got the
job as Energy Secretary when former Senator Tim Wirth's ex-colleagues in the
Senate turned on him after his scathing article about that body in this
magazine; he now deals with drug-running at State while Mrs. O'Leary presses her
nose to the power window.

Why do I feel no regret in reporting the lowly spots in the pecking order of
these intelligent, reputable Clinton appointees? Because it may well help them
bureaucratically: the Democratic political consultant James Carville, "the
ragin' Cajun" or "Jugular Jim," tells me that around Clinton, "to be down is to
be up. You write that I'm in a state of exile, and if Clinton reads it, for the
next week I'm the one he has traveling with him. Clinton spots the most
vulnerable person in the room and protects that person."

Such protection is already being given the Interior Secretary. Clintonites go
out of their way to extol the loyalty and patience of the former Arizona
Governor Bruce Babbitt, which suggests he has lost more than a few internal
battles on grazing fees and public lands. If being down in the Cabinet is to be
raised up, Babbitt, Shalala and O'Leary are due for a boost -- and in fact,
Babbitt is a leading contender for the opening on the Supreme Court.

MOST EXPERIENCED politicians are doing well in the Clinton Cabinet. Henry
Cisneros, the former Mayor of San Antonio who wisely ducked the rigors of a
Texas Senate race to take on Housing and Urban Development, is considered a
persuasive spokesman for the Administration, as is the Cabinet's other Hispanic
member, the former Denver Mayor Federico Pena, at Transportation. Mike Espy, the
first black to be sent to Congress by Mississipians in this century, was
underrated at the start at Agriculture but is thought to be performing well. Not
one of the trio can be called a major player, but all have modest places at the
power table.

So does Ron Brown, the Democratic National Committee chairman who solved the
Democrats' Jesse Jackson problem, making him the choice for Commerce; although
he has a demerit for sponsoring the O'Leary pick (the Energy Secretary will be
lionized at the next Cabinet meeting, if the Carville vulnerability theory is
correct), Brown has worked out a nice-cop-tough-cop technique with Mickey
Kantor, the trade negotiator, on Japan. The smooth Brown had previously
exploited Kantor's explosive abrasiveness in the Bush-Clinton-Perot television
debate negotiations; together, Brown and Kantor took the vaunted
Baker-Teeter-Darman team to the cleaners on debate formats, and hope to do the
same to the Japanese on trade balances.

As the low-key Robert Rubin takes over building support for the North American
Free Trade Agreement, a political tar baby, the high-key Kantor will keep the
heat on the GATT talks, the world-trade negotiations. Working closely with
Kantor and adding intellectual depth and telegenic feistiness to the economic
group is Laura D'Andrea Tyson, the University of California at Berkeley
economist inclined to apply affirmative action to Japan's trade imbalance.
Kantor, at the pinnacle of Clinton Clout last year as campaign chairman, sought
aggressively to be transition chief and later chief of staff; after his
take-charge bid was blocked by Bruce Lindsey, Stephanopoulos and Hillary, he
came back, subdued, to take a lesser role. "Mickey will be in varying shades of
In," says an insider, "but he won't be Out." And he won't be blamed, as Rubin is
very likely to be, for the rift that develops with organized labor over allowing
American plants to "run away" to Mexico. The Kantor Lesson: in a loose,
free-flowing, grimly antihierarchical staff structure, where collegiality is a
virtue, don't try too hard to get to the top of the heap.

ONE CABINET MEMBER vouchsafed to me the secret behind Bill Clinton's running of
the Executive Branch: "Where power is not delegated, proximity is all."

She or he (sources who place their political lives in my hands to help compile
the Clout Ratings are protected) explained the power lines at this stage of the
new Government: the new President brought a small group of loyalists into his
White House, filled with a spirit of solidarity and a sense of the gladness of
change. Slowly, suspiciously, Bill and Friends fleshed out the skeleton of the
Departments with appointees, many of them relative strangers, and conveyed to
them the trappings of office but declined to delegate the power to make
decisions even about their own staffs.

For example, when Hillary Rodham Clinton's third and final choice for Attorney
General was put in place, Janet Reno soon discovered the A.G. de facto was Mrs.
Clinton's Arkansas law partner, Webster Hubbell: in the aftermath of the Branch
Davidian disaster in Waco, Tex., it was the trusted Associate Attorney General
Hubbell, not Reno, whom the White House consulted. The moment that revealed the
distance between the third-choice A.G. and the President came when she told Tom
Brokaw she was unable to talk to Bill Clinton immediately after the suicidal
fire; instead, Webb Hubbell was the point of contact. Reno got her revenge when
she refused to accept the choice of chief of the criminal division from Hillary:
a law partner of Susan Thomases, the First Lady's First Friend, was passed over,
generating some independence at Justice and not a little ill will from the power
center. (Susan Thomases, who retains her clout, should not be confused with
Linda Bloodworth-Thomason, whose clout diminished in the wake of her husband
Harry's haircutting and travel advice.)

"Close counts only in horseshoes and hand grenades," goes the adage; not so in
Presidential power-playing. Closeness to the President counts for everything --
when power is not delegated.

GEORGE Stephanopoulos -- "stuffin' envelopes" is the mnemonic, though some
prefer Sesame Street's "Snuffleupagus" -- was, in the First Clinton
Administration, the third member of the power trio around the President. Not
since James Hagerty advised Eisenhower while managing his press relations had a
"communicator" counted for so much in a White House, and not since Ted Sorensen
served as John F. Kennedy's alter ego had an adviser been so closely attuned to
his principal's principles and mind-set.

In contrast to longtime Friends of Bill like Bruce Lindsey and Mack McLarty, the
slight, 32-year-old bachelor came aboard only a year ago, a refugee from Dukakis
and Mondale campaigns who had learned the hard way how not to lose.

At the start, he was the intellectual straw boss, consulted on everything,
active everywhere and spread too thin. His judgment to move quickly to deliver
on promises to abortion rights groups was well received by press and public,
though he got no credit for it; however, his judgment to pay back homosexuals
for their support in the first weeks of the Administration was faulted by the
news media and insiders alike.

Ensconsced in the Press Secretary's traditional office, his leg hooked over an
arm of the Queen Anne chair, touseled head resting in the corner, Stephanopoulos
would dismiss criticism of a paucity of press conferences as "elitist," and
moments after that, he would fence with the press corps, gutsily rejecting the
premises of loaded questions. A visitor came out of the office once occupied by
Ron Ziegler with the impression that Stephanopoulos delighted in what he was
doing, and most of the time -- unlike most of his youthful cohorts, frazzled by
policy all-nighters, courting exhaustion as a kind of fraternity initiation --
Stephanopoulos found running a country from its communications center to be fun.

Then the First Clinton Administration came to an end. The communications chief
was not along on the trip when the hairdresser, Cristophe of Beverly Hills,
recommended by the Hollywood producer, Harry Thomason, blew-dry the Clinton
image of folksiness. But he was closely involved in the firing of the veteran
White House travel staff at the behest of two campaign helpers: Thomason, who
wanted a crack at the White House press-travel business for an outfit he partly
owns, and the President's young cousin, who also happened to be the friend of a
Stephanopoulos deputy. To justify the old-style divvying of the political
spoils, Stephanopoulos -- unwarned by counsel Bernard Nussbaum's aides -- went a
bridge too far, eliciting an unusual formal F.B.I. statement of the existence of
a criminal investigation; this unthinking abuse of police power for political
purpose reminded oldtimers of the Nixon sins. "When Christopher and Bentsen
aren't around the White House," said one exasperated observer, "it's 'Home
Alone.' "

From this episode, Stephanopoulos learned that there are some battles that
cannot be won, and that some awkward situations called for backpedaling rather
than brazening. He called around to those he misled to apologize. "We learn
every single day in this office," the roughed-up young man told the press corps
in a brief flash of genuine contrition. "We'll continue to learn."

But when the news media reaction to Scalpgate and Travelgate combined with the
deeper political rebellion against the leftward lurch to pound down public
support of the new President, the Clintons realized the politics of change
itself needed a drastic early-course change. "Communications" and "partisanship"
were blamed, rather than strategic policy blunders, and Stephanopoulos took the
fall; he was gathered into the Oval Office bosom as "Senior Policy Adviser,"
where he will lie low until the next turn of the clout-rating wheel.

He was replaced as the symbol of the Second Clinton Administration (I steal this
construct from F.D.R.'s Brain Truster and speech writer Raymond Moley, who
divided the First and Second New Deals) by David Gergen. The moderate Ray Price
brought David into the speech-writing ranks of the Nixon Administration; he went
on to serve Gerald Ford and, when his hoped-for post at the head of Ronald
Reagan's U.S.I.A. went to a Reagan crony, became a top press aide in the White
House, barring access to reporters he considered "hostile." He successfully
crossed the street to magazine and television commentary, taking generally
sensible and libertarian positions on the right, and identified the motive for
his recrossing as "patriotism." Clinton was indeed on the ropes: his economic
plan passed the heavily Democratic House only because, in the Oklahoma Democrat
David McCurdy's words, "We couldn't afford to let him die." Time was overripe
for a switch to the center; the choice of Gergen represents that recognition of
a need to end the leftward lurch.

BRUCE LINDSEY, the eminence grise around the White House, is the Clintons'
confidant, the closest-in adviser; I am told by one of his many nonadmirers that
he sought the job of Chief of Staff, but both Hillary and her husband felt he
would not be as good an administrator as the other longtime friend, Mack
McLarty. Lindsey's consolation was to be given greater access to the President's
ear; in addition, he was given the specific task of staffing the Administration
with loyalists and an affirmative representation of women and minorities. At
first Lindsey tripped over Nannygate, and as a result was cautious to a fault in
selecting sub-Cabinet appointees; as one support-deprived official puts it, "Zoe
froze the system." But the protected Lindsey, unlike the exposed McLarty, took
no heat. He performs a function that Bebe Rebozo performed for Nixon: sounding
board for the Clintons' resentments at ill treatment from the press.

Harry Thomason's clout rating, which had soared to 7.4 after he and his wife,
Linda, produced the Inaugural extravaganza, has taken a tumble to 3.7. He can
still flash the coveted White House "resident's pass," allowing him john
privileges in the family quarters, but the Hollywood set, which began to
advertise its clout with "the long hug" of Bill Clinton by Barbra Streisand at
the gala, found its influence on the wane -- at least until next fund-raising
time.

AL GORE IS HAVING FUN, but he tries not to let it show. He subscribes to the
notion that in national politics, stuffiness is next to godliness, and only
lately, and with the most sober second thought, has he begun to lighten up. The
Vice President -- grimly obsequious to the President in public -- lays it on the
line in private without the formal deferrence exhibited by the Secretary of
State or the professorial shuffling of the nation-al security adviser. I ran
into him just outside the Oval Office one day, tossed the singles-bar line at
him -- "Do you come here often?" -- and was cheerfully told, "All the time."

I had known him only as the Senate's "Mr. Green," who would trudge over to
newspaper offices with large charts to demonstrate why we were not devoting
enough space to global warming. Now near the top of the heap, he has extracted
small victories for biodiversity and environmentalism from the economic group,
which is concerned about the fallout on the job market. Clout is not
transferrable, however; though Gore placed his Senate aide, Carol Browner, at
the head of the Environmental Protection Agency, she is not regarded as a heavy
hitter.

As a longtime Washington hand -- son of a Senator, eight years a Senator himself
-- Gore helps prepare the President for the arcane ways of the capital. For
example, before Clinton's State of the Union Message to a joint session of
Congress, it was Gore who pointed out that when the President called for change,
only half the chamber would rise and applaud, and the speaker at the rostrum
should not expect the entire audience to react positively. Seems obvious enough,
but that night, Clinton called Gore to thank him for the heads-up, admitting he
would have been thrown by the sight of so many sitting on their hands had he not
been forewarned.

More important, Gore is one of the very few willing to beard the lion in his
den. Clinton, winging his foreign policy at the start, told The New York Times
that he wanted to "depersonalize" the conflict with Saddam Hussein; that was
duly reported as a dramatic change from Bush's policy, which had been to insist
on the dictator's ouster before relations with Iraq could be resumed. Clinton
reacted with anger and confusion, insisting that no policy change had been made.
Christopher, testifying to Congress that day, put some daylight between himself
and the President's blunder, and Tony Lake, the scholarly national security
adviser, is not the sort to storm into the Oval Office to straighten out a
petulant President. It took Al Gore, shirt-sleeved but somber, to go in and say
he would go on a talk show the next day to wrench the position back into line.
Clinton agreed to let Gore "walk back the cat." Later, the lawyerly Secretary of
State found a way of making Clinton's dovish "de-personalize" seem even more
hawkish on Saddam than Bush had been -- by welcoming Kurdish leaders to
Washington and telling them that it meant that only a true democratic
replacement for Saddam, and not some successor Iraqi thug, would be acceptable
to the United States.

Who swings the most weight with Clinton in the formulation of foreign policy? So
far, there have been two big decisions -- one easy, one hard. The easy one was
to back strongly Boris Yeltsin and his reformers in Russia, as Richard Nixon was
urging and as George Bush had failed to do. Strobe Talbott, the former Time
columnist who was a Clinton chum at Oxford and now has the former Soviet Union
portfolio at State, pressed for a summit embrace. Tony Lake deferred to his
judgment in this area: "Tony is spooked by Talbott," mutters an N.S.C.
colleague. A political honcho said, "We couldn't save Wyche Fowler in Georgia;
how are we gonna save Yeltsin?" Secretary of State Christopher (who must suspect
Talbott covets his job) was cautious as usual but leaning toward giving Yeltsin
a world spotlight before his referendum. Defense Secretary Les Aspin (who must
suspect Jim Woolsey, the C.I.A. director, covets his job) is a mature Washington
hand and a possible distance runner, if his health holds up; Aspin and Gore were
outspokenly for it. Clinton then arranged to see Nixon, who had been rebuffed
when he tried to get Bush to support the reformers, and who showed the new
President how foreign aid could be presented as a palatable way to protect
planned defense cuts. Clinton came down cleanly for Yeltsin, and picked up
deserved credit when the reformers won the referendum.

Bosnia was the hard one. When the Munich analogy clashed with the Vietnam
syndrome, Clinton's National Security Council split. Tony Lake, Les Aspin and
United Nations Ambassador Madeleine Albright were the hawks; Christopher and
Gen. Colin Powell (soon to retire and be replaced as Chairman of the Joint
Chiefs by an airman, with more faith in bombing) were the doves. Gore was not
usually identified as taking a point of view, because he would have to be out
front selling whatever Clinton decided, but I'm told that in advising the
President, Gore "took an aggressive posture."

After the television pictures of the siege of Srebrenica pushed editorial and
some public opinion toward intervention, Clinton let it be known he favored
fairly hawkish allied action: "lift and strike," lifting the United Nations
embargo that kept arms from Bosnian Muslims and air strikes to suppress Serbian
artillery and cut supply lines. Like Bush during the televised flight of
terrified Kurds from the wrath of Saddam Hussein, Clinton had been swayed by the
widespread revulsion at the slaughter of civilians -- but not swayed enough to
take the leadership required for action.

Clinton first made certain the world knew the United States would not go this
alone, in effect giving the Europeans a veto over any American plan; that was
his first mistake. His next was to dispatch Christopher to Europe to "consult"
with Britain and France, which wanted no action beyond economic sanctions.

Christopher interpreted Clinton's words as instruction to actually consult --
which in this case meant to bring back an answer of "no." The tip-off came in
Brussels, when Manfred Worner, the NATO Secretary General, told Christopher he
was ready to convene a meeting of allied ambassadors at which NATO would firmly
support joint action. If Christopher wanted a "yes" to take home, he would have
jumped at the opportunity; instead, President Clinton's man turned the NATO
meeting down. Then, one by one, he made what British Prime Minister John Major
told associates was a "bloodless" presentation to the major allies. Christopher
returned not with the grudging approval of the allies, as Clinton had hoped, but
with a convenient "out"; gutless Europe, not the courageous American President,
was to blame.

Frankly, I thought at the time that Clinton must have sent his Secretary of
State to Europe with the mission of being turned down, but I am assured that the
President was sincere in wanting to coerce the Serbs into a cease-fire and was
knocked off-course by his Secretary's ineptness.

What happened to Christopher's clout rating? Amazingly, it went up; Clinton has
exhibited no irritation, publicly or privately, with the failure of his
Secretary of State to carry out his mission. On the contrary, the
make-the-most-of-it President nearly boasted of a decision to refuse to "go it
alone." Sixth-floor professionals at State may be sick at heart, and
seventh-floor political appointees, like Under Secretary Peter Tarnoff, may be
rebuked when they blurt out a too-poor-to-lead policy, but the Clintons were
drawn closer to "Chris" by his first diplomatic fiasco.

THE NATIONAL Economic Council is a bureaucratic counterpart to the National
Security Council. This new power center was created to show the public that in
the new era, economic policy would be at least as high a priority as national
security; more important, it moves the center of gravity on economic policy away
from the Treasury and into the White House.

The President and Hillary's choice to head the council was Robert Rubin, a New
York investment banker who, at 54, had risen to the top of Goldman, Sachs &
Company. He knew Mickey Kantor from his years as a Democratic fund-raiser, which
brought him into the Clinton economic inner circle during the campaign. Rubin
was also a longtime friend of Lloyd Bentsen's, and had served as trustee of the
Texas Senator's blind trust; each man had recommended the other to be Treasury
Secretary, although Bentsen subtly made it known he really wanted that role as
the principal spokesman for economic policy. Rubin dutifully settled for Mr.
Inside; because he has no aspirations for elective office and no need to top
last year's $26 million income, he is content to have the President's economic
ear. The council is too big; Clinton let every Cabinet officer sit on it who
asked to, but Rubin gets around that time-wasting expansiveness by breaking it
down into subcouncils.

Here's an example of how Rubin's operation works: A hardball strategy, devised
by Howard Paster, a legislative aide, to ram a "stimulus" package through the
Senate, succeeded only in uniting Republicans in opposition; a filibuster
organized by Bob Dole shifted the issue from "job creation" to "pork." The first
legislative defeat of a Clinton initiative encouraged Ross Perot to go public
with his objections to a failure to cut spending, and it became apparent that
the entire Clinton plan to sell a historic tax increase by calling it budget
reduction was in trouble. Pollster Greenberg, in the 5 P.M. Ward Room meeting,
confirmed that the public did not trust Clinton to use the new money to sop up
red ink. The poor rogues reporting court news were prepared to consign the
economic plan to a "crisis of confidence."

Bentsen, a Texas patrician with a moderate image -- and at 72, the Grand Old Man
of the Clinton Administration -- had Rubin convene a meeting of a portion of the
council in the Roosevelt Room of the White House. The G.O.M., who had absented
himself from heavy lobbying on the losing stimulus plan, liked the idea being
pressed by Representative Charles Schumer of New York to create a "trust fund"
in which new tax money would go, earmarked for reducing the deficit. Never mind
that Democrats had denounced a similar "tax-return checkoff" proposal made the
year before by President Bush as a feckless gimmick; the public wanted ironclad
assurances that new taxes would not be diverted to new spending, and Bentsen
felt the idea's time had come.

Leon Panetta, director of the Office of Management and Budget, was all for it.
Panetta has long been a Washington maverick: I remember him from the Nixon
Health, Education and Welfare Department, where he ran the Office of Civil
Rights and angrily quit to co-write a book entitled in sarcasm "Bring Us
Together." A generation ago, he switched parties, won a seat in Congress and
ultimately became the Democrats' leading House budgeteer; when the didactic
Alice Rivlin bored Bill Clinton stiff in a job interview -- "she's more loyal to
cutting the deficit than to the Clintons" was one assessment -- the faithful,
good-humored Panetta won the top job at the Office of Management and Budget.

Panetta saw the "trust fund" idea as a way of enforcing fiscal discipline. For
months, he had been losing this battle; in the formulation of the economic plan,
his pleas for $2 in spending cuts for every $1 in tax increases were countered
inside the economic council by the passionate, articulate arguments of Robert
Reich. That Harvard political economist, rewarded with the Labor secretaryship
for his years of loyal Friend-of-Billhood, is an unabashed spender on (in his
preferred term, investor in) Government programs to train workers and finance
the creation of jobs. In the early planning, Reich urged taxation for new
spending; Panetta wanted to use most of the new tax money for deficit reduction;
Bentsen was in the middle. Rubin, inexperienced in politics and focused on the
impact of the promise of deficit reduction on interest rates and the bond
markets, came down on the side of Reich.

In the trust-fund meeting, Reich again pressed the liberal side, arguing against
the fund because it might turn out to be more than a gimmick and might hamstring
the spending necessary to train a new work force. But the climate had changed;
Stephanopoulos sided with Bentsen, who felt the President now needed to present
to suspicious taxpayers some sort of anti-deficit guarantee. Reich then asked
for a parallel "investment trust fund," to set aside money saved by spending
cuts in defense for his training programs; that didn't fly. Rubin made the
decision by asking his deputy, Gene Sperling, to do the paper work to make sure
the fund would not unduly tie the Administration's hands. Next morning, in a
15-minute meeting with the President, the pros and cons of a trust fund were
presented and Clinton chose the pro. The fund was in a speech the next day. Then
Alice Rivlin shrugged it off as mere "display" and had to be told to get with
the program.

THE HILLARY FACTOR is pervasive. She has apparently decided that health will be
to the Clinton Administration as Social Security was to F.D.R., as highways were
to Eisenhower -- the lasting legacy to show that one couple can make a
difference.

The most severe internal struggle so far has been the fitting of health reform
into the budget package. Leon Panetta urged that first things should come first:
agreement with Congress on taxing and spending for this fiscal year, with the
second bite -- the health plan with its accompanying taxation -- coming in the
fall. Hillary disagreed; she insisted that the health reformation come close on
the heels of the budget, while the Clinton mandate was still fresh.

She lost that one. But she won on the economic plan, tilting it toward Reich and
away from Panetta, and her influence is felt in most of the Administration's
appointments. Did she have an input on Bosnia? She expresses no position on
foreign affairs, but as several insiders say, in the same words, "They talk
about everything." The First Lady -- with so much at stake in her health reform,
and with a more focused mind than her husband -- was said to exert her influence
on the side of letting the Bosnians down and concentrating on America.

That's why, in the current indexation, she outclouts 'em all. Clinton staff
members, who tend to absolve the President of blame with the traditional "if the
Czar only knew," say the mistakes made in recent months would have been
minimized "if only Hillary were here" and not occupied with the health task
force.

But just as a nonpartisan face was being put on the Second Clinton
Administration, there was Hillary making a fiercely partisan speech against the
"special interests" among the health care providers. As the President pulls in
his spending horns, the First Lady, with more clout than anybody, presses for
the heavier spending option in the health plan.

It's not easy to keep up, but to cloutologists, turbulence has its attractions.

WILLIAM SAFIRE'S CLOUT RATINGS
William Safire's Clout Scale, used here for the first time to rate the political
influence of members of the Clinton Administration, is based on criteria
pioneered by the developer of the Richter scale to measure seismic disturbances
and the Saffir-Simpson scale to measure the force of hurricanes.

On a scale of 0 to 10 -- with 0 indicating total political impotence and 10
signifying Undisputed Leader of the Free World, a rating automatically given a
new President -- cloutologists give Administration members numerical ratings
based on the sum of these criteria: (a) job title (with 5 for the top four
Cabinet positions and the Chief of Staff, 3 for minor Cabinet posts and National
Security Adviser, 1 for Veterans Affairs, .5 for Environmental Protection
Agency, etc); (b) proximity to the President's ear (up to 7 for Closest
Adviser); (c) quality of intellect and force of personality during internal
struggles; (d) ability to sell the President's programs on television or through
deep-backgrounders; (e) longtime F.O.B. status; (f) political savvy, and (g)
last-minute secret weighting by the author to reflect irritation at
inaccessibility or salivation at the potential of future leaks.

Hillary Rodham Clinton, 9.2: Has no problem with that.

Al Gore, 8.4: Obsequious in public, candid in private.

Warren Christopher, 8.0: Foreign policy inward, lawyer's influence upward.

Thomas McLarty, 7.5: Chief of Staff "Mack the Nice."

David Gergen, 7.3: Moderate image-saver can teach it either way.

Robert Rubin, 7.3: Mr. Economic Inside.

Thomas McLarty, 7.5: Chief of Staff "Mack the Nice"
 Lloyd Bentsen, 7.2: Mr. Economic Outside.

Les Aspin, 7.2: Slow Pentagon starter, long-distance runner.

George Stephanopoulos, 7.1: Took the rap for the early leftward lurch.

Bruce Lindsey, 7.1: Arkansas mafia's consigliere.

Tony Lake, 7.0: Chief of National Security; Professoriate.

Strobe Talbott, 7.0: Russiameister spooks State and N.S.C.

Leon Panetta, 6.8: Budget chief always down, never out.

Robert Reich, 6.7: Liberal at Labor showed early foot, now fading.

Laura D'Andrea Tyson, 6.5: Surprises Economic Councilmates with feistiness.

James Carville and Paul Begala, 6.3: Mule-drivers of the permanent campaign.

Roy Neel, 6.2: Gore's man on the inside.

Mickey Kantor, 6.2: Trade rep. always out, never down.

James Woolsey, 6.1: Chief spook all cloak, no dagger.

Bernard Nussbaum, 6.1: President's mouthpiece constantly under fire.

Janet Reno, 6.1: Attorney General de jure popular at expense of the Clintons.

Henry Cisneros, 6.0: H.U.D.'s escapee from Texas Senate race.

Webster Hubbell, 6.0: Hillary's back channel to Justice.

Susan Thomases, 5.8: New York lawyer protecting Hillary's back.

Mark Gearan, 5.7: Mack's liberal deputy chief of staff.

Ron Brown, 5.6: Finding comfort in Commerce.

Rahm Emanuel, 5.5: Re-election is the bottom line.

Madeleine Albright, 5.4: U.N. envoy loyally defends policy she disagrees with.

Stan Greenberg, 4.9: Pollster wets finger, points direction.

Mike Espy, 4.8: There when a farmer needs a friend.

Federico Pena, 4.8: Picking up a little speed at Transportation.

Howard Paster, 4.5: Legislative aide trying to make a comeback.

Bruce Babbitt, 4.5: Interior caught between Western strategy and liberal budget.

Harry Thomason and Linda Bloodworth-Thomason, 3.7: With friends like these . . .
.

Richard Riley, 3.2: Education chief left lecturing on his own.

Carol Browner, 3.1: Not easy being green.

Donna Shalala, 3.1: Health to Hillary: Human Services out of budget.

Hazel O'Leary, 3.0: Much of the zip has gone out of Energy.

Jesse Brown, 3.0: Warms veterans' chair at Cabinet table.

LOAD-DATE: July 8, 1993

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

CORRECTION-DATE: June 20, 1993, Sunday

CORRECTION:

 An article on page 25 of The Times Magazine today assesses the relative
influence of members of the Clinton Administration and others in the President's
inner circle. In discussing Interior Secretary Bruce Babbitt, it says Mr.
Babbitt is a leading contender for the Supreme Court. On Monday, after the
magazine had gone to press, President Clinton nominated Ruth Bader Ginsburg for
the opening on the Court.

GRAPHIC: Photos: Chief Justice William Rehnquist (far right) swearing in the
Clinton cabinet in January. On the author's clout scale, the steady-but-stuffy
Al Gore is up; Health and Human Services Secretary Donna Shalala (third from
left) and Environment Administrator Carol Browner (center) are down, which might
actually bode well for them. (pg. 24); Whom does the First Lady call when she
needs something at Justice? Associate Attorney General Webster Hubbell, left,
shown at a Justice Department meeting in April. (pg. 28)(Photographs by David
Burnett/Contact)

                   Copyright 1993 The New York Times Company


                              289 of 312 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                  June 21, 1993, Monday, Late Edition - Final

Mail by the Millions Deluges The Clintons, Even the Cat

BYLINE: By THOMAS L. FRIEDMAN,  Special to The New York Times

SECTION: Section A; Page 1; Column 5; National Desk

LENGTH: 1207 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, June 20


Bill Clinton has not reinvented government yet, but he has certainly revived one
Washington institution: the United States Postal Service.

Since taking office, the President; his wife, Hillary, their daughter, Chelsea,
and their cat, Socks, have received more mail than any other first family in
history during the first five months: 3.5 million pieces, more than the Bushes
received all of last year.

The mail reflects every facet of Mr. Clinton's personality and agenda. It
started with people sending him hundreds of coupons for McDonald's Big Macs
(which the White House donated to charity). Then came enough jogging shorts,
caps and tennis shoes to outfit a track team. After that it was recipes for how
to lose weight and home-brewed allergy potions to clear the Presidential
sinuses. For the first feline, someone sent a kitty litter box built inside a
miniature replica of the White House.

Then came the medals. Scores of them. Gay soldiers and Vietnam veterans sent
them to the President, with poignant notes, telling him that if anyone in
uniform gives him any grief, to wear these for protection. In fact, Mr. Clinton
keeps one sent by a Navy Seal commando just behind his desk in the Oval Office.

Finally came the medical bills. They were addressed to Mrs. Clinton. Hundreds of
them -- hospital bills, doctors' bills, dentists' bills -- sent by the young and
old alike, with "can-you-believe-how-much-this-cost?" notes appended to them and
"can-you-do-something-about-it" appeals.

We are talking mail. Mountains of it, rivers of it, cascading into the basement
of the Old Executive Office Building, billowing out of mail bins, piling up in
corners, and testifying to an extremely unusual personal relationship between a
President and his constituency while disclosing some of the tides of hope and
fear lapping up against this White House.

Some love him. Some hate him. But everyone seems to want to write him.

"The volume has gone up with every President, but with this President it has
gone through the roof -- literally through the roof," said Lillie Bell, director
of White House Mail Analysis, who has been answering mail for Presidents for 24
years.

Approachable Bill

"The thing I notice most, though, is the tone," Ms. Bell added. "In the old
days, people who wrote the President wrote to him as figure way up above them.
But most people write to this President the way you would write a friend. He's
not way up there. There is no awe in the letters.

"They just write 'Dear Bill and Hillary.' In the old days, if a letter came in
addressed that way we automatically assumed that it was from a personal friend
of the President's and we set it aside. But not now; they all think they're his
friend."

But that is both a blessing and curse for Mr. Clinton. For while the mail
certainly highlights just how approachable Americans feel their new President
is, it also underscores how much they do not see him as the usual regal-like
Commander in Chief.

It is a balance that Mr. Clinton is still struggling with: how to remain open
enough to generate the populous participation he has invited for his agenda but
aloof enough to preserve the stature and dignity of the Presidency?

The same approachability that invites 700,000 letters a month also leads to
sailors on the the aircraft carrier Theodore Roosevelt openly expressing their
contempt for Mr. Clinton while he is on board, and to Maj. Gen. Harold Campbell
of the Air Force describing the President as "gay-loving," "pot-smoking,"
"draft-dodging" and "womanizing" in a banquet speech to Air Force personnel in
Europe.

"People feel more liberties with him," said one close Presidential aide. "The
President is not surrounded by a bubble. When you put the Presidency in a bus
and haul it around the country, it's no longer above your head, it's right there
in front of you, and it can get a flat tire."

It is really Mrs. Clinton who has the steely demeanor and reputation, and the
President who comes off as the softy. Somehow, said another Presidential aide,
they have to find a way to "make Hillary more human and Bill less human."

A favorite letter making the rounds of the mail room is from a young boy who
wrote: "Dear Hilliry Clinton, I think your position is very import. I want to be
first man when I grow up. I hope you do a good job."

But aloofness is simply not in Mr. Clinton's character, and while he has tried
to stay on his side of that fine line between Commander in Chief and first pal,
a lot of his constituents are crossing over. Or as one recent letter to the
President begins: "Dear Bill, I was thinking about you at breakfast this
morning."

While the mail is usually divided for and against the President on any issue,
and huge volumes of it are politically generated by interest groups, the
authentic notes do echo with a deep sense that people actually believe the
President will personally do something about their concerns.

One young woman wrote that she was being molested by her father, thinking that
because Mr. Clinton had to deal with an alcoholic father he would be able to
understand and help. The White House is working with law-enforcement officials
to deal with the young woman's problem.

Another sense that clearly comes across in the mail is that many Americans
believe the country is truly at a watershed moment and that whether they like
the President or not, many believe he cannot be allowed to fail. Even the young
ones feel it.

One letter shown to the President went like this: "Dear President Bill Clinton,
I'm only 9 years old, and my granny said you want me to pay the National Debt. I
don't have a job yet, but I'll get one soon. If the Reagans spent all that money
and they are rich, why me? $4,000,000,000,000.0. If I get older and I don't want
to pay it and Reagan has died, how do I call the peolice? I love America. Your
good friend."

What Happens to Letters

Much of Mrs. Clinton's mail is the result of what she has come to symbolize: For
women, a working mother trying to balance family and job; for men, someone who
is seriously trying to tackle the health-care crisis. Many women have written to
the First Lady for legal advice, appealing for her help as a lawyer to get their
dead-beat husbands to pay alimony.

Marsha Scott, director of Presidential correspondence, has a staff of 103 paid
employees to help sort and answer the mail, along with 65 summer interns and
about 200 volunteers a day. The President is given a sample of pro and con mail
every Friday and a breakdown of his support, issue by issue. Mr. Clinton answers
some of the letters himself. Mail to Socks is responded to with a White House
postcard with a paw print on it.

The person on the President's staff taking most heart from the volume of mail is
the President's pollster, Stan Greenberg, because of what he sees as its
underlying message.

"It says that despite the President's negative poll ratings people still have
their fingers crossed for him," Mr. Greenberg said. "People are hurting, and
they are scared and they are worried that he won't succeed, but they are still
hoping otherwise. They would not be writing to him if they did not think there
was still a reason to appeal to him."


LOAD-DATE: June 21, 1993

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo: Harold C. Schultz, left, sorting through letters with other
volunteers, many of whom are retired, in the Comments and Greetings division.
(Jose R. Lopez/The New York Times) (pg. A14)

Graph: "Writing to the White House" tracks estimated number of letters delivered
to the White House each year since 1981. 1993 figure is for President Clinton's
first five months in office. Also shown is a letter to the First Lady. (Source:
White House estimates) (pg. A14)

                   Copyright 1993 The New York Times Company


                              290 of 312 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                  June 21, 1993, Monday, Late Edition - Final

Abandoned Filipinos Sue U.S. Over Child Support

BYLINE: By BRUCE LAMBERT,  Special to The New York Times

SECTION: Section A; Page 3; Column 1; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 1446 words

DATELINE: OLONGAPO, the Philippines


Next to her son James, what Lucia Villegas Hill prizes most may be a handful of
documents identifying his father as an American sailor at the United States Navy
base that shut down here last year.

"He's so far away now," she said, handing over a crinkled 1975 marriage
certificate and a faded photograph of a man whose features bear some resemblance
to her son's. It has been years since Mrs. Hill's husband wrote or sent money,
and she clings to a scrap of yellow paper with his last known address and phone
number, in Port Orchard, Wash.

For centuries, women in diverse lands and cultures have been left to raise
children alone after being abandoned by foreign soldiers.

But Mrs. Hill and thousands of others in this town next to the former Subic Bay
Naval Station have taken a novel approach. Instead of pressing individual
paternity or child-support suits, they have filed a $68 million lawsuit arguing
that the United States has a legal responsibility to educate and provide medical
care for an estimated 8,600 Amerasians in Olongapo.

The suit, filed as a class action in March in the Federal Court of Claims in
Washington, argues that the Navy effectively fostered and regulated an elaborate
night-life and prostitution industry, live-in arrangements and marriages here in
which servicemen fathered thousands of children.

Sporadic Support Payments

Mrs. Hill, for example, says she met her husband, also named James, in the
Shamrock Club, a popular night spot.

"I'm very sad because of what happened," she said. "But I still have hope, and
No. 1 is for my boy to meet his father."

Many mothers subsisted for a time on sporadic payments from the fathers,
pressuring Navy officials when payments lagged. But the financial support began
drying up in 1991, when the Philippine Senate barred the renewal of United
States leases on the sprawling naval base and other installations in the
Philippines. The United States had already decided that year to abandon Clark
Air Base, its other major military site in the country, after it was damaged by
a volcanic eruption.

When most American ships and planes finally left last year, the decades-long
party was over at the Pussy Cat Bar, the Joy Club and hundreds of other hostess
clubs, discotheques, brothels, massage parlors and short-stay hotels with neon
signs just outside the gates of the Subic base.

Like tens of thousands of Filipinos who had worked at Subic or Clark in
maintenance, food-service or similar jobs, mothers who had supported their
children by working in the clubs suddenly found themselves unemployed.

Suit Has Stirred Skepticism

"Nothing is being done to relieve the human damage which was done to those who
were left behind, namely the thousands of forgotten children of American
servicemen," the lawsuit contends. It was filed in cooperation with the local
women's groups Preda, Buklod, Gabriela and Wedpro.

The lawyer representing the women and children is Joseph W. Cotchett, a former
Green Beret from Burlingame, Calif., who won an $8 billion judgment last year
against Charles W. Keating Jr. and three co-defendants on behalf of 20,000
savings and loan investors.

Although the Navy has declined to comment, the suit has stirred skepticism among
United States military officials and some former G.I.'s, who argue that American
taxpayers are not responsible for foreigners conceived by consenting adults.

Critics also argue that the children may have been fathered by foreigners who
were not Americans, and that some women tried to get pregnant in the hope of
marrying or moving to the United States.

Hurt, Anger and Yearning

But talk of the missing American "tatays" -- Filipino for fathers -- stirs hurt,
anger and yearning among women and children who meet regularly here at the Human
Development Center, perched on a hill with panoramic views overlooking the old
14,400-acre base at Subic and the deep blue bay.

"I want to get to know him, and even though he left us here, I can remind him of
his responsibility to help my studies," James Hill, 16, said of his father.

Nida Havier, 35, said she had lived with a Navy man for three years before he
departed. It "was very painful, it hurt me very much," she said. Their son,
Anthony, now 7, asks where his father is and says he wants to see him.

Mercedes Gervacio, who has four Amerasian children, teaches other mothers how to
sell candy on the street to earn $3 or $4 a day. She said one boyfriend talked
of marriage, "but it was just a promise."

The center where they shared their stories is run by an Irish priest, the Rev.
Shay Cullen, who describes the young Amerasians as "throwaway children."

Children of interracial unions have been common in the Philippines since
Magellan and his fleet arrived in the early 16th century.

But the departure of the American troops and the emergence of child support as a
national issue in the United States have focused attention on the issue now.
There is growing pressure in the United States to prevent absentee fathers from
evading their obligations by crossing state lines.

"It is time to demand that people take responsibility for the children they
bring into this world," President Clinton said in an address to Congress in
February. The lawsuit quotes Mr. Clinton and argues that the issue crosses
international boundaries.

Government Has More Money

The suit was filed against the United States Government mainly because the
Filipino women and children cannot afford the legal costs involved in tracking
down fathers or proving paternity. The average income in the Philippines is $740
a year.

Another reason the United States was chosen as the defendant, largely
unmentioned, is that it has more money than the fathers do.

Papers filed in the case focus on establishing the Navy's direct role in the
local bar and sex industry. The suit contends that the Navy helped regulate the
clubs, some of which were owned by Navy officers or retirees; patrolled Olongapo
with military police, and registered thousands of "hospitality" women and gave
them information and medical care aimed at limiting venereal disease.

The Navy also approved off-base apartments where many sailors lived with
girlfriends or wives.

Advocates of the class-action suit see a disparity in United States laws that
exclude Filipino children from the special immigration rights granted to many
other Amerasians.

Others Can Immigrate

Just over a hill south of the Subic base, the United Nations runs a camp for
Vietnamese refugees that still processes a trickle of Amerasians -- now adults
-- who were conceived during the Vietnam War. Under United States law, they are
entitled to immigrate under the sponsorship of any American. That coveted right
also extends to children of American servicemen who were stationed in South
Korea, Thailand, Cambodia and Laos.

But the children born to G.I.'s in the Philippines do not qualify for
preferential status. The rationale is that Amerasians suffered from
anti-American hostility and racial bias in the other countries but not here.

Critics say that assumption is faulty. While many Filipinos have mixed Chinese,
Malay and Spanish ancestry, there is bias against people of darker skin. When
the American parent is black, the child is often ostracized and taunted with
racial epithets. Amerasian children are also often stigmatized as illegitimate.

Local views of the class-action lawsuit vary. The town's Mayor, Richard Gordon,
himself the grandson of an American, called the suit simplistic. "It demeans us
to ask for money," he said.

Mr. Gordon favors revising United States immigration laws to include the
children fathered here by G.I.'s, and some lawmakers, including Senator Daniel
K. Inouye, a Hawaii Democrat, have expressed interest in the issue.

But Father Cullen opposes uprooting children from their culture. "Are we saying
the Philippines is not good enough for them?" he said.

The Pearl Buck Foundation, which contributes to education and health care for
Amerasians and helps some apply to immigrate, says its biggest program is in the
Philippines.

The head of the Philippine program, William S. McCabe 2d, dismisses estimates of
children fathered by American servicemen as guesses. He said that many claims
are legitimate but that fraud is common. "There's a game here called 'Get Out of
the Country,' " he said.

President Fidel V. Ramos has called the future of the Amerasians the most
important issue remaining from the American military evacuation, "the joint
responsibility of both countries." But neither side has made a proposal to
address the needs of the fatherless children.


LOAD-DATE: June 21, 1993

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo: "I'm very sad because of what happened," said Lucia Villegas
Hill, shown with her son James, whose father, an American sailor who was
stationed at Subic Bay in the Philippines, no longer writes or sends money. She
is among thousands of women who have filed a lawsuit against the United States,
asserting that the Navy fostered a life style in which servicemen fathered
thousands of children. (Bruce Lambert/The New York Times)

Map shows location of the former Subic Bay Naval Station.

                   Copyright 1993 The New York Times Company


                              291 of 312 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                  June 21, 1993, Monday, Late Edition - Final

Sniping Is Growing At The U.N. Over Weakness In Peacekeeping

BYLINE: By RICHARD BERNSTEIN,  Special to The New York Times

SECTION: Section A; Page 6; Column 1; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 1410 words

DATELINE: UNITED NATIONS, June 18


The fighting between United Nations forces and a warlord in Somalia and the
failure of international troops to be an effective buffer in Bosnia are forcing
many to rethink the organization's vastly expanded role as a global peacekeeper.

Diplomats here have publicly complained of amateurism in the peacekeeping
operations, with the United States representative, Madeleine K. Albright,
asserting recently that "ill-equipped and often unprepared troops" are often
sent into the field.

Officials in the United Nations Secretariat grumble that member nations are
piling on tasks without providing adequate forces or money to do the jobs.

Such recriminations by no means spell disaster for United Nations peacekeeping
efforts, which have been revitalized over the last few years and credited for
successes like the disarmament of rebels in El Salvador and the elections in
Cambodia last month.

From Optimism to Realism

Yet the view of global police work has shifted, from a mood of buoyant optimism
at the United Nations just a few months ago to what some are calling a new
realism about the difficulties.

"There's no question that for a while we hoped that simply by deploying forces a
solution would magically emerge," a European diplomat said.  "But it doesn't
work that way."

Ms. Albright endorsed the concept of "multilateral action" in a speech to the
Council on Foreign Relations on June 11, saying, But she harshly criticized the
way United Nations peacekeeping efforts were organized, saying many of the 13
operations mounted in the last five years had been hampered by a "near-total
absence of contingency planning," hasty recruitment and a "byzantine and
drawn-out budgetary decision making process."

A New Cooperation

The criticism is a change for an organization that only a year or so ago was
basking in its growing responsibilities.

For decades the Security Council had been paralyzed by cold-war competition
between the Soviet Union and the United States, both of which had veto power in
the Council's decisions. But the collapse of Communism and the fading of the
superpowers' arms race opened the way for new cooperation, leading to
internationally brokered accords in Cambodia and Angola.

Some analysts worry that the organization's involvement in so many conflicts
could land it in quagmires reminiscent of the United States experience in
Vietnam.

"The possibilities for going wrong are numerous and the costs potentially
open-ended," Laurence Martin, the director of the Institute of International
Affairs in London, writes in the latest issue of The National Interest, a
quarterly journal.

'An Endless Agenda'

He was speaking particularly of the Security Council's willingness to send
peacekeepers into countries riven by domestic conflicts that the United Nations
had previously tended to avoid, like the ethnic fighting in Bosnia or the
anarchy in Somalia.

To try to protect national minorities and to build governments where there are
none is "to accept an endless agenda and to assume the task of state and
community-building on a vast scale," he said.

Of the last nine peacekeeping operations authorized by the Security Council,
seven have involved internal wars. Most of the previous missions were aimed at
preventing further conflict between two countries, like monitoring the border
between Iraq and Kuwait.

As its missions expand, the troops under United Nations command have expanded
from just 11,500 at the beginning of 1992 to roughly 80,000 now, according to
the United Nations Under Secretary General for Peacekeeping, Kofi Annan of
Ghana. That number is expected to grow to nearly 100,000 once forces have been
recruited to protect the six Bosnian "safe areas" designated this month by the
Security Council.

Donors Slow to Pay

But officials at the United Nations say it has become increasingly difficult to
persuade countries to contribute modern specialized forces.

In another obstacle, the main donor nations are behind by $1.2 billion in their
peacekeeping payments, with the United States alone owing $312 million.  United
States officials, using different accounting procedures, say the figure owed is
more like $40 million, but the Clinton Administration has vowed to pay the full
United States assessment.

"With the United Nations engaged in so many operations around the world, the
impression has been created that it is doing exactly what it was set up to do,
but it is all very fragile," Mr. Annan said in an interview.

Complicating the task is what Secretary General Boutros Boutros-Ghali, with a
touch of irony, has called the "excessive credibility" that the organization has
gained.

"There is a naivete that believes the United Nations is capable of just walking
in and solving all problems," one official here said, speaking on condition of
anonymity. "And then, at the other end of the spectrum, there is cynicism, a
tendency of countries to dump responsibility on the United Nations simply to
show their publics that they are doing something."

Little Decisive Action

The most frequently cited example is Bosnia and Herzegovina, where Western
nations have refrained from direct military intervention to halt "ethnic
cleansing" by Serbian nationalists. The United States and other countries have
solemnly approved one resolution after another imposing economic sanctions and
declaring safe havens, but little decisive action has been taken.

"It's not fair to accuse the United States of cynical manipulation of the
Security Council," one American official said. "It's unrealistic to expect that
a bureaucracy created 45 years ago and moribund for so long would suddenly be
able to act decisively around the globe. We're doing all we can by committing
forces in some places, air power in others, money in others."

Some analysts say that peacekeeping missions of recent years have been of two
kinds, one far more difficult than the other. The easier ones were what Enid
Schoettle, a senior fellow at the Council on Foreign Relations, calls "mopping
up old regional conflicts at the end of the cold war" -- specifically, she says,
in Namibia, Angola, Nicaragua, El Salvador and Cambodia.

"The great powers and the parties to the conflicts decided to end these wars and
then involved the United Nations," she said.

At the same time, Dr. Schoettle said, a genuinely multinational force was
mobilized with the permission of the United Nations to drive Iraqi troops from
Kuwait, and with that, "there was a rising curve of expectation."

'The Only Policeman'

A year ago, Secretary General Boutros-Ghali issued an "Agenda for Peace," in
which he proclaimed that "a conviction has grown among nations large and small
that an opportunity has been regained to achieve the great objectives of the
Charter -- a United Nations capable of maintaining international peace and
security."

Mr. Boutros-Ghali was in a sense recognizing that for the first time since the
1950's, the major powers were more eager in some cases to use the United Nations
than to act unilaterally.  "Willingly or not, the United Nations has become the
only policeman in the world," an official here said.

Still, Dr. Schoettle said, at just about the time that Mr. Boutros-Ghali
presented his "Agenda for Peace," "the disillusion started to set in."

In part that was because the United Nations was increasingly faced with
conflicts in which the major cold-war powers had never played a role -- internal
wars involving collapsing governments, in Somalia, for example, or ethnic
hatred, in former Yugoslav republics.

Lessons for the Future

One miscalculation has been recognized in Angola, where the United Nations was
able to oversee elections last year but then was unable to react when rebels led
by Jonas Savimbi resumed fighting.

It is widely acknowledged here that the 298-member peacekeeping force in Angola
was hampered by its size. If the United Nations had deployed a larger force with
a mandate to disarm the factions, those officials say, it might have been
successful in preventing Mr. Savimbi's rebels from renewing their attacks.

The lessons learned there are now in a sense being applied in Somalia, where
United Nations forces have attacked the arms depots of Gen. Mohammed Farah
Aidid.

"We've had our down sides," one United States official said. "It doesn't mean
that peacekeeping has failed. It can work if it's done the right way."

LOAD-DATE: June 21, 1993

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1993 The New York Times Company


                              292 of 312 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                  June 21, 1993, Monday, Late Edition - Final

Differences Are Narrowed at U.N. Talks on Rights

BYLINE: By PAUL LEWIS,  Special to The New York Times

SECTION: Section A; Page 7; Column 1; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 669 words

DATELINE: VIENNA, June 20


Despite pessimism among Western countries about the prospects for the world
human rights conference, the first in 25 years, the 168 nations meeting here
have agreed that their final declaration should affirm the universal nature of
United Nations human rights standards, saying they apply equally to all peoples
regardless of racial, cultural and religious traditions or their level of
economic development.

This means the United States and its allies have turned back a challenge from a
powerful group of mainly Asian countries led by China, who wanted the conference
to declare that freedom, fairness and justice mean different things in different
parts of the world.

As a negotiating tactic, the United States threatened to name countries
obstructing the effort to draft an affirmation of fundamental human freedoms in
the wake of Communism's collapse and to agree on new steps to strengthen their
enforcement.

This approach, which American officials describe as "identify and isolate," is
having some success even though the conference had agreed to confine itself to
debating abstract human rights principles and to avoid discussion of individual
countries' records.

Diplomats here say many developing nations appear reluctant to see their names
on the "human rights enemies list" of a new American Administration that says
the protection of democratic values is a major part of its foreign policy.

"We have made very clear to countries trying to obstruct the conference that if
they cause gridlock we will give names," said John Shattuck, Assistant Secretary
of State for Human Rights and Humanitarian Affairs. He is leading the American
delegation here along with Timothy Wirth, the Under Secretary of State-designate
for Global Issues. "But we are reasonably optimistic now we will get a final
document from this meeting that is satisfactory.'

Reed Brody of the Washington-based International Human Rights Law Group said:
"The conference has already been a success because because it has shown there is
massive pressure on the United Nations to strengthen its human rights
activities. Even if we don't get everything here we'll get more later." Mr.
Brody serves as spokesman for the more than 3,000 representatives of private
human rights groups attending the meeting.

At one point last week, after what it saw as delaying tactics by some developing
countries, the United States informally circulated a list that named China,
Syria, Iran, Iraq, Cuba, Myanmar, the Sudan, Libya, Vietnam, North Korea and
Malaysia as countries "engaged in a lot of bracketing" -- that is, holding up
agreement by putting brackets around part of the declaration to show they
disagree.

Halfway through the conference, which began last Monday, Western diplomats here
say the United States and its allies have secured some important victories for
their views on human rights, although Western diplomats also say many barriers
still remain to an acceptable agreement.

On the issue of the universality of human rights, the conference has now agreed
that while differences of "historical, cultural and religious background must be
borne in mind, it is the duty of states, regardless of their political, economic
and cultural systems, to promote and protect all human rights and fundamental
freedoms."

There is also agreement on the need to safeguard the rights of women, especially
in countries that ascribe them an inferior social position.

But the United States and its allies have also made a significant concession to
the developing world.

For the first time at a major human rights conference they have agreed that
people have binding economic and social rights, including an "inalienable right"
to economic development for poorer nations. The Reagan and Bush Administrations
refused to concede this because they thought it would undermine their efforts to
link development aid to recipients' human rights records and enable developing
nations to claim they had an inherent right to economic assistance.

LOAD-DATE: June 21, 1993

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1993 The New York Times Company


                              293 of 312 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                  June 21, 1993, Monday, Late Edition - Final

THE MEDIA BUSINESS;
Mother Jones Tries to Reinvent Itself

BYLINE: By DEIRDRE CARMODY

SECTION: Section D; Page 6; Column 1; Financial Desk

LENGTH: 687 words


Named after Mary Harris Jones, a militant union organizer and socialist who died
in 1930 at the age of 100, Mother Jones magazine never had any doubts about its
identity. Since its start-up in 1976, in the wake of Vietnam and Watergate,
Mother Jones has proudly called itself radical, muckraking and counterculture.

But what on earth is the role of an alternative magazine today?

Mother Jones keeps asking itself that question. Circulation is 115,000, down
from a peak of 238,000 in 1980. Advertising is flat. And grimmest of all, there
simply has not been much of a buzz about the magazine.

"There was certainly a time in the 80's when I think the left was generally
hunkering down and wondering whether the Reagan era would be over," said Jay
Harris, who became publisher two years ago. "But I think there was a predictable
quality to our stories and I think we are trying to break that."


First Editor Returns

Last fall, Jeffrey Klein, the first of the magazine's four editors in chief,
returned to the job after a 10-year absence. He had most recently been editor of
the Sunday magazine of The San Jose Mercury News. Many credited him with making
that magazine more lively. Mr. Klein, however, was eager for a wider, more
national audience.

His presence is already being felt. Mother Jones's January-February issue
reported that the Justice Department engaged in a massive shredding of documents
immediately after the Presidential election. A controversial article in the
May-June issue cited the work of two San Diego epidemiologists who linked
increases in malignant melanoma -- a potentially fatal skin cancer -- to the
prevalent use of sunscreens.

The July-August issue takes on House Speaker Thomas S. Foley: "Killing Reform --
The Inside Story on How House Speaker Foley Kept His Job." The article suggests
that Mr. Foley is opposed to campaign finance legislation because the Democrats
will be badly hurt by it and will perhaps even lose control of the House.

Mr. Klein shrugs off labels like liberal and leftist and declines to talk about
where the magazine now falls on the political spectrum.


Another Dimension

"There is obviously a left and right dimension, but I think the more critical
dimension is outsider and insider," he said. "I think that is where the real
political battles are."

Mother Jones, a nonprofit magazine, is published by the Foundation for National
Progress. The foundation contributes about $500,000 a year to the magazine.
These funds come from 25,000 core donors and other foundations.

Advertisers include green marketers and social ventures, as well as sellers of
organic products, recordings and books.

"Their audience is exactly the audience we need to communicate to: 25 to 44
years old, more male than female," said Chris Tobey, vice president for
marketing at Rhino Records of Los Angeles, a longtime advertiser.

Stan Sesser, a writer on Southeast Asia, whose articles have appeared in The New
Yorker and recently in Mother Jones, said that over the years Mother Jones
became "too predictable even for people who were supporters."

"Every time you opened the magazine, you felt you already knew what was going to
be in it," he said. "The magazine has to find a mix that takes it from being
deadly serious to both hard-hitting and at the same time lighter."

Paul Solman, business correspondent for "The MacNeil/Lehrer Newshour" and an
original contributing editor to Mother Jones, said he has had many discussions
with Mr. Klein, a friend, about the magazine.

"It matters more to me for a person to figure out how to serve a broad community
that is trying to be helpful in the world than, say, how do we build
circulation."

Charles Peters, editor in chief of The Washington Monthly, said: "There has been
this strong movement on the left that is trying to free themselves from the
automatic cliches of the left. That is praiseworthy. But I think Jeff and all
the former left is in danger of losing the passion for the downtrodden and
losing touch with the people I worry most about: the working poor and the lower
middle class."

LOAD-DATE: June 21, 1993

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1993 The New York Times Company


                              294 of 312 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                  June 22, 1993, Tuesday, Late Edition - Final

NEWS SUMMARY

SECTION: Section A; Page 2; Column 5; Metropolitan Desk

LENGTH: 960 words


International A2-11

PLAN FOR EX-EAST BLOC'S A-PLANTS
A report says that 25 of the most dangerous nuclear reactors in six former
Soviet bloc nations could soon be closed down and replaced by gas-fired power
plants, but that they oppose such a plan.  A1

WHICH IS THE REAL IRAN?
To many neighbors of Iran and to the West, Iran is a menace. But to the Shiite
Muslim clerics who rule the country, it is misunderstood.  A1



EASING OF VIETNAM POLICY SEEN
President Clinton's senior foreign policy advisers have concluded that the
Administration should no longer attempt to block loans to Hanoi from the
International Monetary Fund, U.S. officials said. A9

ST. PETERSBURG, CRADLE OF REVOLT
Of the many faces in Russia's reactionary opposition, some of the most prominent
come from St. Petersburg, but no one believes that it is likely to be the cradle
of another revolution.  A3

2 BOMBS KILL 7 IN MADRID
Two bombs exploded in Madrid, killing 7 people and wounding more than 20. The
authorities suspect the Basque terrorist organization E.T.A., which wants
independence in the north.  A3

MORE SPLITS IN JAPAN POLITICS
Japan's governing party continued to splinter as 10 legislators formed another
new party, further reducing the chances that the Government will be able to
keeppower.  A6

EUROPE TELLS BOSNIA TO JOIN TALKS
The European Community urged the Bosnian President to join new peace talks with
Serbia and Croatia in Geneva, but insisted that it remained committed to
preserving Bosnia as a single state.  A8

AZERBAIJAN REBEL CLAIMS POWER
A rebel commander declared that he was taking power in Azerbaijan after winning
support from not only Government troops but also from members of Parliament.
A10

U.S. ASSURES MEXICO ON KIDNAP
The Clinton Administration promised Mexico that it will not kidnap Mexicans in
their country while an agreement between the two countries banning the practice
is being negotiated.  A11

National A12-20

COURT SUPPORTS HAITIAN POLICY
The Supreme Court upheld the Bush and Clinton Administrations' policy of
intercepting fleeing Haitians at sea and returning them to Haiti without asylum
hearings.  A1

Human rights advocates call the decision "shameful." A18

POPE VOWS TO HELP U.S. BISHOPS
In his first public statement on a problem that has shaken the Catholic Church
in the United States, Pope John Paul II has told American bishops that he will
help them use church law to remove sexual offenders from the priesthood.  A1

BATTLE MAY SCUTTLE NAVY BASE
A new $440 million Navy base on the Texas coast may be ordered closed, the
victim of a tug of war whose outcome will determine which base is to serve as
the home of the Navy's mine-sweeping operations.  A12

KINSHIP CLAIM MET WITH DISBELIEF
Friends and neighbors of Henry Leon Ritzenthaler, who says he is President
Clinton's half-brother, spent the day in Paradise, Calif., befuddled by the news
of a famous person in their midst.  A12

CLINTON SEEKS SUPPORT FOR PLAN
Although they voice optimism that the budget plan will pass the Senate,
President Clinton and his aides sought citizen support for the five-year, $500
billion package.  A20

PLAN TO CHANGE LAW FOR INSURERS
To increase competition in the market for medical care, White House officials
are recommending that the health-insurance industry be stripped of its immunity
from Federal antitrust law.  A16

COURT TO RULE ON ASH AS WASTE
In a case that could help determine the economics of municipal waste disposal,
the Supreme Court agreed to decide whether ash left from burning solid waste
must be treated as hazardous waste.  A19

REPUBLICANS TO IMITATE PEROT
Six months after Ross Perot touted the formation of his own grassroots
organization, the Republican Party said that it would do the same thing, and
that it would use the same kind of opinion surveys Perot does.  A20

'CORRECTNESS' HAUNTS NOMINEE
Sheldon Hackney, nominated by to be the next chairman of the National Endowment
for the Humanities, has become, much to his dismay, a symbol of political
correctness on America's college campuses.  A20

Metro Digest B1

MORE FLAWS IN EMPIRE CLAIMS
Empire Blue Cross and Blue Shield routinely paid some claims without trying to
determine whether they had already been paid or were fraudulent, company
officials acknowledge. Officials decided making the payments was cheaper than
checking them.  A1

COURT UPHOLDS NEW YORK TAXING
New York State's method of taxing nonresidents, which has prompted protests from
commuters from neighboring states, was allowed to stand by the United States
Supreme Court.  A1

Business Digest D1

Science Times C1-11

Electrical emissions: dangerous or not?  C1

China breaks ground for world's largest dam.  C1

Scientist at work: Ervin Staub.  C1

Arts/Entertainment C12-16

A poor start at the box office for "Last Action Hero." C13

Police drama draws fire.  C13

Theater: "Camelot" returns.  C13

Fashion B7

Sports B8-14

Basketball: Nets trade Bowie for Benjamin.  B9

Bulls belong to past and future.  B9

Tennis: Same old Agassi at Wimbledon.  B9

Obituaries B6

Editorials/Op-Ed A22-23

Editorials

Japan: How clean a break?

Courage to reform rent controls.

Reining in school custodians.

Topics: Birds with attitude.

Letters

A. M. Rosenthal: Clinton, Iraq and Iran.

Russell Baker: It's a pandemic.

Edmond Mulet: The palace coup that failed.

Adam Clayton Powell 3d: The pictures are better on radio.

Chronicle B4
Bridge C12
Chess C12
Crossword C14

LOAD-DATE: June 22, 1993

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Summary

                   Copyright 1993 The New York Times Company


                              295 of 312 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                  June 22, 1993, Tuesday, Late Edition - Final

INSIDE

SECTION: Section A; Page 1; Column 1; Metropolitan Desk

LENGTH: 146 words


10 More Quit Japan's Party

Members of the ruling Liberal Democratic Party formed another new party, further
weakening the Government of Kiichi Miyazawa. Page A6.

Costly Delays on Health Care

Most economists agree that delaying curbs on escalating medical costs will be
even more expensive than the Clinton health-care plan. Page D1.

Easing Stand on Aid to Hanoi

Aides to President Clinton are urging him to end his opposition to plan to bring
Vietnam back into the International Monetary Fund. Page A9.

China's Controversial Dam

It will create a lake 350 miles long and save millions from flooding. Or it may
simply create the world's largest mud pie. Science Times, page C1.

Studio's Jitters Over 'Hero'

"Last Action Hero" took in a relatively low $15.3 million its first weekend, and
Columbia Pictures executives are on the spot. Page C13.

LOAD-DATE: June 22, 1993

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Summary

                   Copyright 1993 The New York Times Company


                              296 of 312 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                  June 22, 1993, Tuesday, Late Edition - Final

U.S. MAY LET HANOI GET I.M.F. FUNDING

BYLINE: By STEVEN A. HOLMES,  Special to The New York Times

SECTION: Section A; Page 9; Column 1; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 504 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, June 21


President Clinton's senior foreign policy advisers have concluded that the
Administration should no longer attempt to block loans to Hanoi from the
International Monetary Fund, senior Administration officials said tonight. The
recommendation could presage an easing of the relationship between the United
States and Vietnam.

In a meeting last week, members of the National Security Council decided to
recommend to the President that the United States raise no objections to a plan
by France and Japan to pay more than $140 million in arrears that Hanoi owes to
the fund. Such an action would free the monetary fund to approve new lending to
Vietnam during its next board meeting in July.

Officials said tonight that no decision has been made by the President as yet.
In addition, it is unclear whether Mr. Clinton's advisers have reached a
consensus on whether to recommend that the United States end its 18-year-old
trade embargo against Vietnam.

Subsidizing Vietnam

Proponents of a rapprochement between the United States and Hanoi say that once
the fund begins lending to Vietnam, it would be harder for the Administration to
justify the continuation of a trade embargo. The extension of the fund's loans
to Vietnam would mean that United States taxpayers would, in essence, be
subsidizing Vietnam's economic development, but at the same time United States
companies would be precluded from concluding contracts that are a part of that
economic development.

Asked about the proposal, Secretary of State Warren Christopher would only say
today that, "It's under intensive review, and hopefully we will be having a
decision on that in the near future."

The Clinton Administration, citing Hanoi's increased cooperation in helping to
determining the fate of 2,260 American servicemen who are unaccounted for from
the war in Southeast Asia, had been strongly considering easing its opposition
to new monetary fund loans to Vietnam when the lending agency met in April.

But, just prior to the meeting, a Harvard-based researcher, Stephen J. Morris,
brought forward a document he discovered in the Russian archives alleging that
Hanoi had many more Americans prisoners than it had acknowledged capturing.

Created a Sensation

Though a number of specialists on the war say the Morris document contained a
number of inaccuracies, it created such a sensation in Washington that the
Administration was forced to postpone any plans it might have had in moving to
allow the lending program.

Meanwhile, a bipartisan group headed by former Secretary of State Edmund Muskie
came out today in favor of ending the embargo.

Following a trip to Vietnam in April, a majority of the 10-member delegation
concluded that interests would best be served by lifting the embargo, Mr. Muskie
said in a statement.

Earlier today, officials in Hanoi announced that Vietnam would apply for
observer status, and later for membership, in the General Agreement on Tariffs
and Trade, a world trade body.






LOAD-DATE: June 22, 1993

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1993 The New York Times Company


                              297 of 312 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 June 23, 1993, Wednesday, Late Edition - Final

NEWS SUMMARY

SECTION: Section A; Page 2; Column 5; Metropolitan Desk

LENGTH: 971 words



International A3-13

BOSNIAN REPLACED IN TALKS
President Alija Izetbegovic was replaced as head of Bosnia's delegation on the
eve of key peace talks opening in Geneva with Serbian and Croatian leaders on
their plan to divide the country into three loosely confederated ethnic states.
A1

KOHL BACKS ARMS FOR BOSNIA
Chancellor Helmut Kohl of Germany surprised and irritated his European Community
partners by pressing strongly for an end to the arms embargo on Bosnian Muslims
at a regional summit meeting that ended in Copenhagen.  A6


CLINTON LETTER PLAYED DOWN
In a sign of confusion in Clinton Administration policy toward Bosnia, the
United States played down the significance of a letter from President Clinton to
Chancellor Helmut Kohl of Germany urging him to support a stillborn American
effort to arm the Muslim Government of Bosnia.  A6

A NEW PARTY FOR JAPAN?
As leaders of Japan's ruling party conceded publicly that they are headed to
their first electoral defeat in four decades, 44 rebellious members of
Parliament resigned and prepared to form a new centrist party that seems likely
to become the core of a coalition government.  A1

U.S. WEIGHS VIETNAM BIDS
The Clinton Administration is considering allowing American companies to bid on
contracts in Vietnam that are financed by loans from international lending
agencies like the World Bank and the Asian Development Bank, officials said.
A11

U.S. FIGHTS RUSSIAN SALE TO LIBYA
Amid growing concerns over Moscow's military exports to the third world, the
United States is trying to block the shipment of Russian rocket fuel ingredients
to Libya, officials said.  A8

INQUIRY ON RUSSIA NUCLEAR PLANT
The United Nations agency overseeing the nuclear power industry called for an
independent assessment of new evidence Russia has just given it suggesting one
of the Chernobyl-type reactors that the major Western nations want shut down is
safer than they think.  A8

A European Community offer to Eastern Europe.  A8

Azerbaijani steps up pressure on country's President.  A3

Iran's morals police crack down on "vice and social corruption." A4

Food distributrion resumed in Somalia.  A3

Ousted Haitian may meet military leaders.  A5

National A14-20

SENATE BRACES FOR FIGHT
With some of their careers and perhaps the eventual success of the Clinton
Presidency on the line, senators prepared to begin voting on raising taxes.  A1

SENATE VOTES FUNDS FOR JOBS
The Senate approved a smaller version of President Clinton's ill-fated $16
billion package to stimulate the economy, paying for summer jobs and child
immunization.  A18

A PLAN TO PARE COMMITTEES
Scholars have offered a plan to strengthen Congress by eliminating some
committees, so that lawmakers can attend meetings.  A18

COURT SIDES WITH FIRST LADY
A Federal appeals court ruled that Hillary Clinton was a full-time Government
official, essentially acquiescing to her views.  A1

CHALLENGE TO SMOKE RULING
Leaders of the tobacco industry sued the Federal Government to overturn its
declaration that second-hand tobacco smoke causes cancer.  A1

COMPROMISE ON GAY BAN NEAR
The Administration was nearing a decision on a new policy about homosexuals in
the military.  A20

The Housing Secretary sharply criticized his agency.A20

SUCCESSFUL MODEL FOR I.B.M.
The success of I.B.M.'s Thinkpad notebook computer may provide the company with
a model of how to bring out products.  A1

DETROIT MAYOR WILL NOT RUN
After dominating Detroit politics for two decades, Mayor Coleman Young announced
that he would not seek re-election this fall.  A14

CASE AGAINST EXTREMIST WEAKENS
After a two-month trial, the Government's image of Randy Weaver as an fugitive
bent on armed conflict has been eclipsed by courtroom revelations.  A14

CALIFORNIA'S PYRRHIC VICTORY
California appears to have avoided a state budget crisis, but the price will be
steep, as counties defy what they consider the illegal expropriation of their
property taxes.  A17

FOREIGN AID AND SELF-INTEREST
While Americans view foreign aid as a give-away, bills like the Administration's
Russian aid package are in the political self-interests of an assortment of
interest groups.  A19

Education Page B7

The two big teachers' unions may become one.

Metro Digest B1

QUESTIONS ON CROWN HEIGHTS
The 1991 racial disturbances in Crown Heights have moved to the forefront of the
New York City mayoral campaign, as the imminent release of a state report has
forced Mayor Dinkins again to defend his handling of the violence.  A1

Business Digest D1

Living Section C1-10

Health Page C12

Arts/Entertainment C13-18

Architects debate their effect.  C13
On playing Tina Turner.  C13
Music: Newport All-Stars.  C13
Dance: A Pilobolus premiere.  C13
Books: John le Carre after the cold war.  C17
Television: Spielberg's "Family Dog." C18

Sports B8-14

FOR METS, NOWHERE TO GO BUT UP
The Mets, the team with the worst record in baseball, took another step in an
organizational overhaul by announcing the resignation of their general manager,
Al Harazin. His likely replacement is Joe McIlvaine, a member of the Mets'
hierarchy when New York won the World Series in 1986.  A1

Obituaries D22-23

Pat Nixon, former First Lady.  D22

Editorials/Op-Ed A22-23

Editorials

A budget too much like Perot's.
Jettison the space station.
Two tasks for Albany.
Pass the gay rights bill.

Letters

Anna Quindlen: Going nowhere.
Robert H. Bork: The Senate's power grab.
Alice M. Rivlin: Where is the old Bob Dole?

Chronicle D24

Bridge C14

Crossword C18

LOAD-DATE: June 23, 1993

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Summary

                   Copyright 1993 The New York Times Company


                              298 of 312 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 June 23, 1993, Wednesday, Late Edition - Final

U.S. Weighs Easing of Vietnam Trade Sanctions

BYLINE: By STEVEN A. HOLMES

SECTION: Section A; Page 11; Column 1; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 674 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, June 22


The Clinton Administration is considering allowing American companies to bid on
contracts in Vietnam that are financed by loans from international lending
agencies like the World Bank and the Asian Development Bank, officials said
today.

If accepted by the President, such an action, combined with an Administration
decision not to block a plan that would give Hanoi access to loans from
multilateral lending institutions, would be the most far-reaching easing of the
18-year-old United States trade embargo against its former wartime enemy.

An official familiar with the Administration's deliberations said the idea of
allowing American companies to bid for projects financed by international
lending institutions is considered a compromise between simply allowing Vietnam
to access to loans and completely lifting the embargo.

Senior Administration officials say President Clinton will probably decide on
the issue this week. One official stressed that he may not make any change in
policy.

Representatives of business groups seeking trade with Vietnam say that
permitting American companies to bid on development projects financed by
international lending institutions would only allow a narrow range of American
companies access to Vietnam's potential market. For example, American petroleum
companies, seeking to exploit Vietnam's offshore oil fields would not be
permitted to execute contracts with Hanoi. Nor would trading companies seeking
to import rice or textiles from Vietnam.

Mr. Clinton has come under increasing pressure by groups on all sides of the
question of whether the United States should ease tensions with Vietnam. All
sides agree that the main issue is Hanoi's cooperation in determining the fate
of 2,260 American servicemen who are listed as unaccounted for from the
Southeast Asia wars.

Some veterans groups such as the American Legion, and their allies in Congress,
argue that no improvement of relations between the United States and Vietnam
should be undertaken.

"We've urged him not to approve the loan by the I.M.F. because of the fact that
Vietnam has not cooperated with respect to the P.O.W./M.I.A issue.," said John
Sommer, executive director of the American Legion. "They continue to dribble out
a document or two relating to missing Americans when it suits their purpose or
when they are seriously criticized for not cooperating."

Others, such as Senator John Kerry, the Massachusetts Democrat who headed the
Select Committee on P.O.W./M.I.A. Affairs, say some reciprocal action is needed
to insure Hanoi's continued help in the search for unaccounted for Americans.

Maj. Gen. Thomas G. Needham, the Pentagon official in charge of the search for
unaccounted for Americans, has told Administration officials and lawmakers that
Hanoi's cooperation in the search "is at its highest level."

With Hanoi's help, 104 of the 196 American servicemen who were considered to
have had the best chance of survival after being captured or shot down over
Vietnam have officially been determined to have died, Department of Defense
officials said. Investigators have also checked 66 cases of Americans whom
defectors or other individuals have reported seeing alive in the years since the
war. According to Mr. Kerry, no evidence has been discovered that the Americans
were alive.

Hanoi has also produced new documents that have been demanded by American
investigators and allowed interrogation of top military leaders.

Administration officials also say that pressure is building on them from allies
such as Japan and France to at least not stand in the way of new lending by the
monetary fund.

In April, the two countries asked the United States how it would view a plan to
lend Vietnam $140 million to pay off debts incurred when Hanoi conquered the
South and as a result assumed loans that had been granted to the old South
Vietnamese Government. Once Hanoi becomes current in its loans to the monetary
fund, it would be eligible for new World Bank and Asian Development Bank loans.

LOAD-DATE: June 23, 1993

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1993 The New York Times Company


                              299 of 312 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 June 23, 1993, Wednesday, Late Edition - Final

BUSINESS DIGEST

SECTION: Section D; Page 1; Column 1; Financial Desk

LENGTH: 576 words



International

Steep penalties were announced on steel from 19 countries that the Commerce
Department said was being dumped in the United States. The ruling angered
European and Asian producers and could more than double the price of imported
steel. [Page D1.]

Import duties on advanced computer screens were revoked by the Commerce
Department, which rejected calls for protection from domestic companies that
wanted to make the screens. [D1.]

Lloyd's of London posted a $4.3 billion 1990 loss, a slightly
worse-than-expected result that compounded its gloom. [D3.]

A giant Mexico City building complex could fail because of the shaky economy and
uncertainty over the Nafta. [A4.]

A $4 billion fund to privatize Russia's state-owned enterprises was called
"preposterous" by Japan. [A8.]

American companies may be allowed to bid on contracts in Vietnam financed by
agencies like the World Bank. [A11.]

Companies

Philip Morris, R. J. Reynolds, tobacco growers and distributors sued the
Government to overturn its declaration that secondhand tobacco smoke causes
cancer. [A1.]

The success of I.B.M.'s Thinkpad notebook computer may provide the company with
a model for developing the new products it needs in its struggle to revive its
sagging fortunes. [A1.]

Kmart warned that second-quarter earnings were likely to be disappointing,
kicking off a selloff of retail stocks. [D1.]

Coopers & Lybrand's chairman has big plans for the accounting firm, possibly
including extending his tenure. [D1.]

Pratt & Whitney hired a Boeing executive, James T. Johnson, to run its large
commercial engine division. [D3.]

Packard Bell Electronics and Zenith Data Systems will join forces to design and
manufacture new desktop machines. [D3.]

Nynex will sell its British software company for $139.3 million under its
strategy to focus on telecommunications. [D3.]

New tick-tack-toe-inspired Cheerios due in stores next month will allow
consumers to have their games and eat them too. [D3.]

Empire Blue Cross and Blue Shield is the subject of a criminal investigation by
the Manhattan District Attorney. [B1.]

The Economy

Senators from both parties agree that the President's budget package will pass
soon on a party-line vote. [A1.] The Senate approved a far smaller economic
stimulus bill. [A18.]

Federal Reserve policy makers are toying with nudging up interest rates, despite
the apparent ebbing of inflation, to make doubly sure that upward price pressure
does not return. [D1.]

New York State banking authorities want to require a fixed percentage of
deposits to be plowed back into communities. [D2.]

Executive pay at 26 health-care companies is rising rapidly and is unrelated to
companies' performance, a study asserts. [D2.]

Markets

Stocks were generally lower, with the Dow industrials off 13.29 points, to
3,497.53, and other indexes off slightly. [D6.]

Interest rates were little changed as dealers began digesting a large supply of
new Treasury issues. [D15.]

The dollar surged against the mark and rose slightly against the yen. Gold
prices fell. [D17.] Orange juice soared. [D17.]

Today's Columns

Wall Street is excited about Silver King even though the television station
owner's profits plunged. Market Place. [D6.]

Consumers are increasingly attracted to ads from small and in-house shops, a
survey shows. Stuart Elliott: Advertising. [D18.]

LOAD-DATE: June 23, 1993

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Summary

                   Copyright 1993 The New York Times Company


                              300 of 312 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 June 24, 1993, Thursday, Late Edition - Final

Review/Television;
Armistead Maupin, Not Dreamt Up but Inspired

BYLINE: By JOHN J. O'CONNOR

SECTION: Section C; Page 20; Column 1; Cultural Desk

LENGTH: 712 words


Public television is taking note of Gay Pride Month with three outspoken
specials concerning gay people and gay issues. Perhaps not surprisingly, two
programs, profiles of American writers, were produced for the BBC: "Larry
Kramer," broadcast last weekend on PBS, and "Armistead Maupin Is a Man I Dreamt
Up," on PBS tonight at 10. Sunday at 11 P.M. on PBS, there's "Lives in the
Balance: The Lesbian and Gay Movement in the 1990's," a documentary centered on
April's march on Washington by gay men and lesbians, their friends and their
families numbering about 300,000, as reported by the United States Park Police.

"Larry Kramer" captures an unusually balanced portrait of the novelist
("Faggots") and playwright ("The Normal Heart," "The Destiny of Me"), who is
best known for raging against an American establishment he accuses of neglecting
"the 20th-century plague, AIDS."

That anger is expressed eloquently in this profile, but there are also
intriguing glimpses of a more relaxed and philosophical Kramer, especially in
family gatherings with his mother, brother and sister-in-law. Also explored is
Mr. Kramer's longtime denunciations of sexual promiscuity among many gay men. An
interviewer speaks about many gay men in the late 1970's coming to terms with
their sexuality. "Most of them are dead now," Mr. Kramer says.

If Mr. Kramer's public abrasiveness seems prototypically New York, Mr. Maupin's
almost genial activism strongly reflects his Raleigh, N.C., roots, transplanted
remarkably intact to San Franciso. He notes with amusement that people assume
his name is a pseudonym or even an anagram (which might read "is a man I dreamt
up"), but he is indeed Armistead Jones Maupin Jr., the son of a segregationist
and grandson of an Englishwoman he describes as "a great lady" fond of gin and
tonics and reading palms.

In the early 1970's, after a tour of Vietnam in the Navy ("as a gay man, I was
comfortable"), Mr. Maupin began writing a daily column called Tales of the City
for The San Francisco Chronicle. This represented two milestones. It was thought
to be the first fictional column to appear in an American newspaper in 30 years.
And the characters, based on friends and Mr. Maupin himself, were both gay and
straight. The columns have become best-selling books and the first one, "Tales
of the City," is being adapted for television by Richard Kramer
("Thirtysomething"). That's for the BBC, of course.

As someone observes, Mr. Maupin's tales publicized the things that make San
Francisco unique as an American city. Mr. Maupin puts it this way: "In this
town, the love that dare not speak its name never shuts up." He finds his
homosexuality "as basic to my nature as the color of my eyes." In a fictional
letter closely resembling the real one he sent to his mother, he writes, "If you
and papa are responsible for the way I am, I thank you with all my heart." As
for the battle against AIDS over the last decade, Mr. Maupin, sitting with Terry
Anderson, his H.I.V.-positive lover, looks past the obvious horrors and says
"there is beauty here and conspicuous bravery."

'Lives in the Balance'
'The Lesbian and Gay Movement in the 1990's'
PBS, Sunday at 11 P.M.
(Channel 13 in New York)

Some of both can be found in "Lives in the Balance: The Lesbian and Gay Movement
in the 1990's." What comes across vividly is the quite startling diversity of
the gay universe, from teen-agers to the elderly, from staid to outrageous, from
three-piece suits to leather. How, or if, this can all be held together as a
concerted movement is still far from settled. But the energy is unmistakable.
Reacting to homophobes preaching on the sidelines, one gay youth says almost
cheerfully: "We're used to them. It's time they got used to us." Another
participant sums up the unmistakable message, "America will never be the same
again." PBS broadcasts of the documentary in Washington, New York and San
Francisco are being sponsored by Out magazine.

Armistead Maupin Is
a Man I Dreamt Up
PBS, tonight at 10
(Channel 13 in New York)

A BBC Lionheart Television production. Kristiene Clarke, producer; Kate Meynell,
director; Joyce Gentle, editor; Mike Dauncey, camera; Bruce Gallaway, sound. Sir
Ian McKellen, narrator.

LOAD-DATE: June 24, 1993

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo: Armistead Maupin examines gay issues and gay life in "Armistead
Maupin Is a Man I Dreamt Up," tonight on PBS. (Robert Foothorap)

TYPE: Review

                   Copyright 1993 The New York Times Company


                              301 of 312 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                  June 25, 1993, Friday, Late Edition - Final

Books of The Times;
Rites of Passage Toward Great Unhappiness

BYLINE: By MICHIKO KAKUTANI

SECTION: Section C; Page 31; Column 1; Weekend Desk

LENGTH: 952 words



The Infinite Plan
 By Isabel Allende
 Translated by Margaret Sayers Peden
 382 pages. HarperCollins. $23.

In her latest novel, "The Infinite Plan," Isabel Allende abandons the hot,
politically turbulent Latin American milieu of her earlier fiction for a generic
American setting. She also exchanges the strong, beautiful heroines of "The
House of the Spirits" and "Eva Luna" for a prideful, strutting male protagonist
and trades in the softly accented magical realism of such previous books for a
more leaden-footed brand of naturalism. This results in a
Bildungsroman-cum-family saga that owes more to Judith Krantz than to Gabriel
Garcia Marquez.

The hero of "The Infinite Plan" is one Gregory Reeves, the son of an itinerant
preacher and prophet, who travels through America like a benign version of David
Koresh, trying to win converts to the infinite plan: a vague, quasi-religious
doctrine of destiny and salvation. When Gregory's father falls ill, the family
gives up its nomadic existence and takes up residence in the Hispanic barrio of
Los Angeles. There, Gregory is a misfit, a white boy who is threatened and
mocked by gang members and neighborhood bullies.

As the years pass, Gregory watches his family slowly unravel: his ailing father
turns increasingly hostile and demented; his mother withdraws further and
further into a dream world; his sister, Judy, grows fat, sullen and angry. A
local couple, Pedro and Immaculada Morales, gradually become Gregory's surrogate
parents; their daughter, Carmen, becomes his soul mate and best friend.

Gregory, himself, suffers through the usual pains of adolescence: girls,
hormones, doubts about who he is and who he wants to be. He finds a succession
of mentors: Olga, an old family friend, takes him to bed and instructs him in
the art of sex; Cyrus, a committed Communist who runs the elevator at the public
library, teaches him about politics and history.

From here, Ms. Allende plunges her hero into a succession of adventures that are
meant to make Gregory a kind of representative man, a symbol of his generation's
spiritual and political peregrinations. There's an interlude in Berkeley and San
Francisco that gives Ms. Allende a chance to describe drug-taking hippies and
bra-burning feminists, followed by a stint in Vietnam, which gives her a chance
to describe firefights and jungle showdowns with snipers. None of these events
are conjured up with the least bit of originality or felt emotion: rather, they
feel like trite, second-hand orchestrations of old magazine stories and pulp
fiction.

Of the 1960's, Ms. Allende writes: "It was a time of great changes and
continuing surprises. The novelty of free love, for so many years kept under
lock and key, spread rapidly, and what had begun as another hippie fantasy
became the favorite parlor game of the bourgeoisie." Of soldiers on an R-and-R
holiday, she writes: "Filthy, adrenaline flowing, as one man, a family of
desperadoes, they threw themselves like animals on the ice-cold beer and
sizzling hamburgers, which they hadn't seen in months, and when someone tried to
remind them of canteen regulations, they raised a storm that nearly degenerated
into another slaughter."

Gregory's reasons for going to Vietnam are explained in the tritest of terms: "I
came because of Hemingway, in search of my manhood, the myth of the macho, the
definition of masculinity, pride in the muscles and endurance I acquired during
training, wanting to prove my valor because at heart I have always suspected I
am a coward and to prove my fortitude because I was sick of being betrayed by my
feelings. A late rite of passage." His reasons for later embracing the yuppie
pursuit of success are announced in equally corny terms: "I'm going to have true
power -- money and prestige -- something I never saw in the barrio; then no one
can look down on me or raise his voice to me."

Given the way things happen in sagas like this, it's not long before Gregory has
indeed become a high-powered lawyer, who spends even more money than he earns.
His success, naturally, has not brought him the happiness and security he
craves. There are two lousy marriages: the first to a nitwit debutante who does
nothing but play tennis; the second to a vapid secretary who later becomes a
model. Gregory's children from both these marriages are a mess: his daughter
becomes a drug addict and prostitute; his son is an uncontrollable brat,
attended to by a phalanx of doctors and shrinks. Throughout these travails,
Gregory commiserates with his childhood friend Carmen who after years of drift
and confusion, has come into her own with a thriving jewelry business.

Filling out the stories of Gregory and Carmen are the tales of a multicultural
supporting cast: Gregory's devoted Chinese accountant; his amazingly competent
black housekeeper; his intelligent Chinese therapist, and Carmen's adopted
Vietnamese son. None of these people are described in anything but the
shallowest of cliches: Gregory's housekeeper is actually described as "200
pounds of beautiful, cheerful black womanhood, pure gleaming chocolate." None of
them lend "The Infinite Plan" the faintest glimmer of authenticity.

The reader struggles to find positive things to say about this novel: the story
of Carmen's journey from loneliness to love, from the dangerous streets of the
Los Angeles barrio to the poshest neighborhoods of Rome, possesses some of the
heartfelt emotion that Gregory's story does not, and Ms. Allende keeps us
continually wondering whether Gregory and Carmen will ever become a couple. Such
elements, however, are insufficient to sustain what is, in the end, a
disappointing and mechanical novel.

LOAD-DATE: June 25, 1993

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo of Isabel Allende.

TYPE: Review

                   Copyright 1993 The New York Times Company


                              302 of 312 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                  June 25, 1993, Friday, Late Edition - Final

Amelia Earhart Doesn't Go Uncelebrated;
Military Women

SECTION: Section A; Page 30; Column 4; Editorial Desk

LENGTH: 120 words


To the Editor:

No, there are not enough women represented in statuary in the United States
(Op-Ed, June 14), but we want to alert readers about a big step in the right
direction.

After a 10-year effort, we will dedicate the Vietnam Women's Memorial at the
site of the Vietnam Veterans Memorial in Washington next Veterans Day, Nov. 11.
Although women have participated in every war since the Revolution, this will be
the first memorial in the capital to American military women. The bronze
figurative sculpture in the round by Glenna Goodacre portrays three military
women, one caring for a wounded soldier.

DIANE CARLSON EVANS
Chairwoman
Vietnam Women's Memorial Project
Washington, June 16, 1993

LOAD-DATE: June 25, 1993

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Drawing

TYPE: Letter

                   Copyright 1993 The New York Times Company


                              303 of 312 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                  June 27, 1993, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

Counting Down to the Year 2000

BYLINE: By David Richards

SECTION: Section 2; Page 5; Column 1; Arts & Leisure Desk

LENGTH: 1686 words


I've left a number of plays recently wondering if Samuel Beckett didn't get it
wrong.

For the last 30 years or so, the playwright many consider the 20th century's
greatest has been responsible for the theater's prevailing view of doomsday. The
universe, as he saw it, was emptying out, drying up, grinding down. Nature was
too exhausted to put out much more than a leaf here or an ant there. Human
congress was limited to the futile conversation between tramps, the idle
speculations of the half-interred or the fragmented memories echoing inside a
single staring skull.

Things were destined to get quieter and quieter, until a cold, hollow wind took
over and blew away the dust of men and their civilizations, leaving darkness and
eternal silence.

As the year 2000 approaches, we're bound to be in for an onslaught of plays
about the apocalypse and what's in store for us. No fewer than three such works
have arrived in New York in recent months. And they seem to give Beckett the
lie. What's notable about them, you see, is not the hush but the noise; not the
absence of talk but its proliferation; not the slow grinding down of life but a
feverish gearing up for the big red-letter day when everything may or may not
come crashing apart.

"Millennium Approaches," trumpets the subtitle of the first part of Tony
Kushner's "Angels in America," the Broadway season's biggest dramatic event.
Indeed, at the end of that epic evening, a majestically winged angel bearing
enigmatic tidings comes bursting through the bedroom ceiling of a tortured young
man dying of AIDS. We'll have to wait until the fall for "Perestroika," Part 2
of the vision, to hear what she has to say. In the meantime, rest assured that
none of Mr. Kushner's characters, least of all that AIDS patient, is going
gently into the night.

Adrift in Ronald Reagan's America, they rail against his policies, curse the
widespread abnegation of responsibility (which is also sometimes theirs), and
generally spin helplessly in the whirlwind. One of them, a Valium-addicted
housewife, escapes into madness periodically as others might slip into a warm
bath to ease the aches and pains. "Maybe Christ will come again," she muses,
looking ahead to the turn of the century. "Maybe seeds will be planted . . .
maybe early figs to eat, maybe new life . . . or maybe, maybe the troubles will
come, and the end will come, and the sky will collapse and there will be
terrible rains and showers of poison light." She is not alone with her
anxieties. "Angels in America" is a very anxious play.

The characters in Jose Rivera's fantasy "Marisol" (which played the Public
Theater this spring) are faced with nothing less than the breakdown of creation,
not to mention the reduction of New York City to mounds of stinking rubble and
smoldering ash. God, it seems, has grown old and senile, and only the angels,
rising up in open revolt, offer any hope of reversing the deterioration. As it
is, apples have already turned to salt, coffee is extinct and the moon hasn't
been spotted in nine months.

One of Mr. Rivera's characters attributes such phenomena to "a lot of
pre-millennium jitters," adding, "I've never seen so much nervousness . . .
paranoia has clouded our view." She is probably right about the jitters,
although Mr. Rivera more than justifies the paranoia. His titular heroine, a
Puerto Rican yuppie, has been long protected by a guardian angel who is being
called away to lead the war in heaven. So while a "celestial Vietnam" rages
overhead, Marisol finds herself single-handedly fighting off marauders and
neo-Nazi skinheads down below. All hell has, in fact, broken loose. Chaos is
everywhere the rule, not the slow petrification that Beckett envisioned as our
"Endgame."

Or consider Athol Fugard's two-character drama, "Playland" (which is closing
today at the Manhattan Theater Club). It takes place in a tawdry traveling
carnival that has set up its garish shooting galleries and cheap rides on the
outskirts of a Karoo town. Mr. Fugard clearly intends it as a symbol for white
South Africa at the crossroads, and his play, which is about the tentative
coming together of a black watchman and a white army officer on New Year's Eve
1989, depicts what is meant to be a prophetic healing of the country's festering
racial wounds.

Chronicling as they do the cruelty of apartheid and the irrational violence it
has provoked in both the oppressor and the oppressed, his dramas have always had
a sense of the impending cataclysm about them. While "Playland" would like you
to believe that it's not too late to rescind the fateful deadline, the
significant change here, I think, is not the playwright's shift from despair to
a hesitant optimism; it's the confessional zeal that has seized his characters
(more pre-millennium jitters), the whirl and flash of the midway that serves as
a backdrop to their encounter, the blazing red sunset that settles over the
stage at one point and suggests the fires of hell lapping at the horizon.

Such floridness is all the more noteworthy when you consider that Mr. Fugard has
entertained a far starker outlook in the past. What, for example, is "Boesman
and Lena," his account of two outcasts wandering the bleak mud flats, if not the
South African equivalent of Beckett's "Waiting for Godot"? No one seems to be
waiting any longer, though. The rough-and-tumble rush to Judgment Day is on, and
everyone's champing to unburden his soul before it's too late.

Beckett, it can be argued, was the ultimate playwright of the atomic age.
Without downgrading their metaphysical implications or the resonant poetry of
the dialogue, his plays can be viewed as illustrations of the world after the
bomb has dropped. Only a few bedraggled survivors remain to comb a devastated
planet for remnants of the past or pathetic harbingers of the future. Each
successive play usually presented a paring back of what was a minimalist
landscape to begin with. Characters became less mobile, their memories less
coherent, their fears ever more primal. It was only a joke, of course, but in
the sketch Beckett contributed to "Oh, Calcutta!," that 1969 collection of stage
erotica, the lights came up to reveal a mound of bodies covered with trash.
There was a collective inspiration of breath, followed by a collective
exhalation. End of play, and arguably, end of the world.

THE BOMB, HOWEVER, NO longer hangs over our heads quite so ominously, promising
oblivion for the fortunate and mutation for the less lucky. The planet may well
self-destruct one day, but I'm not sure we think that day will be marked by a
bang and a mushroom cloud. Overpopulation is the ticking time bomb that scares
us now. The land has become an ecological disaster area. The seas are dumping
grounds. Nothing seems to work -- government, schools, drawbridges or sewage
systems -- while a terrible plague has infected the populace, producing platoons
of living skeletons.

Not for nothing does AIDS figure prominently in Mr. Kushner's play. Two of his
characters -- a young scion of American WASPdom named Prior Walter and the
notorious lawyer Roy Cohn -- are dying of it. Eventually, all the other
characters must come to terms with it, as well, even if that means turning away
and running. Engendering, as it does, a slow, irreversible wasting, AIDS also
serves as a brutal metaphor for powerlessness. In that sense, Mr. Kushner seems
to see it as the disease of the country as a whole.

In one of the play's most arresting scenes, Cohn vociferously denies that he has
contracted AIDS. As he explains it to his doctor: "Homosexuals are not men who
sleep with other men. Homosexuals are men who in 15 years of trying cannot get a
pissant antidiscrimination bill through City Council. Homosexuals are men who
know nobody and who nobody knows. Who have zero clout. Does this sound like me?"
By this demented logic, Cohn, because he has power, couldn't possibly have AIDS.
The lesions lie.

Obviously, Beckett's reductivist dramaturgy -- with its whimpers and terminal
sighs -- is going to seem less expressive of a society that is running
deliriously at the mouth. We no longer appear to be living on the rim of
nothingness -- or if we are, we've relegated that fear to the back of our minds.
Suffocation threatens us rather than depletion. Our world is choked with bodies
and detritus, polluted with the evidence of our excesses. Where Beckett's
characters are irretrievably alone in the cosmos, these days we tend to be alone
in the madding crowd, which you can hear roaring at the stroke of midnight in
Mr. Fugard's play.

It's risky predicting what paths our dramatists will follow as they edge up on
the year 2000. If these three plays are any guide, however, we can expect a more
fantastical writing, freer in its mixture of dream and reality, more fraught
with guilt and hysteria. The very texture of the plays is likely to get thicker
-- you'll notice Mr. Kushner already imposing one scene on top of another, so
that the drama becomes, in essence, a double exposure. The way has certainly
been paved for apparitions and omens, along with the battling angels.

I also suspect that revolutionary zeal will be an increasingly larger part of
the scheme. "Playland" amounts to an impassioned exhortation for the collective
forgiveness without which, Mr. Fugard argues, a multiracial South Africa cannot
possibly advance into the future. "Marisol" concludes with a vision of billions
of little people, innocent people, hurling rocks, sticks and their furious
discontent at "the senile sky," while the Angel in "Angels in America," once
she's cleared the ceiling, announces solemnly that "the great work begins."

Beckett's characters may have waited out the final day on a desolate hillock or
in a funeral urn, resigned and baffled by the night closing in. Playwrights
today, it would seem, are less prepared to take the millennium lying down. If we
go out, these three suggest, we will do so fighting. If, on the other hand, a
shining new era awaits us, our clamors and cries will have had a lot to do with
its coming to pass.

LOAD-DATE: June 27, 1993

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photos: John C. Becker and Ruth White in the premiere, in 1961 at the
Cherry Lane Theater in Manhattan, of Samuel Beckett's "Happy Days" -- His
characters became less mobile, their fears ever more primal. (Alix Jeffry/"Happy
Days"); Anne O'Sullivan in Jose Rivera's "Marisol" -- Chaos is everywhere the
rule, not the slow petrification that Beckett envisioned as our "Endgame."
(Martha Swope/"Marisol"); Kevin Spacey in Athol Fugard's "Playland" -- A florid
confessional zeal, exacerbated by pre-millennium jitters, has seized his
characters. (Gerry Goodstein/"Playland")

TYPE: Review

                   Copyright 1993 The New York Times Company


                              304 of 312 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                  June 27, 1993, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

Two Communities Savor Victory Over Pentagon Plans for Cutbacks;
Lives Constructed Around Military Can Go Forward

BYLINE: By JON NORDHEIMER,  Special to The New York Times

SECTION: Section 1; Page 30; Column 1; Metropolitan Desk

LENGTH: 1090 words

DATELINE: WRIGHTSTOWN, N.J., June 25


McGuire Air Force Base, the military enterprise that sustains this region, went
from the brink of extinction this week to an expanded role that seems to assure
a prosperous future for its neighboring communities into the next century.

Not only will McGuire be kept open as an active Air Force base, contrary to a
Pentagon recommendation in March, but it will expand in size and stature as the
chief air mobility wing for the eastern United States, the Base Closing and
Realignment Commission decided on Thursday.

The reversal of fortune was stunning not only for the base's 4,500 airmen, their
6,000 dependents and 2,200 civilian employees, but for local business people and
thousands of retired military families who settled in the piney woods of South
Jersey to enjoy the benefits of the base hospital and commissary.

"These past few months have been scary time for everyone," said Marjorie Stine,
widow of a retired Air Force sergeant. "Everyone's been on pins and needles
waiting for the axe to fall."

Leroy Wilkins Sr., a retired Air Force captain who now sells real estate in the
Wrightstown area, said, "People were thinking of selling and moving out for the
past few months, but they couldn't find any buyers.  Now I believe we are going
to see a lot of buying, not selling."

The communities around McGuire -- Wrightstown, Browns Mills, New Egypt -- had
braced for the base closing commission to ratify the Pentagon's plan to transfer
most of McGuire's military supply function to Plattsburgh Air Force Base in
upstate New York.

"If that happened, Wrightstown and everything else around here becomes a ghost
town," said Ms. Stine, who moved here two years ago from Philadelphia when the
navy yard there was shut, ending the availability of military medical care.

Other Good News

Instead, the commission overruled the Pentagon and reversed the fates of the two
bases. Plattsburgh is to be closed and its fleet of more than 20 KC135 refueling
tankers permanently relocated at McGuire, designated as the staging area east of
the Mississippi River for Air Force transport missions and rapid deployment of
troops.

In addition, McGuire is to acquire 19 KC10 tankers -- larger jets that also
provide midair refueling for Air Force and Navy planes -- now stationed at
Barksdale Air Force base in Louisiana, the commission decreed.

The planes would join the 51 C141 Starlifter cargo and troop carriers in
McGuire's 438th Airlift Wing and two squadrons of KC 135 tankers operated by the
Air National Guard, adding an unspecified number of new jobs to the base
payroll, eventually reaching perhaps as high as 2,000 to 3,000, sources said.
Tens of millions of dollars to be spent on upgrading hangars and other base
facilities.

It is expected that some civilians at Plattsburgh will be offered the
opportunity to transfer to McGuire. The changes are expected to take a year or
more to accomplish.

The reprieve for McGuire was not the only good news for New Jersey.  The
commission rejected a plan to move the Army's Communications Electronic Command
from Fort Monmouth, near Red Bank, N.J., to Illinois. Instead, it decided to
move the unit from leased property off the base to buildings on post being
vacated by a military intelligence command and the Army Chaplain School.

The commission also voted Friday to reject the Pentagon's recommendation to
shrink the submarine base at New London, Conn. But it voted to close the Staten
Island Homeport, virtually ending any significant Navy presence in New York
City.

'A Game of Table Stakes'

The commission's recommendations on base closings and realignments now go to
President Clinton and then to Congress.

"I can't imagine the President, with the sensitivity at the moment on budget
cuts, rejecting the recommendations of an independent commission," said United
States Senator Frank Lautenberg, Democrat of New Jersey. He spoke at a news
conference here today with Senator Bill Bradley, also a Democrat of New Jersey,
and Representative H. James Saxton, a Republican whose Third District includes
the air base.

Should the President ask for any revisions, Senator Lautenberg explained, the
commission would have to reconsider the entire proposal. "It's a game of table
stakes -- he either accepts it all or gets nothing," he said.

Representative Saxton, in an interview, said the suspense of waiting for the
fate of McGuire to be decided was "very unsettling" to an area economically
dependent on the base. Real estate prices, already depressed by the lackluster
economy and cutbacks at nearby Fort Dix, dropped further, he said, and planning
for schools and businesses was suspended.

Some Problems as Well

A few local residents had a somewhat different reaction.

"I couldn't say everyone would be disappointed if all the bases closed," said
Virginia Detrick, head of the library at Browns Mills, a crossroads town near
the entrance to Fort Dix.  For all the prosperity the military contributed, she
said, it brought some problems as well, such as rowdiness and crime.

Before the buildup of military bases in the area a local economy based on
sawmills and gristmills barely supported a sparse population of farmers,
hunters, wheelwrights and blacksmiths living deep in the pine and cedar woods,
30 miles from Philadelphia and 60 miles from New York City. Some subsistence
farming remains, but there is no other major industry except the military.

Fort Dix opened in 1917 to train doughboys. In 1949, the Army landing field at
the fort became an Air Force base in 1949, named in honor of Major Thomas B.
McGuire Jr., a flying ace and Congressional Medal of Honor winner from New
Jersey who was killed in action in 1945.

gfcrosslineSympathy for Losers

Now that McGuire's place seems secured into the next century, Jozsef Farago,
Mayor of Wrightstown, is upbeat about the future.

Mr. Farago escaped from his native Hungary during the 1956 revolution and was
able to enter the United States by volunteering for Army service. He rose to be
a drill sergeant at Fort Dix during the Vietnam War, married a local girl, and
after leaving the service 16 years ago bought Kelly's Bar, a Wrightstown
landmark that had been a U.S.O. club during World War II.

"We'll do okay here with the Air Force," he said. "But do you know what bothers
me? What bothers me is what's going to happen to all those people in
Plattsburgh? What are they going to do with no more air base? Where are they
going to go?

"They, you know, are now going to live our nightmare."

LOAD-DATE: June 27, 1993

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo: Now that the immediate future of McGuire Air Force Base in
Wrightstown, N.J., is secure, Jozsef Farago, Mayor of Wrightstown, is upbeat. He
is the owner of Kelly's Bar, a U.S.O. club during World War II. (Frank C.
Dougherty for The New York Times)

Map: "Base Changes" shows the future of bases in the tri-state area as decided
by a Federal commission.

                   Copyright 1993 The New York Times Company


                              305 of 312 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                  June 27, 1993, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

P.O.W. TRADE BID FROM'67 DISCLOSED

BYLINE: By CRAIG R. WHITNEY,  Special to The New York Times

SECTION: Section 1; Page 9; Column 1; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 864 words

DATELINE: BONN, June 26


Recently declassified State Department documents show that in early 1967, an
East German lawyer dangled the possibility of trading two convicted Soviet spies
in Britain for American prisoners of war who were captured in Vietnam and who
were reported to be receiving medical treatment in East Germany.

But the lawyer, Wolfgang Vogel, now says that he was mistaken and that no
American prisoners from Vietnam were in East German hospitals when he asked
American officials in January and February of 1967 if they were interested in a
trade for the spies, known as Peter and Helen Kroger, who were then serving
20-year terms for spying on British nuclear weapons development.

Gen. Markus Wolf, the East German espionage chief at the time, also said in an
interview in Berlin that he was unaware that any American prisoners of war were
ever on East German soil.  And Roger Shields, a former Deputy Assistant
Secretary of Defense who has long been familiar with the prisoner issue, said
none of the captured servicemen who returned to the United States in 1973 had
ever been held or treated in East Germany or elsewhere in Eastern Europe, or
knew fellow prisoners who had been.

Mr. Vogel said American officials originally came to him in January 1966 with a
request to see if he could do something for missing and captured prisoners in
Vietnam. He is now under investigation by Berlin prosecutors for questionable
dealings with some of the 33,755 former East German political prisoners whose
releases he negotiated during the cold war in exchange for nearly $2 billion in
payments by the West German Government.

U.S. Gave List to Vogel

Francis J. Meehan, a former United States Ambassador to East Germany and
Czechoslovakia who is now retired in Scotland, confirmed that in January 1966,
on instructions from Washington, he handed Mr. Vogel a list of Navy and Air
Force pilots thought to be held by the North Vietnamese.

The list, which Mr. Vogel still has in his office files, included 11 names of
pilots, with their ranks, serial numbers, dates of birth and the dates they were
presumed shot down. All 11 men on it were held in North Vietnam until the United
States pulled out of the war in early 1973, and returned home then, Mr. Shields
said.

In January, after fragmentary German news reports on his negotiations, Mr. Vogel
said that as he recalled it, the information that the pilots may have been under
treatment in East Germany had come from his principal West German negotiating
partner, Jurgen Stange, a lawyer in West Berlin.

"Meehan approached us and asked if we could do something for the pilots," Mr.
Vogel said. "I made inquiries through Josef Streit, the Prosecutor General, but
he called the chief doctor of the military hospital in Bad Saarow and was
assured that there were no pilots here."

Issue Raised With K.G.B.

Inquiries through intelligence channels to the Soviet Union about whether they
could make American prisoners available for exchange also failed to produce
results, Mr. Vogel said.

"I had to tell the Americans that I saw no possibility of doing anything," he
said.

The State Department documents, in the form of cablegrams, were declassified
from secret and confidential last year. They were made available by a
Congressional staff member who wanted to see the issue investigated further. The
documents tell a somewhat different story but do not change the ending.

According to the cablegrams, three weeks after Mr. Vogel returned to East Berlin
from his Moscow trip, Mr. Stange, the West Berlin lawyer, told an American
diplomat in West Berlin on Jan. 25, 1967, that East Germany "was making a new
offer to get back the Soviet spies Peter and Helen Kroger."

"The G.D.R.," the cablegram traffic said, referring to East Germany, "is
willing, in exchange, to turn over to us two wounded U.S. fliers captured in
Vietnam and currently in an East German hospital."

Taken Seriously in Washington

The report was apparently taken seriously in Washington, which instructed field
officers to meet with Mr. Vogel.

On Feb. 15, 1967, after discussions in London, the State Department instructed
the Berlin mission to "inform Stange and Vogel that Krogers not available for
exchange." The Krogers were not in United States hands, the department said, and
it was "not up to us to release them," but Mr. Vogel should be asked to try to
arrange visits to the captured prisoners by the International Committee of the
Red Cross or some other neutral organization.

In June 1967, Mr. Vogel told American officers in Berlin that he was "not even
sure that they were still in East Germany," and that the offer in any case was
off because the North Vietnamese had withdrawn it.

After the cablegrams were described to him in April, Mr. Vogel said, "There
never were any U.S. pilots in East Germany."

The Krogers were released on July 24, 1969, in exchange for Gerald Brooke, a
British lecturer imprisoned in Moscow who was accused of being a courier for an
anti-Soviet emigre group. Helen Kroger, whose real name was Leontina Cohen, died
in Moscow on Dec. 30, 1992, at 79. Her husband, Peter, is believed to be alive
and would be 82.

LOAD-DATE: June 27, 1993

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1993 The New York Times Company


                              306 of 312 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                  June 27, 1993, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

Stop Punishing Vietnam

SECTION: Section 4; Page 14; Column 1; Editorial Desk

LENGTH: 351 words


France and Japan want to lend Vietnam $140 million to pay off the old Saigon
regime's debts to the International Monetary Fund. That would make Hanoi
eligible for new international loans to help its market-oriented economic
reforms.

It's a constructive idea. But it has been held up until now by stubborn
opposition from Washington. Beyond a reasonable concern about missing
servicemen, previous administrations have seemed determined to keep punishing
Hanoi for winning the war almost 20 years ago. President Clinton can end this
counterproductive sulk by following his advisers' recommendation to let Paris
and Tokyo proceed.

The main argument against doing so comes from groups like the American Legion
and diehard Republican senators. These insist that Vietnam still isn't
cooperating in resolving the cases of Americans listed as prisoners of war or
missing in action since the Vietnam War. Yet a bipartisan group of senators
recently visited Hanoi and reported continuing progress. While 2,260 Americans
remain formally listed as P.O.W.'s or M.I.A.'s, the number of active cases has
now been reduced below 100.

Two years ago, the Bush Administration produced a "road map," tracing out the
steps it expected Hanoi to take to achieve fully normal relations with the
United States. Washington indicated that it would begin to soften U.S. policies
as Vietnam took the appropriate steps.

Yet despite undeniable progress on the Vietnamese side -- including, most
recently, Hanoi's full cooperation with last month's elections sponsored by the
United Nations in Cambodia -- Washington has barely budged. President Bush, a
Vietnam hawk and the President who boasted of burying the "specter of Vietnam"
in the sands of Kuwait, might have helped heal the wounds at home by taking the
first significant steps before he left office.

Instead he left it to Mr. Clinton, whom some veterans groups still distrust for
opposing, and avoiding service in, the Vietnam War. Even if he has to take some
political heat for it, Mr. Clinton should do the right thing and end American
opposition to the loans.

LOAD-DATE: June 27, 1993

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Editorial

                   Copyright 1993 The New York Times Company


                              307 of 312 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                  June 27, 1993, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

Balanced Jurist at Home in the Middle

BYLINE: By NEIL A. LEWIS,  Special to The New York Times

SECTION: Section 1; Page 20; Column 4; National Desk

LENGTH: 2053 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, June 26


hen advocates for the homeless pitched nine tents in Lafayette Park across from
the White House in 1981, they also set up a complicated constitutional question
involving free speech and government regulation.

By the time the issue was resolved, it provided a clear demonstration of the
resolutely centrist judicial style of Ruth Bader Ginsburg -- then a judge on the
United States Court of Appeals for the District of Columbia Circuit, now
President Clinton's nominee for the Supreme Court.

The protesters planned to sleep in the tent city (which they called
"Reaganville" in an effort to embarrass the President) to demonstrate the
nation's shortage of housing. The Government argued that the protesters could
not sleep in the tents because park regulations prohibited camping.

The appeals court ruled 6 to 5 in favor of the protesters, with Judge Ginsburg
providing the swing vote: she went along with the decision but refused to join
her liberal colleagues in a sweeping statement about free speech.

Where on the Spectrum?

The Supreme Court swiftly reversed that decision, ruling 7 to 2 that the
sleeping prohibition was a reasonable regulation that did not infringe on free
speech. The two dissenters, Justices William J. Brennan Jr. and Thurgood
Marshall, argued that important free-speech rights were at stake.

Judge Ginsburg's role in the tent city case provided a neat example of how
elusive is her place on the philosophical spectrum of the Federal courts. She
has supported the right to abortion but criticized the Supreme Court decision
that created it; she has generally sided with the Government in criminal matters
but has held it to a high standard on civil rights issues. She was a pioneering
liberal litigator on women's rights but has practiced judicial restraint since
President Jimmy Carter named her to the bench in 1980.

On a court that tends to divide along liberal and conservative lines, Judge
Ginsburg is often in the middle.

In the tent case, for example, Judge Ginsburg stood for free speech but not as
strongly as colleagues who, like her, were appointed by Democrats. The minority
opinion she opposed on the appeals court was written by Judge Antonin Scalia,
now the Supreme Court's leading conservative theorist.

Measured against the Supreme Court of the time, she was not as conservative as
the majority but not as liberal as the most steadfast liberals, Justices Brennan
and Marshall.

And who was the author of the Supreme Court majority opinion upholding the park
regulations and reversing Judge Ginsburg's position? Justice Byron R. White,
whom Judge Ginsburg would replace on the Court.

Views Are Complex

But if the tent case provides a crisp outline of Judge Ginsburg's decidedly
moderate jurisprudence, the hundreds of other cases in which she has
participated, along with her speeches and academic writings, demonstrate the
complexities of her views.

She has expressed a strongly favorable view of affirmative action plans that
benefit minorities but has struck down some plans as too broad.

She has a well-deserved reputation as a stickler for legal detail, but she
clearly believes that people should have wide access to the Federal courts,
putting her on the liberal side.

Judge Ginsburg also has a more accommodating view than the current Supreme Court
of how far governments should go to tolerate religious practices that conflict
with the law. She is largely favorable to law enforcement on criminal matters,
though her view of the death penalty is unknown.

During her 13 years on the appeals court, Judge Ginsburg often sided with the
more conservative judges appointed by Presidents Ronald Reagan and George Bush.
According to a computerized study of the appeals court's 1987 voting patterns,
published in Legal Times, Judge Ginsburg voted more consistently with her
Republican-appointed colleagues than with her fellow Democratic-appointed
colleagues. For example, in 1987 cases that produced a division on the court,
she voted with Judge Robert H. Bork 85 percent of the time and with Judge
Patricia M. Wald 38 percent of the time.

Judge Bork, a leading conservative member of that court, was rejected for a
Supreme Court seat later that year after a bruising confirmation battle. Judge
Wald is one of the appeals court's staunchest liberals.

Because Judge Ginsburg was a pioneer in litigating women's rights cases before
the Supreme Court, and thus a hero to liberals, she has often disappointed her
former allies because of her moderation and her willingness to forge coalitions
with conservatives since joining the appeals court in 1980.

Paul Gewirtz, a professor of constitutional law at Yale Law School, said her
philosophy resisted easy categorization as liberal or conservative.

"Judge Ginsburg's two-sided profile as both an ardent pioneering litigator for
equality rights and a disciplined and cautious judicial moderate presents an
admirable image for the Supreme Court," he said.

In an era when Supreme Court confirmation hearings have become raucous battles,
Judge Ginsburg's is expected to be relatively smooth. No significant opposition
has developed to the judge, who goes before the Senate Judiciary Committee on
July 20.

Here are some of Judge Ginsburg's positions on several hotly contested issues
that are certain to come up in the Supreme Court.

Abortion
Right to Equality Is Paramount

Since her nomination on June 14, this has been the most heated issue surrounding
her nomination. A close friend complained that the opponents of abortion seem to
understand very well that Judge Ginsburg is a strong supporter of abortion
rights, while the abortion-rights groups who should be her allies have been
uneasy.

The reason is her frequent criticism of the reasoning, but not the outcome, of
Roe v. Wade, the Court's 1973 ruling that first found a constitutional right to
abortion. Over the years, and most recently in a March speech at New York
University, Judge Ginsburg said that the Supreme Court ruling was too sweeping
and thus added to the nation's bitter debate over abortion.

She said the Court had been unwise to have imposed a detailed scheme prescribing
how states may regulate abortion in each of the three trimesters of pregnancy.
She said the Court should have struck down the Texas law and allowed the states
to test the limits of the right to abortion.

Such an approach, which she said would have added to the Court's legitimacy,
demonstrated her view of the limited role of courts and the need for judicial
restraint.

One analyst, Jeffrey Rosen, wrote in The New Republic in May that Judge Ginsburg
was the best candidate for the Court because, among other things, her
"intelligently nuanced" position on Roe demonstrated her ability to reach a
principled consensus on the Court.

Since her March appearance at N.Y.U., Judge Ginsburg has amended the published
version of the speech on three occasions to reinforce her opposition to
restrictive abortion laws. She has told friends that she was surprised that some
members of the N.Y.U. law faculty could not discern her deep opposition to
abortion restrictions.

One change she inserted in the published version described the Texas statute as
one that "intolerably shackled a woman's autonomy."

Her overall stance on the abortion issue demonstrates two principles of her
approach to judging. The first is that the concept of equality is overriding;
the second is that judges should advance the law only incrementally and in
dialogue with lawmakers.

Equality, Not Privacy

Yet while her March speech set off a ripple of doubt from liberal advocacy
groups, a 1985 article in the North Carolina Law Review on Roe showed a more
explicitly favorable view of abortion rights. In that article, she argued that
the Court should have struck down the Texas law on a broad ground of equality
rather than on the idea of a constitutional right to privacy.

Had the Justices done so, she argued, the Supreme Court would probably have
ruled differently on a related issue: whether the Government had to pay for
abortions for poor women.

Instead, in a series of cases from the late 1970's to the early 1980's, the
Court ruled that local governments had no obligation to provide public money for
abortions, even in cases in which money was provided for childbirth.

In the article, she also offers a broad statement of a woman's right to control
her own body. "In the balance," she wrote, "is a woman's autonomy of her full
life's course. . . her ability to stand in relation to man, society, and the
state as an independent sustaining equal citizen."

Religious Freedom
In the Middle Of Pitched Debate

In recent years the Supreme Court Justices have debated how much leeway to give
religious groups for practices that violate laws. In 1990, the Court ruled that
the guarantee of religious freedom did not protect American Indians who smoked
peyote in violation of Oregon law.

The 5-to-4 decision rested on the notion that as long as the state law was
reasonable and not directed specifically at the religious practice, the First
Amendment did not exempt the practitioners from the law. This year, the Court
reaffirmed that test even though it struck down a local law in Florida
prohibiting animal sacrifice.

Judge Ginsburg could find herself in the middle of the debate over what kind of
test to use, a debate certain to recur. She expressed a strong tendency to
accommodate religious practices when she dissented in an appeals court decision
not to reconsider the 1984 case of a Jewish serviceman who wanted to wear his
yarmulke while on duty, Goldman v. Secretary of Defense.

Civil Rights
'Past Wrong' Isn't Everything

In a 1981 case, Wright v. Regan, she wrote that a group of black parents had a
right to bring a nationwide class-action suit against the Internal Revenue
Service asserting that it had given tax-exempt status to schools that racially
discriminated. Her opinion on the need for access to the Federal courts was
overturned by the Supreme Court in 1984.

In 1992, she joined with two other judges in an opinion, O'Donnell Construction
Company, Appellant, v. District of Columbia, striking down a government program
that set aside 35 percent of construction contracts for minority companies. She
said it was unjustified under the 1989 Supreme Court decision holding that such
programs were unconstitutional.

In doing so, however, she made clear that she held a broad view of affirmative
action programs, although she said she agreed with Justice John Paul Stevens
"that remedy for past wrong is not the exclusive basis upon which racial
classification may be justified."



Ginsburg in Her Own Words

Special Versus Equal Treatment, a speech published in 1986.

" Were I Queen, my principal affirmative action plan would have three legs.
First, it would promote equal educational opportunity, and effective job
training for women, so they would not be reduced to dependency on a man or the
state. Second, my plan would give men encouragement and incentives to share more
evenly with women the joys, responsibilities, worries, upsets, and sometimes
tedium of raising children from infancy to adulthood. (This, I admit, is the
most challenging part of the plan to make concrete and implement.) Third, the
plan would make quality day care available from infancy on. Children in my ideal
world would not be women's priorities, they would be human priorities."

Some Reflections on the Feminist Legal Thought of the 1970's -- as printed in
the University of Chicago Legal Forum, 1989 Volume.

" When I began teaching law in 1963, few women appeared on the roster of
students, no more than four or five in a class of over one hundred; in 1967,
less than two percent of the nation's law teachers were women. Law school
textbooks in that decade contained such handy advice as, "land, like woman, was
meant to be possessed." The prevailing attitude was captured in the rumination
attributed to Harvard University's president when the Vietnam draft call was at
its height: We shall be left with the blind, the lame and the women.

"The changes we have witnessed since that time are considerable. Women are no
longer locked out, they are not curiosities in any part of the profession. "


NAME: Ruth Ginsburg

LOAD-DATE: July 7, 1993

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

SERIES: Ruth Ginsburg: Her Life and Her Law/Second of two articles.

GRAPHIC: Photo: Judge Ruth Bader Ginsburg, President Clinton's nominee for the
Supreme Court, in her chambers at Federal Court in Washington. (Paul
Hosefros/The New York Times)

TYPE: BiographySeries

                   Copyright 1993 The New York Times Company


                              308 of 312 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                  June 27, 1993, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

The Most Entertaining Americans? Canadians

BYLINE: By RICK MARIN;  Rick Marin, who was born in Toronto, writes about the
arts for Vogue and TV Guide.

SECTION: Section 2; Page 1; Column 1; Arts & Leisure Desk

LENGTH: 2350 words


WHAT'S SO FUNNY ABOUT Canada? It's a big country with a lot of snow, Mounties
and politely boring people who say "eh." The British novelist Kingsley Amis put
a fictitious tome titled "Canadian Wit and Humor" on his list of the World's
Shortest Books. "Worthwhile Canadian Initiative" was the winner of The New
Republic magazine's Most Boring Headline contest.

Joke-wise, Canada gets no respect. But it should, especially since Canada has
produced some of America's funniest comedians, actors, writers, directors -- a
veritable army of renegade humor professionals. Without them, there would have
been no "Saturday Night Live," no "SCTV," no Spy magazine, no "Ghostbusters," no
"Wayne's World," no sidekick for David Letterman to take with him to CBS.
Expatriate Canucks like Dan Aykroyd, Michael J. Fox, Mike Myers, Phil Hartman,
John Candy, Rick Moranis and Martin Short could gather on Thursday to celebrate
Canada Day, a holiday most Americans would rank somewhere below National Pickle
Week.

Thanks to their nearly undetectable accent and their proximity to the United
States, Canadians have insinuated themselves into the pop culture of the United
States, from Mary Pickford ("America's Sweetheart") to the Amazing Kreskin.
"Field of Dreams," the mythic movie about the great American pastime, was based
on the baseball novel "Shoeless Joe," by the Canadian W. P. Kinsella. Television
is filled with Canadians, from Lorne Greene in reruns of "Bonanza" and the space
cowboy William Shatner on "Star Trek" to Jason Priestley, the heartthrob on
"Beverly Hills 90210." "Generation X," the bible of the 20-somethings, was
written by a Canadian. Even Superman, defender of truth, justice and the
American way, was the invention of Joe Shuster, from Toronto.

"I remember a time when America wasn't Canadian," somebody laments in an old
"Saturday Night Live" sketch that posited an invasion of the United States by
its deceptively innocuous neighbor from the North. Spy magazine (co-founded by
the Ottowa-born E. Graydon Carter) once ran a mock-paranoid feature titled "The
Canadians Among Us."

They are indeed among us, but it's in the realm of comedy -- on both sides of
the camera -- that their presence seems so weirdly disproportionate. Scratch the
surface of television comedy over the last three decades and you'll find
Canadian writers and producers behind such shows as "The Smothers Brothers
Comedy Hour," "Rowan and Martin's Laugh-In," "The Mary Tyler Moore Show," "The
Sonny and Cher Comedy Hour," "Hee Haw," "Taxi," "Fernwood 2-Night," "SCTV,"
"Major Dad," "Home Improvement," "Seinfeld," "The Simpsons" and "The Ren and
Stimpy Show."

Why is this? Interviews with dozens of Canadians and Canada-watchers reveal that
boredom, cold and an obsession with American television have propelled Canadians
-- with their irreverence and their sense of irony -- into the solar plexus of
American pop culture.

"Toronto in the 1950's was a very safe and ordered place, so the chief thing to
be overcome in my childhood was boredom," says Lorne Michaels, who came to the
United States 25 years ago to write jokes for Woody Allen and "Laugh-In" before
creating "Saturday Night Live." In Canada Mr. Michaels performed in a television
show called "The Hart and Lorne Terrific Hour," in which his partner, Hart
Pomerantz, dressed up as a beaver (Canada's national animal) and Mr. Michaels
interviewed him.

Assimilation was easy. Canada is, in many ways, a slice of the same white bread
American heartland that produced Johnny Carson, David Letterman and Jay Leno.
Citizens of the United States generally know nothing about Canada and care less.
Canadians, on the other hand, are experts on the United States. "I know more
about America than most Americans," boasts Peter Jennings, the ABC anchorman,
saying "aboot" for "about" in the Canadian accent he denies having.

Once Mr. Michaels had skipped south of the border, he did what most immigrants
do: imported more of his countrymen. He brought his partner's brother Earl
Pomerantz, who went on to write for "Mary Tyler Moore" and "The Cosby Show" and
was the creator of "Major Dad." ("We wanted to get to a warmer place," Mr.
Pomerantz recalls.)

Mr. Michaels also asked Mr. Aykroyd to join the original cast of "Saturday Night
Live." More recently, he brought "The Kids in the Hall" to HBO and then to CBS.
And, securing his lock on late night, he will be the executive producer for
NBC's new Conan O'Brien show, scheduled to replace "Late Night With David
Letterman" in August.

Comedy
The Gross National Product

Ask Canadians in the comedy business about influences and they invariably invoke
two names: Wayne and Shuster. Johnny Wayne and Frank Shuster (a relative of the
Shuster who created Superman) were a comedy team whose literate buffoonery
became a staple on "The Ed Sullivan Show." Their big routine was a parody of
Shakespeare's "Julius Caesar" called "Who Killed Big Julie?" Sample shtick:

Wayne: "I'll have a martinus."

Shuster: "Don't you mean a martini?"

Wayne: "If I want two, I'll ask for them."

Before Wayne and Shuster, there was Stephen Leacock, sort of a Mark
Twain-meets-James Thurber humorist whom every Canadian youth is compelled to
read in high school. Another influence: the cross-dressing, pants-down humor of
"Monty Python's Flying Circus," which was broadcast in Canada several years
before it was in the United States. "Americans appreciate British humor like
Monty Python, but they don't always get it," says Andrew Malcolm, a former
correspondent for The New York Times and author of a narrative history titled
"The Canadians." "Canadians get it."

They also get satire and political humor, despite being famously deferential in
the face of authority. Canadians will say "Thank you" to a bank machine. Yet
they rebel in their comedy, channeling repression into humor. The Winnipeg-born
David Steinberg did political stand-up in his Vietnam-era "Tonight" show heyday.
Mort Sahl, who left Montreal at an early age, virtually invented the form. Rich
Little, who is from Ottawa, impersonated Richard Nixon to death, as did Dan
Aykroyd on "Saturday Night Live," a tradition continued by another Canadian,
Phil Hartman, who does Bill Clinton.

"When I came to NBC there was this curiosity as to why I would want to do
political comedy, because it was a sure ratings killer," says Mr. Michaels.
"America was founded on the distrust of authority. In Canada, you don't feel
secure in that right, so you exercise it. Defying authority in a small way is a
big Canadian thing."

Paul Shaffer, the David Letterman sidekick who migrated south in the wake of
musicians like Neil Young and Joni Mitchell, likens the Canadian comedy
phenomenon to the British invasion of the American pop music scene during the
same decade. Like the Beatles and the Rolling Stones, he says, Canadians "had an
even more intense reverence for America than the Americans themselves."

Tube Power
Either On It Or Watching It

When the comedian Mike Myers was in the eighth grade, he did a project called
"Canadians in Comedy." He also did one on Lorne Michaels, he says, "in the hope
that he would someday give me a job." Which, of course, he did.

Mr. Myers, who drew much of the suburban heavy-metal mythology of "Wayne's
World" from his Torontonian youth, says he remembers Martin Short telling him,
"When Americans watch TV, they're watching TV, but when Canadians watch TV,
they're watching American TV." That distinction, Mr. Myers says, "makes you
notice things."

Even before cable, Canadians were saturated with television. "If you were living
in Vancouver or Toronto in the 70's, you were living in the most TV-dense place
on the planet," says Doug Coupland, whose book "Generation X" is laced with
American pop references.

Most of the country's 26 million citizens are massed along its southern border;
they survive the long winter nights with antennas that pick up the indigenous
channels plus signals from across the 49th parallel.

" 'Looney Tunes' was our introduction to American culture," says Mr. Carter, who
is now the editor-in-chief of Vanity Fair. "We felt slightly above the pop
cultural circus of the United States but slightly envious at not being a part of
it." Dave Foley, a cast member of "The Kids in the Hall," claims that he honed
his "observational sensibility" by spending his formative years watching "Green
Acres."

Many Canadians cut their teeth on local television as a result of a strict
nationalist cultural policy, enforced by the Government-run Canadian
Broadcasting Company, mandating that 40 percent of all television and radio
programming contain "Canadian content." Almost anyone in Canada who wants to be
on television can do so. Los Angeles became the terminus for an underground
railroad of CBC-trained talent. "By end of the 1960's, American variety
television was controlled by Canadians," says Norman Jewison, who left Toronto
to be a television producer in Hollywood before he started directing films.

Outsiders
The Funhouse Mirror

Although founded on anti-Americanism (many early Canadian settlers were British
loyalists), Canada is perhaps the world's most pro-American country. Robert
MacNeil, who is cohost of "The McNeil/Lehrer Newshour" on PBS and plans to write
a book about being an expatriate Canadian, describes this love-hate relationship
as "ironic distance." Sean Kelly, a founding editor of the National Lampoon who
instituted the magazine's satiric "Canadian Corner" feature, draws an analogy to
the "insider/outsider" culture of the Jews or the Irish: "You're part of the
culture," he says, "but you're observing that culture."

Many Canadians agonize over questions of "national identity," wondering what it
is and why they don't have one. There are hardly any Canadian heroes, except
hockey players. Mr. Jewison says he gathers Hollywood's Canadian cabal at his
Malibu beach house for Canada Day parties, but when they sing "O Canada,"
"nobody can remember the words."

Michael J. Fox, who became famous as the arch-conservative Republican teen-ager
Alex P. Keaton on the long-running sitcom "Family Ties," says that "playing this
Reaganite kid, I was free to parody and play with the idea because, being
Canadian, I had nothing at stake." He also managed to make a potentially odious
character nice, a distinctively Canadian trait. Jim Carrey, a cast member of "In
Living Color," leavens his often deranged characters (like safety-crazed Fire
Marshall Bill) with goofy Canadian charm.

Niceness is one reason Americans like -- and permit -- Canadians to make fun of
them. It may also explain why these mocking foreigners have been so successful
here. They are harmless, totally nonthreatening, profoundly silly. Could an
American have made "Meatballs," "Ghost busters" or the gently cutting White
House satire "Dave" -- all of which were directed by the prolific Canadian comic
auteur Ivan Reitman.

"There's something slightly absurd about Canada," says Harold Ramis, the
screenwriter and director who moved from Chicago to Toronto to work on "SCTV,"
the inspired television parody that launched the careers of John Candy, Rick
Moranis, Martin Short and Catherine O'Hara. The very idea of Canada cracks up
the writing staff of "The Simpsons," who hired a television writer from Calgary
to supply them with jokes about the Canadian Football League and the location of
the world's largest nickel (Sudbury, Ontario).

Mike Myers, who says "I bore people with my Canadianness," admits to weeping
sometimes with homesickness. To cheer himself up, he subscribes to a publication
called Hockey Night in Toronto.

Expert at mocking others, Canadians can be stuffily humorless about themselves.
Perhaps the only thing that the comedian Howie Mandel and the economist John
Kenneth Galbraith have in common is that they don't regard their compatriots as
necessarily funnier than residents of the United States.

"One should not exaggerate the influence," counsels Mr. Galbraith. Mr. Mandel
agrees: "I don't know if they're producing any more comedians than any other
state."

<O CANADA: THE LIST

Canadians are the pod people of American pop culture, as Spy magazine
(co-founded by a canadian) once pointed out. They look like people who live in
the United States; thay act like them, and they talk like them (sort of). Are
they taking over? Casual perusal of any "Who's Who" reveals the large percentage
of famous Americans who are, in fact, Canadian - or wer at least born there.
Here is a selective list of famous Canadians, present and past, whom mant in the
United States have assumed were home grown.

STAGE AND SCREEN
Genevieve Bujold
Raymond Burr
Len Cariou
Brent Carver
Hume Cronyn
Lolita Davidovich
Yvonne DeCarlo
Colleen Dewhurst
Marie Dressler
Deanna Durbin
Glenn Ford
Lorne Greene
Arthur Hill
Walter Huston
Margot Kidder
Gene Lockhart
Raymond Massey
Kate Nelligan
Leslie Nielsen
Walter Pidgeon
Mary Pickford
Christopher Plummer
Jason Priestley
Ivan Reitman
William Shatner
Helen Shaver
Norma Shearer
Jay Silverheels
Donald Sutherland
Fay Wray

BROADCAST NEWS
Arthur Kent
Peter Jennings
Robert MacNeil
Morley Safer

MAGICIANS AND PSYCHICS
Doug Henning
The Amazing Kreskin

COMEDY
Dan Ackroyd
John Candy
Jim Carrey
Tommy Chong
Michael J. Fox
Phil Hartman
Rich Little
Howie Mandel
Lorne Michaels
Rick Moranis
Mike Myers
Mort Sahl
mack Sennett
Martin Short
David Steinberg
Alan Thicke
The Kids in the Hall

CARTOON HEROS
Superman (created by the Canadian Joe Shuster)
Ren and Stimpy (created by the Canadian John Kricfalusi)

MUSIC
Bryan Adams
Paul Anka
Bachman Turner
Overdrive
The Band (except for Levon Helm)
Leonard Cohen
Celine Dion
Percy Faith
Glenn Gould
Jeff Healy
K.D. Lang
Gordon Lightfoot
Guy Lombardo
Joni Mitchell
Anne Murray
Oscar Peterson
Rush
Paul Shaffer
Snow
Hank Snow
Teresa Stratas
Neil Young

GAME SHOW HOSTS
Monty Hall
Alex Trebec

THINKERS
John Kenneth Galbraith
Art Linkletter

LOAD-DATE: August 5, 1993

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photos: Even "America's Sweetheart," Mary Pickford, was a product of
Toronto. (Museum of Modern Art)(pg. 1); Neil Young -- The Canadian musician
migrated south, along with Joni Mitchell, Paul Shaffer and a host of others.
(Michelle V. Agins/The New York Times); The expatriot Mike Myers in "Wayne's
World," which was based on a "Saturday Night Live" skit -- Think Toronto.
(Paramount)(pg. 23)

                   Copyright 1993 The New York Times Company


                              309 of 312 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                  June 29, 1993, Tuesday, Late Edition - Final

RAID ON BAGHDAD;
Poll Shows Raid on Iraq Buoyed Clinton's Popularity

BYLINE: By RICHARD L. BERKE

SECTION: Section A; Page 7; Column 1; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 1497 words


President Clinton's decision to attack Iraq has brought him a substantial boost
in approval ratings for handling both foreign policy and his overall job as
President and has diminished uncertainty over his leadership on the world stage,
according to the latest New York Times/CBS News Poll.

The poll found that two-thirds of Americans surveyed supported the weekend air
strike on the Iraqi intelligence headquarters in Baghdad, and six out of 10
approved of Mr. Clinton's general dealings with Iraq, more than approved of Mr.
Clinton's handling of the crises in Bosnia and Herzegovina and Somalia.

As Mr. Clinton prepares to travel to Tokyo next week for a meeting of the Group
of Seven industrial democracies, White House officials seized on the air strike
as evidence that the President is sure-footed in international affairs. The
Administration sent out its top military officials, most notably Gen. Colin L.
Powell, the chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff, on a series of television and
newspaper interviews in the past two days to praise Mr. Clinton as a tough
leader who would not be bullied by the Iraqi President, Saddam Hussein.

A 'Lesson' for Iraqi

The poll indicated that many in the public were already supportive; 61 percent
said the retaliation is "a good idea because it teaches Saddam Hussein a
lesson," while 28 percent said it is "a bad idea because it risks further
bloodshed."

The incident appears to be the latest in a line of what scholars call "rally
events," when uses of force abroad or diplomatic breakthroughs cause Americans
to rally around their flag, their troops and their Commander in Chief. Past
"rally events" have produced, on average, an 8-percentage-point increase in the
President's approval rating, and they have lasted an average of about 10 weeks,
according to an analysis of the last 10 presidencies by the Gallup Organization.

President Bush's popularity surged by 18 percentage points in January 1991, when
allied air strikes on Iraq began in the Persian Gulf war, according to the
analysis. Other particularly large upturns recorded by Gallup were President
Carter's 19 percentage point boost when the American hostages were seized in
Iran in November 1979; President Ford's gain of 11 percentage points after he
forced the return of the Mayaguez, an American vessel seized by Cambodia in May
1975, and President Nixon's 16-percentage point lift after the Vietnam peace
accord in January 1973.

Mr. Clinton's gain since Saturday appears to fit the pattern. The Times/ CBS
News poll found that after the air strike, 50 percent of Americans surveyed
approved of the way Mr. Clinton was handling his overall job as President; last
week, only 39 percent approved. More specifically, after the bombing 49 percent
said they approved Mr. Clinton's stewardship of foreign policy; just before the
attack, respondents were was split, with an approval of 38 percent and
disapproval of 40 percent.

Two Rounds of Polling

The national telephone poll was conducted both before and after Saturday's
attack. Interviews with 1,363 adults were completed June 21 to 24; 622 of the
same individuals were interviewed a second time after the attack in order to
gauge any change in their reactions. The poll had a margin of sampling error of
plus or minus 3 percentage points for the entire sample, and 4 percentage points
for results from the post-attack call-backs.

Seeking to contrast himself with Mr. Bush, Mr. Clinton campaigned promising to
devote himself to domestic issues, but he has been distracted by a series of
foreign crises. But if he is to succeed in domestic areas, aides said it was
important for him to be viewed as a decisive world leader.

At his first Cabinet meeting after the attack on Baghdad, Mr. Clinton returned
to domestic issues.

"I think it's very important today at this Cabinet meeting that we move on to
other matters, that we go back to the domestic agenda," Mr. Clinton said.

But Mr. Clinton's advisers did not dispute the contention of some analysts that
the political lift from the bombing may be would be fleeting.

"In the short term, it's clearly going to give him a bump politically," said
Barbara Kellerman, a political scientist who is an authority on Presidents and
world leadership. "But I'd describe it as no more than a goose bump in the
international community. In the long run this is going to be inconsequential."

'He Has What It Takes



Larry Hugick, a pollster in Princeton, N.J., who has examined more than five
decades of Presidential approval ratings, agreed that Mr. Clinton's increase in
popularity may prove short-lived. "The question," he said of Mr. Clinton, "is
whether he can build on this in any way, showing people that he has what it
takes in being tough in foreign policy. If a President doesn't show strength and
builds up an image for weakness, it's almost impossible to overcome."

The poll does show that while the attack brought slight upturns in other
measurements of Mr. Clinton's performance, respondents still have many
reservations about him.

Respondents' confidence in Mr. Clinton's ability to deal wisely with a difficult
international crisis rose by 5 percentage points, to 39 percent from 34 percent.
But before and after the bombing, more than 50 percent said they were uneasy
about Mr. Clinton's approach.

Before the bombing, Americans said they had mixed views of the President's
handling of other foreign trouble spots. For example, 52 percent approved of the
way Mr. Clinton has handled the situation in Somalia, but only 36 percent
approved of how he has dealt with Bosnia and Herzegovina.

Mr. Clinton's aides said the trip to Tokyo will afford him another opportunity
to strengthen his domestic support, particularly since the agenda is mostly
economic.

Priority on Domestic Issues

"The best way for him to play it at the summit will be to focus on what it does
for American jobs and our domestic interests," said Joan Baggett, who takes over
this week as the White House political director. "It will be preserving our
leadership role in the country, but also making sure that we keep the focus on
the domestic issues as top priority."

The risks of foreign entanglements were also demonstrated in the poll.
Fifty-four percent favored sending American ground forces to Bosnia as part of a
United Nations peacekeeping force to enforce a cease-fire there. But only 37
percent said the United States has a responsibility to do something about the
fighting there, while 51 percent said the country has no such responsibility.

The poll indicated that the public's attention to the Bosnia situation has
waned. Only 34 percent said they had been following news about the situation
closely or fairly closely; in May, 61 percent said they were.

Ms. Baggett said she was not too worried that the new public attention on Mr.
Clinton's foreign policy efforts would interfere with his determination to keep
focused on domestic issues.

"Presidents do get a foreign policy bug," she said. "We'll just have to make
sure he doesn't succumb to it."

How the Poll Was Conducted

The latest New York Times/CBS News Poll on President Clinton and foreign policy
is based on telephone interviews conducted both before and after the United
States attack on Baghdad over the weekend.

On June 21 to 24, a total of 1,363 adults were interviewed around the United
States, excluding Alaska and Hawaii. On Sunday, 1,000 of the same respondents
were called back and 622 were successfully re-interviewed to gauge their initial
reactions to the attack.

The sample of telephone exchanges called was selected by a computer from a
complete list of exchanges in the country. The exchanges were chosen to assure
that each region was represented in proportion to its population. For each
exchange, the telephone numbers were formed by random digits, thus permitting
access to both listed and unlisted numbers. Within each household, one adult was
designated by a random procedure to be the respondent for the survey.

The results have been weighted to take account of household size and number of
telephone lines into the residence, and to adjust for variations in the sample
relating to region, race, sex, age and education.

In theory, in 19 cases out of 20, the results based on such samples will differ
by no more than three percentage points in either direction from what would have
been obtained by seeking out all American adults.

For smaller subgroups the potential sampling error is larger. For example, for
the group re-interviewed on Sunday, the margin of sampling error was plus or
minus four percentage points.

In addition to sampling error, the practical difficulties of conducting any
survey of public opinion may introduce other sources of error. For instance, the
results of the post-attack calls on Sunday are subject to additional potential
error because of the limited time available to pursue hard-to-reach people.

LOAD-DATE: June 29, 1993

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Graphs: "Response to Iraq" shows the how people feel about the way Bill
Clinton is handling Iraq and the missile attack on Iraq on Saturday.; "Before
and After the Bombing in Iraq" shows how people feel about Bill Clinton before
and after the attack on Iraq.

                   Copyright 1993 The New York Times Company


                              310 of 312 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 June 30, 1993, Wednesday, Late Edition - Final

Review/Television;
Schwarzkopf Returns To Vietnam

BYLINE: By WALTER GOODMAN

SECTION: Section C; Page 22; Column 1; Cultural Desk

LENGTH: 581 words


The return of a soldier to the field where he fought is inherently sobering, but
the appearance of two network-news personalities trading war stories on
television is obtrusively promotional.

"Schwarzkopf in Vietnam: A Soldier Returns," which also signals the return of
the documentary series "CBS Reports," is an inadequate title. For, as Dan Rather
announces at the outset, this is a joint appearance. "This is our Vietnam," he
says, and reassures the audience that "the general and I are feeling good about
being back." He promises that viewers will see them walking "where we once
walked before." And, sure enough, there are the old "CBS Evening News" clips,
with a young Dan Rather poking his head out of a Vietcong tunnel.

It takes away nothing from the courage or ability of either man to note that at
times, as the two revisit the old battlegrounds, the CBS News veteran and the
network's latest recruit seem to be competing like a couple of old campaigners
at the American Legion hall. In this contest, Gen. H. Norman Schwarzkopf wins,
particularly with his account of his experiences as a battalion commander in
1969 and 1970. First he had to shake up the troops (another officer says the men
preferred hammocks to body bags), and then lead them into, literally, a
minefield. The accounts of three soldiers who were severely wounded by the mines
are powerful.

Some of General Schwarzkopf's comments about the war have a resounding banality.
He seems to think that the declaration "War is insanity!" becomes original if
you say it forcefully enough. The program is more interesting when Mr. Rather
draws out his comrade's feelings about America's flight from Vietnam, in
particular the role of the press and television in turning much of the nation
against the war. The general says he thought that the coverage was unfair --
somehow, he says rather plaintively, the war came to be blamed on the military
-- but he sees now that it was lost not by reporters but by "a bankrupt
strategy," which provided no clear objective.

He says the Persian Gulf war (he is shown being cheered on a victory parade)
"made Vietnam all right," because America finally gave its fighters the
redeeming thank you that had been withheld from those who returned from Vietnam.
He offers two conclusions, one dubious, the other by now obvious: there is no
such thing as a limited war and the warriors need the support of the American
people.

Mr. Rather points out that the fall of South Vietnam did not, as constantly
threatened by successive Administrations, have a domino effect in Southeast
Asia, and the program ends on a visit to Hanoi, where students tell the
Americans they want to become rich capitalists. Coming after the vivid reminders
of the ordeal of Vietnam, deemed at the time a victory for Communism, Mr.
Rather's description of the former enemy capital as a pleasant city where free
enterprise is encouraged rubs in the war's waste.

The cost is personified by the three wounded veterans. Comparisons are
invidious, but given the setup of the program, you can't help reflecting that
their careers were not advanced, either in the Army or on television, by the
experience.

Schwarzkopf in Vietnam
A Soldier Returns
CBS, tonight at 10
(Channel 2 in New York)

Written by Dan Rather and Joel Bernstein; Mr. Bernstein, senior producer. Eldra
Gillman, unit manager; Terry Manning, editor; Deirdre Naphin, associate
producer; Linda Mason, executive producer.

LOAD-DATE: June 30, 1993

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo: Gen. H. Norman Schwarzkopf in the CBS documentary "Schwarzkopf
in Vietnam: A Soldier Returns." Dan Rather is the host. (Lou Bopp/CBS News)

TYPE: Review

                   Copyright 1993 The New York Times Company


                              311 of 312 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 June 30, 1993, Wednesday, Late Edition - Final

NEWS SUMMARY

SECTION: Section A; Page 2; Column 5; Metropolitan Desk

LENGTH: 1058 words



International A2-9

U.S. PUTS A-TESTS ON HOLD
President Clinton has decided that the U.S. will follow a "no first test" policy
on nuclear arms. Planned tests in the Nevada desert will be put on hold
indefinitely, so long as no other tests nuclear arms.  A1

INVESTMENT SCAM IN CHINA
Thousands of Chinese investors have been swindled by a small-time businessman
who raised $175 million and then squandered much of the money on luxuries for
himself.  A1


REFUGEE INFLUX WORRYING CZECHS
The new, more restrictive German immigration law that takes effect tomorrow has
heightened fears in the Czech Republic and in Poland, transit countries for most
refugees into Germany, that they will become the dumping ground for those whom
Germany rejects.  A1

CHALLENGE TO NIGERIA RULERS
In an unusual challenge to Nigeria's military Government, at least 30 officers
said they would retire from the armed forces in protest against the ruler's
decision to annul the recent presidential elections.  A2

U.N. KEEPS BAN ON BOSNIA ARMS
The U.S. and some unusual non-European allies failed to convince the Security
Council to end the embargo on arms shipments to Bosnia.  A6

BOSNIA SEEKS UNITY ON PLAN
Bosnia's collective presidency agreed to seek a united position on a
Serbian-Croatian peace proposal that would partition the country along ethnic
lines. But there was no sign of progress in healing the rift over the proposal,
which has pitted the Muslims in Bosnia against the Serbs and Croats.  A6

U.S. HITS IRAQ ARTILLERY SITE
A United States warplane fired a missile at an Iraqi antiaircraft artillery site
as Iraq continued to interfere with American patrols and defy U.N. sanctions,
Administration officials said.  A3

U.S. AND ECONOMIC MEETING
With trade issues deadlocked and resistance building to the American aid
strategy for Russia just days before the economic summit meeting in Tokyo, the
Administration has turned its attention to the group's political declaration as
a way of making the summit a success.  A8

MORE WOES FOR JAPANESE PARTY
Just when Japan's governing party thought that its fortunes could not take
another turn for the worse, the Mayor of one of northern Japan's largest cities
was arrested today on bribery chargese.  A9

Rights group faulted Israel on West Bank shootings.  A3

U.N. talks on Haitian crisis are revived.  A9

London Journal: The British season of self-mortification.  A4

National A10-13, B7

NETWORKS TO WARN OF VIOLENCE
In the first step toward adopting a television rating system for violent shows,
the nation's four broadcast networks have agreed to provide warnings to parents
before shows laden with mayhem.  A1

OFFSHOOT OF GAY-RIGHTS DEBATE
Anti-gay rights campaigns around the country, which would prevent states from
granting homosexuals protection from discrimination, have produced an unintended
result: homosexuals are "coming out." A10

THE 'OTHER' LONG ISLAND SECEDES
After 207 years of paying taxes to the City of Portland, Me., four and a half
miles across Casco Bay, the Town of Long Island (population 200) will declare
its independence.  A10

STRETCH OF MISSISSIPPI CLOSED
From St. Louis to St. Paul, a 500-mile stretch of the Mississippi has been
closed to nearly all commercial traffic because of some of the highest flood
levels since 1965.  A12

RULING MIRRORS RACIAL QUESTIONS
New analysis: The Supreme Court's ruling that shaping legislative districts to
elect more blacks may be unconstitutional reflects the uncertainties many
Americans feel about racial preferences.  A12

RULING COULD IMPEDE NAVY
In a ruling that the Government says could disrupt operations of the Navy's
nuclear-powered fleet, a Federal judge has barred a reservation in Idaho from
accepting nuclear fuel for storage until an environmental study of the area is
completed.  A10

REPUBLICANS CRITICIZE LEADER
Anger among Republicans who believe their leader on the Senate Judiciary
Commitee has been too easy on President Clinton burst into the open, as a
nominee for a top Justice Department post was put on hold.  A13

Senator Howard Metzenbaum said he would not seek re-election.  A13

House and Senate negotiators failed to agree on military spending.  A13

Education Page B8

Mexican children's U.S. education is endangered by a lawsuit.

The Sovern era ends at Columbia.

Metro Digest B1

EXTORTION IN HIRING CHARGED
Thirty-one people were indicted on charges that they ran eight groups that,
under the guise of obtaining construction jobs for black and Hispanic workers,
violently extorted thousands of dollars from New York building contractors.  A1

STEIN WITHDRAWS FROM RACE
One month after he abandoned his sputtering mayoral campaign, New York City's
Council President, Andrew J. Stein, abruptly withdrew as a candidate for
re-election to the job that is being renamed Public Advocate and said he would
never again seek elective office.  A1

LOOKING FOR A YANKEES HOME
Concluding that a major threat exists in which the Yankees would abandon their
home in the Bronx and perhaps New York, Governor Cuomo has begun a major push to
direct the team toward a 30-acre railyard on the western edge of midtown
Manhattan.  A1

Business Digest D1

Living Section C1-10

Confessions of a passionate
picnicker.  C1
At breakfast with Mabel Carney Stover.  C1
If the soup is cold, speak up,
already!  C1

Health Page C14

A gift of friendship: kidneys from unrelated living donors.
Personal Health: Who needs a hysterectomy and who doesn't.

Arts/Entertainment C15-22

International dancers.  C15
Western museum in Beijing.  C15
Film: "The Firm." C15
Music: Park concerts begin.  C15
Books: On black Americans.  C21
Book Notes C22
Television: "Schwarzkopf in Vietnam," on CBS.  C22

Sports B10-15

Obituaries B9

Editorials/Op-Ed A14-15

Editorials

A dinosaur ruling.
Still not good enough on Iraq.
Albany's last chance on ethics.

Letters

Anna Quindlen: Living in it.
Bob Herbert: Send them back?
John Costello and Oleg Tsarev: The spy who knew too much.


Chronicle B4

Bridge C22

Crossword C22

LOAD-DATE: June 30, 1993

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Summary

                   Copyright 1993 The New York Times Company


                              312 of 312 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 June 30, 1993, Wednesday, Late Edition - Final

For Many, Human Rights Mean Life Itself;
A Persistent Wrong

SECTION: Section A; Page 14; Column 6; Editorial Desk

LENGTH: 234 words


To the Editor:

The United States has one glaring weakness in attempting to lead the world
conference on human rights in Vienna and to distinguish itself from such
countries as China, Iran and Vietnam (The Week in Review, June 20). On the issue
of capital punishment, the United States is closer to those countries it seeks
to condemn than to its traditional Western allies.

With nearly 2,800 people awaiting execution, the United States has one of the
largest death rows in the world. We further isolate ourselves by willingness to
execute those who were juveniles at the time of their crime or those with mental
retardation.

The death penalty is not the same as ethnic cleansing, but the General
Accounting Office has reported widespread evidence of racial discrimination in
its application. The United States does not condone torture, but it's hard to
find a more fitting name for isolating an individual for many years, sometimes
bringing him to the brink of execution, before killing him in a variety of
gruesome ways.

Sooner or later, universal human rights will include the right not to be
executed by the state. Most of the Western world has adopted suitable
alternatives. If the United States wants credibility as a human rights leader,
it should abandon this practice.

RICHARD C. DIETER
Executive Director, Death Penalty
Information Center
Washington, June 21, 1993

LOAD-DATE: June 30, 1993

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Letter

                   Copyright 1993 The New York Times Company
